William Shakespeare
William Shakespeare (baptised 26 April 1564; died 23 April 1616)[nb 1] was an English poet and playwright, widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's pre-eminent dramatist.[1] He is often called England's national poet and the "Bard of Avon".[2][nb 2] His surviving works, including some collaborations, consist of about 38 plays,[nb 3] 154 sonnets, two long narrative poems, and several other poems. His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright.[3]
Shakespeare was born and raised in Stratford-upon-Avon. At the age of 18, he married Anne Hathaway, with whom he had three children: Susanna, and twins Hamnet and Judith. Between 1585 and 1592, he began a successful career in London as an actor, writer, and part owner of a playing company called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, later known as the King's Men. He appears to have retired to Stratford around 1613, where he died three years later. Few records of Shakespeare's private life survive, and there has been considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance, sexuality, religious beliefs, and whether the works attributed to him were written by others.[4]
Shakespeare produced most of his known work between 1589 and 1613.[5][nb 4] His early plays were mainly comedies and histories, genres he raised to the peak of sophistication and artistry by the end of the 16th century. He then wrote mainly tragedies until about 1608, including Hamlet, King Lear, Othello, and Macbeth, considered some of the finest works in the English language. In his last phase, he wrote tragicomedies, also known as romances, and collaborated with other playwrights.
Many of his plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime. In 1623, two of his former theatrical colleagues published the First Folio, a collected edition of his dramatic works that included all but two of the plays now recognised as Shakespeare's.
Shakespeare was a respected poet and playwright in his own day, but his reputation did not rise to its present heights until the 19th century. The Romantics, in particular, acclaimed Shakespeare's genius, and the Victorians worshipped Shakespeare with a reverence that George Bernard Shaw called "bardolatry".[6] In the 20th century, his work was repeatedly adopted and rediscovered by new movements in scholarship and performance. His plays remain highly popular today and are constantly studied, performed and reinterpreted in diverse cultural and political contexts throughout the world.

Early life
William Shakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare, an alderman and a successful glover originally from Snitterfield, and Mary Arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning farmer.[7] He was born in Stratford-upon-Avon and baptised there on 26 April 1564. His actual birthdate remains unknown, but is traditionally observed on 23 April, St George's Day.[8] This date, which can be traced back to an 18th-century scholar's mistake, has proved appealing to biographers, since Shakespeare died 23 April 1616.[9] He was the third child of eight and the eldest surviving son.[10]
Although no attendance records for the period survive, most biographers agree that Shakespeare was probably educated at the King's New School in Stratford,[11] a free school chartered in 1553,[12] about a quarter-mile from his home. Grammar schools varied in quality during the Elizabethan era, but the curriculum was dictated by law throughout England,[13] and the school would have provided an intensive education in Latin grammar and the classics.
At the age of 18, Shakespeare married the 26-year-old Anne Hathaway. The consistory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence 27 November 1582. The next day two of Hathaway's neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage.[14] The ceremony may have been arranged in some haste, since the Worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times,[15] and six months after the marriage Anne gave birth to a daughter, Susanna, baptised 26 May 1583.[16] Twins, son Hamnet and daughter Judith, followed almost two years later and were baptised 2 February 1585.[17] Hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11 August 1596.[18]
After the birth of the twins, Shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592, and scholars refer to the years between 1585 and 1592 as Shakespeare's "lost years".[19] Biographers attempting to account for this period have reported many apocryphal stories. Nicholas Rowe, Shakespeare’s first biographer, recounted a Stratford legend that Shakespeare fled the town for London to escape prosecution for deer poaching in the estate of local squire Thomas Lucy. Shakespeare is also supposed to have taken his revenge on Lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad about him.[20] Another 18th-century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London.[21] John Aubrey reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster.[22] Some 20th-century scholars have suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire, a Catholic landowner who named a certain "William Shakeshafte" in his will.[23] No evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and Shakeshafte was a common name in the Lancashire area.[24]
London and theatrical career
It is not known exactly when Shakespeare began writing, but contemporary allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on the London stage by 1592.[26] He was well enough known in London by then to be attacked in print by the playwright Robert Greene in his Groats-Worth of Wit:
...there is an upstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his Tiger's heart wrapped in a Player's hide, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute Johannes factotum, is in his own conceit the only Shake-scene in a country.[27]
Scholars differ on the exact meaning of these words,[28] but most agree that Greene is accusing Shakespeare of reaching above his rank in trying to match university-educated writers such as Christopher Marlowe, Thomas Nashe and Greene himself (the "university wits").[29] The italicised phrase parodying the line "Oh, tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide" from Shakespeare's Henry VI, Part 3, along with the pun "Shake-scene", identifies Shakespeare as Greene's target. Here Johannes Factotum—"Jack of all trades"— means a second-rate tinkerer with the work of others, rather than the more common "universal genius".[28][30]
Greene's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare’s career in the theatre. Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mid-1580s to just before Greene's remarks.[31] From 1594, Shakespeare's plays were performed only by the Lord Chamberlain's Men, a company owned by a group of players, including Shakespeare, that soon became the leading playing company in London.[32] After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the company was awarded a royal patent by the new king, James I, and changed its name to the King's Men.[33]
In 1599, a partnership of company members built their own theatre on the south bank of the River Thames, which they called the Globe. In 1608, the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre. Records of Shakespeare's property purchases and investments indicate that the company made him a wealthy man.[34] In 1597, he bought the second-largest house in Stratford, New Place, and in 1605, he invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford.[35]
Some of Shakespeare's plays were published in quarto editions from 1594. By 1598, his name had become a selling point and began to appear on the title pages.[36] Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright. The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson's Works names him on the cast lists for Every Man in His Humour (1598) and Sejanus His Fall (1603).[37] The absence of his name from the 1605 cast list for Jonson’s Volpone is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing its end.[38] The First Folio of 1623, however, lists Shakespeare as one of "the Principal Actors in all these Plays", some of which were first staged after Volpone, although we cannot know for certain which roles he played.[39] In 1610, John Davies of Hereford wrote that "good Will" played "kingly" roles.[40] In 1709, Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of Hamlet's father.[41] Later traditions maintain that he also played Adam in As You Like It and the Chorus in Henry V,[42] though scholars doubt the sources of the information.[43]
Shakespeare divided his time between London and Stratford during his career. In 1596, the year before he bought New Place as his family home in Stratford, Shakespeare was living in the parish of St. Helen's, Bishopsgate, north of the River Thames.[44] He moved across the river to Southwark by 1599, the year his company constructed the Globe Theatre there.[45] By 1604, he had moved north of the river again, to an area north of St Paul's Cathedral with many fine houses. There he rented rooms from a French Huguenot called Christopher Mountjoy, a maker of ladies' wigs and other headgear.[46]
Later years and death
Rowe was the first biographer to pass down the tradition that Shakespeare retired to Stratford some years before his death;[47] but retirement from all work was uncommon at that time,[48] and Shakespeare continued to visit London.[47] In 1612 he was called as a witness in a court case concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy's daughter, Mary.[49] In March 1613 he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory;[50] and from November 1614 he was in London for several weeks with his son-in-law, John Hall.
After 1606–1607, Shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to him after 1613.[52] His last three plays were collaborations, probably with John Fletcher,[53] who succeeded him as the house playwright for the King’s Men.[54]
Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616[55] and was survived by his wife and two daughters. Susanna had married a physician, John Hall, in 1607,[56] and Judith had married Thomas Quiney, a vintner, two months before Shakespeare’s death.[57]
In his will, Shakespeare left the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter Susanna.[58] The terms instructed that she pass it down intact to "the first son of her body".[59] The Quineys had three children, all of whom died without marrying.[60] The Halls had one child, Elizabeth, who married twice but died without children in 1670, ending Shakespeare’s direct line.[61] Shakespeare's will scarcely mentions his wife, Anne, who was probably entitled to one third of his estate automatically.[62] He did make a point, however, of leaving her "my second best bed", a bequest that has led to much speculation.[63] Some scholars see the bequest as an insult to Anne, whereas others believe that the second-best bed would have been the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance.[64]
Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days after his death.[65] The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 2008:
Plays

Main articles: Shakespeare's plays and Shakespeare's collaborations
Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, and critics agree that Shakespeare did the same, mostly early and late in his career.[70] Some attributions, such as Titus Andronicus and the early history plays, remain controversial, while The Two Noble Kinsmen and the lost Cardenio have well-attested contemporary documentation. Textual evidence also supports the view that several of the plays were revised by other writers after their original composition.
The first recorded works of Shakespeare are Richard III and the three parts of Henry VI, written in the early 1590s during a vogue for historical drama. Shakespeare's plays are difficult to date, however,[71] and studies of the texts suggest that Titus Andronicus, The Comedy of Errors, The Taming of the Shrew and The Two Gentlemen of Verona may also belong to Shakespeare’s earliest period.[72] His first histories, which draw heavily on the 1587 edition of Raphael Holinshed's Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland,[73] dramatise the destructive results of weak or corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins of the Tudor dynasty.[74] The early plays were influenced by the works of other Elizabethan dramatists, especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe, by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of Seneca.[75] The Comedy of Errors was also based on classical models, but no source for The Taming of the Shrew has been found, though it is related to a separate play of the same name and may have derived from a folk story.[76] Like The Two Gentlemen of Verona, in which two friends appear to approve of rape,[77] the Shrew's story of the taming of a woman's independent spirit by a man sometimes troubles modern critics and directors.[
Shakespeare's early classical and Italianate comedies, containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mid-1590s to the romantic atmosphere of his greatest comedies.[79] A Midsummer Night's Dream is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic lowlife scenes.[80] Shakespeare's next comedy, the equally romantic Merchant of Venice, contains a portrayal of the vengeful Jewish moneylender Shylock, which reflects Elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to modern audiences.[81] The wit and wordplay of Much Ado About Nothing,[82] the charming rural setting of As You Like It, and the lively merrymaking of Twelfth Night complete Shakespeare's sequence of great comedies.[83] After the lyrical Richard II, written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, and Henry V. His characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work.[84] This period begins and ends with two tragedies: Romeo and Juliet, the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence, love, and death;[85] and Julius Caesar—based on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's Parallel Lives—which introduced a new kind of drama.[86] According to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, in Julius Caesar "the various strands of politics, character, inwardness, contemporary events, even Shakespeare's own reflections on the act of writing, began to infuse each other"
In the early 17th century, Shakespeare wrote the so-called "problem plays" Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida, and All's Well That Ends Well and a number of his best known tragedies.[88] Many critics believe that Shakespeare's greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art. The titular hero of one of Shakespeare's most famous tragedies, Hamlet, has probably been discussed more than any other Shakespearean character, especially for his famous soliloquy "To be or not to be; that is the question".[89] Unlike the introverted Hamlet, whose fatal flaw is hesitation, the heroes of the tragedies that followed, Othello and King Lear, are undone by hasty errors of judgement.[90] The plots of Shakespeare's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves.[91] In Othello, the villain Iago stokes Othello's sexual jealousy to the point where he murders the innocent wife who loves him.[92] In King Lear, the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating the events which lead to the murder of his daughter and the torture and blinding of the Earl of Gloucester. According to the critic Frank Kermode, "the play offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty".[93] In Macbeth, the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare's tragedies,[94] uncontrollable ambition incites Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth, to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne, until their own guilt destroys them in turn.[95] In this play, Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure. His last major tragedies, Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus, contain some of Shakespeare's finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T. S. Eliot.[96]
In his final period, Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays: Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale and The Tempest, as well as the collaboration, Pericles, Prince of Tyre. Less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors.[97] Some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare's part, but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day.[98] Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, Henry VIII and The Two Noble Kinsmen, probably with John Fletcher.[99]
Performances
Main article: Shakespeare in performance
It is not clear for which companies Shakespeare wrote his early plays. The title page of the 1594 edition of Titus Andronicus reveals that the play had been acted by three different troupes.[100] After the plagues of 1592–3, Shakespeare's plays were performed by his own company at The Theatre and the Curtain in Shoreditch, north of the Thames.[101] Londoners flocked there to see the first part of Henry IV, Leonard Digges recording, "Let but Falstaff come, Hal, Poins, the rest...and you scarce shall have a room".[102] When the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord, they pulled The Theatre down and used the timbers to construct the Globe Theatre, the first playhouse built by actors for actors, on the south bank of the Thames at Southwark.[103] The Globe opened in autumn 1599, with Julius Caesar one of the first plays staged. Most of Shakespeare's greatest post-1599 plays were written for the Globe, including Hamlet, Othello and King Lear
After the Lord Chamberlain's Men were renamed the King's Men in 1603, they entered a special relationship with the new King James. Although the performance records are patchy, the King's Men performed seven of Shakespeare's plays at court between 1 November 1604 and 31 October 1605, including two performances of The Merchant of Venice.[105] After 1608, they performed at the indoor Blackfriars Theatre during the winter and the Globe during the summer.[106] The indoor setting, combined with the Jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques, allowed Shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices. In Cymbeline, for example, Jupiter descends "in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The ghosts fall on their knees."[107]
The actors in Shakespeare's company included the famous Richard Burbage, William Kempe, Henry Condell and John Heminges. Burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of Shakespeare's plays, including Richard III, Hamlet, Othello, and King Lear.[108] The popular comic actor Will Kempe played the servant Peter in Romeo and Juliet and Dogberry in Much Ado About Nothing, among other characters.[109] He was replaced around the turn of the 16th century by Robert Armin, who played roles such as Touchstone in As You Like It and the fool in King Lear.[110] In 1613, Sir Henry Wotton recorded that Henry VIII "was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony".[111] On 29 June, however, a cannon set fire to the thatch of the Globe and burned the theatre to the ground, an event which pinpoints the date of a Shakespeare play with rare precision.[111]
Textual sources
In 1623, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two of Shakespeare's friends from the King's Men, published the First Folio, a collected edition of Shakespeare's plays. It contained 36 texts, including 18 printed for the first time.[112] Many of the plays had already appeared in quarto versions—flimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves.[113] No evidence suggests that Shakespeare approved these editions, which the First Folio describes as "stol'n and surreptitious copies".[114] Alfred Pollard termed some of them "bad quartos" because of their adapted, paraphrased or garbled texts, which may in places have been reconstructed from memory.[115] Where several versions of a play survive, each differs from the other. The differences may stem from copying or printing errors, from notes by actors or audience members, or from Shakespeare's own papers.[116] In some cases, for example Hamlet, Troilus and Cressida and Othello, Shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions. In the case of King Lear, however, while most modern additions do conflate them, the 1623 folio version is so different from the 1608 quarto, that the Oxford Shakespeare prints them both, arguing that they cannot be conflated without confusion.[117]
Poems

In 1593 and 1594, when the theatres were closed because of plague, Shakespeare published two narrative poems on erotic themes, Venus and Adonis and The Rape of Lucrece. He dedicated them to Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton. In Venus and Adonis, an innocent Adonis rejects the sexual advances of Venus; while in The Rape of Lucrece, the virtuous wife Lucrece is raped by the lustful Tarquin.[118] Influenced by Ovid's Metamorphoses,[119] the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust.[120] Both proved popular and were often reprinted during Shakespeare's lifetime. A third narrative poem, A Lover's Complaint, in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor, was printed in the first edition of the Sonnets in 1609. Most scholars now accept that Shakespeare wrote A Lover's Complaint. Critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects.[121] The Phoenix and the Turtle, printed in Robert Chester's 1601 Love's Martyr, mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover, the faithful turtle dove. In 1599, two early drafts of sonnets 138 and 144 appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim, published under Shakespeare's name but without his permission.[122]
Sonnets
Published in 1609, the Sonnets were the last of Shakespeare's non-dramatic works to be printed. Scholars are not certain when each of the 154 sonnets was composed, but evidence suggests that Shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership.[123] Even before the two unauthorised sonnets appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim in 1599, Francis Meres had referred in 1598 to Shakespeare's "sugred Sonnets among his private friends".[124] Few analysts believe that the published collection follows Shakespeare's intended sequence.[125] He seems to have planned two contrasting series: one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion (the "dark lady"), and one about conflicted love for a fair young man (the "fair youth"). It remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals, or if the authorial "I" who addresses them represents Shakespeare himself, though Wordsworth believed that with the sonnets "Shakespeare unlocked his heart".[126] The 1609 edition was dedicated to a "Mr. W.H.", credited as "the only begetter" of the poems.
It is not known whether this was written by Shakespeare himself or by the publisher, Thomas Thorpe, whose initials appear at the foot of the dedication page; nor is it known who Mr. W.H. was, despite numerous theories, or whether Shakespeare even authorised the publication.[128] Critics praise the Sonnets as a profound meditation on the nature of love, sexual passion, procreation, death, and time.[129]
Style

Main article: Shakespeare's style
Shakespeare's first plays were written in the conventional style of the day. He wrote them in a stylised language that does not always spring naturally from the needs of the characters or the drama.[130] The poetry depends on extended, sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits, and the language is often rhetorical—written for actors to declaim rather than speak. The grand speeches in Titus Andronicus, in the view of some critics, often hold up the action, for example; and the verse in The Two Gentlemen of Verona has been described as stilted.[131]
Soon, however, Shakespeare began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes. The opening soliloquy of Richard III has its roots in the self-declaration of Vice in medieval drama. At the same time, Richard’s vivid self-awareness looks forward to the soliloquies of Shakespeare's mature plays.[132] No single play marks a change from the traditional to the freer style. Shakespeare combined the two throughout his career, with Romeo and Juliet perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles.[133] By the time of Romeo and Juliet, Richard II, and A Midsummer Night's Dream in the mid-1590s, Shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry. He increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself.
Shakespeare's standard poetic form was blank verse, composed in iambic pentameter. In practice, this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line, spoken with a stress on every second syllable. The blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones. It is often beautiful, but its sentences tend to start, pause, and finish at the end of lines, with the risk of monotony.[134] Once Shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse, he began to interrupt and vary its flow. This technique releases the new power and flexibility of the poetry in plays such as Julius Caesar and Hamlet. Shakespeare uses it, for example, to convey the turmoil in Hamlet's mind:[135]
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
And prais'd be rashness for it—let us know
Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well...
Hamlet, Act 5, Scene 2, 4–8[135]
After Hamlet, Shakespeare varied his poetic style further, particularly in the more emotional passages of the late tragedies. The literary critic A. C. Bradley described this style as "more concentrated, rapid, varied, and, in construction, less regular, not seldom twisted or elliptical".[136] In the last phase of his career, Shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects. These included run-on lines, irregular pauses and stops, and extreme variations in sentence structure and length.[137] In Macbeth, for example, the language darts from one unrelated metaphor or simile to another: "was the hope drunk/ Wherein you dressed yourself?" (1.7.35–38); "...pity, like a naked new-born babe/ Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd/ Upon the sightless couriers of the air..." (1.7.21–25). The listener is challenged to complete the sense.[137] The late romances, with their shifts in time and surprising turns of plot, inspired a last poetic style in which long and short sentences are set against one another, clauses are piled up, subject and object are reversed, and words are omitted, creating an effect of spontaneity.[138]
Shakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre.[139] Like all playwrights of the time, he dramatised stories from sources such as Plutarch and Holinshed.[140] He reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible. This strength of design ensures that a Shakespeare play can survive translation, cutting and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama.[141] As Shakespeare’s mastery grew, he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech. He preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays, however. In Shakespeare's late romances, he deliberately returned to a more artificial style, which emphasised the illusion of theatre.[142]
Influence
Shakespeare's work has made a lasting impression on later theatre and literature. In particular, he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation, plot, language, and genre.[143] Until Romeo and Juliet, for example, romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy.[144] Soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events; but Shakespeare used them to explore characters' minds.[145] His work heavily influenced later poetry. The Romantic poets attempted to revive Shakespearean verse drama, though with little success. Critic George Steiner described all English verse dramas from Coleridge to Tennyson as "feeble variations on Shakespearean themes."[146]
Shakespeare influenced novelists such as Thomas Hardy, William Faulkner, and Charles Dickens. The American novelist Herman Melville's soliloquies owe much to Shakespeare; his Captain Ahab in Moby-Dick is a classic tragic hero, inspired by King Lear.[147] Scholars have identified 20,000 pieces of music linked to Shakespeare's works. These include two operas by Giuseppe Verdi, Otello and Falstaff, whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays.[148] Shakespeare has also inspired many painters, including the Romantics and the Pre-Raphaelites. The Swiss Romantic artist Henry Fuseli, a friend of William Blake, even translated Macbeth into German.[149] The psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud drew on Shakespearean psychology, in particular that of Hamlet, for his theories of human nature.
In Shakespeare's day, English grammar, spelling and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now,[150] and his use of language helped shape modern English.[151] Samuel Johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his A Dictionary of the English Language, the first serious work of its type.[152] Expressions such as "with bated breath" (Merchant of Venice) and "a foregone conclusion" (Othello) have found their way into everyday English speech.[153]
Critical reputation
Shakespeare was not revered in his lifetime, but he received his share of praise.[155] In 1598, the cleric and author Francis Meres singled him out from a group of English writers as "the most excellent" in both comedy and tragedy.[156] And the authors of the Parnassus plays at St John's College, Cambridge, numbered him with Chaucer, Gower and Spenser.[157] In the First Folio, Ben Jonson called Shakespeare the "Soul of the age, the applause, delight, the wonder of our stage", though he had remarked elsewhere that "Shakespeare wanted art".
Between the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the end of the 17th century, classical ideas were in vogue. As a result, critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson.[158] Thomas Rymer, for example, condemned Shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic. Nevertheless, poet and critic John Dryden rated Shakespeare highly, saying of Jonson, "I admire him, but I love Shakespeare".[159] For several decades, Rymer's view held sway; but during the 18th century, critics began to respond to Shakespeare on his own terms and acclaim what they termed his natural genius. A series of scholarly editions of his work, notably those of Samuel Johnson in 1765 and Edmond Malone in 1790, added to his growing reputation.[160] By 1800, he was firmly enshrined as the national poet.[161] In the 18th and 19th centuries, his reputation also spread abroad. Among those who championed him were the writers Voltaire, Goethe, Stendhal and Victor Hugo.[162]
During the Romantic era, Shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge; and the critic August Wilhelm Schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of German Romanticism.[163] In the 19th century, critical admiration for Shakespeare's genius often bordered on adulation.[164] "That King Shakespeare," the essayist Thomas Carlyle wrote in 1840, "does not he shine, in crowned sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet strongest of rallying signs; indestructible".[165] The Victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale.[166] The playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw mocked the cult of Shakespeare worship as "bardolatry". He claimed that the new naturalism of Ibsen's plays had made Shakespeare obsolete.[167]
The modernist revolution in the arts during the early 20th century, far from discarding Shakespeare, eagerly enlisted his work in the service of the avant-garde. The Expressionists in Germany and the Futurists in Moscow mounted productions of his plays. Marxist playwright and director Bertolt Brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of Shakespeare. The poet and critic T. S. Eliot argued against Shaw that Shakespeare's "primitiveness" in fact made him truly modern.[168] Eliot, along with G. Wilson Knight and the school of New Criticism, led a movement towards a closer reading of Shakespeare's imagery. In the 1950s, a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for "post-modern" studies of Shakespeare.[169] By the eighties, Shakespeare studies were open to movements such as structuralism, feminism, New Historicism, African American studies, and queer studies.[170][171]
Speculation about Shakespeare

Authorship
Main article: Shakespeare authorship question
Around 150 years after Shakespeare's death, doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him.[172] Proposed alternative candidates include Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe, and Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford.[173] Several "group theories" have also been proposed.[174] Only a small minority of academics believe there is reason to question the traditional attribution,[175] but interest in the subject, particularly the Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship, continues into the 21st century.[176]
Religion
Main article: Shakespeare's religion
Some scholars claim that members of Shakespeare's family were Catholics, at a time when Catholic practice was against the law.[177] Shakespeare's mother, Mary Arden, certainly came from a pious Catholic family. The strongest evidence might be a Catholic statement of faith signed by John Shakespeare, found in 1757 in the rafters of his former house in Henley Street. The document is now lost, however, and scholars differ as to its authenticity.[178] In 1591 the authorities reported that John Shakespeare had missed church "for fear of process for debt", a common Catholic excuse.[179] In 1606 the name of William's daughter Susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend Easter communion in Stratford.[179] Scholars find evidence both for and against Shakespeare's Catholicism in his plays, but the truth may be impossible to prove either way.[180]
Sexuality
Main article: Sexuality of William Shakespeare
Few details of Shakespeare's sexuality are known. At 18, he married the 26-year-old Anne Hathaway, who was pregnant. Susanna, the first of their three children, was born six months later on 26 May 1583. However, over the centuries readers have pointed to Shakespeare's sonnets as evidence of his love for a young man. Others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than sexual love.[181] At the same time, the 26 so-called "Dark Lady" sonnets, addressed to a married woman, are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons.[182]
Portraiture
Main article: Portraits of Shakespeare
There is no written description of Shakespeare's physical appearance and no evidence that he ever commissioned a portrait, so the Droeshout engraving, which Ben Jonson approved of as a good likeness,[183] and his Stratford monument provide the best evidence of his appearance. From the 18th century, the desire for authentic Shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted Shakespeare. That demand also led to the production of several fake portraits, as well as misattributions, repaintings and relabelling of portraits of other people
Classification of the plays
Shakespeare's works include the 36 plays printed in the First Folio of 1623, listed below according to their folio classification as comedies, histories and tragedies.[186] Two plays not included in the First Folio, The Two Noble Kinsmen and Pericles, Prince of Tyre, are now accepted as part of the canon, with scholars agreed that Shakespeare made a major contribution to their composition.[187] No Shakespearean poems were included in the First Folio.
In the late 19th century, Edward Dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances, and though many scholars prefer to call them tragicomedies, his term is often used.[188] These plays and the associated Two Noble Kinsmen are marked with an asterisk (*) below. In 1896, Frederick S. Boas coined the term "problem plays" to describe four plays: All's Well That Ends Well, Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida and Hamlet.[189] "Dramas as singular in theme and temper cannot be strictly called comedies or tragedies", he wrote. "We may therefore borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as Shakespeare's problem plays."[190] The term, much debated and sometimes applied to other plays, remains in use, though Hamlet is definitively classed as a tragedy.[191] The other problem plays are marked below with a double dagger (‡).
Plays thought to be only partly written by Shakespeare are marked with a dagger (†) below. Other works occasionally attributed to him are listed as apocrypha.
Difficulty of creating a precise chronology

Shakespearean scholars, beginning with Edmond Malone in 1790, have attempted to reconstruct the plays' relative chronology by various means, including contemporary allusions and records of performance, entries in the Stationers' Register, dates of publication, visceral impressions and studies of the development of the playwright's style and diction over time.
However, despite several hundred years of scholarship, there is no such thing as a precise or definitive chronology of Shakespeare's plays, as with the currently available evidence, it is impossible to determine exactly when many of them were written. This is especially pronounced in relation to the earlier plays. No authoritative chronological record survives from his lifetime, and dates of performance are often of limited use, as oftentimes it is impossible to determine if a given performance is the first performance. Dates of first publication are also relatively useless in determining a chronology, as about half of the plays were not published until the First Folio in 1623 (seven years after Shakespeare's death). Performance dates and publication dates are also problematic insofar as many of the plays were performed several years before they were published (for example, Titus Andronicus was performed in 1592, but not published until 1594; Henry VI, Part 3 was performed in 1592 but not published until 1595).
Another problem with publication dates is that many of the plays published prior to 1623 were pirated, unauthorised versions. These 'bad quartos' are often hypothesised to be memorially reconstructed from performances and then sold as if they were the actual play. In many cases however, scholars are unsure of the exact relationship between the play as it appeared in the 1623 First Folio and the original publication. The Taming of the Shrew is a good example; scholars continue to debate whether the 1594 quarto play A Pleasant Conceited Historie called the taming of a Shrew is an early draft of the 1623 play (from which it differs in many details – including character names), a bad quarto (i.e. a reported text), a source, an adaptation or simply another play based on a story now lost upon which Shakespeare also based his own play. Similarly, scholars continue to debate whether the 1594 quarto play The First Part of the Contention betwixt the two famous Houses of Yorke and Lancaster is an early draft of Henry VI, Part 2, a reconstruction from a performance, or both (a reconstruction of a performance of an early draft). The same ambiguity exists in relation to the 1595 octavo play The true Tragedie of Richard Duke of Yorke and Henry VI, Part 3.
Added to this, a number of orthodox scholars, as well as many anti-Stratfordian researchers (so called because they argue that someone other than William Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon was the author of what is generally known as the Shakespearean canon), disagree with the conventional dating system entirely.[a] E.A.J. Honigmann for example, although not an anti-Stratfordian, does dissent from the more common dating of the plays. In 1982, he developed what he refers to as the 'early start theory'. Most 20th century chronologies tend to be based on the work of E.K. Chambers in 1930, which posits that Shakespeare only began composing plays when he arrived in London sometime between 1588 and 1591. Honigmann, however, suggests he began writing plays sooner, and believes the chronology begins with Titus Andronicus, which he estimates was written in 1586, and continues with The Two Gentlemen of Verona, which he places in 1587.[1] Honigmann's theory does have the value of explaining how Shakespeare was able to write so many plays in such a short period of time upon arriving in London (at least six in the first two or three years), however, the majority of critics reject it.[2]
As with the early start theory, the majority of scholars likewise reject the Oxfordian theory, which argues that Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford wrote the plays. Dean Keith Simonton, a researcher into the factors of musical and literary creativity, especially Shakespeare's, has conducted several studies into Shakespeare's chronology, concluding "beyond a shadow of a doubt" that the traditional play chronology is roughly in the correct order, and that Shakespeare's works exhibit logical stylistic development over the course of his career, just as is found for other artistic geniuses.[3] Simonton also conducted a study into the correlation between the thematic content of Shakespeare’s plays and the political context in which they would have been written according to both traditional and Oxfordian datings. When lagged two years, the Stratfordian chronologies yielded substantially meaningful associations between thematic and political context, while the Oxfordian chronologies yielded no relationships, no matter how they were lagged.[4] Simonton, who had declared his Oxfordian sympathies, had expected the results to support Oxford's authorship, and was surprised when they did not, concluding that "that expectation was proven wrong" and that the results supported what has become the traditional chronology and dating.[5]
Chronology

There are five main scholarly editions of the Complete Works of Shakespeare: The Riverside Shakespeare (G. Blakemore Evans, 1974; 2nd edn., 1996), The Oxford Shakespeare: The Complete Works (Stanley Wells, Gary Taylor, John Jowett and William Montgomery, 1986; 2nd edn., 2005), The Norton Shakespeare: Based on the Oxford Edition (Stephen Greenblatt, Walter Cohen, Jean E. Howard and Katharine Eisaman Haus, 1997; 2nd edn., 2008), The Arden Shakespeare: Complete Works (Richard Proudfoot, Ann Thompson and David Scott Kastan, 1998; 2nd edn. 2002) and The RSC Shakespeare: William Shakespeare, Complete Works (Jonathan Bate and Eric Rasmussen, 2007).[6]
Arden presents the plays alphabetically without any attempt to construct an overall chronology. Oxford, Riverside, Norton and RSC all present chronologies which differ from one another. As such, dates in the following lists are estimates. This list adopts the Oxford Chronology, although none of the major chronologies has any real authority over any of the others.
Plays by Shakespeare

The Two Gentlemen of Verona (1589-1591)
First official record: Francis Meres' Palladis Tamia (1598)
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: adaptation by Benjamin Victor performed at David Garrick's Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in 1762.[7] Earliest known performance of straight Shakespearean text at Royal Opera House in 1784, although because of the inclusion of the play in Palladis Tamia, we know it was definitely performed in Shakespeare's day.[8]
Evidence: The play contains passages which seem to borrow from John Lyly's Midas (1589), meaning it could not have been written prior to 1589.[9] Additionally, Stanley Wells argues that the scenes involving more than four characters, "betray an uncertainty of technique suggestive of inexperience."[10] As such, the play is considered to be one of the first Shakespeare composed upon arriving in London (Roger Warren, following E.A.J. Honigmann, suggests he may have written it prior to his arrival) and, as such, he lacked theatrical experience. This places the date of composition as most likely somewhere between 1589 and 1591.[11]
The Taming of the Shrew (1590-1594)
First official record: possible version of play entered into Stationers' Register on 2 May 1594. First record of play as it exists today found in the First Folio (1623)
First published: possible version of play published in 1594 as A Pleasant Conceited Historie, called the taming of a Shrew. Play as it exists today first published in the First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: probably performed at Newington Butts Theatre, 13 June 1594, as The Tamynge of A Shrowe.[12]
Evidence: Scholars continue to debate the relationship between the 1594 A Shrew and the 1623 The Shrew. Some theorise that A Shrew is a reported text, meaning The Shrew must have been written prior to 2 May 1594; others, that A Shrew is an early draft, meaning The Shrew must have been completed sometime after 2 May 1594. Other critics argue that A Shrew could have been a source for The Shrew, or they could be two completely unrelated plays based on the same (now lost) source, or A Shrew could be an adaptation of The Shrew. Critics remain divided on this issue, and as such, dating the play is extremely difficult.[13]
Henry VI, Part 2 (1590-1591)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 12 March 1594
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1594 as The First part of the Contention betwixt the two famous Houses of Yorke and Lancaster, with the death of the good Duke Humphrey: And the banishment and death of the Duke of Suffolke, and the Tragicall end of the proud Cardinal of Winchester, with the notable Rebellion of Jack Cade: and the Duke of Yorke's first claim unto the Crowne. Play as it exists today first published in the First Folio (1623) as The second Part of Henry the Sixt, with the death of the Good Duke Humfrey
First recorded performance: a performance directed by James Anderson was staged at the Surrey Theatre on 23 April, 1864.[14]
Evidence: It is known that 3 Henry VI was on stage by early 1592, and it is also known that 3 Henry VI was definitely a sequel to 2 Henry VI, meaning 2 Henry VI must have been on stage by early 1592 as well. This places the likely date of composition as 1590-1591.
Henry VI, Part 3 (1590-1591)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers Register in 1595
First published: version of the play published in octavo in 1595 as The True Tragedie of Richard Duke of Yorke, and the death of good King Henrie the Sixt, with the Whole Contention betweene the two Houses Lancaster and Yorke. Play as it exists today first published in the First Folio (1623) as The thid Part of Henry the Sixt, with the death of the Duke of Yorke
First recorded performance: adaptations dominated the stage for many years. The earliest known performance of the straight Shakespearean text was in 1906, when F.R. Benson directed a production at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre.[15]
Evidence: It is known that the play was on stage by early 1592 as in A Groatsworth of Wit, Bought with a Million of Repentance, Robert Greene mocked Shakespeare by parodying a line from 3 Henry VI. Groatsworth was registered in the Stationers' Register in September 1592, meaning True Tragedy/3 Henry VI must have been on stage prior to 23 June 1592 as that was when the government shut the London theatres due to an outbreak of plague. To have been on stage by June 1592, the play was most likely written some time in 1590 or 1591.
Henry VI, Part 1 (1591)
First official record: possibly in Philip Henslowe's Diary, 3 March 1592. Henslowe reports seeing a new play entitled Harey Vj (i.e. Henry VI) which could be a reference to 1 Henry VI. Additionally, an entry is found in the Stationers' Register in September, 1598 which refers to "The first and Second parte of Henry VJ". Most critics however feel this probably refers to what we today call 2 Henry VI and 3 Henry VI, not 1 Henry VI.[16] The first definite record of the play was not until the First Folio in 1623, as the Henry VI trilogy was not included in Meres' Palladis Tamia.
First published: First Folio (1623) as The first Part of Henry the Sixt
First recorded performance: possibly on 3 March 1592 at the The Rose in Southwark, as seen by Philip Henslowe; earliest definite performance was on 13 March 1738 at Covent Garden.[17]
Evidence: On 3 March 1592, Philip Henslow saw a new play entitled Harey Vj, but gives no further information. In August, Thomas Nashe published Piers Penniless his Supplication to the Devil, in which he refers to a play he had recently seen featuring a rousing depiction of Lord Talbot, a major character in 1 Henry VI. Most critics take Nashe's reference to Talbot as proof that the play Henslow saw was 1 Henry VI. As such, to have been a new play in March 1592, it must have been written some time in 1591.[18] Furthermore, many critics consider 1 Henry VI to have been a prequel to the successful two-part play The Contention and True Tragedy.[19]
Titus Andronicus (1591-1592)
First official record: Philip Henslowe's Diary, 23 January 1594.
First published: version of the play published in quarto in February 1594 as The Most Lamentable Romaine Tragedy of Titus Andronicus. There are only minor differences between the 1594 and subsequent 1623 texts (i.e. the 1594 text is not considered a bad quarto).[20] The Folio text appeared under the title The Lamentable Tragedy of Titus Andronicus
First recorded performance: 23 January 1594 at the Rose Theatre in Southwark.[21]
Evidence: Obviously, to have been on stage by January 1594, the play must have been written some time prior to that. According to the title page of the 1594 quarto, the play had been performed by Pembroke's Men, a company which ceased performing in September 1593. As such, the play must have been composed some time prior to September. Additionally, it is unlikely to have been written later than June 1592, as that was when the London theatres were closed due to an outbreak of plague. The theatres would remain shut for the better part of two years, not fully reopening until March 1594 and Shakespeare concentrated most of his energies during this period on poetry. As such, the play was most likely composed sometime between late-1591 and early 1592.
Richard III (1592)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 20 October 1597
First published: version of the play published in quarto in December 1597 as The tragedy of King Richard the third. Containing, his treacherous plots against his brother Clarence: the pittiefull murther of his innocent nephewes: his tyrannicall usurpation: with the whole course of his detested life, and most deserved death. Folio text appears under the title The Tragedy of Richard the Third, with the Landing of Earle Richmond, and the Battell at Bosworth Field
First recorded performance: in 1602, John Manningham mentions seeing Richard Burbage playing the role of Richard III in Shakespeare's play, but he offers no further information. The play was definitely performed at St James's Palace on November 16 and/or 17, 1633 by the King's Men.[22]
Evidence: It is known that Richard III was definitely a sequel to 3 Henry VI, which was on-stage by 23 June 1592, hence Richard III must have been written later than early 1592. Additionally, the play has been argued to contain evidence that it was originally written for Strange's Men, but then rewritten for Pembroke's Men, a company which formed in mid-1592.[23] Also, with the closure of the theatres due to an outbreak of plague in June 1592, the play was unlikely to have been written any later than that, all of which suggests a date of composition as sometime in early-1592.
Edward III[24] (1592-1593)
First official record: entered into the Stationers' Register on 1 December 1595
First published: published in quarto in 1596 as The Raigne of King Edward the third
First recorded performance: 6 March 1911 at the Little Theatre in London, under the title The King and the Countess, directed by Gertrude Kingston and William Poel.[25]
Evidence: Obviously, the play was written by December 1595. According to the title page of the quarto, the play had recently been performed, but no company information is provided. This could mean that the company that performed the play had disbanded during the closure of the theatres from June 1592 to March 1594. Furthermore, internal evidence suggests that the play may have been specifically written for Pembroke's Men, who ceased performing in September 1593. This places the date of composition as somewhere between early 1592 and September 1593.[26]
The Comedy of Errors (1594)
First official record: if this is the same as the play titled "The Night of Errors", it was performed on 28 December 1594 at Gray's Inn.[27]
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: 28 December 1594 at Gray's Inn, performed by the Lord Chamberlain's Men.[28]
Evidence: Probably the "errors" referred to in Meres' Palladia Tamia.
Love's Labour's Lost (1594-1595)
First official record: version of the play published in 1598 (this play was never entered into the Stationers' Register)
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1598 as A Pleasant Conceited Comedie called Loves labors lost
First recorded performance: according to the quarto title page, the play was performed at court for Queen Elizabeth sometime over Christmas 1597.
Evidence:
Love's Labour's Won (1595)
First official record: Francis Meres' Palladis Tamia (1598)
First published: the play has never been published
First recorded performance: there are no recorded performances of the play
Evidence: The play is mentioned in a booklist by Christopher Hunt in August 1603. Aside from this, and the mention in Meres, there is no other evidence for the existence of the play (although the title suggests it was a sequel to Love's Labour's Lost, hence its position in the Oxford chronology). Whether or not this play ever existed is open to debate. The inclusion in Meres has been explained by some critics as a reference to a play we now know as another name. As neither The Taming of the Shrew nor Much Ado About Nothing were included in Meres, these two plays are often cited as possibilities. All's Well That Ends Well has also been suggested.[29]
Richard II (1595)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 29 August 1597
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1597 as The Tragedie of King Richard the second. 1623 Folio text appeared under the title The life and death of King Richard the Second
First recorded performance: possible performance on 9 December 1595 at Sir Edward Hoby's house in Canon Row, watched by Sir Robert Cecil; earliest definite recorded performance at the Globe Theatre on 7 February 7 1601.[30]
Evidence:
Romeo and Juliet (1593-1595)
First official record: version of the play published in 1597 (this play was never entered into the Stationers' Register)
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1597 as An excellent conceited tragedie of Romeo and Juliet
First recorded performance: 1 March 1662 at Lincoln's Inn Fields, directed by William Davenant.[31]
Evidence:
A Midsummer Night's Dream (1595)
First official record: Francis Meres' Palladis Tamia (1598)
First published: in quarto in November or December 1600
First recorded performance:
Evidence:
The Life and Death of King John (1596-1597)
First official record: Francis Meres' Palladis Tamia (1598)
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: although there are several references to the play having been performed during the seventeenth century, none of them offer any specific details, and the first definite performance was on 26 February 1737 at Covent Garden.[32]
Evidence:
The Merchant of Venice (1596)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 22 July 1598
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1598 as The most excellent historie of the merchant of Venice. With the extreame crueltie of Shylocke the Jewe towards the sayd merchant, in cutting a just pound of his flesh: and the obtayning of Portia by the choyse of three chests
First recorded performance: the play was performed at court for King James on 10 February 1605.[33]
Evidence: The play was obviously in existence by 1598, however, other evidence places its date of composition as earlier, probably 1596. Shakespeare's source for the casket subplot is believed to have been Richard Robinson's translation of the Gesta romanorum, which wasn't published until late 1595. In addition, Salarino's reference to "my wealthy Andrew docked in sand" is thought to refer to the San Andréas, a Spanish merchant vessel that ran aground in Essex in June 1596. It is also thought by scholars that the play was written to capitalise on the enormous success of Christopher Marlowe's The Jew of Malta, which was first performed in 1596.[34]
Henry IV, Part 1 (1596)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 25 February 1598
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1598 as The History of Henrie the Fourth, with the battell at Shrewsburie between the King and Lord Henry Percy, surnamed Hotspur of the North, with the humorous conceits of Sir John Falstaffe 1623 Folio text appeared under the title The First Part of Henry the Fourth, with the Life and Death of Henry Sirnamed Hot-spurre
First recorded performance: the play was probably performed at court for an Ambassador from Burgundy on 6 March 1600.
Evidence:
The Merry Wives of Windsor (1597)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 18 January 1602
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1602 as A most pleasaunt and excellent conceited comedie, of Sir John Falstaffe, and the merrie wives of Windsor. Entermixed with sundrie variable and pleasing humors, of Sir Hugh the Welch knight, Justice Shallow, and his wise cousin M. Slender. With the swaggering vaine of Auncient Pistoll, and Corporall Nym
First recorded performance: 4 November 1604 at Whitehall Palace.
Evidence: Textual evidence and certain topical allusions suggest the play was composed as a specially commissioned piece for a Garter Feast (an annual meeting of the Order of the Garter), possibly the Feast on 23 April 1597. It is theorised that Shakespeare interrupted his composition of 2 Henry IV somewhere around Act 3-Act 4, so as to concentrate on writing Merry Wives.[35]
Henry IV, Part 2 (1596-1597)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 23 August 1600
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1600 as The second part of Henrie the fourth, continuing to his death, and coronation of Henrie the fift. With the humours of Sir John Falstaffe, and swaggering Pistoll 1623 Folio text appeared under the title The Second Part of Henry the Fourth, Containing his Death and the Coronation of King Henry the Fift
First recorded performance: a play entitled Sir John Falstaffe was performed at Whitehall over the Christmas period of 1612 which is believed to be 2 Henry IV.[36]
Evidence: The play could not have been written any earlier than January 1596, as it contains an allusion to the Sultanate of Muhammad III, who didn't become sultan until that date.
Much Ado About Nothing (1598)
First official record: version of the play published in 1600 (this play was never entered into the Stationers' Register)
First published: Much adoe about Nothing was published in quarto in 1600
First recorded performance: 14 February 1613, performed at court as part of the festivities to celebrate the marriage of Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia and Frederick V, Elector Palatine
Evidence: The play was not included in Francis Meres' Palladis Tamia, which was registered on 7 September 1598, suggesting it hadn't been performed prior to that date. Furthermore, evidence in the quarto text suggests that Shakespeare originally wrote the role of Dogberry for William Kempe, however, records indicate that Kempe left the Lord Chamberlain's Men sometime in late 1598, so the play must have been written before then. As such, it was most likely composed sometime in the latter half of 1598 and was certainly completed before the new year.[37]
Henry V (1599)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 14 August 1600
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1600 as The cronicle history of Henry the fift, with his battell fought at Agin Court in France. Togither with Auntient Pistoll. 1623 Folio text appeared under the title The Life of Henry the Fift
First recorded performance: 7 January 1605 at the Globe Theatre, performed by the Lord Chamberlain's Men.[38]
Evidence: Of all Shakespeare's plays, Henry V is one of the easiest to date. A reference by the Chorus to the Earl of Essex's Irish expedition of 1599 means the play was most likely written sometime between March 1599 (when Essex left for Ireland) and September 1599 (when he returned).[39]
Julius Caesar (1599)
First official record: Thomas Platter the Younger's Diary, 21 September 1599
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Tragedie of Julius Caesar
First recorded performance: 21 September 1599 at the newly opened Globe Theatre[40]
Evidence: Obviously, the play was completed by September 1599, and may have been composed specifically as the opening play for the new theatre. In addition, because the play is not mentioned in Meres' Palladis Tamia, registered in September 1598, it was unlikely to have been performed prior to then. This places the date of composition as somewhere between September 1598 and September 1599. Additionally, textual analysis has connected the play to Henry V, which was almost certainly written in 1599, suggesting so too was Julius Caesar.[41]
As You Like It (1599)
First official record: on 4 August 1600 a staying order was entered in the Stationers' Register for As yo like yt
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: possibly on 2 December 1603 at Wilton House in Wiltshire, where a play was performed for James I;[42] earliest definite performance on 20 December 1740, at Drury Lane.[43]
Evidence:
Twelfth Night (1601)
First official record: John Manningham mentions in his Diary having seen the play performed in February 1602
First published: First Folio (1623) as Twelfe Night, Or what you will
First recorded performance: John Manningham saw the play performed at the Middle Temple on Candlemas 1602, which fell on 2 February.[44]
Evidence:
Hamlet (1599-1601)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 26 July 1602. Folio text appeared under the title The Tragedie of Hamlet, Prince of Denmarke
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1603 as The tragicall historie of Hamlet Prince of Denmarke
First recorded performance: the entry in the Stationers' Register in July 1602 states that the play was "latelie Acted by the Lo: Chamberleyne his servantes", however, it offers no further information. The first definite performance took place on a ship anchored off the coast of Africa in September 1607, the Red Dragon. The play was performed by the crew.[45]
Evidence: Because the versions of Hamlet which appeared in 1603, in 1604 (again in quarto) and in the First Folio of 1623 differ so much from one another, dating the play is exceptionally difficult. There is also the problem of the Ur-Hamlet, a possible source used by Shakespeare and which is now lost. Others however, feel that Ur-Hamlet (if it ever existed) was most likely an early draft. Obviously, the play was written sometime between September 1598 (as it was not included in Meres' Palladis Tamia) and July 1602 (when it was registered in the Stationers Register). Furthermore, internal references to Julius Caesar would indicate the play could not have been written any earlier than September 1599. Additionally, in his 1598 copy of an edition of Geoffrey Chaucer's works, Gabriel Harvey has written that Shakespeare's "Lucrece & his tragedie of Hamlet, prince of Denmarke, have it in them, to please the wiser sort". Harvey also mentions the Earl of Essex as still alive, which would suggest he wrote the note prior to 25 February 1601, when Essex was executed. This would seem to narrow the date of composition to between September 1599 and February 1601, however not all scholars accept the veracity of Harvey's note. Internal evidence in the play has also been cited, usually as illustrative of a date of composition of 1600 or 1601.[46] As such, many scholars interpret the available evidence as suggestive of a date of initial composition sometime in 1600, with subsequent revisions. This dating, however, is far from universally accepted.[47]
Troilus and Cressida (1601)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 7 February 1603
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1609 as The historie of Troylus and Cresseida. 1623 Folio text appeared under the title The Tragedie of Troilus and Cressida
First recorded performance: an adaptation of the play by John Dryden was staged in 1679.[48]
Evidence:
Measure for Measure (1600-1603)
First official record: revels accounts for Christmas 1604-1605 state the play was performed over the holidays
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: Revels accounts for Christmas 1604-1605 indicate the play was performed at Whitehall on St. Stephen's Day 1604.
Evidence: This play is notoriously difficult to date specifically partly due to a lack of solid evidence and partly due to the theory that the text which appeared in the First Folio was not Shakespeare's original text. Obviously the play was written (in some form) prior to December 1604. The only other evidence are possible topical references within the play itself which would seem to indicate a date most likely in 1602,[49], however this is not universally accepted by all scholars. Furthermore, there is a theory that Thomas Middleton rewrote the play after Shakespeare's death, possibly in 1621, which throws further doubt on the exact date of initial composition.[50]
Othello (1602-1603)
First official record: revels accounts refer to the play having been performed in November 1604
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1622 as The Tragedy of Othello, the Moore of Venice
First recorded performance: revels accounts indicate the play was performed at Whitehall on 1 November 1604.
Evidence:
King Lear (1603-1606)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 26 November 1607 as A booke called. Mr William Shakespeare his historye of Kinge Lear
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1608 as The true chronicle historie of the life and death of King Lear and his three daughters. With the unfortunate life of Edgar, sonne and heire to the Earle of Gloster, and his sullen and assumed humor of Tom of Bedlam
First recorded performance: according to the Stationers' Register, the play was performed at Whitehall on 26 December 1606
Evidence: the play must have been written by late 1606. Additionally, most scholars agree that it couldn't have been written any earlier than 1603, as it seems to be partially indebted to Samuel Harsnett's Declaration of Egregious Popish Impostures (entered into the Stationers' Register on 16 March 1603). This would place the date of composition as somewhere between March 1603 and December 1606. A further possible source for the play has evoked some disagreement however. Whilst many scholars feel that Shakespeare used the anonymous play The True Chronicle History of King Leir (entered into the Stationers' Register on 8 May 1605), and hence must have been written between May 1605 and December 1606, others argue that the relationship between the two plays has been inverted, and The True Chronicle History of King Leir was actually written to capitalise on the success of Shakespeare's play, which was probably written in 1603 or 1604. No real critical consensus has been reached regarding this disagreement.[51]
Timon of Athens (1605-1606)
First official record: entered into the Stationers' Register on 8 May 1623
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Life of Timon of Athens
First recorded performance: in 1674, Thomas Shadwell wrote an adaptation of the play under the title Timon of Athens: Or, The Man-hater
Evidence: This play is another which is extremely difficult to date precisely, not the least cause of which is the claim that Shakespeare may only have written part of it, with the play being subsequently edited by Thomas Middleton. It has also been argued that the play could not have been staged at the Globe, and hence, Shakespeare's involvement may be minimal. There is no reference to the play whatsoever prior to 1623, and as such, evidence for its date of composition must come from within the play itself.
Macbeth (1603-1606)
First official record: possibly by Simon Forman, who records seeing the play in April 1611. However, there is considerable debate amongst scholars as to whether Forman's account is genuine
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Tragedie of Macbeth
First recorded performance: possibly in April 1611, recorded by Simon Forman
Evidence: A reference to 'dire combustion' seems to allude to the Gunpowder Plot of 1605. Most scholars place the date of composition as somewhere between 1603 and 1607, and efforts to narrow that date have proved inconclusive. In 1790, Edward Malone dated the play 1606, and most scholars agree with this date, however they acknowledge that there is little solid evidence, and instead, the date simply seems correct in the context of Shakespeare's other work of the period. One piece of evidence cited as suggestive of a date in late 1606 is the sisters "sev'n-nights, nine times nine" chant. It has been suggested that this alludes to a real ship which was lost in a tempest in December 1604, before rejoining the fleet and eventually returning to harbour in June 1606 after 567 days at sea. 7x9x9 is 567, which some believe is a reference to the voyage. Furthermore, the name of the ship was Tiger's Whelp, and the Weird Sisters do allude in the play to a ship called the Tiger. If this is correct, the play could not have been written any earlier than July 1606.[52]
Antony and Cleopatra (1606)
First official record: entered into the Stationers' Register on 20 May 1608
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Tragedie of Antony and Cleopatra
First recorded performance: according to the 1669 records for the Lord Chamberlain's Men, the play had recently been performed at Blackfriars, but no further information is given; earliest definite performance in 1759 when it was staged by David Garrick.
Evidence:
All's Well That Ends Well (1606-1607)
First official record: First Folio (1623)
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: 1741 at Goodman's Fields Theatre, directed by Henry Giffard.[53]
Evidence:
Pericles, Prince of Tyre (1608-1609)
First official record: version of the play entered into the Stationers' Register on 20 May 1608
First published: version of the play published in quarto in 1609 as The Late and much admired Play Called Pericles, Prince of Tyre, with the true Relation of the whole History, adventures, and fortunes of the sayd Prince: As also, the no lesse strange, and worthy accidents, in the Birth and Life, of his Daughter Mariana
First recorded performance: April 1607, seen by the Venetian ambassador to England, Zorzi Giustinian.[54]
Evidence: Because the play was not included in the First Folio, there has always been doubt as to whether or not Shakespeare actually wrote it at all. The general theory today is that Shakespeare wrote an initial version of the play, which was then altered by George Wilkins. In 1608, Wilkins published a prose narrative of Pericles which contains several lines that seem to recall specific lines in the play, leading to the conclusion that his editing of the play led him to the composition of the prose. This would place Wilkins' revision in 1607-1608. Furthermore, textual analysis of the play have led it to be placed as near contemporaneous with All's Well That Ends Well and Coriolanus, which would confirm a date of 1607-1608.[55]
Coriolanus (1608)
First official record: entered into the Stationers' Register on 8 November 1623
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Tragedy of Coriolanus
First recorded performance: an adaptation of the play by Nahum Tate was performed at Drury Lane in 1681, under the title The Ingratitude of a Common-Wealth
Evidence:
The Winter's Tale (1594-1611)
First official record: possibly by Simon Forman on 15 March 1611 when he saw the play at the Globe
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: possibly on 15 March 1611, when Simon Forman saw it performed at the Globe
Evidence: Of all Shakespeare's plays, this is perhaps the most difficult to date with any degree of accuracy. It has provoked great debate amongst scholars, who posit dates ranging from 1594 to 1611. Obviously the play was written by March 1611. Today, most critics gravitate towards the later date, with 1610-1611 receiving the most support. There is no external evidence other than Forman's note, and some believe there is a reference in the play to Ben Jonson's Oberon, which would date the play as late 1611 but, the allusion (which not all critics agree it is) could have been added at a later date, and hence doesn't preclude an earlier date. Other critics have posited a revisions theory, that the play may have been written early in his career and then revised by him at a later date. Textual analyses are the only available evidence, but unlike many of the plays, they are inconclusive, and indicate that the play could indeed belong to the beginning of his career or the end.
Cymbeline (1610-1611)
First official record: Simon Forman saw it performed at the Globe in 1611
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Tragedie of Cymbeline
First recorded performance: In an undated entry, Simon Forman saw the play performed at the Globe in 1611
Evidence:
The Tempest (1610-1611)
First official record: revels accounts refer to the play having been performed in November 1611
First published: First Folio (1623)
First recorded performance: 1 November 1611, at Whitehall for James I, performed by the King’s Men.
Evidence:
Cardenio (1612-1613)
First official record: entered into the Stationers' Register in 1653, attributed to William Shakespeare and John Fletcher
First published: an adaptation was published in 1727 by Lewis Theobald entitled , Double Falshood, or the Distrest Lovers
First recorded performance: 1613, performed at the Globe by the King's Company
Henry VIII, or All is True (1613)
First official record:
First published: First Folio (1623) as The Famous History of the Life of King Henry the Eight
First recorded performance: 29 June 1613, the night the Globe burnt down.
Evidence: Probably written in collaboration with John Fletcher
The Two Noble Kinsmen (1613)
First official record: entered into the Stationer' Register on 8 April 1834
First published: published in quarto in 1634
First recorded performance:
Evidence: Not included in the First Folio; written in collaboration with John Fletcher.
Apocrypha

Sir John Oldcastle (1600)
First official record:
First published:
First recorded performance:
Evidence: Philip Henslowe's diary records it was actually written by Anthony Munday, Michael Drayton, Richard Hathwaye and Robert Wilson in collaboration.
Sir Thomas More (Shakespeare's involvement: 1603-1604)
First official record: 1728, MS owned by John Murray
First published: 1844 by the Shakespeare Society
First recorded performance: at the Nottingham Playhouse in 1964, starring Ian McKellen.[56]
Evidence: The original play is believed to have been written in 1591-1592 by Anthony Munday and Henry Chettle. Due to censorship issues and problems staging the play because of an unusually large number of speaking parts, the play was substantially revised by Thomas Heywood, Thomas Dekker and (possibly) William Shakespeare. When the revision took place is difficult to determine, as evidence places it at some time between 1593 and 1604, although the majority of critics seem to favour a later date of 1603-1604.[57] Whether or not Shakespeare was involved with the writing of the play is still open to debate. The argument is that three pages of the MS are in his handwriting, but this is not universally accepted. Of the various editions of the complete works, only the Oxford 2nd edition of 2005 includes the play. However, Oxford have never issued a stand-alone scholarly edition of the play, neither have Cambridge, Norton or Penguin. A scholarly edition is available under the Revels Plays banner and in the Arden Shakespeare howevThe London Prodigal (1604)
First official record:
First published: 1605
First recorded performance:
Evidence: Acted by Shakespeare's company and published under his name, but the style is not his.
A Yorkshire Tragedy (1605)
First official record:
First published: 1608
First recorded performance:
Evidence: Acted by Shakespeare's company and published under his name, but the style is not his. More probably by Thomas,Middleton.


