John Perkins Cushing (April 22, 1787 – 1862), called "Ku-Shing" by the Chinese, was a wealthy Boston sea merchant, opium smuggler, and philanthropist. His sixty-foot pilot schooner, the Sylph, won the first recorded American yacht race in 1832, and the town of Belmont, Massachusetts is named after his estate.

Perkins was born in Boston, Massachusetts to Robert and Ann Perkins (Maynard) Cushing. His father's Cushing ancestor had emigrated to Hingham, Massachusetts, during the early years of the Massachusetts Bay Colony. Cushing's sister Nancy later married Henry Higginson. When his mother died of smallpox, Cushing was raised by his uncle, Thomas Handasyd Perkins, and in 1803 at age 16 sailed for China to become clerk in his uncle's counting house. The head of the firm in China soon fell ill and died at sea. Cushing thus arrived in China to find himself Perkins & Company's sole agent. There he remained for nearly 30 years.

Cushing managed the affairs of the firm skillfully and was soon taken into partnership. Under Cushing, the firm of Perkins & Company was formally established in Canton in 1806. At one point he made a good profit during a famine in China by importing rice. During the War of 1812, the family loaned their money out--at 18 percent interest--to other merchants in Canton. But the fur trade paled and when hard cash grew harder to come by, a search began for a substitute for the furs and specie that had been foundations of Boston's China trade. Opium seemed the ideal commodity. By the 1820s Cushing was known as the most influential of all the foreigners in Canton, and had struck up a close relationship with the hong merchant Houqua, who at his death in 1843 was said to be the richest man in the world.

In 1820 Cushing brought on his cousin Thomas Tunno Forbes to train for the business. Forbes, however, died in 1827 before assuming control of the firm. Cushing, eager for retirement and lacking a suitable replacement, made arrangements to dissolve Perkins & Company by an 1827 consolidation with Russell & Co (created by China trader Samuel Russell in 1823).

He returned to Boston in 1830 with Eastern manners and manservants, and soon married the only daughter of the Rev. John Sylvester John Gardiner of Trinity Church, Boston. It was rumored at the time that there was much disappointment among the young ladies of Boston, who, as some one expressed it, "beset him like bumblebees about a lump of sugar."

Cushing built himself a handsome mansion on Summer Street, acquired a splendid 200-acre (0.81 km2) estate in Watertown named "Bellmont" (now part of Belmont, Massachusetts which is named after his estate), and erected one of the finest conservatories in New England. His house was one of the finest and most comfortable of any in or near Boston. It was a double one-—a house within a house-—and thus warm in winter and cool in summer. Its spacious grounds and beautiful gardens were open to the public, and thousands of visitors went out there each year. Once when the assessors called upon him to question him as to his taxes, he asked, "What is the entire amount to be raised?" The sum was named by the assessors, whereupon Mr. Cushing said, "You can charge the whole amount to me."

Cushing was very fond of the Perkins family, and often brought to the house presents of large boxes of the finest white sugar. He spent much time at their house, and when one heard "deuce, ace, tray", it was safe to assume that either William Appleton or Cushing was engaged in a backgammon contest with Colonel Perkins.
Wallace was playing for Scottish league side Dumbarton - having signed for them from Scottish Junior club Yoker Athletic - when he was purchased for £70,000 by the then Coventry manager Gordon Milne. Wallace soon settled into the Coventry side with his small frame perfectly complimenting his larger strike partner Mick Ferguson. He was adored by the Coventry City faithful and his heroic antics both one and off the field endeared him to the fans and his classic ginger curly perm haircut made him stand out as much as his acrobatic goals. He emerged from a bad car accident whilst at the club sporting a deep scar on the forehead and also detached a retina whilst playing for Coventry at Norwich.The 1977-78 saw Ian playing in Coventry's most exciting top flight team. A side containing Ferguson, Tommy Hutchison, Terry Yorath, Graham Oakey, Bobby MacDonald and Jim Blyth played a brand of attacking football that swept many teams aside, often by large margins of victory.

He was sold to neighbouring Midlands club (and then European champions) Nottingham Forest in July 1980 for the then massive sum of £1.25 million and went on be Forest's top scorer for two seasons running. He subsequently moved to French club Brest before returning to English football with Sunderland in the years 1985-1986. He had spells with clubs in Portugal and Australia at the end of his playing career.
[edit] International career

Whilst a prolific goalscorer with top-flight clubs Coventry City and Nottingham Forest, Wallace surprisingly only played three times for his country. He scored his only international goal in the meeting with Bulgaria in February 1978, which featured his Coventry team-mate Jim Blyth in goal.
[edit] Dumbarton manager

He returned to Dumbarton as manager in November 1996 replacing Jim Fallon. He was dismissed from this job in October 1999 and was replaced by Jimmy Brown.
[edit] Personal life

Wallace appeared in Dumbarton Sheriff's Court on a charge of assault after a dispute with his partner.[1] At this time Wallace was an alcoholic and had appeared intoxicated at an earlier hearing.[1]
[edit] References

    ^ a b FALLEN SCOTLAND IDOL'S KNIFE ATTACK ON LOVER, Daily Record, 11 January 2006.

    Brown, Jim (2000). Coventry: An Illustrated History. Desert Island Books Ltd. ISBN 1-874287-36=8. I have to write about this wallace its my homework I hate it
The lauda (pl. laude) or lauda spirituale was the most important form of vernacular sacred song in Italy in the late medieval era and Renaissance. Laude remained popular into the nineteenth century.

Originally, the lauda was a monophonic (single-voice) form, but a polyphonic type developed in the early fifteenth century. The early lauda was probably influenced by the music of the troubadours, since it shows similarities in rhythm, melodic style, and especially notation. Many troubadours had fled their original homelands, such as Provence, during the Albigensian Crusade in the early 13th century, and settled in northern Italy where their music was influential in the development of the Italian secular style.

A monophonic form of the lauda spread widely throughout Europe during the 13th and 14th centuries as the music of the flagellants; this form was known as the Geisslerlied, and picked up the vernacular language in each country it affected, including Germany, Poland, England and Scandinavia.

After 1480 the singing of laude was extremely popular in Florence, since the monk Savonarola (and others) had prohibited the dissemination of any other style of sacred vernacular music. Many of Josquin's motets and masses are based on melodies he heard in laude during his sojourns in Italy around this time.

Laude had a resurgence of popularity again at the time of the Counter-Reformation, since one of the musical goals of the Council of Trent was to increase the intelligibility of text, and the simple, easily understood laude provided an ideal example.

The lauda declined in importance with the development of the oratorio.
[edit] References and further reading

    John Stevens and William F. Prizer. "Lauda spirituale", The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie (London: Macmillan, 1980), x, 538-543.
    Gustave Reese, Music in the Renaissance. New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 1954. ISBN 0-393-09530-4
    The New Harvard Dictionary of Music, ed. Don Randel. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1986. ISBN 0-674-61525-5
    Richard H. Hoppin, Medieval Music. New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 1978. ISBN 0-393-09090-6
The College of Physicians of Philadelphia is the oldest private medical society in the United States. Founded in 1787 by 24 Philadelphia physicians "to advance the Science of Medicine, and thereby lessen human misery, by investigating the diseases and remedies which are peculiar to our country" and to promote "order and uniformity in the practice of Physick," it has made important contributions to medical education and research. The College hosts the Mütter Museum, a gallery of 19th-century specimens, teaching models, instruments, and photographs, as well as the Historical Medical Library, which is one of the country's oldest medical libraries.[3][4][5]

The College of Physicians of Philadelphia Building, designed by the firm of Cope & Stewardson and built in 1909, was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark in October, 2008. It was also then listed on the National Register of Historic Places.[3][2
Current programs

The College remains a private membership organization of physicians, whose members or "fellows" attend regular meetings on professional education and development. Starting in 1995 the C. Everett Koop Community Health Information Center has provided current information about medical and health topics to the general public. The Francis Clark Wood Institute for the History of Medicine, founded in 1976, supports seminars and conferences in the history of medicine and the Mütter Museum and the College Library specialize in the history of medicine rather than general medical topics. The Library and Museum are open to the public.[6]
[edit] Museum
Main article: Mütter Museum

Founded by Thomas Dent Mütter in 1858 for medical research, the museum's contents include medical oddities, anatomical and pathological specimens, and antique medical equipment. Anatomical specimens include the conjoined liver of Siamese twins Chang and Eng Bunker; and a section of the brain of Charles J. Guiteau, who assassinated President Garfield. Medical instruments include a wooden stethoscope and Marie Curie's quartz-piezo electrometer[7]
[edit] College library
Their library was established in 1788 and served as Philadelphia's main medical library for over 150 years. It is now a research library specializing in the history of medicine. De sedibus et causis morborum (On the Seats and Causes of Disease) by Giambattista Morgagni was one of the first acquisitions of the library. This book, published in Venice in 1761, was given by Morgagni to John Morgan, a founding fellow of the College. The library's collection includes over 400 editions printed before 1501, known as incunables, which they claim is the best-cataloged incunable collection in the world. Over 12,000 other rare books including De motu cordis (On the Motion of the Heart) (1628) by William Harvey and De humani corporis fabrica (On the Fabric of the Human Body) (1543) by Andreas Vesalius are in the collection.[8] The library is open to the public three days per week, by appointment only. Many historical items have been digitalized and are available online.[9]
[edit] History of the college

Because of the Quaker tradition of philanthropy, Philadelphia became a leader in the development of medicine in the 18th century. America's first public hospital, founded 1752, and first medical school, founded 1765, were in Philadelphia, as were some of the earliest public health measures, including America's first public water supply in the 1790s. By 1783 Benjamin Rush, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, proposed a society similar to Royal College of Physicians in London. The first meeting was held on January 2, 1787. Within weeks the fellows were organizing a library and starting to produce a pharmacopoeia; within a year a series of scientific papers were being presented, which were collected in the Transactions of the College of Physicians starting in 1793.[10]

The College's public health activism began in 1787 with statement on temperance sent to the Pennsylvania Legislature. In 1793, a yellow fever epidemic broke out in Philadelphia and the College proposed eleven public health measures to the mayor. When the epidemic returned in 1794 and 1797, the College organized the municipal response, proposing a city health law and a Board of Health with the authority to enforce quarantine. In 1841 the College encouraged the city to buy land along the Schuylkill River, to guarantee the purity of the city’s drinking water, leading to the establishment of Fairmount Park, the nation’s largest urban park. The College of Physicians’ humanitarian activism was reflected in its efforts to prevent the mentally ill from being executed.[11]

The earliest meetings of the College were held at Fourth and Arch Streets but the growth of the library soon made that space inadequate. In 1791, the College moved to a room on the second floor of the American Philosophical Society’s new hall at Fifth and Chestnut Streets, in the group of public buildings surrounding Independence Hall. In the 1840s and 1850s the College moved twice, and in 1859 considered new quarters again when Thomas D. Mütter gave the College his pathology collection, and an endowment of $30,000 to support it, on the condition that the College build a fireproof building to house it within next five years.[12]

James H. Windrim designed a utilitarian two story building that opened on March 4, 1863 at Locust and Thirteenth Streets and cost $40,858.28. In 1885 a third story was added and the interior was transformed into the style of a gentleman’s club. By 1900 the growth of the library and museum collections forced consideration of another move. Andrew Carnegie contributed $50,000 in 1903 to start the building fund, and in 1906 he agreed to contribute the final $50,000 needed for construction. The cornerstone was laid on April 29, 1908 and the building dedicated on November 10, 1909. The completed cost was $289,266, excluding the furniture and finishing of the principal rooms.[13]
The College of Physicians of Philadelphia Building is a two story rectangular red brick structure with limestone trim that was completed in 1909. Many of its forms are drawn from London's Royal College of Physicians, designed by Robert Hooke and built in 1673–77. The building houses the library, a lecture hall, the museum, and offices. Three facades are highly decorated – the main facade on South 22nd Street facing west, the northern facade facing Ludlow Street, and the southern facade facing a courtyard. Three broad horizontal bands of limestone – along the basement, at the top of the first floor, and the balustrade – artistically unite all the facades.[14]

The 22nd Street facade is most richly ornamented with a grand entrance behind a monumental gate and a wrought iron fence. The entrance is classically composed, flanked by Roman Doric columns with richly carved capitals. Outside this pair of columns are two pilasters, carved with the seal of the College of Physicians, that support a Doric entablature.[15]

The interior is an opulent example of the Beaux-Arts architecture. A 30-foot-wide (9.1 m) octagonal rotunda, the main hall, and a rich formal marble stair form the central axis, with the main rooms branching off this axis. The stair, which dominates the first story, has a bronze railing and a niche holding a sculpture of Aesculapius, the god of healing. Mitchell Hall, originally called the Hall of Portraits, is a grand ceremonial hall measuring 71 by 48 feet (15 m). It holds much of the College's art collection, including works by Robert Vonnoh and William Merritt Chase. The Norris Room contains an unusual carved stone Gothic fireplace designed by Theophilus Parsons Chandler, Jr. The fireplace was donated in 1885 by George William Childs, publisher of the Philadelphia Public Ledger, and originally built in the College’s old Locust Street building. The Mütter Museum is a two-storied space surrounded by a gallery in the northeast corner of the building,[16]
Adam Kuhn (28 November 1741–5 July 1817) was an American physician and naturalist, and one of the earliest professors of medicine in a North American university.

Kuhn was born in Germantown, son of German immigrant parents. He studied medicine under his father.[1] Then he went to Sweden and studied medicine and natural history 1761–1764 at Uppsala University, where he was probably the only American student of Carolus Linnaeus. He continued his studies at the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated as M.D. in June 1767, and published his thesis, De Lavatione frigida.[1] Returning to America, he practiced as a physician in Philadelphia and was 1768–1789 professor of Materia medica and 1789–1797 of the Theory and Practice of Medicine at the Medical School of the College of Philadelphia (later the University of Pennsylvania), founded in 1765 as the first faculty of Medicine in the thirteen colonies.

Kuhn was a physician of the Pennsylvania Hospital from May 1775, until January 1798. He was one of the founders of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia in 1787, and was its president from July 1808 until his death.[1]

Benjamin Rush wrote in his autobiography that Kuhn, after the death of Dr John Jones in June 1791, was considered the leading physician in Philadelphia and the one favored by "the principal officers of the general government". He treated "Washington Custes" (George Washington Custis, the son of Washington's stepson, see Martha Washington) and functioned as the family physician of George Washington. There is, however, no evidence that he actually treated the President.[2]
Formation

Since the Rio Earth Summitt in 1992, individual youth have been participating in international negotiations related to different environmental and sustainable development issues. With the formation of the European Youth Forum in 1996, and the U.S. youth organization SustainUS in 2001, youth-run organizations began to send delegations of youth to actively participation in these various worldwide negotiations, principally through the United Nations. Individual youth had been participating in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and with the new level of youth organization participation in international negotiations, youth organizations began to identify the UN climate negotiations as a new forum to increase youth participation in.

From November 28 to December 9, 2005, the United Nations (UN) Climate Change Convention (COP 11 or COP/MOP 1) took place at the Palais des congrès de Montréal in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Youth delegations from member nations, including the United States (via SustainUS), Canada, and Australia, attended, to advocate on behalf of young people. As a result, the concept of the International Youth Climate Movement was first developed, though it was originally referred to as the International Youth Delegation, referring to the youth delegates at the international climate negotiations.[4]

Following on from this in September 2006, the Canadian Youth Climate Coalition was launched, consisting of 48 youth organisations from across the nation.[5] This was soon followed by the Australian Youth Climate Coalition in November, which itself was a coalition of 27 youth organisations from across Australia.[6]

In March 2008, the Indian Youth Climate Network joined the Global Youth Climate Movement whilst in June 2008, the United Kingdom ambassadors to the World Wide Fund for Nature's Voyage for the Future programme, Emma Biermann and Casper ter Kuile, created the UK Youth Climate Coalition (UKYCC), after returning from the Arctic to witness the impact of climate change.[7] More recently, coalitions in Africa, China, Japan, Pacific Islands and South Asia have been established with the same mission statement as the International Youth Climate Movement.
[edit] Structure

Across the world, there are youth organisations who have formed coalitions to take positive action on climate change, such as the UK Youth Climate Coalition, which are led entirely by a team of young people. Each Climate Coalition or Climate Network is affiliated to a regional or continental movement. These movements include the African Youth Initiative on Climate Change; Caribbean Youth Environmental Network; European Youth Climate Movement; Project Survival Pacific; Nordic Youth Climate Action Movement; North East Asia Youth Environmental Network; the South American Youth Climate Coalition and the South Asia Youth Environment Network. Consequently, these local, national and continental organisations come together to form the International Youth Climate Movement.
[edit] Governance

The International Youth Climate Movement, although an umbrella term for the movements of young people taking place across the world, is run by teams of volunteers. These teams of volunteers organise themselves into different working groups and form the central organs of the movement, coordinated by a "Bottomlining Team" that helps to organize their efforts, especially at international climate negotiations.[8]
[edit] Funding

The movement is funded by contributions from its member organisations, as well as occasional contributions from organizations like UNICEF and the government of the Netherlands.[9]
[edit] MembersNational members of the Youth Climate Movement include: the AYLCF Climate Action Network (France); Australian Youth Climate Coalition; Canadian Youth Climate Coalition; China Youth Climate Action Network; ECO Singapore; Energy Action Coalition (U.S.A.), headed by coalition organization SustainUS; Project Survival Pacific, Ghana National Youth Coalition on Climate Change; Hong Kong Climate Change Coalition; Indian Youth Climate Network; Japan Youth Ecology League; Malaysian Youth Climate Justice Network; Nature and Youth Denmark; New Zealand Youth Delegation; Nigerian Youth Green Coalition on Climate Change; Russian Youth Climate Movement; Bangladesh Youth Movement for Climate (BYMC); and the UK Youth Climate Coalition.
[edit] Campaigns

Alongside the national campaigns undertaken by the domestic coalitions and domestic networks, such as the Power Shift conferences, the International Youth also undertake their own global campaigns, which are coordinated by a team of young volunteers.[1]
[edit] Conference of Youth

Th first Conference of Youth was held in 2005, in Montreal, Canada, shortly before the Eleventh Conference of Parties. The event brings together youth delegates for sharing resources, training, networking and collective discussions. It is also an opportunity for the youth climate movement to plan their activities over the course of the negotiations and the subsequent year.

The fifth Conference of Youth took place at the University of Copenhagen from the 4-6 December 2009 where over 700 young people from 100 countries are reported to have attended.[1]. The sixth was held at the Universidad del Caribe in preparation for the Cancun climate negotiations.

The two or three day event takes place annually, and it is scheduled each year to be held shortly before the United Nations Conference of Parties, where nations convene to assess the progress of the climate negotiations.
[edit] Participation to the UNFCCC negotiation process

Since 2005, each domestic coalition or network within the Youth Climate Movement has sent a delegation to the United Nations Climate Change Conference (UNFCCC) to represent young people in their respective country.

In June 2009, the youth organisations participating in the United Nations climate change negotiations submitted an application to become a constituency. In August 2009, the constituency application was provisionally approved by the climate change Secretariat, making youth the 7th constituency to join the climate negotiations.[10] The official title for the youth participation to the climate negotiations is 'YOUNGO'. The maiden focal points for the YOUNGO elected were Wilson Ang (Singapore), sponsored by SustainUS, and Lina Li (China), sponsored by 350.org, representing the International Youth Climate Movement in an official capacity (despite the provisional status until 2011).[11]

Currently, the elected focal points who represent the International Youth Climate Movement are Lauren Nutter (U.S.A.). sponsored by SustainUS, and Jean Paul Brice Affana (Cameroon), sponsored by Jeunes Volontaires pour l'Environnement. They follow 2009-2010 Focal Points, Sébastien Duyck (France), sponsored by Service Civil International and Rishikesh Ram Bhandary (Nepal), sponsored by SustainUS.[12]

Throughout the year, there are other opportunities for the members of the International Youth Climate Movement to convene. For example, at the International Youth Summit on Energy and Climate Change in Beijing, China[13]
[edit] Think 2050 Campaign

In 2009, the UK Youth Climate Coalition worked with the Youth Movement, in particular the European Youth Climate Movement and SustainUS to launch the "How old will you be in 2050?" campaign at the United Nations Climate negotiations taking place in Bonn, Germany.[14] The slogan has been used by the Youth Movement since then and was also the focus for the International Youth "Young and Future Generations Day" in December 2009.[15] The campaign seeks to emphasise the need to cut carbon emissions by 80% by 2050 on 1990 levels, as young people will be the ones to inherit this world and decisions made today will have a direct impact on their lives in 40 years time.[1][16]
This webpage has been set up to publicise and promote plans for demonstrations on climate change, to coincide with the annual United Nations Climate Talks which are taking place this year (COP17/MOP7) in Durban, South Africa on November 28th to December 11th 2011.

We intend synchronised demonstrations around the world on Saturday December 3rd 2011 - in as many places as possible - to call on world leaders to take urgent action on climate change.

After the disapointing results from the Copenhagen conference in 2009 the conference in Cancun, Mexico, last year arguably saved the international negotiations from complete breakdown but achieved little more. It is clear that the job of achieving a fair and effective global agreement on climate change is far from done.  The consensus among scientists is that we have less than ten years  to stop and reverse the global growth in greenhouse gas emissions before 'runaway' climate change becomes uncontrollable. The need for fair and effective international collaboration to achieve this becomes more urgent every year. Our next chance to achieve an agreement that will deliver this is during the Durban Talks in December. We feel therefore that there is an overwhelming need to demonstrate a global will for urgent and effective action and a just solution to the climate crisis at this time.

The 'Call to Action' for the demonstrations is as follows

“We demand that world leaders take the urgent and resolute action that is needed to prevent the catastrophic destabilisation of global climate, so that the entire world can move as rapidly as possible to a stronger emissions reductions treaty which is both equitable and effective in minimising dangerous climate change.

We demand that the long-industrialised countries that have emitted most greenhouse gases currently in the atmosphere take responsibility for climate change mitigation by immediately reducing their own emissions as well as investing in a clean energy revolution in the developing world. Developed countries must take their fair share of the responsibility to pay for the adaptive measures that have to be taken, especially by low-emitting countries with limited economic resources.

Climate change will hit the poorest first and hardest. All who have the economic means to act, must therefore urgently and decisively do so.”

To help build for these demonstrations please click on your country in the column on the left to find a local contact, or if there is not yet one listed there contact us at
The Police National E-Crime Unit (PCeU) is a part of the Specialist Crime Directorate of the Metropolitan Police Service in London, dedicated to combating e-crime in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The unit has a national remit, and was created in April 2008[1] to centralise the efforts of all police forces in the UK (excluding Scotland) to fight all forms of E-crime.

The unit's responsibilities are quite specific and include activities once carried out by other bodies while excluding other activities, currently done by others.[clarification needed][2]

The unit's stated mission is to improve the police response to victims of e-crime by developing the capability of the police service across England, Wales and Northern Ireland, co-ordinating the law enforcement approach to all types of e-crime, and by providing a national investigative capability for the most serious e-crime incidents.

The Police Central e-crime Unit (PCEU) was created on the 1st October 2008 and is responsible for improving the UK national polcing response to cyber crime. The unit is housed within the Specialist Crime Directorate (SCD6) part of the Metropolitan Police Service based in central London. As the PCeU is part an ACPO Police Force it has jursidiction within England, Wales and Northern Ireland. However the unit works closely with the SCDEA in Scotland and international law enforcement. The PCeU has a seat at the table at both Europol and Interpol cyber workstreams.

The PCeU is one of strands of work within the ACPO e-crime programme led by DAC Janet WILLIAMS. There are nine strands of work in total; Central e-Crime Structure, Olympics, Training Recruitment and Retention, Regional e-Crime Units, Forensics, Legal Issues, Prevention, Increasing Knowledge for Action, Research & Development.
The huge open-pit mine was once the largest in the world, but has been surpassed by Chuquicamata, and is perhaps the oldest mining site still being used in the American southwest. Apaches, Spaniards, Mexicans, and Americans have all obtained native copper and copper ore from this site, once known as the Santa Rita mine, and in the 19th century, a tunnel mine. The present-day open-pit mining operation was begun in 1910. It is the third oldest open pit copper mine in the world after the Bingham Canyon Mine and Chuquicamata.

A mill to process the low-grade copper ore was established in 1911 in nearby Hurley but was replaced by a new (current) Ivanhoe concentrator facility in 1982. Milling operations recently (January 2004) restarted at the Chino Concentrator after a three-year hiatus caused by low copper prices. SX/EW operations started in 1988 and have run continuously since. Reserves of copper ore at Chino are expected to last until 2015.

A smelter in Hurley was commissioned in 1939 and was modernized in 1985 to increase capacity and achieve compliance with the Clean Air Act. In 2005, the smelter was permanently closed.

December 3, 2008, Chino's parent company, Freeport-McMoRan, announced it plans to suspend mining and milling activities at Chino, but will continue reclamation activities and copper production from its SX-EW plant. About 600 people from the current work force of 830 will be laid off beginning about Feb. 13, 2009.

Freeport-McMoRan announced in October 2010 that they would be restarting operations at the mine ramping production up to a planned mining and milling rate by 2013. They are also planning $150 million in refurbishments and new equipment.
Club history

Ramsey RUFC was formed in the late 1970s by a group of old boys from the local comprehensive school, Ramsey Grammar School.

The club was admitted to the Rugby Football Union in December 1981. The club tasted their first success capturing the Shimmin Wilson Manx Shield in the 1988/89 season. They regained the Shield in 1994/95, 1995/96, 1996/97, 1998/99 and 1999/00. In the 2000/01 season Ramsey completed their biggest achievement winning the domestic double of the Shimmin Wilson Manx Shield and the Dorchester Maritime Manx Cup. They also won the Shield in 2001/02, 2002/03, 2003/04, 2004/05 and 2006/07. In 2006/07 they completed another double winning the inaugural Manx Challenge Cup. They also won the Manx Bowl in 2005/06.

In 2003 Ramsey completed the construction of their Club House at The Mooragh Park in Ramsey.
Team Performance
2008/2009 Season

Ramsey played their first ever game in the UK Leagues system on 13 September 2008 away to Linley & Kidsgrove RUFC. Tries from Shaun Wyllie and Finton Cummins ensured Ramsey a 14-5 victory.[1]. Ramsey finished 2nd in the League and were accordingly promoted to South Lancs/Cheshire Division 3.
2009/2010 Season

Ramsey topped the table for much of the season but successive losses to Holmes Chapel and Prenton leave them needing to win their last two games to be promoted.
Club Colours

Ramsey play in Red and Black Hoops, Black Shorts and Red and Black Hooped Socks. The club logo is a Loaghtan Sheep. Ramsey's Second Team play in Blue and Black Hoops, Black Shorts and Blue and Black Hooped Socks.
Jeanne Eagels (also title The Jeanne Eagels Story) is a 1957 fictionalized biographical film of the life of stage star Jeanne Eagels, made by Columbia Pictures.[1][2] It was produced and directed by George Sidney from a screenplay by John Fante, Daniel Fuchs and Sonya Levien, based on a story by Fuchs. The film stars Kim Novak and Jeff Chandler with Charles Drake, Agnes Moorehead, Larry Gates, Virginia Grey, Gene Lockhart and Murray Hamilto
tephanie Salas (born Stephanie Salas Banquells February 3, 1970) is a Mexican singer/actress. Stephanie Salas was born into one of the most famous showbusiness families in all of Mexico. Her mother is actress Sylvia Pasquel; her grandmother is legendary actress Silvia Pinal; her grandfather was the actor and director Rafael Banquells; and her aunts are the singers Alejandra Guzmán and Rocío Banquells.

Stephanie made her showbusiness debut singing at age eight alongside her mother on the show Noche a noche hosted by Verónica Castro. She would later join the cast of Vaselina, the Spanish-language state production of Grease alongside Timbiriche. At age 16 she was asked to join the cast of the telenovela El precio de la fama by producer Ernesto Alonso.

In 1992 Stephanie starred alongside Bibi Gaytán, Paulina Rubio & Eduardo Capetillo in the popular telenovela Baila Conmigo. It was here that Stephanie sang several songs on the musical oriented youth soap. Her most popular being the song "Tonterias". This led to her signing a contract with Televisa owned label Melody.

That same year Stephanie released her debut album entitled Ave María. The title track (written by Lolita De La Colina) became a huge hit in Mexico and in parts of Latin America. Produced by Oscar López, the album went on to achieve gold status in Mexico.

Stephanie's follow-up came in 1994 with the title La raza humana. This album received critical praise, though compared to its predecessor it was not a huge commercial success. However this album did receive the prestigious Palmas de oro which is bestowed to the best in music by Mexican music critics for that year. Of note were the songs Corazón, which saw Stephanie dabble in house music, and the song Nube which was inspired by Nirvana leader Kurt Cobain's untimely passing. This album also featured many collaborations with Stephanie's partner Pablo Valero (former member of Santa Sabina).

For the latter part of the 90s Stephanie took time off to raise her two daughters. While she was pretty dormant on the music front, Stephanie did find time to continue acting. She left Televisa briefly and participated in several telenovelas for competing network TV Azteca such as El candidato and Agua y aceite.

Salas participated in the Spanish language version of Eve Ensler's Vagina Monologues. The Mexican production of this play has been running for over 7 years and has toured all of Mexico and has been performed over 3,500 times. Stephanie's other theatrical productions include : Mame; Mi vida es mi vida; and El protagonista.

After not releasing any music since 1994, Stephanie returned to the music scene in late 2006 with a new project entitled Tuna. Alongside musician Pepe Acosta,[1] they have released their self-titled debut on the Mexican independent label MW Records. The band was previously named Tinta but had to change its name due to legal issues. Stephanie is currently promoting her new release.Abstract

Making the central bank an agency with the mandate and reputation for maintaining price stability is a means by which a government can choose the strength of its commitment to price stability. This article develops four measures of central bank independence and explores their relation with inflation outcomes. An aggregate legal index is developed for four decades in 72 countries. Three indicators of actual independence are developed: the rate of turnover of central bank governors, an index based on a questionnaire answered by specialists in 23 countries, and an aggregation of the legal index and the rate of turnover.

Legal independence is inversely related to inflation in industrial, but not in developing, countries. In developing countries the actual frequency of change of the chief executive officer of the bank is a better proxy for central bank independence. An inflation-based index of overall central bank independence contributes significantly to explaining cross-country variations in the rate of inflation.

     1992 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK
Veto players theory predicts that policy outcomes must lie within a range that
satisfies all players. Thus, the likelihood that opportunistic policy will exert
costs on a valued constituency increases with the number of veto points. Even
if weak property rights with respect to the domestic currency represents the
status quo ante, institutional innovations or election outcomes that increase
the number of veto player should lower the likelihood that such policy will
persist since it is likely to harm the political prospects of at least one of the
veto players.
Given that the demand for hedging mechanisms that guard against currency
risk will be lower in countries with a robust property rights regime, the
argument linking veto players to the property rights of investors implies a
testable hypothesis about the relationship between veto players and currency
substitution. If checks and balances improve the property rights of domestic
investors by improving the government’s commitment to the value of the
domestic currency, then veto players will lower the propensity to store value
in foreign currencies. In the aggregate, countries with greater numbers of
veto players will exhibit, ceteris paribus, less overall currency substitution.
The empirical section of the article tests this claim.
The Dependent Variable: Foreign Currency Deposits
The degree of foreign currency substitution throughout the world is striking
in spite of the systemic risks associated with it.5 At least a quarter of
bank deposits are denominated in foreign currency in 56 countries in my
sample. There are regional and income group differences in the degree of
dollarization along with significant variation across countries, with
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries
typically less dollarized than developing nations. My empirical analysis
employs regional and OECD dummies to capture the variation that may
emerge because of regulatory and historical commonalities within country
groups.
Economic explanations of currency substitution highlight the optimization
decision of domestic investors for whom foreign currency deposits represent
one component of their portfolio. Portfolio returns are subject to a host of
factors, including changes in the domestic price level and fluctuations in the
real exchange rate (Ize & Levy-Yeyati, 2003). The Ize and Levy-Yeyati
(2003) model posits that a representative domestic investor chooses an asset
currency composition (including deposits) that minimizes the variance of
portfolio returns. The authors show that the degree of dollarization that
depositors chose is subject to the pass-through of prices to the nominal
Downloaded from
exchange rate since pass-through creates an incentive to store value in more
stable currency substitutes.
Models that emphasize the economic determinants of depositor behavior
are subject to endogeneity bias,6 and recent research has begun to address
this problem and the possible influence of institutional environment as
well. Thus far, the literature centers around a negative correlation between
dollarization and aggregate measures of broad institutional “quality”:
Countries with “good institutions” are shown to be less financially dollarized
(de Nicolo, Honohan, & Ize, 2005; Honig, 2009; Levy-Yeyati, 2006;
Rajan & Tokatlidis, 2005).7 For de Nicolo et al. (2005, p. 1703), the correlation
between dollarization and “low-quality” institutions is suggestive of
a moral hazard interpretation of dollarization, as “countries with weaker
institutions are more likely to engage in government bailouts,” which
increase the incentive to dollarize.8 Honig (2009, p. 4) interprets the correlation
between government quality and deposit dollarization as evidence
that residents of countries with low-quality governance will lack confidence
that future policy will promote currency stability. But low-quality
governance is endogenous to underlying institutional arrangements that
remain unidentified.
Another problem with prevailing approaches, identified by Glaeser et al.
(2004), is that the subjective institutional indicators do not measure institutions
but instead reflect recent economic performance and overall levels of
economic development. For instance, it is well known that GDP per capita
correlates highly with the governance quality indices, making it all the more
difficult to discern for which theoretical construct the governance indicators
actually proxy. Indeed, it is rare to find an empirical test in which an aggregated
index of governance quality enters significantly in specifications that also
include GDP per capita.
Although suggestive of a promising new line of inquiry, existing studies
leave the following questions unanswered. What types of political arrangements
constitute “good institutions” in the context of financial intermediation?
Or more specifically, which institutions allow governments to commit to the
value of the domestic tender, thereby improving the property rights of
investors? As yet, the literature has not established a firm theoretical or empirical
relationship between durable, rule-based political institutions and the
property rights of domestic currency holders. This article fills the gap in the
literature by arguing that veto players improve the property rights of investors
by making opportunistic policy pursuits more difficult. The following section
tests this claim.
Downloaded
Note: Foreign currency deposits/total deposits from Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2005).
The checks variable (Database of Political Indicators [DPI]; Beck et al., 2001) measures
the number of veto players in the government in a particular year. Polcon is an alternative
measure of veto players (Henisz, 2000). The political variables polarization, election, total
elections, and proportional representation are from the DPI. Polity (Jaggers & Marshall, 2002)
is a subjective indicator of democracy. Distance is a standardized measure of latitude (Hall
& Jones, 1999). Capital account openness is from Chinn and Ito (2006). Exchange rate regime
classifications are from Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2005). The central bank turnover ratios
are from (Ghosh, Gulde, & Wolf, 2003). The restrictions on foreign currency are from Levy-
Yeyati (2006). The remaining economic variables are from the World Bank Development
Indicators. The checks, polity, inflation, and GDP/capita variables are logged.
A Taxing Master is an independent person appointed by the Irish High Court to assess the legal costs of a party to a legal matter.

The Taxing Master provides an independent and impartial process of assessment of legal costs which endeavours to achieve a balance between the costs involved and the services rendered. The party seeking to have a bill of costs put before the Taxing Master must lodge that bill with the Taxing Master's Office together with a summons to tax and an order of the court/requisition to tax.

The position of the Taxing Master and his/her office is governed by the Courts (Supplemental Provisions) Act 1961.

Every person represented by a solicitor in Ireland in a matter before the High Court is entitled to have their bill assessed by the Taxing Master.[1] Should a client feel his bill is not fair or reasonable he should ask his solicitor in writing to have the matter taxed. However, where a client of a solicitor feels they have been overcharged they should make a complaint to the Law Society of Ireland.[2]
Career

Moffat began his career in the lower divisions of the Scottish League, playing for Ross County and Elgin City between 2005 and 2007. In 2007, Moffat made a move to the United States to play for Cleveland City Stars in the USL Second Division, and stood out enough to be named to the league's Best XI. Having impressed MLS scouts with his performances, Moffat was signed by the Columbus Crew following the conclusion of the 2007 USL2 season, joining his former teammate Andrew Peterson.

Moffat scored his first MLS goal, and the first goal of the 2008 MLS season, on 29 March 2008 against Toronto FC. Moffat quickly became a fan favorite for his work ethic on and off the field, but unfortunately suffered a season-ending knee injury early in the season. While with Columbus Moffat appeared in 44 league matches and scored 5 goals.

On November 24, 2010, he was selected by the Portland Timbers in the 2010 MLS Expansion Draft to play for fellow Scotsman John Spencer.[1]

On July 21, 2011, Moffat was traded to the Houston Dynamo along with allocation money for Lovel Palmer and Mike Chabala.[2] On August 14, 2011, he scored a sensational 40-yard goal in the match versus his former team Portland Timbers at Robertson Stadium which was named an MLS Goal of the Week with a potential nomination for MLS Goal of the Year.[3]
Early life

After the death of Sir Wilfrid Lawson, 10th Baronet in 1806, the title expired and the estates passed to the nephew of his wife, Thomas Wybergh, the son of Thomas Wybergh of Clifton Hall, Westmorland who assumed the name and arms of the Lawson family. Six years later Thomas drowned off the coast of Madeira[2] and having no direct heirs the estates passed to his younger brother Wilfrid, who likewise assumed the name of Lawson. In 1821, he married Caroline Graham, sister to the famous Peelite statesman, Sir James Graham of Netherby. Their marriage produced eight children; four boys, Wilfrid, Gilfrid, William and Alfred; and four daughters, Caroline, Elizabeth, Catherine and Maria.
[edit] Wybergh connections

The Wybergh family, long established in North Westmorland, arrived in the district of St Bees, sometime in the 13th century. Gilbert de Engayne, the last of that ancient family in the direct line had a daughter Eleanor, who in 1364 carried the manor and demesne of Clifton near Penrith, in marriage to William de Wybergh, of St Bees. The aforementioned possessions remained the property of their descendants until the twentieth century. Eleanor Wybergh died in the reign of Henry IV of England, and the family laid her body to rest in Clifton Church, close to the old hall, where the residents placed a window in stained glass to her memory, bearing her effigy and arms. In 1524, Thomas Wybergh married a Lancaster of Melkinthorpe Hall. The family later suffered greatly in the English Civil War. In 1652, a Thomas Wybergh of St Bees, had his name attached to ‘the list of delinquents’, thus forfeiting the right to own his estates, which were later sold under the direct orders of Oliver Cromwell. The arms of Wybergh are, ‘of three bars sable, and in chief three stoiles of the last'.

After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the Wybergh’s transferred their allegiances from the Stuart’s to the House of Hanover. During the rising of 1715, Thomas Wybergh a prisoner of the Jacobites was exchanged for Alan Ayacough, who had supported the Pretender. His son, also called Thomas was later involved in the 1745 Uprising.

Following Thomas’s death in 1753, the estates passed to his eldest son William, who died in 1757. He was succeeded by Thomas, the father of the person under discussion, who died in 1827. Thomas married Isabel Hartley, and after their son assumed the Lawson inheritance the family settled at Isel, where they remained for many years.[3]
[edit] Politics

Throughout his life, Lawson took an active role in politics, where he championed the Whig (Blue) cause. He supported the extreme radical section: he was what he called a ‘true blue’, a supporter of the political philosophy of Charles James Fox, the constitutional republicanism of John Wilkes and in time the social reforming of Richard Cobden and John Bright. Lawson remained a constitutionalist, and wished to extend the franchise to include the masses, but he practised what he preached in his own household and family. He resented the class structure. Although his name is intimately associated with some of the political contests before the passing of the 1832 Reform Act, he only stood in one election.
[edit] Carlisle election

After the death of Sir Philip Musgrave in 1827, Lawson reluctantly[4] came forward as the Parliamentary Whig (Blue) candidate for the representation of the City of Carlisle, in opposition to James Law Lushington, the Tory (Yellows) Lowther nominee. Lawson stood on the following manifesto:

        "That it is essential to the general interest of the nation that the people should be free, and that it is the duty of their representatives to assert the rights of the people, redress their grievance and watch over the expenditure of public money."[5]

For radicals, freedom from obligation was a precondition for political citizenship and the cornerstone of the chartist cause; freedom was their antidote to slavery. Lawson is emphasising that parliament could only represent the people if the electorate were given the opportunity to elect representatives freely. Although he advocated reforms, Lawson senior was more of a radical in the Sir Francis Burdett tradition than a reformer, an advocate of ‘going back to the roots’. As Matthew McCormack differentiates: the reformer sought to remove abuses as a means of preserving the system, whereas the radical insisted upon the necessity of a more fundamental change.[6]

In those days, elections took place over several days. It was a time of open voting where 'tallies' or groups of ten likeminded freemen ascended a small scaffold erected adjacent to the Moot Hall, where the Lord Mayor publicly recorded each man's vote.[7] They were exciting times, a theatre crammed with noise and bustle: the playing of patriotic music by rival bands; the flaunting of flags and banners; the display of party favours and colours; the processions and counters processions; and the cheering and counter cheering.[8]

On the day of the nomination, Lawson travelled the nineteen-mile journey from Brayton in an open carriage, drawn by four horses. In the suburbs, his supporters, many of whom were ineligible to vote, withdrew the horses and dragged their candidate through the streets in triumph. They proceeded, carrying a blue ensign bearing the slogan ‘Lawson and Independence’, to make a demonstration in front of their rivals headquarters in the Bush Inn. Then, amidst a loud chorus of cheers, they paraded the carriage several times round the Market Cross. At the close of the poll on the opening day Lawson had received ten votes, while Lushingtons had received none.[9]

On the second day, Lawson recited a letter written by a voter from Edinburgh, who had received a message signed by one of Lushington's election agents enclosing £10, inviting the receiver to journey to Carlisle and vote accordingly. "But" added the writer, "I have returned the £10, and I shall be in Carlisle on Tuesday to vote for Lawson." This example of political virtue was regularly referred to throughout the campaign.[10] Marred by rain, the day ended with a brawl after scores of Yellow supporters attacked their opponents. At the close of the second day Lushington had received 175, while Lawson trailed with 153.[11]

On the third day a coach carrying Blue freemen arrived from Newcastle. At the Kings Arms, a mob of angry Yellow supporters surrounded the coach and tried to prevent the freemen entering their headquarters. Blue supporters appeared and drove their rivals back to their committee rooms in the Kings Head. Stones, slates and items of furniture were hurled, resulting in serious damage. At the close of the day Lushington had 276 votes to Lawson's 261. According to The Times: "It's beginning to look like a proper Carlisle election, rioting included"[12]

On the fourth days, Lawson abandoned the election with the poll standing at Lushington 362 votes, Lawson 323. Lawson gave an explanation.

        Gentlemen, at this period of the contest I have a statement to make, which I shall do without any feeling of mortification, and, as I before told you I should do, without envying my opponent, whatever feelings of triumph he may be disposed to indulge in. He has at this moment a majority of 39, after 685 votes have been polled; and, notwithstanding I have still many promised votes on which I could rely, I must admit that at this moment I do not appear to have the means of withstanding the influence of your corporation, and of the powerful family with which it is allied. But, gentlemen, however much I could have desired the success of your cause upon this occasion, I do assure you that I would rather remain for ever in retirement, than that I should have succeeded by the means to which my opponent has resorted."[13]

Following the announcement of the withdrawal, the Yellows proceeded to seek revenge for their defeat on the previous day. Wielding bludgeons they attacked their opponents with great force, and a scene of riot and broken heads prevailed. Having wreaked their vengeance on the people they proceeded to the Liberal headquarters and vandalised the Coffee house. The day ended with the reading of the Riot Act and the arrival of the military.[14]
[edit] Baronetcy restored

In 1831, Sir James Graham, then First Lord of the Admiralty suggested to his brother-in-law.

        As you possess the ancient and large property connected with an honourable title, and as you have a son to whom you may transmit the Title with the estates, it might not be disagreeable to you to have the old Brayton Baronatage restored."

Lawson accepted, and Graham conveyed his wishes to the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey and by such means were the Coronation honours of the reform government decided. On 1 September, 1831, King William VI created Lawswon a baronet.[15]
[edit] Temperance

When Lawson fell dangerously ill in 1834, he turned to religion, and sent for a Presbyterian minister named Walton who preached in the neighbouring village of Blennerhasset. His health restored, he befriended the Home Mission Society, whose purpose was to send missionaries into neglected villages in England. He became an associate and established a House Mission Station in Aspatria. Shortly afterwards he attended a Temperance lecture, which had an immediate impact on the Lawson household.[16]

        "Sir Wilfrid Lawson of Brayton Hall, Cumberland, is said to have been so strongly impressed by the arguments of Mr (William) Pollard, who is lecturing on behalf of Temperance societies throughout the county, that he has had the whole of his Brandy, Rum, Gin and Whisky taken from his cellars at the back of the Hall, and destroyed by fire in his own presence.[17]

A modified version of this story appeared in the Pall Mall Gazette almost fifty years later and was used to vilify the baronet's son.

        "An amusing instance of the zeal displayed by the more enthusiastic advocates of temperance is that of the late Sir Wilfrid Lawson, father of the present baronet. Old Sir Wilfrid, as the inhabitants of West Cumberland are wont to call him - on his conversions to the cause of teetotalism, had all the wines and spirits taken out of the cellars and thrown into the fishpond at Brayton Hall, thereby causing great destruction of life, to the astonished and unoffending fish."[18]

Thus was born the legend of the Whisky Pond. In 1878, Samuel Smiles published a biography, of George Moore of Mealsgate, which noted a visit made by Moore and the Lord Mayor of London, to Brayton in 1854.

        "Sir Wilfrid Lawson and most of his family are teetotallers, but the Lord Mayor pronounced his wines, the best he had ever drank."[19]

For many years Lawson adopted the old temperance platform, that while spirits were forbidden, wine and beer could be used as beverages.[20] Eventually the Lawson family became great drinkers of ginger beer.[21]
[edit] Rebellion

In his younger days, Lawson was a mischievous rebel, and an ardent friend of controversy. The following examples will somewhat explain his character, and highlight the integrity and humour that he bequeathed to his family. At the pre-election dinner in 1830, prior to nominating his brother-in-law, Sir James Graham, Lawson proposed a toast, which formed the subject of much comment at the time. Sir James had been speaking of the right and duty of the people to resist despotic powers as exercised against their liberty, when Lawson, rose to propose a toast.[22]

        "That the heads of Don Miguel, King Ferdinand (VII of Spain) and Charles Capet (Charles X), be severed from their bodies and rolled in the dust - and the more speedily the better."[23]

The vociferous cheers with which his sentiment was received showed that the feelings of the speaker were shared by his audience. It was however much condemned by the opposing press on the following day.
[edit] Liberalism

An incident occurred in 1837, which demonstrates Lawson’s independent character? It happened after Graham infuriated his constituents by accepting a position in the Tory government.[24] At the ensuing election, his former supporters nominating rival candidates then flocked into the constituency to show their contempt. Cavalcades of horsemen, sporting banners and flags, many of whom had ridden many miles, stood in a line, four a breast, stretching over half a mile in length. One flag bore a black gamecock, with yellow legs and comb, and a large white feather in its tail. It carried a motto, ‘The Renegade Cock of the North’, in reference to Graham’s sobriquet. Another carried a yellow flag at half-mast, bearing a portrait of Graham lying on his back, with the slogan, ‘Sir James Crow, jump about, wheel about, and fall just so’. While a coat turned inside out with yellow sleeves hung from the top of one Flagstaff. Lawson sat at the head of the concourse and was the first to defy his brother-in-law, resulting in Graham’s only defeat in that city. It was also said that Lawson's neighbours and fellow-landowners, who in private remained on intimate terms, would, when they met in the streets of Carlisle, walk out of their way rather than be seen discussing issues with a man of such character.[25]
[edit] Reform

During the reform agitation that preceded the introduction of the 1867 Reform Act, Lawson came out of political retirement to chair several meetings held on behalf of the non-electors of Carlisle. his speeches left the listener with little doubt of his allegiance.

        “There are few persons now, I think, who would say that the great mass of their fellow-countrymen are not fit to perform such simple acts of citizenship as that of voting for a member of parliament. When the unenfranchised, as a class are spoken of, I suppose the working classes are meant. Now I think the working classes of this country are capable of forming an intelligent opinion of what is for the good of the country and as likely to make an honest, independent, and patriotic use of the franchises any class of the community. I cannot understand how any Christian man can wish to deprive his fellow countrymen of any privilege he possesses himself. But it is said, ‘they are so numerous’! Well if they deserve the character, which by common consent is acceded to them, the more numerous such persons are the better for the country. Let it be remembered, that the House of Commons is called, and intended to be, the representation of the people of this country, which it can scarcely be said to be when but it represents one fifth part of our adult population. I am afraid you must be prepared for a severe struggle before this question of reform is settled, a struggle perhaps more severe than that for the Reform Bill of 32. You will have to devote a great deal of time and perseverance to the prosecution of this movement if you are in earnest of this matter. It is a duty you owe to yourselves and to your unenfranchised fellow countrymen who will derive the benefits, and it is a duty from which I think you shall not shrink. The Tories talk of forming a great constitutional party. I quite agree with them. We are that great constitutional party.”[26]

[edit] Agricultural matters

owning a large landed estate, Lawson took a deep interest in the progress of agriculture, particularly im the adoption of modern methods. In 1837, he entered into a partnership with the inventor Joseph Mann of Abbey Holme. For three years they experimented with early reaping machinery. However, although the equipment cut the stalks satisfactory, it failed to process the grain. Lawson spent thousands of pounds improving land cultivation and water drainage. He was also an enthusiastic breeder of Shorthorn cattle.
[edit] Philanthropy

As a philanthropist he contributed unselfishly to the welfare of his neighbours. He supported schools throughout the local district and in other parts of the United Kingdom, trying to spread the Evangelical religion. In 1825, he was the principal subscriber to the inauguration of a Free school at Aspatria; and later a similar institution solely for girls. He was the principal proprietor of Christian News, the organ of the Evangelical Union, published in Glasgow.[27] He remained a strict teetotaller and founder member and a principal donator to the United Kingdom Alliance. He supported the Congregationalists in Aspatria, and supplied the means of erecting their chapel at Aspatria. He also donated a piece of land for use of a cemetery.
[edit] Businessman

Although previous generations had increased the Lawson estate through judicious marriages and careful purchases, this Sir Wilfrid exploited the spirit of the new industrial age, becoming an ardent supporter and early investor in the growth of railways. He was the principle shareholder and personality in the Maryport and Carlisle Railway Company, he held shares in the London and South Western Railway; the Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway; the Great Western Railway; the North Eastern; Cockermouth and Workington Railway; London Bridge and Charring Cross; Great North of England Railway; Darlington and Barnard Castle Railway; Stockton and Darlington; South Durham and Lancashire Union Railway; Forth and Clyde Junction Railway; in addition to the Liege and Numur railway. He was a man of considerable wealth, who also held shares in several large hotel companies and Turnpike Trusts. Besides the family estates of Brayton and Isel, he also owned considerable freehold and customary estates at Fitz, Arkelby, Mechi, Littlethwaite and Meregill; in Whinfell, Loweswater and Lorton; and of Parkhouse in Torpenhow and Newbiggin Grange at Ireby. Through his business acumen, he became a man of considerable wealth, who bequeathed a large estate and a sum of over £300,000 to his eldest son.[28]
[edit] Finally

On 12 June 1867, Sir Wilfrid Lawson died at Brayton, he was in his 71st year. In accordance with his wishes the funeral was conducted by his lifelong friend, the Rev. Professor Kirk of Edinburgh, without ostentation or parade. The funeral procession numbered four simple mourning carriages, containing family and servants. Notwithstanding his wishes hundreds followed the cortege. The following reminiscence, by Miss Elizabeth Lawson, captures her father's life.

        "Our father was greatly interested in all efforts for the good of his fellow-men, and frequently `Deputations' from various religions, social and political societies used to come to Brayton. Religious services were frequently held in the house, and in the neighbouring villages; which we used to attend. It often caused surprise that our father was so keenly interested in religious meetings, while at the same time he kept up his old interests in country sports and occupations. He enjoyed a long days shooting and hunting almost to the end of his life, and in skating and playing hockey on the ice he often tired out many younger men. He was extremely fond of open-air life, and had a most enthusiastic love of our Cumberland lakes and mountains often taking a few days refreshment in driving about them. He was a very silent man, but he certainly had the power of attaching people to him in a greater degree.".[29]

The Dowager Lady Lawson, died on 1 November 1870 at her residence at Arkelby Hall, she was 77 years of age; her obituary recorded:

        "Lady Lawson possessed a kind heart and a benevolent dispossession and her death will be much regretted"[30]

