The increased familiarity with Chávez, stockpiling of foreign currency
reserves, and the boom in global markets explain the relatively mild change
in the EMBI prior to 2006. His declarations about moving toward a vague
21st-century socialism since 2005 did not mark a clear shift away from the
general state-centered, prodomestic producer economy that he had been
pursuing since at least 2003. The EMBI increased after his re-election,
because he believed that he had a new mandate to change the “geometry of
power,” which meant substantially altering the 1999 constitution. The effort
proved unsuccessful, but what is relevant is that Chávez’s move to accelerate
the transition to 21st-century socialism through a very vague set of 69
constitutional amendments rendered the policy environment unpredictable,
driving up risk, even despite record prices for petroleum and robust dollar
reserves. Thus, even when domestic and economic fundamentals are strong,
policy uncertainty can drive risk.
Conclusion
There is little quantitative and qualitative support for partisan explanations
of sovereign risk related to elections in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico,
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
Spanakos, Renno / Sovereign Risk, Ideology, and Presidential Elections 1313
and Venezuela between 1994 and 2007. This is true of both simple partisan
(right-left difference) and more sophisticated partisan accounts that
distinguish between incumbent and challenging leftist candidates and
between radical and institutional lefts. These results question how
important the right-left scale is in studies of Latin America. The data
also control for party system institutionalization, a variable often
ignored in the analysis of how elections affect financial markets. The
data show that older party systems in Latin America do not necessarily lead
to increased stability and predictability of the political system, as is
claimed by the literature on partisanship (Mainwaring, 1999).
The quantitative analysis is strongest in support of the role of external
vulnerability and risk tolerance. This finding confirms conventional wisdom
among market professionals, that risk is based on ability to pay debt, which
is best represented by access to foreign currency. Foreign reserves are critical
for emerging markets, particularly during downturns in global liquidity,
because many emerging market borrowers issue debt in foreign currencies,
creating a potentially unsustainable currency mismatch (Eichengreen &
Hausmann, 2005). The obvious policy implication is that governments
should try to denominate their debt in local currency and should maintain
foreign currency reserves that exceed what may be considered adequate
under noncrisis situations.
But how large the stock of foreign currency reserves should be to
ensure confidence in a government’s ability to meet its debt obligations is
subject to perception. This is where the policy environment enters and the
issue of uncertainty emerges. A reserve of 30 billion U.S. dollars may be
sufficient in one context but not in another. More important, for emerging
market countries, it may be both at the same time, as was the case in
Brazil in 2002, when perceptions of policy uncertainty led to the negative
interpretation of foreign reserves driving the market. If economic fundamentals
allow for multiple equilibria, policy clarity can explain perceptions
of risk. Moreover, as is the case in the postelectoral period in
Venezuela in 2006, political uncertainty can drive sovereign risk even in
the face of record reserves and commodity prices. Thus, tracing interactions
between policy uncertainty, policies chosen, and vulnerability to
external events best explains perceptions of sovereign movement during
electoral periods.
Future research should examine these processes during ministerial shuffles
and other periods of change between elections. It should also examine
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
1314 Comparative Political Studies
whether the relationship that credit markets perceive between risk and
uncertainty is echoed in other arenas such as equity markets.
Notes
1. Venezuela’s market is less important, but due to the foreign policy of president Chávez,
the purchase of the debt of neighboring countries, and the burgeoning local currency debt
market, it is becoming increasingly important.
2. This is measured in terms of basis points, in which 100 basis points is the equivalent
of 1%.
3. When there is greater liquidity, interest in investing in emerging markets, or when
commodity prices are high, investors will be less exacting. Perception that certain other countries
or regions are “hot” can reduce market demand for the debt of a particular country and
increase risk. Similarly, internal dynamics of capital markets can punish one country for the
failures of another, ironically even if the former is seen as relatively successful. This was the
case in 2001, when traders who lost money or could not sell Argentine debt sold Brazilian debt
to cover their losses, increasing Brazil’s Emerging Markets Bond Index.
4. Part of this is due to low levels of partisan ideology and/or policy clarity among many
political parties (Mainwaring, 1999) and a relative convergence left and right in Latin America
about economic policies in the most recent wave of democratization.
5. The more recent classifications are considered to be preliminary by Coppedge (Personal
communication, July 6, 2007).
6. For example, the de la Rua Coalition was center left, but Nestor Kirchner was replaced
by Eduardo Duhalde, a conservative. The Brazilian elections were also coded slightly differently.
Given that there was significant continuity between the Itamar Franco and Fernando
Henrique Cardoso administrations, both were coded as center.
7. The dependent and independent variables were tested for unit root problems using the
Dickey-Fuller test and detected problems only in the Consumer Price Index variable. Given that
it did not present consistent effects on Emerging Markets Bond Index, it does not appear to be
a substantial problem. A violation of homoskedasticity was detected in the pooled sample using
the Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg test for heteroskedasticity as well as a problem of first order
correlation, using the Wooldridge test for autocorrelation in panel data. This was corrected by
using cross-sectional time-series Feasible Generalized Least Squares regression for the pooled
data and Prais-Winsten AR(1) regression for country-specific analysis.
8. As stated earlier, left to right labels are not uncontroversial. Coppedge (1998) labels
the Partido Justicialista (Peronist party) as center-right, and so that distinction is maintained
here. Duhalde was clearly an opponent of the Peronists who surrounded president Menem, but
he stressed social concerns more than Menem did.
9. All electoral data are from Georgetown University’s Political Database on the
Americas: http://pdba.georgetown.edu/Elecdata/elecdata.html
10. The linkage to Chávez is very important, as Evo Morales success seems to have been
boosted by Chávez’s support, whereas Felipe Calderón and Alan Garcia were able to gain
points by associating Andrés Manuel López Obrador and Ollanta Humala with Chávez.
11. Unlike previous efforts at controlling inflation, the real plan was more credible, largely
because of the successful negotiation with Congress by Edmar Bacha, secretary of economic
policies at that time, to anchor the new currency through fiscal restraint.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
Spanakos, Renno / Sovereign Risk, Ideology, and Presidential Elections 1315
References
Alesina, A., Roubini, N., & Cohen, G. D. (1997). Political cycles and the macroeconomy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
The Americas: Adios Menem, hallo Kircher? Argentina’s presidential election. (2003, May 3).
The Economist, p. 57.
The Americas: It’s all Chavez. (1998, July 4). The Economist, pp. 30-31.
Argentina fighting Menem. (1995, April 22). The Economist, pp. 42-43.
Argentina shades of grey. (1994, December 10). The Economist, pp. 38-39.
Beck, T., Clarke, G., Groff, A., Keefer, P., & Walsh, P. (2001). New tools in comparative
political economy: The database of political institutions. World Bank Economic Review,
15(1), 165-176.
Bernard, W., & Leblang, D. (2006). Democratic processes and financial markets: Pricing
politics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Block, S. A., & Vaaler, P. M. (2004). The price of democracy: sovereign risk ratings, bond
spreads and political business cycles in developing countries. Journal of International
Money and Finance, 23(6), 917-946.
Buxton, J. (2003). Economic policy and the rise of Hugo Chávez. In S. Ellner & D. Hellinger
(Eds.), Venezuelan politics in the Chávez era: Class, polarization and conflict (pp. 113-
130). Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Cardoso, F. H., & Faletto, E. (1979). Dependent development. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Castañeda, J. G., & Navia, P. (2007). The year of the ballot. Current History, 106(697),
51-57.
Coppedge, M. (1998). The dynamic diversity of Latin American party systems. Party Politics,
4(4), 547-568.
Cukierman, A. (1992). Central bank strategy, credibility and independence. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cukierman, A., Webb, S., & Neyapti, B. (1992). Measuring the independence of central banks
and its effect on policy outcomes. The World Bank Economic Review, 6, 353-398.
Dietz, H., & Myers, D. J. (2007). From thaw to deluge: Party system collapse in Venezuela
and Peru. Latin American Politics and Society, 49(2), 59-86.
Eckstein, H. (1975). Case studies and theory in political science. In F. Greenstein & N. Polsby
(Eds.), Handbook of political science (pp. 79-138). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Eichengreen, B., & Hausmann, R. (Eds.). (2005). Other people’s money: Debt denomination and
financial instability in emerging market economies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Franzese, R. J., Jr. (2002). Electoral and partisan cycles in economic policies and outcomes.
Annual Review of Political Science, 5, 369-421.
Garrett, G. (1998). Global markets and national politics: Collision course or virtuous circle?
International Organization, 52(4), 787-824.
George, A. L., & Bennett, A. (2005). Case studies and theory development in the social sciences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Herron, M. C. (2000). Estimating the economic impact of political party competition in the
1992 British election. American Journal of Political Science, 44(2), 320-331.
Hibbs, D. A., Jr. (1977). Political parties and marcoeconomic policy. American Political
Science Review, 70(4), 1467-1487.
Leaders: Change, please; Mexico’s presidential election. (2006, July 1). The Economist, p. 10.
Leaders: Menem’s final days. (1999, May 29). The Economist, pp. 15-16.
Downloaded from cps.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
1316 Comparative Political Studies
Leblang, D. A. (2002). The political economy of speculative attacks in the developing world.
International Studies Quarterly, 46(1), 69-92.
Lebowitz, M. A. (2006). Constuyámoslo ahora: El Socialismo para el siglo XXI [We will build
it now: Socialism of the 21st century] (M. Harnecker, J. Duckworth, et al., Trans.).
Caracas, Venezuela: Centro Internacional Miranda.
Mahon, J. E., Jr. (1996). Mobile capital and Latin American development. University Park:
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Mainwaring, S. P. (1999). Rethinking party systems in the third wave of democratization: The
case of Brazil. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Moffett, M., & Fritsch, P. (1998, September 14). Real politics: Brazil strives to steady its
markets as election adds to uncertainty—to back currency, it hoists interest rates, but that
threatens the economy—leftist challenge to Cardoso. Wall Street Journal, p. A1.
Mosley, L. (2003). Global capital and national governments. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Singh, A. (2005, October). Global context and regional outlook for Latin America and the
Caribbean. Paper presented at a symposium sponsored by the Banco de la Republica Bogota,
Colombia. Retrieved February 1, 2008, from www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2005/
101305.htm
Sola, L. (2006). Financial credibility, legitimacy and political discretion: The Lula da Silva government.
In L. Sola & L. Whitehead (Eds.), Statecrafting monetary authority: Domestic and
financial order in Brazil (pp. 237-267). Oxford, UK: Centre for Brazilian Studies.
Spanakos, A. P., & Renno, L. R. (2006). Elections and economic turbulence in Brazil:
Candidates, voters and investors. Latin American Politics and Society, 48(4), 1-26.
Starr, P. K. (1999). Capital flows, fixed exchange rates, and political survival: Mexico and
Argentina, 1994-1995. In P. Oxhorn & P. K. Starr (Eds.), Markets & democracy in Latin
America: Conflict or convergence (pp. 203-238). Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Vaaler, P. M., Schrage, B. N., & Block, S. A. (2006). Elections, opportunism, partisanship and
sovereign ratings in developing countries. Review of Development Economics, 10(1), 154-170.
Wallerstein, I. (2004). World Systems Theory: An introduction. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Anthony Peter Spanakos is an assistant professor in the Department of Political Science and
Law at Montclair State University and an adjunct assistant professor in the Department of
Politics at New York University. His research has focused on policy reform and democratization
in Latin America. He is the coeditor of Reforming Brazil (2004) and has published in
Latin American Politics and Society, Latin American Research Review, and Dados.
Lucio R. Renno is an associate professor at the Graduate Studies and Research Center on the
Americas at the University of Brasilia. His research interests include legislative studies and voting
behavior. He has articles published in the American Journal of Political Science, Electoral Studies,
Legislative Studies Quarterly, Journal of Legislative Studies, Journal of Politics, among others
The Independence of
International Organizations
CONCEPT AND APPLICATIONS
YORAM Z. HAFTEL
Department of Political Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
ALEXANDER THOMPSON
Department of Political Science
Ohio State University
Despite its widespread use in studies of domestic political institutions, the concept of “independence”
has not been systematically applied to the study of international institutions. Most arguments regarding the
ability of international organizations (IOs) to promote cooperation and mitigate conflict rely on the implicit
assumption that such institutions possess some independence from states, and yet the field has failed to conceptualize—
let alone measure—this institutional characteristic. Extracting insights from the theoretical literatures
on both international and domestic institutions, the authors distill several design features that lend
independence to political institutions and then generate coding rules for measuring the independence of IOs.
Based on an original data set of regional integration arrangements, the authors then use regression analysis to
test several propositions for explaining variation in IO independence, shedding light on some important
theoretical and empirical puzzles in international relations.
Keywords: international organizations; regional integration; institutional design; independence
Recent international relations (IR) scholarship has become increasingly concerned
with issues of institutional variation and design. Theorists have identified several
dimensions along which international institutions vary, including their degree of formality
(Lipson 1991; Abbott and Snidal 1998), hierarchy (Weber 1997; Lake 1999),
legalization (Goldstein et al. 2001), and institutionalization (Stone Sweet, Sandholtz,
and Fligstein 2001; Haftel 2004b).1 In each case, the literature identifies trade-offs
253
AUTHORS’ NOTE: The authors are listed in alphabetical order. An earlier version of this article was
presented at the 2003 annual convention of the International Studies Association, Portland, Oregon. For
valuable comments, we thank Ian Hurd and Jon Pevehouse. Matthew Scherbarth provided research assistance
and helpful suggestions. The data and an appendix are available online at http://jcr.sagepub.com/cgi/
content/full/50/2/253/DC1/.
JOURNAL OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION, Vol. 50 No. 2, April 2006 253-275
DOI: 10.1177/0022002705285288
© 2006 Sage Publications
1. The most comprehensive treatment of institutional variation is Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal
(2004).
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
associated with creating andworking through institutions that vary along these dimensions.
Typically, this involves some form of increased transaction costs or constraints
as institutions exhibit high values on these dimensions, which are traded off for political
benefits such as the ability to credibly commit, signal, fill in incomplete contracts,
or gain legitimacy for policies. Understanding how international institutions matter in
world politics, as both an independent and a dependent variable, hinges on such
questions of variation and design.
The purpose of this article is to conceptualize and measure another dimension
of international institutions, their independence, and to test several propositions for
explaining its variation. The notion of independence subsumes key aspects of the various
institutional dimensions listed above and does so in a more politically meaningful
way. The independence of an institution largely determines its authority and
influence—in short, its ability to shape international politics. Among the most intriguing
questions for students of IR is whether international institutions should be treated
as actors in their own right rather than as epiphenomenal (the realist position), as simple
arenas within which states interact (the traditional neoliberal position), or as social
contexts that shape state interests (a typical constructivist position). Evidence is
mounting that international organizations (IOs), in particular, should be treated as
independent agents that play an active and even strategic role (Snidal and Thompson
2003, 223-4; Hawkins and Jacoby 2006).
IR scholars have focused indirectly on institutional independence and related concepts.
International applications of principal-agent theory have investigated the conditions
under which states delegate authority to IO agents. In some cases, these agents
possess a significant degree of “autonomy” or “discretion” and may engage in actions
not anticipated by their state principals (Hawkins et al. 2006; Pollack 2003; Nielson
and Tierney 2003; Majone 2001). Others stress the role of IO bureaucracies. To serve
their own interests and increase their power, international bureaucracies, like others,
strive “to maximise their budget, their staff and their independence” (Vaubel 1996,
195). Borrowing from sociological institutionalism, Michael Barnett and Martha
Finnemore (2004) go farther, arguing that IOs can become autonomous sites of
authority because their bureaucracies possess legitimate authority and control over
expertise. Nowhere is the stress on supranational actors as drivers of IO influence
more pronounced than in studies of the European Union (EU) (Alter 1998; Sandholtz
and Stone Sweet 1998).
This literature suffers from two important weaknesses. First, scholars tend to focus
on a few “usual suspects”—including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the
World Bank, certain United Nations (UN) specialized agencies, and EU institutions—
when they address the issue of IOs as independent actors. These institutions are by no
means representative of the universe of international organizations; in particular, they
have unusually large staffs and substantial resources at their disposal. This promotes
an exaggerated sense of the degree and nature of independent behavior as well as a
misleading focus on bureaucracies as the main source of IO independence. Second,
the theoretical literature on institutional design and independence has tended to
overlook issues of measurement.
254 JOURNAL OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
Indeed, the political science study of IOs seems to have split into two branches, one
largely theoretical and the other explicitly empirical with a quantitative focus. Grand
theorists tend to focus on conceptualizing institutional design features with little attention
to operationalization beyond particular cases.2 The quantitative literature, on the
other hand, tends to treat IOs as homogeneous black boxes, with insufficient attention
to variation among them.3 One of our goals is to bridge these traditions by starting with
a variable that is both conceptually rich and theoretically grounded, on one hand, and
operationalizable and thus practical for empirical research, on the other.
In the next section, we provide a theoretical discussion of IO independence. Borrowing
from IR theory as well as the literature on institutional independence at the
domestic level—regarding central banks, judiciaries, and executive agencies—we discuss
what independence entails in terms of both the institution’s design features and
the structure of the relationship between political actors and the institution. In the third
section, we operationalize IO independence. We propose six institutional design features
that determine the degree of independence of an IO and present a protocol for
coding IOs on the dimension of independence. The coding scheme is applied to a sample
of regional integration arrangements (RIAs). The fourth section offers a test of several
hypotheses—including the distribution of power among member states, the
degree of trade interdependence among them, the duration of the institution, and the
number and heterogeneity of members—for explaining variation in IO independence.
The final section summarizes our main conclusions, points to some limitations of the
study, and offers additional research suggestions.
CONCEPTUALIZING IO INDEPENDENCE
Despite an enormous literature on independence as a characteristic of domestic
political institutions, the IR field has largely ignored it.We highlight a handful of notable
exceptions that provide a foundation for its informed conceptualization. We also
borrow from the literature on institutions at the domestic level for further insight into
the qualities that render an institution independent. Our conceptualization highlights
three interrelated elements of institutional independence: autonomy, neutrality, and
delegation.
Perhaps the most direct effort to address independence in an IR context comes from
Kenneth Abbott and Duncan Snidal (1998, 9), who define institutional independence
as “the authority to act with a degree of autonomy.” This is consistent with Robert
Dahl’s (1982, 16) proposition that to be independent “in a political sense is to be not
under the control of another,” which he characterizes as a state of “autonomy.” Barnett
Haftel, Thompson / INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 255
2. Some of the best empiricalwork on international organization (IO) design and independence is in
the form of case studies. Our point is that these studies rarely offer away to measure variables across cases so
that findings can be replicated and generalized.
3. This is true, for example, of the quantitative literature on sanctions (L. Martin 1992; Drury 1998)
and of the literature on conflict and IOs (Russett, Oneal, and Davis 1998; Russett and Oneal 2001; Mansfield
and Pevehouse 2000). There are some recent efforts to capture institutional variation in large-n analysis,
including Bearce and Omori (2005); Boehmer, Gartzke, and Nordstrom (2004); Haftel (2004b, forthcoming);
Koremenos (2005); and Pevehouse and Russett (forthcoming).
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
and Finnemore (2004) offer a similar conceptualization of autonomy in the context of
IOs, which they understand as independence from states. In the most general terms,
then, independence for an IO is the ability to operate in a manner that is insulated from
the influence of other political actors—especially states. Thus, autonomy is a key element
of any conceptualization of political independence.
This notion of insulation from the control of other actors is an important ingredient
of independence in domestic polities as well. It is precisely because of their autonomy
that independent judiciaries are able to serve as commitment mechanisms, providing
“an institutional apparatus that is capable of restraining us from giving in to momentary
temptations of lawlessness” (Ferejohn 1999, 374; see also North and Weingast
1989). Similarly, a cross-national study of central banks finds that independence is
determined by the extent of executive branch authority to manipulate the careers of
bank officials and the ability of the bank to resist government influence in monetary
policy making (Cukierman,Webb, and Neyapti 1992). Autonomy is thus affected by
both ex ante influence and ex post efforts at control or punishment. For example, executive
agencies are least independent when legislators include a legislative veto as part
of the statute creating a newagency, thereby reducing its autonomy (E. Martin 1997).
Returning to the IR literature, in his application of principal-agent theory to EU
institutions, Giandomenico Majone (2001) notes that the independence of an agent is a
function of its autonomy but also of its preferences (see also Thompson 2006). To be
truly independent, an agent must have preferences distinct from its principal or principals.
AsKeohane, Moravcsik, and Slaughter (2000, 459) propose with respect to international
courts and tribunals, independence measures “the extent to which adjudication
is rendered impartially with respect to concrete state interests.” As a general
principle, then, an independent actor has interests that are neutral or impartial with
respect to other political actors. The notion of neutrality is the second key element on
which we build.
The neutrality principle is echoed by scholars of domestic judicial independence as
well. For a judiciary to be independent, it must act as a “neutral third” in disputes
(Shapiro 1981). In addition to their commitment function, independent central banks
also provide information regarding policy choice and their consequences. Their ability
to do so depends on their expertise and perceived neutrality, which render the information
credible (Bernhard 1998). Daniel Carpenter (2001) makes a similar point in the
context of domestic bureaucracies: the most authoritative bureaucracies have interests
that are distinct from the powerful politicians that seek to control them. Their role as
independent actors depends on this impartiality.
However, even if an actor has autonomy and neutral interests, it may still have very
little influence. The issue of delegation must also be considered. Delegation of authority
to a bureaucracy (to make and implement rules) or to a third-party dispute settlement
mechanism (to resolve conflicts) has been identified as a key element of an institution’s
degree of legalization (Abbott and Snidal 2000). As institutional properties,
independence and delegation are tightly intertwined (Keohane, Moravcsik, and
Slaughter 2000). International institutions with significant delegated authority have
the power to set agendas and shape policies through the exercise of discretion (Pollack
256 JOURNAL OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
2003) and to impose “sovereignty costs” on states in certain situations (Abbott and
Snidal 2000).
The notion of discretion, in particular, has occupied scholars concerned with
domestic institutions. Some executive agencies are tightly constrained by rules defining
their authority, while others are granted more discretion and thus influence (Horn
1995). Bureaucracies with “proposal power” have the greatest independence and can
constrain the choices available to the executive and legislature (Bendor, Glazer, and
Hammond 2001, 252). Similarly, a central bank with greater latitude in terms of the
policy goals it can pursue has more independence from the government. It should be
noted that discretion is partly a function of control mechanisms, which can be used to
constrain or punish institutional actors. Thus, the elements of autonomy and delegation
are inextricably linked.
In the next section, we build on these three institutional properties—autonomy,
neutrality, and delegation—to identify a set of specific features that lend independence
to an international institution. We conclude that variation in IO independence is
largely a reflection of institutional design in such areas as decision-making procedures
(especially relevant to the issues of autonomy and neutrality), the existence and discretion
of supranational bureaucracies (to capture neutrality and delegation), and the
existence and legalization of third-party dispute settlement (to capture autonomy,
neutrality, and delegation).
OPERATIONALIZING IO INDEPENDENCE
Here we outline the institutional design features we believe are most important for
measuring IO independence and develop a scheme for coding international institutions
on the independence dimension. For each of three aspects of institutional
design—decision making, supranational bureaucracy, and dispute settlement—we
propose two indicators for our measure, for a total of six. We use examples from our
data set of regional integration arrangements4 to illustrate our points. After outlining
the coding scheme, we offer some basic descriptive statistics for the data.
DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES
The nature of decision-making and rule creation procedures is a major component
of independence insofar as it determines howmuch control individual states have over
IO activities. Just as more decentralized power (i.e., the presence of multiple veto players)
lends independence to central banks by making it more difficult to overturn their
decisions (Moser 1999), and just as the unilateral power of a government to veto court
Haftel, Thompson / INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 257
4. The online appendix contains basic information for these organizations. They are primarily
designed to facilitate economic cooperation, although many also have political and security components.
While some are not highly formalized, they all go beyond mere treaties insofar as they have regular meetings
and well-specified decision-making procedures.We thus refer to them as “organizations” rather than rely on
more general terms such as institutions or regimes.
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
decisions undermines judicial independence, IO independence is partly a function of
the number of states required to control decision making. The issue of who is making
decisions and how closely these decision makers are tied to national interests is also
important. Accordingly, we identify two dimensions of decision-making procedures,
voting rules and the body that makes major decisions, and explain how they relate to
independence.5
Voting rules have important implications for the degree of IO independence, especially
with respect to the autonomy dimension. A key distinction is between decisions
made by consensus, or unanimity, and decisions made by some type of majority rule.
As the size of the veto group becomes larger, states increasingly relinquish control. In
other words, majority rule forces states to countenance decisions with which they disagree,
leading to a loss of control and some pooling of sovereignty (Moravcsik 1998,
67). Rule by consensus, on the other hand, is intended to protect state sovereignty and
reign in IO autonomy since no obligation can be imposed without each member’s consent
(Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal 2001, 772).
Our sample reveals that nearly all RIAs follow a consensus rather than a majority
voting rule to preserve national prerogative. “The ‘ASEAN [Association of Southeast
Asian Nations] way’ of decision-making by consensus,” for example, “has served as a
rationalization for the unwillingness of member states to transfer any decision-making
authority to regional institutions” (Ravenhill 1995, 860). The only exception is the EU.
With the Single European Act in 1986, the European Community moved from unanimity
to weighted voting, in the form of the qualified majority voting (QMV) formula,
in most issue areas.6 Although the QMV procedure provides larger states with
more voting power, it also ensures that no single state can block the integration process,
as France did in the 1960s.7 Representing perhaps the ultimate manifestation of
independence, in some areas member states would require unanimous support to
oppose an EU-level policy: European Central Bank policies and European Court of
Justice rulings could only be overturned through treaty revisions. Because majority
rule is rare among IOs, in our coding scheme, we make a dichotomous distinction
between those institutions that have a meaningful majority rule procedure and those
that do not (i.e., we do not distinguish a simple majority from versions of super-majority),
8 assigning the former a point and the latter a zero.
The question of what decision-making body holds the power to make decisions has
important implications for the functioning of an IO and its independence. Because IOs
are composed of governments, the ultimate authority to make decisions lies in the
hands of the heads of state, who typically wield the most influence of any national
258 JOURNAL OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
5. Joseph Nye (1971, 40) provides a related discussion.
6. TheTreaty of Nice extended the scope of qualified majority voting(QMV)to include some 90 percent
of issues. For more on this and its implications, seeWood and Yes7ilada (2002, 111-3). Some sensitive
issues still require unanimity.
7. Similarly, Jeffrey Schott (2000) argues that theWorld Trade Organization’s consensus rule is hindering
the current negotiating round by allowing small groups of states to hold up the process.
8. Several regional integration arrangements (RIAs), such as the Andean Pact and the CommonMarket
of Eastern and Southern Africa, employ majority voting on some procedural issues.We do not count such
practices as a meaningful majority rule.
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
political actor in the context of IOs (Moravcsik 1994). Nevertheless, the degree of
involvement of heads of state in an IO varies, and even when their meeting (e.g., the
Presidential Council, the Conference of Heads of State, or the like) is the highest
authority, this does not necessarily mean that it makes most decisions. In some cases,
the main decision-making body is a ministerial council—usually composed of foreign
or finance ministers in the case of RIAs.
We argue that IOs in which a ministerial council (or other body of representatives)
is the most important decision-making body are more independent than IOs in which
heads of state are the key decision makers. In the latter, national interests tend to dominate,
and ministers, if they do meet, are constrained in their ability to promote distinct
goals of the organization or the member state community. As one observer of African
RIAs notes, “The lack of decision-making authority on the part of the Council of Ministers
constitutes an institutional sword of Damocles. Because the Council runs the
risk of seeing its decisions amended or overturned by the Authority [of heads of state],
the Council of Ministers has a natural propensity to avoid new or daring initiatives”
(Ntumba 1997, 308-9). In cases where decision-making power is delegated to a ministerial
council—for example, the EU, the Andean Pact, and ASEAN—the process benefits
from greater flexibility and at least a modicum of neutrality from state interests. In
some cases, a minister or other delegate will begin to identify with the IO and the member
state community, and while heads of states may delegate more or less discretion to
their individual representatives, control over these agents will always be imperfect.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency often defied White House positions during
UN climate negotiations, pursuing interests more closely aligned with the EU and
environmentalists than with the president (Bodansky 2001, 38).
This distinction has added importance since heads of state often fail to meet on a
regular basis. In regional organizations that are managed primarily by heads of state,
infrequent meetings can undermine their ability to function. A comparison between
two RIAs illustrates this point. In the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Presidential
Summit is the sole decision-making organ; as such, cooperation “relies upon the ability
of the heads of state to meet regularly in order to build the architecture of a regional
organization” (Mortimer 1999, 178). The fact that the summit was convened only six
times in nine years (instead of eighteen times, as planned) resulted in an IO thatwas in
“a state of, at best, prolonged hibernation” (Mortimer 1999, 177). In the Andean Pact,
on the other hand, although the Presidential Council is formally the institution’s highest
authority, most decisions are made by the Council of Foreign Ministers and the
Commission. Like AMU, the Andean Presidential Council did not meet on a regular
basis in the early 1990s due to political divisions. Although the lack of summit meetings
did hamper the advancement of the Andean Pact, the RIA nevertheless made considerable
progress at this time precisely because heads of state were not the primary
decision makers (Mendoza 1998).
In sum, we contend that an IO in which a ministerial council (or its equivalent) is the
most important decision-making body is more independent than one dominated by
heads of state, ceteris paribus.We assign one point to the former and zero otherwise.
Haftel, Thompson / INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 259
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
SUPRANATIONAL BUREAUCRACY
The existence of a supranational bureaucracy, typically embodied in a secretariat or
a commission, is an important sign of IO independence. By supranational bureaucracy,
we refer to a permanent technical and administrative body that manages the
operation of the IO on a regular basis (Jacobson 1984, 89). The staff is intended to
function as management and technical experts who do not represent individual governments
and are insulated from political influence in the performance of their duties.
Article 213 of the Treaty of Rome, for example, requires that “the Members of the
Commission shall, in the general interest of the Community, be entirely independent
in the performance of their duties.” In other words, bureaucratic interests are neutral
with respect to individual national interests.
This independence varies among secretariats, of course, and some IOs do not even
possess a separate bureaucracy. These institutional features are an important component
of independence, as evidenced by the frequent objection among state leaders that
secretariats are too institutionalized or have too much capacity.9We capture variation
in supranational bureaucracy independence with two indicators: the existence of a distinct
secretariat or its equivalent and the authority of this body to initiate policy. These
are intended to capture whether an IO has a neutral bureaucracy and the extent to
which this bureaucracy is delegated meaningful discretion.
The existence of a supranational bureaucracy that manages the operation of the IO
is the most basic requirement for this criterion. When states endowIOs with a secretariat
or commission, they are delegating to a centralized authority and generating independence
in the process. As Koremenos, Lipson, and Snidal (2001, 771) observe,
“Centralization is controversial, politically and conceptually, because it touches so
directly on national sovereignty.” It is unsurprising, then, that not all IOs have a secretariat.
Our survey of existing RIAs reveals several such instances: the administration
of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) is managed through the Finance
Department of South Africa, the Bangkok Agreement lacks a secretariat and is coordinated
by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, and the North
American Free Trade Agreement has three separate national secretariats. We assign
one point to an IO that has a permanent secretariat or commission and zero otherwise.
When there is a permanent secretariat, the authority of the supranational bureaucracy
must also be considered. Building on discussions of discretion in the context of
central banks and executive agencies, we propose that an important sign of IO independence
is the degree of responsibility that the member states delegate to the organization’s
bureaucracy. Most secretariats perform informational and operational roles;
that is, they prepare meetings and documents, provide technical assistance, and ensure
the day-to-day functioning of their organizations.10 At the same time, some IO bureaucracies
are provided with additional and much more active responsibilities. In particu-
260 JOURNAL OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
9. Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) governments, for example, resisted the creation
of a permanent Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) secretariat due to fears of lost sovereignty.
Some ministers even complained about secretariat officials being connected by e-mail, arguing that it
reflected too much “institutionalization” (see Funabashi 1995, 139).
10. This categorization of functions builds on Jacobson (1984).
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
lar, some secretariats and commissions can initiate and recommend policies and
thereby promote the goals of the organization, prerogatives that greatly enhance
bureaucratic authority. We focus on the power to initiate and recommend as an
important source of independence.
The European Commission represents the ideal type for secretariats with the power
to initiate. The commission plays a crucial agenda-setting role and indeed has the sole
right of initiative in almost all “first pillar” matters (Majone 2001; Pollack 2003). As
Leon Lindberg (1971, 85) points out with respect to the European Commission, “possession
of a formal right to initiate most policy proposals, to be present as these are discussed
by the governments, and to participate actively in the discussion . . . have also
been important resources [of the commission’s strength].” The bureaucracies of the
Andean Pact and theWest African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) enjoy
similar powers. In contrast, as one scholar of African regionalism points out, many
secretariats are delegated little authority: “expected only to ensure the smooth functioning
of the community machinery on a day-to-day basis, they are severely handicapped
in doing anything else by the lack of any real decision-making power”
(Ntumba 1997, 313). An observer of the Central American Common Market (CACM)
complains that the regional secretariat lacks “the powers to remove obstacles in the
path to greater integration” (Bulmer-Thomas 1998, 320). Without the power to initiate,
secretariats such as these cannot set agendas and break political logjams that hinder
movement toward further cooperation. To capture this variation in secretariat discretion,
we assign one point to an IO whose bureaucracy can initiate policies or make
recommendations and zero otherwise.
THIRD-PARTY DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
Dispute settlement reflects an important institutional dimension of IO independence
and captures elements of the autonomy, neutrality, and delegation principles. The
presence of a centralized mechanism for solving disputes facilitates exchange and
cooperation among political and economic actors at the domestic level and among
states (North and Weingast 1989; Yarbrough and Yarbrough 1997, 134-5). International
dispute settlement mechanisms (DSMs) are potentially constraining, however,
because states must delegate important judicial powers to neutral third parties. Typically,
theseDSMsare designed with substantial autonomy, such that states cannot control
or overturn decisions. We propose that the most independent dispute settlement
procedure must be automatic (states must not be able to bypass the procedure) and
binding (states must not be able to ignore or veto the ruling), and the judges themselves
must be drawn from a standing body (so that they cannot be screened and selected on
an ad hoc basis, ensuring neutrality). These features correspond to those identified
in the IR literature on legalization and dispute settlement (Smith 2000; Goldstein
et al. 2001; Posner and Yoo 2005). Few DSMs meet all three criteria—exceptions
are the European Court of Justice and the World Trade Organization’s (WTO’s)
mechanism—and there is considerable variation.
James McCall Smith (2000) offers a five-point scale for measuring DSMs along a
continuum of legalization: none, low,medium, high, and very high.We employ Smith’s
Haftel, Thompson / INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 261
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
measurement and data in this article but for simplicity and symmetry collapse his categories
into just three: none, low, and high. For our coding purposes, a low level of
legalization refers to an instance in which third-party review is automatic and binding
but judges are picked from an ad hoc roster, while a high level of legalization entails a
standing tribunal as well as automaticity and bindingness.11 Under the category of
third-party dispute settlement, then, we assign one point to each level of legalization
for a maximum of two points.12
INDEPENDENCE ACROSS RIAS: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Having outlined our composite indicator of independence, in this subsection we
present several descriptive statistics of our data set of regional integration arrangements
with an eye toward demonstrating the variable’s validity and usefulness.
Table 1 presents the six indicators and reports the number of times each trait occurs
in the thirty RIAs of the sample. As discussed above, the indicators are constructed as
“dummies,” such that RIAs score one point for trait present and zero for trait absent.
Our sample includes all existing RIAs for which information is available and is thus
close to the universe. Data for the indicators were collected from several primary and
secondary sources,13 as well as through direct communication with RIA officials. Cod-
262 JOURNAL OF CONFLICT RESOLUTION
TABLE 1
Coding Rules and Occurrence of Traits in Sample
Coding Rule Occurrences of Trait
Decision-making procedures
1. Are decisions made by majority rule? 1
2. Does a council of ministers hold decision-making power? 16
Supranational (regional) bureaucracy
3. Is there a permanent secretariat? 25
4. Can the secretariat make recommendations or initiate? 4
Dispute settlement mechanism
5. Is there a binding dispute settlement mechanism? 11
6. Is there a standing tribunal? 7
11. Collapsing Smith’s (2000) categories does not result in a great deal of information loss for our purposes.
One category omitted from our measure is the presence of nonbinding third-party review. Since states
are free to ignore such a review, we assume that it adds little to institutional independence.Asecond omitted
category captures whether nonstate actors have legal standing in the dispute settlement mechanism (DSM),
an issue that does not relate directly to automaticity or bindingness.
12. For coding purposes, we do take into account whether theDSMhas actually been implemented. In
the case of more than one RIA, including the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) and the Economic Community of
Central African States, states have agreed on paper to form regional tribunals but have not done so (Mortimer
1999, 81; Union of International Associations 1999-2000, 565).
13. We relied especially on various years of the Union of International Association’s Yearbook of
International Organizations; the International Monetary Fund’s “Directory of Economic, Commodity and
Development Organizations” (available online at http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/decdo/contents.htm);
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD1996); electronic searches of periodicals
through the Lexis-Nexis database; and Web sites of the RIAs.
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at Dokuz Eylul Universitesi on September 25, 2011
ing of the indicators regarding dispute settlement mechanisms relies on Smith (2000),
as outlined above.
Since these institutions change over time, albeit slowly, we have clustered our measurements
in the same year, 1996, for purposes of comparison. Our focus on RIAs
serves as a useful first cut at understanding variation in IO independence more generally.
Beginning with a fairly unified sample has advantages: the examination of organizations
of similar type makes comparisons of institutional features and independence
more meaningful by allowing us to control for some factors. Of course, we may not be
able to generalize from our sample to all IOs—those with universal memberships and
in different issue areas may exhibit different patterns, for example. Comparing independence
across types of organizations raises a number of interesting theoretical questions
and is precisely the type of empirical research that our variable facilitates, as we
discuss in the Conclusion.
Figure 1 reports the distribution of RIAs on our independence scale.Acursory look
reveals that considerable variation does exist. The distribution can be described as a
right-tailed bell curve; in other words, most RIAs exhibit a low level of independence,
and only a few exhibit no independence or a high level of independence.
We can also examine more closely the level of independence of specific RIAs. Figure
2 presents the level of independence of each RIA, differentiating the three major
components: decision-making procedures, regional bureaucracy,14 and dispute settlement
mechanism. Looking at the aggregate measures, we observe that the EU is the
most independent IO, followed by the Andean Community; the Central European Free
Trade Agreement, the Group of 3 (G3), and SACU are the least independent RIAs,
each with zero points.
Haftel,Since these institutions change over time, albeit slowly, we have clustered our measurements
in the same year, 1996, for purposes of comparison. Our focus on RIAs
serves as a useful first cut at understanding variation in IO independence more generally.
Beginning with a fairly unified sample has advantages: the examination of organizations
of similar type makes comparisons of institutional features and independence
more meaningful by allowing us to control for some factors. Of course, we may not be
able to generalize from our sample to all IOs—those with universal memberships and
in different issue areas may exhibit different patterns, for example. Comparing independence
across types of organizations raises a number of interesting theoretical questions
and is precisely the type of empirical research that our variable facilitates, as we
discuss in the Conclusion.
Figure 1 reports the distribution of RIAs on our independence scale.Acursory look
reveals that considerable variation does exist. The distribution can be described as a
right-tailed bell curve; in other words, most RIAs exhibit a low level of independence,
and only a few exhibit no independence or a high level of independence.
We can also examine more closely the level of independence of specific RIAs. Figure
2 presents the level of independence of each RIA, differentiating the three major
components: decision-making procedures, regional bureaucracy,14 and dispute settlement
mechanism. Looking at the aggregate measures, we observe that the EU is the
most independent IO, followed by the Andean Community; the Central European Free
Trade Agreement, the Group of 3 (G3), and SACU are the least independent RIAs,
each with zero points.
Haftel, Thompson / INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 263
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Independence
Number of RIAs
Figure 1: Distribution of Independence Scores
14. For our sample, regional bureaucracies are the appropriate subset of supranational bureaucracies.