	

Although the leadership of the Ottoman Empire was dominated by men, at least one woman in the early period of the Empire succeeded in making her way into the sultan's inner circle, and successfully influenced the future of the sultanate. This woman was Roxelana.

Suleyman's wife was known as Roxelana in Europe and Rossa in Istanbul. She was a Ukranian slave who was likely captured in the Caucasus and taken to the slave market in Istanbul, where she was purchased for the sultan's harem. Suleyman's harem, like that of most Ottoman rulers already featured four chief concubines - one which would bear the sultan's heir - and about 300 other concubines. Like Roxelana most women in a sultan's harem were slaves that were given, purchased, or captured in war by the Ottomans. Additionally, almost all of them were Christians.

Her name, said to have been derived from the word "Rus", applied to both Ukrainians and Russians (Muscovites) of the 16th century. Slavic historians locate her original home at the town of Rohatyn in what is now western Ukraine, but was
part of Poland in the 16th century. Ukrainians were in those days known as "Ruthenians", also derived from the same root "Rus".

Roxelana joined the lower ranks of the harem, but she quickly elevated her status. She gained the nickname Khourrem meaning "Laughing One" for her high spirits and storytelling abilities. She soon became one of Suleyman's favourites and accompanied him on several public occasions. This special treatment drew the ire of Suleyman's senior consort Gulfem, whose son Mustafa was considered to be the heir to the Ottoman throne.
Roxelana used her influence over the sultan to have Gulfem and Mustafa banished to a far
province of the Empire in 1534. Roxelana bore Suleyman a son shortly after that who she hoped would replace Mustafa as Suleyman's heir. Next, Roxelana convinced Suleyman that his Grand Vizier Ibrahim was a traitor who was scheming to usurp the sultan's power. Ibrahim who had openly opposed Suleyman's liaison with Roxelana and who did in fact wield an unusual amount of control was assassinated in 1536. With her main obstacles removed, Roxelana soon climbed to the position of chief consort in the harem as well as chief minister to the sultan. 
She then managed to do what no Ottoman concubine before her had done - she convinced the sultan to marry her. Islamic law permitted a sultan to take up to four wives, plus as many concubines as he could afford to keep. Until Suleyman however, no Ottoman sultan had married even once. The marriage caused a stir throughout both Europe and the Islamic world. Once married, Roxelana's sons became heirs to the Ottoman throne. Her son Selim, succeeded Suleyman as sultan in 1566 after a struggle with his brother Bayazid which ended in Bayazid's death in 1561. Roxelana herself died in 1558 eight years before her husband, ending the story of the slave girl who climbed the ranks to the position of sultana.

Click here to see Suleyman's mosque
This amulet against evil eye is very typical in Turkey. You can find it all over Turkey: women use it as a bracelet, earring or necklace; Turkish people use it hanged in their house, office and also at their car, also babies have it hanged in their cloths. It should be mainly blue and look like an eye. There are very different sizes but the shape is usually round. The Turkish name for this amulet that protects one from the evil eye is nazar boncuk.

But what is behind this turkish superstition? Once upon a time ... there was a rock by the sea that even with the force of a hundred men and a lot of dynamite couldn't be moved or cracked. There was also a man in this town by the sea, who was known to carry the evil eye (Nazar). After much effort and endeavor, the town people brought the man to the rock, and the man, upon looking at the rock said, "My God ! What a big rock !" The instant he said it, there was a rip, roar and crack, and instantly the immense and impossible rock was found to be cracked in two.

The force of the evil eye (nazar) is a widely accepted and feared element in Turkish daily life.
As an example of this fear let me tell you another story... A woman gives birth to a healthy child with pink cheeks, all the neighbors come and see the baby. They shower the baby with compliments, commentating especially on how healthy and chubby the baby is. After getting so much attention weeks later the baby gets ill. No explanation can be found for his illness. It is described as "Nazar". Compliments made to a specific body part can result in "Nazar". That's why nearly every Turkish mother fixes with a safety pin this small amulet on the child's clothes. Once this amulet is found cracked, it means it has protected the baby and immediately a new one has to replace it.

So the idea is to protect yourself, your house, your office or the beloved ones.The Nazar amulet can be seen dangling from the bumpers of taxi cabs, pinned to the clothes of babies, built into the foundation of modern office buildings, guarding the doorways of kebap houses and in websites. If you want to use it in your house you should hang it in the entrance of the house, so any visitor will see it. If you want to wear, the most common one is a small amulet that can be hanged on your cloth, or your bag. Also you will find bracelet, earring or necklaces in different forms and shapes to be used.
Turkish people believe that with the evil eye amulet you will be protected and all the bad energy will be directed to the amulet and it will brake. No bad energy will reach you since you are protected with the amulet of nazar boncuk. Have you just had a new child? Bought a new car? Built a new office building? Worried that your "friends" and others are filled with envy about your good fortune? The protection of the Nazar is used for anything new or likely to attract praise. The belief is that even well-intentioned compliments include a conscious or unconscious dose of envy and resentment. The bead reflects the evil intent back to the onlooker. It somewhat resembles an eye and it is said the typical blue color is a factor in protecting the user.
The church was established by Congregational (American Board) missionaries, the first of whom - William and Abigail Goodell - arrived in what was then called 'Constantinople' on June 9, 1831. Over the next three years they were joined by several other missionary families, and these formed the nucleus of the Church. The congregational contingent was strengthened by the arrival in 1842 of Scottish missionaries working among the Sephardim Jews of Constantinople and, joining the Church, that provided a strong base of support for its continuing work for many years. In 1857 the incumbent Dutch ambassador to the Sublime Porte, Count Julius van Zuyland van Nyevelt, invited the small congregation to use the chapel on the embassy grounds. The invitation has been renewed by successive Dutch diplomats to this day. This relationship between the Dutch government and the Church may well account for the community's stability throughout the years.
The English-speaking expatriate contingent in Istanbul swelled when Scottish and other British engineers and technicians came to do work for the Ottoman government. Many of these became regular members to swell the congregation. The cholera epidemic of 1965 hit the Church as hard as it hit all the people, and it spurred the community to organise itself more deliberately. A covenant and creed were written and signed by seventeen members in the Spring of 1866, and the long debate over a name was settled the following Fall; it would be known as 'The Evangelical Union Church of Pera'. 	

Union Church of Istanbul
Through this period the Church was unable to fully support a pastor; it depended for worship leadership on American and Scottish missionaries. The first formal call of a pastor was issued to a licentiate of the Free Church of Scotland. Rev. Alexander van Millingen, in 1868. But the financial collapse of the Ottoman government in 1875-1876, the simultaneous departure of Rev. van Milligen, and the evaporation of its endowment (invested in Turkish stock) plunged the Church into crises. Generously, the Free Church of Scotland stepped in to underwrite the salary of a resident part-time pastor from 1879 to 1885. The Scots pastor of the period tried to unite the congregation with the Free Church, but the members felt that was inappropriate. It was to remain an autonomous community of Christian believers.

In 1888 the Church's finances had recovered and investment was made in two buildings next to the Swedish embassy that eventually came to be known as the 'Unyon Han'. The shops and apartments were rented out and occasionally (as now) the pastor was housed there. The income from these buildings continues to underwrite the pastor's salary and supply facilities for the Church's program. In 1892 a full-time pastor was called, Rev. F.W. Anderson, a Scots Presbyterian, and since that time the Church has endeavoured to maintain a full-time pastoral ministry. 

Union Church of Istanbul
http://www.unionchurchofistanbul.org
	The years for the First World War were difficult, but the long-term ministry of Rev. Robert Frew (a Canadian) saw the congregation through, and toward the end of the War the pastor became the honorary chaplain to the Nederlands legation, an act which gave him legal standing and tax exemption. The reordering of Turkey as a Republic in 1923 under the legendary Mustafa Kemal Ataturk did not seriously affect the workings of the congregation. In fact members seem to have shared the optimism of the new nation. As the third decade of the twentieth century dawned the congregation, which had evolved a distinctively British flavour during the tenure of Scots pastors, now had an influx of more Americans and other nationalities. But it was not under after the Second World War that the pattern of calling American clergy was established. 1933 was celebrated as the centenary of the congregation.
The years of the Second World War, during which Turkey was a natural power, saw the Church struggling to maintain its ministry. It was not until the arrival of Rev. Walter Wiley in January of 1947 that the pastoral situation stabilised. By 1956 the Church declared itself to be fully self-supporting, not needing any subsidy from either the American Board nor even from its own endowment. In 1966 the name was changed: the Evangelical Union Church of Pera became simply 'The Union Church of Istanbul'.

In 1962, with a change in the law governing property ownership by foreigners, the Church set up a Foundation to administer its endowment - the Unyon Han. The evolving relationship between the Church the 'Walter Wiley Foundation' went through a phase during which the Foundation was seen as a body distinct from the Church. That relationship, however, continues to evolve as plans are being developed for extensive remodelling and a more rational and deliberate use of the Union Han buildings for Church program.

Over the years the Union Church has seen and been variously affected by the shifting fortunes of this history-drenched city. Now the membership is about seventy strong with a third again as many people who attend on a more casual basis. The membership profile is young. The Church has a well-run Sunday School program and a variety of adult Bible study groups which meet here and there throughout the city and its suburbs. It also tries to support the educational program with lecture series and special events. The 'Pera Bell Ringers' is a music group which made occasional contributions both the Church's worship experience and to Istanbul's wider cultural life, and a voice choir now enriches its worship. On a given Sunday morning (when there are two services, because the 'Dutch Chapel' is small) worshipers will be found to represent traditions from the most ancient to the very youngest. For all its diversity, the congregation continues to evidence a remarkable unity and warmth of fellowship.

The Union Church of Istanbul is perhaps the oldest congregation of its type anywhere in the world. Please visit http://www.unionchurchofistanbul.org for more information.
Turkish Cultural Habits

The world is rich in habits and culture. You can fell it when you visit another country and you get shocked with something that is not "normal" for you. We will talk here about some Turkish cultural habits:

    Turks have the habit of removing their shoes before entering home. Do not be embaraced if you visit a Turkish family and see in the entrance of the house or even outside the main door a lot of shoes ! The reason is good and simple: cleanliness ! When you walk in the streets, shoes will be in contact with a lot of dirt and the Turks don't want to bring it home.

    the marriage in a notary lasts about 5 to 10 minutes. The bride usually wear bride western clothes and everybody will clap their hands after the YES!

    after the couple marries, the bride will receive a lot of gold gifts and money!! Good isn't it ? Relatives and friends hang in the bride gold coins with a red bow, gold necklaces, gold bracelets, money shines, etc... If there is a party the bride will wear the gifts. The bride also carries a small bag, where she keeps some of the gold gifts if they are so many. Depending on the wealth of the family and friends, the gifts pays the party and more ...

    official marriage in Turkey is done at the notary and the religious one with a religious party. Turkey is a secular country, a man can marry only a woman in the notary, but a man can marry at most 4 women in the Islamic religion. The percentage of poligamic men is very small in Turkey and usually the population do not approve such marriages.

Click here to read more about Turkish Marriage
    when a child is born or is circumcisized, relatives and friends give them a gold coin with a red bow.

    in villages there is usually a coffee bar. In this coffee bar you will see only men drinking tea or coffee, smoking and talking. The women's permanence in such places is not prohibited. They also meet at their own houses to have tea and talk gossips!

    a typical Turk drinks approximately around 10 glasses of black tea pro day. Tea is the most popular drink in Turkey.

    if you are in Turkey on November 10th at 9:05 you will see something very interesting. Almost all the population make one minute of silence. It is interesting to see a metropole like Istanbul, in a crowd place where millions of people, cars and buses stop for one minute. It is like to stop a film. This minute of silence is in memory of the death of the founder of the Turkish republic, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk. Some museum clocks are also stopped at 9:05, this is also in honor of Ataturk.
    Turks are very superstitious !!

    when a child is born, relatives and friends give her/him an evil eye. Usually the family hangs in the child an object that the Turks calls "nazar boncuk" (see picture at this page) which is a blue evil eye. The evil eye can be made of gold depending on the wealth of the family.

    the "nazar boncuk" can also be put in the entrance of the house (the person already enters and sees that the house is protected), outside of the house, in the office, in the car, it can also be used as a jewelery. The "nazar boncuk" in its original form is a blue eye but it can also be represented in a bracelet or in an earring with a blue stone.

    Turkish men greet by kissing each other in their faces. This is a normal thing to see in Turkey. Man kisses man, woman kisses woman and woman kisses man in both cheeks. Religious women don't kiss men.

    there is a ritual when a younger person greets an eldery person of the same family or a closed friend. The eldery person gives his/her hand and the youngest person kisses the hand and take the hand towards his/her forehead. This is a sign of respect.

    Turkish families love to offer something to their guests. It can be lunch, dinner or a tea. If you have an invitation to visit a Turkish family, go with an empty stomach! Usually the woman of the family cook delicious dishes during the whole day and offer a banquet. Taste a little bit of everything because if you reject something they will be desapointed.

As Turkey is rich with cultural habits, we will give continuation to that subject in another opportunity!


British residents first introduced their Turkish hosts to a loosely organized version of the modern game in the late 19th century. Turkish youth, students in particular, took to the new game with enthusiasm, and over the course of the 20th century, a highly intense and individualistic footballing culture and community slowly emerged.

The game was initially viewed as a subversive distraction by the authorities, a foreign cultural intrusion. Before the turn of the century, a group of students at Galatasaray High School sat down and formed an official football club. The club later became UEFA Cup winners and European powers Galatasaray SK.

Istanbul fast became the focal point for a burgeoning Turkish football fever, and the city’s “second” side, Fenerbahçe SK, came into being shortly after their cross-town neighbors Galatasaray in 1907.

Following the end of the Ottoman Empire and its restrictive policies, the Turks established a national football federation (TFF) in 1923 to forge the way for a brave future, but Turkey’s rise would take time. 
he Turkish football league did not adopt a standard format until the early 1950s. Prior to this, the national champions were decided by way of a straight elimination tournament comprised of a handful of regional club champions.

In 1952, Turkey joined the ranks of a growing number of nations with professional football leagues. With the advent of professionalism, Turkish football eventually adopted a format similar to her western neighbors - a league system like the one that is most common in the world today. 
Fenerbahçe SK won the first modern national tournament in 1959, and Galatasaray were not far behind in 1963, winning the inaugural Turkish Cup competition.

With the emergence of a professional, competitive domestic league, the Turkish national side began to gain a head of steam. The nation struggled to gain a foothold among Europe’s great powers, but in recent years the Turkish national side has become a force to be reckoned with.

Turkey made her international debut at the 1954 FIFA World Cup Switzerland They managed to defeat Korea 7-0 before losing out to West Germany in a group play-off for a quick trip home.

The Turks are enjoying something of a footballing renaissance now after qualifying for each of the last two UEFA European Championships and reaching the quarterfinals of the competition in 2000. Also in 2000, Galatasaray defeated English giants Arsenal in the final of the UEFA Cup, in what may have been a warning to the rest of the world of a new class of Turkish football.

Turkey are now looking to leave their mark on the 2002 FIFA World Cup Korea/Japan.

Article extracted from FIFA

More information about Turkish soccer:
Turkish Proverbs

    Two captains sink a ship.

    The sheep separated by the flock is caten by the wolf.

    He who does not appreciate one can not get one thousand.

    I found today, I will eat today. Tomorrow ? Well, God is great.

    One hand does not clap. Two hands do.

    Many ants kill a camel.

    An inexperienced duck dives tail first.

    A lake forms drop by drop.

    A guest comes with ten blessings, eats one and leaves nine.

    The master of the house is the servant of the guest.

    The wind that the sailor likes does not blow at all times.

    Do not speak of rope in a house of a hanged man.

    The dog that barks much does not bite.

    The cock that crows at the wrong time is killed.

    He who gets up (starts up) in anger, sits down with a loss.

    An ass does not appreciate fruit compote.

    It is not disgraceful to ask, it is disgraceful no to ask.
The fly is small, but it is big enough to make one sick.

Stick the needle into yourself (to see how it hurts) before you thrust the packing-needle into others.

What flares up fast, extinguishes soon.

An over-protected eye gets the speck (Being overly careful invites misfortunes).

Killing two birds with one stone.

Two heads are better than one.

A cup of coffee commits one to forty years of friendship.

A heart in love with beauty never grows old.
A heart in love with beauty never grows old.

A hungry stomach has no ears.

A man is as wise as his head, not his years.

A man is judged by his work.

A red apple invites stones.

A small key opens big doors.

A thousand friends are too few; one enemy is one too many.

A wise man remembers his friends at all times; a fool, only when he has need of them.

Activity breeds prosperity.

Beauty Passes, wisdom remains.

Better to die on a full stomach than to live on an empty one.

Both the hunted and the hunter rely on God.

Do what your teacher says but not what he does.

Dogs bark, but the caravan goes on.

Eat and drink with your friends but do not trade with them.
Empty words will not fill an empty stomach.

Every “bad” has its “worse.”

For every wise man there is one still wiser.

God finds a low branch for the bird that cannot fly.

God has created us brothers but has given us separate purses.

If a dog’s prayers were answered, bones would rain from the sky.

If God closes one door, He opens a thousand others.

If skill could be gained by watching, every dog would become a butcher.

It is easier to make a camel jump a ditch than to make a fool listen to reason.

Kind words will unlock an iron door.

Listen a hundred times; ponder a thousand times; speak once.
Making Turkish black tea like the Turks

To make the Turkish black tea like the Turks do you will need two kettles of different sizes: a big and a small one. The big kettle must be made of metal and the small one can be made of metal or ceramic.

First fill with water the big kettle and place it at the stove. Then put the small kettle above the big kettle. At the small kettle put black tea (the measure of black tea is a dessert spoon for each person). Light the stove. While the water is boiling in the big kettle the second small kettle will also be warmed. Please notice that the small kettle contains only black tea and it does not contain water.

After the water boiled, you should put this water on the small kettle where there you have the black tea. (The measure of the water is relative to the number of persons who will drink the tea. For example, if just two people wants to drink tea you should add a little bit of water, if there are more people you must put more water).

Now you must wait 15 minutes more or less, this is necessary so that the tea can cook. You will see that after 15 minutes the tea stays in the bottom of the kettle, this means that the tea can be served.

In Turkey black tea is generally not drink in mugs but in special glass cups as a Turkish tradition.


There are two types of tea to be served: the strong tea "Koyu cay " and the light tea "acik cay". When serving the strong black tea you must fill two thirds of the mug with tea of the second kettle and add the boiling water to fill the rest of the mug. As the tea is strong the colour of this tea is dark brown. When serving the light black tea you must fill one third of the mug with tea of the second kettle and add the boiling water to fill rest of the mug. As the tea is light the colour is light brown. Add sugar, as you like.

In Turkey we would say: "Afiyet Olsun" that means "Good Appetite" or "Enjoy"!

Date: September 23rd, 2001
Articles' Index 
Body Language in Turkey

As any country Turkey has it's own body language. It can be kind of funny or even strange for some other culture to watch those gestures and try to understand what a person is trying to tell you. Understanding the body language is also understanding the culture of a country.

So here are some main body languages that you will see in Turkey. Enjoy !

    The handshake is not the most common greeting among friends. A man will greet another man by kissing each other on both cheeks. A man will greet a woman also on the same way. Note that if there are two religious people (these is valid between a woman and a man) they would not touch themselves with a handshake or kiss.

    It is very common in Turkey to see two man holding hands or arm in arm at walking on the street (Turks tend to touch much more than Westerners). This does not mean they are homosexual, they are just good friends :)

    Turks tend to stare at one another and foreigners more than Westerners are accustomed to. Westerners should not feel singled out or watched when such behavior occurs.

    If you see someone holding their hand with palm up and bringing fingers in toward thumb, this is a compliment and generally means something is "good." It can be done when they like a food, a cloth, or any object. It can also mean they find a woman or man nice and handsome.

    The "thumbs up" gesture is commonly used for hitchhiking

    Shaking your head sideways means, "I don't understand."

    Raising your chin, moving your eyebrows up and simultaneously clicking your tongue means "NO." (Try it. It is fun ! ). This one is one of the most different gestures of the Turkish body language and can be also found in Greece.Please check the picture at the right hand side showing this gesture. A sharp downward nod means yes.

    If a Turk waves their hand up and down at you, palm towards the ground, they are signaling for you to come.

    The gesture created by protruding your thumb between the first and second finger has an extremely offensive meaning. This gesture is called "the fig" and is considered obscene throughout much of the Mediterranean area.

    The idle habit of snapping your fingers with one hand and then slapping the top of a closed fist is considered obscene. This may be one of the rudest possible gestures.
The gesture created when a circle is formed by touching the forefinger to the thumb does not mean "ok." In Turkey this symbol means you are a homosexual. It is quite offensive. Please see picture at the left hand side.

It is rude to point your finger or the sole of your shoe toward a person
The story of the Turkish Language from the Ottoman Empire until today

During the Ottoman Empire (1453~1920), the Turks were one of many linguistic and ethnic groups living in Turkey. There were 3 languages used at that time: Arabic which was used as the primary language of religion; Persian which was the language of art, refined literature, and diplomacy; and at the official level, the Ottoman Turkish that was used only for the administration of the empire. Members of the civil, military, and religious elite talked and conducted their business in Ottoman Turkish, which was a mixture of Arabic, Persian, and Turkish. Ottoman Turkish not only borrowed vocabulary from Arabic and Persian but also lifted entire expressions and syntactic structures out of these languages and incorporated them into the Ottoman idiom.

The multiple linguistic influences on Ottoman Turkish caused difficulties in spelling and writing. Turkish, Persian, and Arabic belong to 3 different language families: Ural-Altaic, Indo-European and Semitic, respectively. Phonological, grammatical, and etymological principles are quite different among the 3 families. For these reasons, during the 19th century intellectuals began to call for a reform of the language. They wanted a language that would be easier to read and write and contain more purely Turkish words.
With the establishment of the republic, Ataturk made language reform an important part of the nationalist program. His goal was to produce a language that was more Turkish and less Arabic, Persian, and Islamic; one language that was more modern, practical, precise and less difficult to learn. He wanted a drastic alteration of both spoken and written language. This process was accomplished to adoption of a new alphabet and purification of the vocabulary.

The language revolution began officially in May 1928, when numbers written in Arabic were replaced with their Western equivalents. Then a Turkish new Latin alphabet was approved. This transition last only a few months. On January 1, 1929, it became unlawful to use the Arabic alphabet to write Turkish.
Some Turkish words from right to left: tea, important, medicine, day, thanks, sugar
	

By replacing the Arabic with the Latin alphabet, Turkey turned consciously toward the West and effectively severed a major link with a part of its Islamic heritage. By providing the new generation no need or opportunity to learn Arabic letters, the alphabet reform cut it off from Turkey's Ottoman past, culture, value system and religion.

By the late 1940s, considerable opposition to the purification language movement had emerged. Teachers, writers, poets, journalists, editors, and others began to complain publicly about the instability and arbitrariness of the officially sanctioned vocabulary. In 1950 the Turkish Language Society lost its semiofficial status. Eventually, some Arabic and Persian loan-words began to reappear in government publications.

The cost of language reform, however, has been a drastic and permanent estrangement from the literary and linguistic heritage of the Ottomans. Although some prerepublican writings have been transliterated into the new alphabet, the vocabulary and syntax are barely understandable to a speaker of modern Turkish.
Foreign women married with Turks

Istanbul is a big metropolis and has many foreigners. A great number of these foreigners are women that have married Turkish citizens and came to live in Turkey. They are Americans, Latins, Europeans and Asians. These women came from several countries: England, Germany, Brazil, Spain, Japan, Australia, United States, etc...
Turk's behaviors are differed of some other cultures, that can cause embarrassments to certain cultures. Usually Turks are very temperamental, and could go easily from tears to a great laugh. Turks are people with which the first contact is very easy. They are hospitable and they like foreigners and tourists.

The adaptation to the Turkish culture is difficult for some of those woman. The most difficult point is the religion (if the foreigner's religion is not Muslim). The restrictions will be a lot if the family of her husband is very religious. In this case, the foreigner usually adapts to the situation or she can be rejected by the family. If the family is open minded there won't be serious conflicts in this respect and the foreigner won't feel pressure on this matter.

Mostly cultural shocks from the Turkish culture would come from: way of life, behavior, hobbies, way of dressing, food, etc...

Today Istanbul offers a good life quality for the foreigners. It is possible to find several industrialized products of local production and also imported. You can find rice pasta or soya for the oriental, cornflakes for Americans, pork meat and several other imported foodstuffs. You will also be able to buy some imported products such as: furniture, cars, computers, machines, woven, material for kitchen, etc...

Eyup Mosque
	

The first great shock for the foreigner that come to live in Turkey is the language. Then the first providence is to learn the language and to attend a Turkish course. The language is a little difficult for the foreigners that has a Latin language as a mother language. For Japanese people, Turkish is easier because the linguistic structure resembles Japanese.

The way of dressing can be a shock for some foreigners with very open mentality. Clothes used in Rio de Janeiro for instance, can be inappropriate to be used in the streets of Istanbul. But speaking generally about garments I could say that the not very religious women do not use very short skirts and no decote, and they have the tendency to dress like the Europeans. The religious women would cover her body from head to feet. Men usually get dressed as the Europeans, and it is difficult to distinguish among a very religious man of a less religious one. The new generation has a tendency to dress with colorful and more extravagant clothes. This whole mixture brings an exotic contrast in the streets of Istanbul.

There is a group in Istanbul called IWI (International Women of Istanbul). This group has about 700 foreign women that live in Istanbul as members. The objective of the group is charity and to promote events for the group. Many are married with Turks, others come to Istanbul together with her family and usually the husband works in a multinational. This group is of great help at the beginning for a foreigner that come to live in Istanbul. She would find companion and friendship of people who speaks her own language at IWI. There are several other groups of foreigners in Istanbul: German group, people that speak Spanish, French, Italian, etc... 
Brazilian dance group in Istanbul
Corpo em Movimento

Between 14th and 19th of August 2001, the Brazilian wheel chair dance group "Corpo em Movimento" (Body in Movement) - ANDEF will be representing Brazil in Turkey in the Second Festival of special Arts in Istanbul.

The dance group "Corpo em Movimento" belongs to ANDEF - Niteroi Association of Physical Deficients, and it is located in Niteroi, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The association is a non governmental organization, that promotes events involving person with physical deficiency.

The association was founded in 1981 and it is one of the largest entities that represents the Physical Deficients and has been recognized nationally and internationally for the quality of the work that it has been developing.

ANDEF's some main actions are: to generate jobs, to promote the practice of adapted sport and to mobilize the society for the physical deficients rights. The Association assists around 1,200 persons monthly and all resources are generated by its own.
he dance group has five couple of dancers of which five persons uses wheel chairs. Its most important objective is to provide a different image of the physical deficients, allowing social integration with their own bodies, which is prejudiced by society. At the same time, it has also non physical deficients in the group which suggests a reflection of this matter.

The group was the first one on wheel chairs to accomplish choreographies of living dance. "Corpo em Movimento" is getting ready to represent Brazil in the Winter Paraolympics, that will take place in the USA at 2002. For that mission the group will have the support of the famous choreographer and dancer "Carlinhos de Jesus", that has been watching the training and presentations of the team personally.

Ballet dancers' cast: Carla Angelica, Lilian Azevedo, Viviane, Marco Aurelio, Marcos Nunes, Camila Rodrigues, Welligton Belmiro, Leandro Augusto, Rafael Silva.
Choreographers: Camila Rodrigues and Carlinhos of Jesus
Coordination: Anna Silvana Cavaliere 
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk founder of the Turkish Republic

Mustafa Kemal Ataturk is the name of the founder of the Turkish Republic. Ataturk means "father of the Turks". Mustafa is his first name and Kemal is the name his teacher gave to him because he was very good with mathematics and it means excellence in Turkish.

Ataturk was born in Selanik (today's Greek city of Tessaloniki) in 1881 and at that time the city was part of Ottoman Macedonia. Ataturk is a national hero. You can find his pictures, his speeches, his monuments and busts everywhere in Turkey. Ataturk was a man with great intelligence and a perfect commander.

He has worked all his life to transform a ruined land to a modern republic. He succeeded in such a way that led other nations from middle east and Africa to take him and his actions as a model.

He was married but later on he divorced. He had five adopted daughters. 
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk attended a military academy and a war college. He became a military officer of Ottoman Empire. At the first World War, he was a bright lieutenant colonel of infantry. One of his first personal achievements was the victory against British troops to defend Gallipoli and protecting Istanbul from the British conquest. With his full strategic and tactical genius, he became a Turkish folk hero by defeating the British army which included the Anzacs from Australia and New Zealand. He was raised to the rank of general "Pasha". Ottoman Empire saw him as a dangerous element because of his potentials. Soon he would start his revolution campaign. 
	

He moved to Anatolia and started revolutionary meetings in several locations, motivating people to defend the country against French, Italian and Greek armies. At the same time he started the movement for establishment of democratic institutions. With very limited resources and at great risks, he change the land towards a better future. His aim was to transform the ruins of Ottoman Empire in a new republic. The war of Independence ended at 1922 with Turkish victory against European armies.

Sultanate was abolished, and the Turkish Republic was established in October 29, 1923. Ataturk was the first president. He died on November 10, 1938 at Dolmabahce Palace. 
Dolmabahce Palace

The Dolmabahce Palace was built between 1843 and 1856 when the Ottoman Empire was losing its power. This superb palace displays the richness and power that the Sultans had. The decline of the Ottoman Empire began and people starting revolting; the Ottoman army was obsolete and disorganized, the economy was out of control.

The Dolmabahce Palace is located on the west, European shore of the Bosphorus and is enormous. It has 248 rooms, 43 entrance halls, 6 Turkish baths and approximately 2.700 windows. It is divided into two sections: the official part - where the sultan would receive distinguished guests from all over the world and the Harem - where the Sultan's wife, mother and concubines lived.

The palace is sumptuously decorated throughout - Bakara crystals, pictures by famous artists, luxurious furniture, rugs and carpets from the famous carpet manufacturers of the city Hereke. Every square meter was decorated with the best money can buy.

A 2,000 square-meters salon has a crystal chandelier weighing 4.5 tons which was a present from the Queen Victoria of England. To heat this enormous salon it was necessary have to begin 3 days before the event.

Ataturk, the founder of the Turkish Republic, lived and governed Turkey from this palace for just 3 months. You can visit his simple, modest bed-room and office, symbolic of a man who lived and died for his country. 
Turkish apple tea

So you have been to Turkey, drank the delicious apple tea in a carpet shop or in a tea garden and want to drink it at home.

You can buy this delicious apple tea with credit card from a secure service and have it delivered to your house.

We offer:

Turkish Apple Tea
100g (3,2 oz) package
Price: 13 USD

Minimum order quantity: 2

How to prepare: Boil water. Place in a medium cup of tea of capacity around 100 ml, add one to two teaspoons of apple tea. The taste is slightly sweet, so is not necessary to add sugar unless you like your tea very sweet. Bon appetit!

You can drink your tea hot or make a cold ice tea ! Delicious !

Transportion: All our products are original from turkey and are delivered directly from Istanbul - Turkey by airmail and the transportion takes approximately 10 days to reach Europe and 15 days to reach South and North America, Asia and all other countries. Transportation is included in the price of the product.
Women and Islam

As this theme is very interesting and also because there is a lot of different things that can be said about it, we open this subject here, but we will also bring more facts about this matter.

At the begin of the article I would like to say that Turkey is a laic country (religion and state are separated) and the country is in a very different position if you compare it with some other Islamic countries. In Saudi Arabia, for example the Kuran (Islamic bible) is part of the law, which not happen in Turkey. An example: in Saudi arabia women should cover themselves with black cloths and scarves otherwise they go to a religious prison. In Turkey those women could choose to cover themselves or not and they will not be punished because of it. Religion and law do not work together in Turkey. So there is a gap between Turkey and some other Islamic countries if you compare them.

The contrast between women and men in Islam is clear in social life. As some religious experts say there are also some laws that protects women, like when a woman get married the man must give an amount of money to her. This money would stay with her and can just be used with her consent. Woman can only marry a man but a man can marry more than a woman. Today polygamy is forbidden in Turkey and Tunisia. In Turkey a man can only marry a woman in the register office and the civil code is a copy of the Swiss code which was implemented by Ataturk the Founder of the Turkish Republic. Still in Turkey, in a religious ceremony in a mosque a man can marry more than a woman.
	
Women selling turkish gozleme

Polygamy was due to two points. The first one is explained through the reason that at ancient times a lot of men died in wars. Allowing a man to marry more than a woman would mean that this woman could give birth to kids that would turn into men and increase the army of the country. So on this way the Koran is protecting the state. The second point is explained on the fact that a lot of men die in the war and they would leave their widow alone without any financial support. At that time women was not as independent as today, they did not sustain themselves financially and they did not have any profession. So those women would turn into prostitution to survive. Giving the right for a man to marry more than a woman was also thinking in a way of protecting this women. Does it make sense ?

Click here for
the Blue Mosque
	

Divorce is possible in Islam, but only if started by the man who is the responsible of the finance of the marriage. There are some rules that make the divorce harder. This fact is because Mohammed said that "divorce is the legal activity less wanted from God". In Turkey a man or a woman can start a legal divorce, the above rule is just valid for religious ceremonies.

In the Kuran, sutra 4 it is said that "if the woman is not obedient, man must instruct her, bring her in a separated bed and beat her". In Turkey any human being which is beaten is under penalty of the law and depending on the injury can go to jail.

Woman circumcision are not mentioned in the Kuran and it is not obligatory. Untill today circumcisions are done in North Africa. In recent years there is a big opposition against it.

A woman can be clearly identified as Muslim if she wears the "chador" ( a scarf). A man can be not easily identified as there is no special object that can be seen as easy as the chador. The scarf can be in different colors, black for the most religious, some have flowers or ornaments and finally some are just white. In non laic countries women must wear black scarves and black cloths. In Turkey there is a great variety of scarves colors and forms used by Moslem women.
Concerts in Istanbul and Turkey

Istanbul is a very rich city when you think about cultural events. In summer, concert halls are working full time to provide colorful cultural events and some events are also held in football stadiums.

If you come to Turkey on the summer, get the program and you will be lucky to be able to see a famous concert in an open air amphitheater, in the Ataturk Cultural Center or many of the concert halls in Istanbul.

This year Eros Ramazoti will give a concert at a football stadium and the sponsors are giving also free entrance tickets ! Elton John will play at the ancient city of Ephesus. Can you imagine listening to Elton Jonh in a 3000 years old ancient amphitheater ? Wonderful isn't it ?! Sting will also come to Istanbul and give a concert in an open air amphitheater.
Concerts in Istanbul and Turkey
	

There are concerts for each taste ! Mostly events were held in summer, but now there are also winter festivals. Festivals take place mostly in Istanbul, but you will also find concerts in Ankara and some cities of the Mediterranean and Aegean sea.

Here are some great and famous English speaking musicians that have been to Turkey: Oscar Peterson, Lisa Minelli, Madonna, Dave Brubeck, Michael Jackson, Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Ray Charles, Miles Davis, John Mclaughlin, Sarah Vaughan among others...

Some Spanish speaking musicians that have also been to Turkey: Paco de Lucia; Buena Vista Social Club came to Turkey last year and will also come again this year.

Some Brazilian musicians that have played in Turkey : Gilberto Gil, Caetano Veloso, Ivan Lins, Daniela Mercury, Tania Maria, Hermeto Pascoal, Milton Nascimento, Sergio Mendes, Chico Cesar, among others ...

Turkish people are very musical and enjoy going to concerts, dancing and also singing. All musical events held in Turkey are very popular and different kind of musicians and styles are mostly welcome. When you think about Turkish Music you will find also a complete different style of music which is performed in summer at the festival. (Please have a look at the Music CDs recommended by this web site). The number one in the pop Turkish hits nowadays is Tarkan with the song "kuzu kuzu". There are some others like Tarik and Sezen Aksu with very nice pop songs and Balik Ayhan who plays very nice gipsy music !

Date: June 17th, 2001
Articles Index
Istanbul hotel gunmen - Hostage drama in Istanbul
Istanbul - April 22nd 2001

14 armed men identifying themselves as Chechen rebels, stormed a luxury hotel in central Istanbul Sunday night around 11:30 p.m. (4:30 p.m. ET)taking hostages.

The Swissotel is a five-star deluxe hotel. It stands in a spot with a finest view of the Bosphorus strait. There are 600 rooms for the guests, 18 conference halls and 7 exit doors.

The gunmen fired some shotguns and took at least 100 people hostage. They did not harm any hostage and allowed children and women to leave.

Hundreds of police and snipers were in front of the hotel and began negotiations with the rebels which continued into the night. Ambulances were also waiting outside the hotel, but no one was wounded.

The hostages were identified as mostly Western, including many Europeans and some Americans. The gunmen also used hotel staff to take guests from their rooms and bring them down to the lobby. Others were able to escape the building and were taken to the Istanbul Hilton. 
The gunmen said they were loyal to Muhamed Tokcan, who led the hijacking of the Avrasy passenger ship on the Black Sea in 1995. Tokcan was in the hotel negotiating by phone with Istanbul Governor Erol Cakir, who was also the lead negotiator. He escaped from a Turkish jail in 1997 after serving less than a year of an eight-year sentence. He was re-arrested in 1999 trying to leave Turkey for the Yugoslav province of Kosovo and was released in December 2000 under a widespread prison amnesty.

Russian forces are engaged in their second major military assault on Chechnya, aiming to bring the rebel Caucasus region back under Moscow's control. The first Chechen conflict took place in 1994-1996.

Turkey arrested and jailed the hijackers of the Avrasya ferry but the majority of them subsequently escaped from prisons across Turkey. No one was hurt in the four-day hijacking, despite threats to blow up the vessel. The gunmen said in a written statement that their action was aimed at protesting Russia's "bloody attacks in the Caucasus" where Chechnya is located, private NTV television said. All Turkish hostages would be released in a sign of goodwill but most of the hostages "would remain as their guests until the end of the action,"the statement said, urging police to stay calm. "We don't have any intention to spill blood".

"We cannot be described as terrorists. Despite the fact that we have been forced to limit the freedom of innocent people, to carry arms and to carry out an action that terrorizes, we are definitely not terrorists." Shortly after the statement, three women walked out of the hotel with one of them holding a young child in her arms.
The Chechen struggle is popular in Turkey. Turks not only share the Islamic faith with Chechens, but some 5 million Turks trace their roots to Caucasus areas such as Chechnya. About 25,000 Chechens live in Istanbul and western Turkey.

There are about 80 Caucasus organizations in Turkey and many have been active in promoting the Chechen cause. The Chechen rebels have been able to find much support within Turkey, primarily from the large number of Chechen emigres in the country.

Some of the journalists argue that the police in Istanbul was doing very strict car searches yesterday. These kind of searches have been relaxed since some weeks, due to a new decision but the searches of yesterday made the press think that police somehow knew there was going to be an action but they did not know exactly where and when.

The rebels ended their action on 10.50 am local time (3.50 am ET) on 23 April 2001. They released all the hostages, they also apologized for taking such an action on the economically challenged days of Turkey.

Chechnian Head of State Mr. Aslan Baschadow has condemned the action. Russian Foreign ministry made a statements that the rebels should be brought to justice.

The United Nations strongly condemned Russia Friday for what its said was Moscow's "disproportionate" use of force in separatist Chechnya and called for "credible criminal investigations" into alleged war crimes by some servicemen.

All the time during the action, press was kept well away from the hotel and they were not even able to get a clear view of what was going on. 