stanbul won the title of European Capital of the Culture 2010 together with Essen in Germany and Pecs in Hungary.

On January 12nd there were commemorations all over the country, among it them several concerts, events and festivities.

In 2000 the European Union decided to enlarge the title of European Capital of the Culture besides their members including as candidates, cities of other countries.

Istanbul intends to show examples of peaceful coexistence among its variety of cultures and religions inhabitants. Istanbul has centuries of different cultures, religions and habits. To be in Istanbul is to be between West and East. 
As a candidate, Istanbul was inspired by philosopher Aristotle's four elements:

The Fire: the youth, the technology and the modern arts.

The Earth: the historical constructions as cultural inheritance.

The Water: Bosphorus Strait and the Golden Horn.

The Air: the minarets, the towers of the churches, the religious diversity and tolerance.

"City of the four elements", is the official slogan.

This year several cultural events will happen during the year and several restorations and innovations will be done. To read more, visit the official site: 
Turkish Lira

As you might know , New Turkish Lira banknotes and coins were put into circulation in 2005. To read more about it, please click here. In the first phase of the currency reform, planned to be in two phases, the prefix “New” was added to the currency’s name as practiced in many countries. It was also decided that in the second phase this prefix would be removed and our traditional currency name, “Turkish Lira” would be reverted back. So the new banknotes and coins are in circulation since the beginning of 2009.

Instead of using YTL (Yeni Turk Lira - New Turkish Lira) Turkish people will use just TL (Turk Lira - Turkish Lira). The design, size and colors of the notes were changed. Now they are smaller and have printed in their back some Turkish persons which are famous in the Turkish history. In all notes and coins you will also see the 
The 200 Turkish Lira banknote is new (there was no 200 New Turkish Lira in the market before). You will see at the back of this banknote a portrait of Yunus Emre. He lived between 1238 - 1320. He was a Sufi folk poet, renowned as a pioneer of Turkish poetry in Anatolia, you will see also in this banknote Yunus Emre's mausoleum, a rose motif used in his verses, a dove symbolizing peace and brotherhood and "Sevelim, Sevilelim" (Love and Be loved) verse that best emphasizes his philosophy. 
You will see at the back of the 100 Turkish Lira banknote a portrait of Buhurizade Mustafa Efendi, also know as Itri. He lived between 1640-1712 and he was the founder of classical Turkish music. You will also see a composition consisting of "notes, kudum* and lute" as well as a "Mevlani dervish playing a reed flute" in harmony with Itri's Mevlani identity.

* kudum is a small double drum 

50 TL - 50 Turkish Lira
with Fatma Aliye's picture and
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's picture
	You will see at the back of the 50 Turkish Lira banknote a portrait of Fatma Aliye (1862-1936). Fatma Aliye , Turkish first female philosopher is regarded as one of the first female authors of Turkish Literature. She took the surname of "Topuz" in 1934. In order to highlight Fatima Aliye's literary identity you will be able to see also an inkpot, quill, paper and book and floral motifs to represent female elegance. 
You will see at the back of the 20 Turkish Lira banknote a portrait of Mimar Kemaleddin. ( 1870-1927). Mimar in Turkish means architect. Mimar Kemaleddin's architectural masterpieces and styles made him one of the pioneers of the national architectural trend. You will be able to see in this banknote a sketch of Gazi University presidential building which is one of the architects masterpiece, arches, circular motifs and forms such as a cube , sphere and cylinder depicting the three-dimensional structure of architecture. 	
20 TL - 20 Turkish Lira
20 TL - 20 Turkish Lira
with Mimar Kemaleddin's picture and
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's picture
You will see at the back of the 10 turkish Lira banknote a portrait of Ord. Prof. Dr. Cahit Arf (1910-1997). Cahit Arf was one of the most significant mathematicians of Turkey and is renowned internationally for many theorems in his name. You will also see mathematical motifs consisting of a section of Cahit Arf's invariant and arithmetical progressions an abacus, numbers and figures that represent the binary system, which is the basis of the computer technology. 	
10 TL - 10 Turkish Lira
10 TL - 10 Turkish Lira
with Ord. Prof. Dr. Cahit Arf's picture and
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's picture
You will see at the back of the 5 Turkish Lira banknote a portrait of Ord. Prof. Dr. Aydin Sayili (1913-1993) Aydin Sayili was awarded the world's first PhD degree for scientific history from Harvard University,. You will be able to see in this banknote also a composition of motifs like the solar system, atomic model, DNA and ancient cave paintings.
The coins are also new and at the back of each one you will see the picture of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founder of the Turkish Republic.

At the coins of value: 1 TL , and 10 cents (in Turkish cents are called: Kurus) you will be able to see some Rumi Turkish motifs.

At the 50 cents (Kurus) coin you will be able to see one of the Bosphorus Bridge and a map of Istanbul. The bridge shows that Istanbul connects 2 continents: Asya and Europe through the bridge.

At the 25 cents (Kurus) coin you will be able to see Kufic motifs.

At the 5 cents (Kurus) coin you will be bale to see a "Tree of life". There are different concept for "Tree of Life" including : a metaphor for common descent in the evolutionary sense, a motif in various world theologies , mythologies and philosophies .

At the 1 cent (Kurus) coin you will be able to see a flower that grows in the snow called colchium autumnale (In Turkish: Kardelen Cicegi ) 
How to prepare Turkish coffee and how to read the coffee grounds

How to prepare Turkish coffee

You will need a special pot (that is called "cevze" in Turkish) to prepare Turkish coffee, a very fine grinded coffee (ask at the shop to grind the coffee as fine as possible !) some coffee cups and sugar.

Let's prepare 4 coffee cups of Turkish coffee. Add in the Turkish pot (“cevze”) two small coffee spoons for each cup of coffee, so for our 4 cups of coffee you will need to add 8 spoons of coffee. Fill one coffee cup with cold water and add it to the pot (for our 4 cups you will need to add 4 cups of cold water). So generally for each coffee cup you will need a cup of water.

If you ask for Turkish coffee in Turkey, the waiter will ask you if you want your coffee "sade" (without sugar) "az sekerli" (with a little bit of sugar) or "sekerli" (with more sugar). So according to your taste you will add sugar to the coffee as you prepare it. The normal amount would be 2 small coffee spoons of sugar for each cup of coffee.

So you added : water, coffee and sugar to your Turkish pot “cevze”. Cook the coffee until it boils.

Remove the pot from the fire, mix it and return it again so it boils a second time. Watch out because the coffee can pour over your stove ! The good Turkish coffee is the one that gives foam !

Add the coffee into the coffee cups and serve. As the Turkish coffee contains grounds of coffee, you should drink it very slowly, appreciating the flavor as the coffee ground settle down at the bottom of the cup.

A frequent question is: “When should I stop drinking the coffee ?” You should drink the coffee until you fell the coffee ground on your mouth. As the coffee ground is heavier then the liquid it will settle down at the bottom of the cup.

As soon as you finish drinking the coffee you can begin the “ceremony” of reading the Coffee grounds ! 
How to read the coffee grounds !

I will explain in a few lines how to read the coffee grounds. There are "experts" in reading coffee grounds and there are also books about it ! My explanation is a very basic one for beginners ! The Chinese were the first to read the future on the tea grounds, after it the Arabs started reading the future it a the coffee grounds. Today it is very common to read the coffee grounds in the Middle East.
The person that drank (Figure 1) the coffee should make the following procedure:(Note that this procedure can not be done by another person!) she should remove the saucer and put it up side down over the coffee cup as it is shown on the animation (figure 2). Then she should make some (2 or 3) small circular movements with the coffee cup and the saucer over it (Figure 3). After doing it, she should turn the saucer and cup all together up side down ( Figure 4). Some people believe that adding a coin on the top of the coffee cup would bring money to the person, so add one ! The coin will absorb the heat of the coffee cup.

Now you should wait until that the cup of coffee cool down. If you look at the coffee cup before it cools down, the coffee grounds will slip away and you will not be able to read the coffee grounds properly. So be patient and wait !

The person who read the coffee ground should "open" the coffee cup (Figure 5). Turks says “open” as they take the coffee cup and start reading the coffee grounds. If the coffee cup stays a little bit tight together with the saucer that means good luck and fortune! Nice start ! The bottom of the coffee cup means your heart or your house. So if the coffee grounds stays at the bottom of the coffee cup, that means you have problems at home or your heart is broken... If the bottom is clean that means the opposite !Everything is white and clean !

You will see around the coffee cup a lot of different images were formed. Here you will need a bit of imagination to see those images ! There are also some persons who has the power of clairvoyance and can see more than others... 
Each image has a meaning, if you see: fish (big luck - happiness or money), dog (fidelity), snake (betrayal), cat (selfishness) and so on! The most usual figure is the fish that is represented by the coffee grounds in a similar form of a fish ( round image as an oval form). So several symbols can be interpreted as: rings (marriage), children (births), bird (good news), etc... Notice that the drawing does not need to be very defined! It would look like a modern art work !

You will also notice that you might find long lines, each one of these lines symbolizes a person. If you have 4 lines, it means that 4 people are getting together. You will have to look and imagine... so you will read the coffee grounds.

After you read the coffee cup, you should get the saucer and pour the coffee grounds over the coffee cup (Figure 6). In the saucer you will also see some images that can be read.

Turkish coffee is very common in Turkey, and it is also very common to see people reading each others friends' cup of coffee, this is a part of the Turkish culture! I hope you have enjoyed this article!

If you have interest in buying Turkish coffee, Turkish cevze (coffee pot to prepare Turkish coffee) or Turkish coffee cups, click at the list bellow. 
Each image has a meaning, if you see: fish (big luck - happiness or money), dog (fidelity), snake (betrayal), cat (selfishness) and so on! The most usual figure is the fish that is represented by the coffee grounds in a similar form of a fish ( round image as an oval form). So several symbols can be interpreted as: rings (marriage), children (births), bird (good news), etc... Notice that the drawing does not need to be very defined! It would look like a modern art work !

You will also notice that you might find long lines, each one of these lines symbolizes a person. If you have 4 lines, it means that 4 people are getting together. You will have to look and imagine... so you will read the coffee grounds.

After you read the coffee cup, you should get the saucer and pour the coffee grounds over the coffee cup (Figure 6). In the saucer you will also see some images that can be read.

Turkish coffee is very common in Turkey, and it is also very common to see people reading each others friends' cup of coffee, this is a part of the Turkish culture! I hope you have enjoyed this article!

If you have interest in buying Turkish coffee, Turkish cevze (coffee pot to prepare Turkish coffee) or Turkish coffee cups, click at the list bellow. 
Taxis - Taksi: They are a lot of taxis in Istanbul, Turks use it a lot and you can catch one very easily. Taxis are yellow and you can see the word "Taksi" written on it, which means "taxi" in Turkish. The use of the taximeter is obligatory in Turkey. Use always your hotel service to call a taxi and if you are somewhere in the city, go to a 5 star hotel and ask for a taxi, they will help you. Avoid catching a taxi in the street, but if you don't have another choice, choose a modern car and a driver with good appearance. Taxis in Turkey are much cheaper than in Europe, and it is a way of transportation used by Turks. 
Walking : it is a pleasure to walk in Sultan Ahmet, where you can appreciate the beauties of the Blue Mosque, Saint Sophia and hippodrome, you can also visit Topkapi Palace and the Underground Cistern. Another place to walk would be the street of Beyoglu and you will get to the most central and commercial area of Istanbul. And if you have enough time in Istanbul, you should also walk nearby the strait of Bosphorus.You can make beautiful walks from the region of Bebek towards Arnavutkoy or Sariyer. You will appreciate the beauty of the sea, see some Turks fishing along the Bosphorus or enjoying their favorite drink: Turkish Tea !
Public Transportation:

Tickets: Tickets to trains, metros, underground train (tunnel), funicular and boats is called "Jeton" and you can easily buy them in kiosks close to each station. 

Public Transportation Schedule: Istanbul is a metro pole with a colorful night life, but mostly public transportation does not provide services during the evening, they finish the transportation service around mid-night. Therefore watch out ! Be aware that taxis charge night tariff after mid-night and it is almost the double of daily tariff.

Bus - Otobus: this kind of transportation is not recommended for the tourists unless you need to go to a specific neighborhood and you can not use the train or can not afford a taxi. Avoid to take a bus in the rush hours in the  morning (between 7:30 and  9:00 o'clock) and in the afternoon (between 18:00 and 19:30 o'clock).

Tourism Bus: The ministry of tourism of Turkey offers the service of a red bus with two floors with open roof in Istanbul for tourits. You can catch the bus at Sultan Ahmet's region, in front of Saint Sophia's Museum. Please check the schedules, prices and bus circuit in the place. 

Tramvay Railway - Tramvay: The tramvay railway or simply Tramvay is a great way of get around in Istanbul. You definitively should use the tramvay if you want to go from Taksim to the area of Sultan Ahmet ( where the Blue Mosque and Saint Sophia are located) and Gran Bazaar. Once again avoid to take the tramvay during the rush hours in the morning (between 7:30 - 9:00 o'clock) and in the afternoon (between 18:00 - 19:30 o'clock). If the tramvay comes and you can believe your eyes .... it is too crowded ! wait for the next one, every 5 minutes a tramvay passes in the train stop. Carry your money, passport and important documents in a secure way, there are some pick pockets at the tramvay. This transportation is very useful for the tourists. Click here to see a transportation map.
Funicular subway - Furnikuler: The funicular subway is a train that connects the region of Kabatas and Taksim. This type of transportation is very useful for the tourists that want to go from Taksim to Sultan Ahmet region ( where is located the Blue Mosque and Saint Sophia) and to the Grand Bazar as a complement to the tramvay railway. Click here to see the transportation map.
	

Funicular Subway
Funicular subway

Tunel subway - tunel : Tunel is a short subway train that connects Karakoy and Tunel. This kind of transportation is used by the tourists that are at the Spice Bazaar, cross the Galata Bridge and want to go to Taksim-Beyoglu. Click here to see the transportation map.
	
Tunel Subway
Tunel subway

Underground Metro - Metro: The metro is not very used by tourists because  it does not connect to any historical point of the city. The Istanbul metro has just one line and it connects the Taksim region to the 4. Levent region. If you want to visit the most modern shopping mall of Istanbul you can take the metro at Taksim and go until the last stop (4. Levent). You will come directly to Kanyon Shopping Mall. Istanbul metro is very modern and cover a restrict area of the city. With the metro service a lot of people avoid the rush hour of Istanbul traffic.Click here to see the transportation map. 
Transfers airport-hotel: You can use taxis for airport transfers. If you can not afford a taxi, you can use a Havas Bus that will take you until the city center. After getting in the city center you will need a taxi to your hotel. But if your group has more than 2 persons, taking a Havas bus will not minimize your cost. Another option would be to take the metro. The inconvenient is that there is a train transfer, so you will have to move from one station to another with your luggage. And after getting to the city center you will need a taxi to go to your hotel.

Car rental: It is not a good idea to rent a car in Istanbul. As a tourist you will have serious problems trying to find your way, you will also have problems with local drivers and the local traffic which is not a piece of cake ! And your last problem would be parking your car ! Renting a car would be a good option if you want to travel at the interior of Turkey, so that you can stop wherever you want and take your time and enjoy the country side.

Date: March 2008
Taxi drivers in Istanbul

I always say that Turkish people are very hospitable and honest, and generally tourists have a very pleasure stay in Turkey. But unfortunately taxi drivers are very dishonest in Istanbul. Many tourists would come across some kind of trouble... ending paying more that they should have paid.

The most usual problems:

    Taking a longer way to reach where the tourist wants to go

    When you pay the taxi driver, watch out the exact shine you are giving to him ! If you give a 50 Turkish Lira shine, he might change this shine without that you notice with a 5 Turkish Lira shine and tell you that you have given him a 5 Turkish Lira shine ( the 5 and 50 Turkish Lira shine have almost the same color!) The same can happen with the 100 and 10 Turkish Lira shine. The best is to pay exact what is shown at the taximeter !

    Some taxi drivers change good shines with false shines ! So if you pay him 50 Turkish Lira he might change without that you notice, to a false shine and give it back to you.

    What should I do ?

    The best is to have always change in your pocket and pay the exact amount shown at the taximeter!

    Take a taxi always in front of your hotel. If it is not possible, be sure the driver seams to be an honest man and check if there is a logo on the door of the taxi ( this mean the taxi is registered in a region of the city)

    If the place that you are going to is very distant, talk with the taxi driver before you get into the taxi. For example, if you take a taxi at the airport and you are going to the region of Taksim, you might pay around 50 Turkish Lira ( January 2010).

    If you feel the taxi driver is being dishonest, get out of the taxi before he begin to drive.

    If you are returning to your hotel at night and you feel the taxi driver is charging you more then he should, wait until you get into your hotel, get out of the taxi, go to the hotel reception and ask the price for your itinerary.

    There are also good and honest taxi drivers in Istanbul and it is usual to give a tip to them.

Roberto Carlos
plays for Fenerbahçe
	

Since some years Brazilian soccer players and Brazilian soccer coaches has been playing in Turkey. Some of the most famous Turkish Soccer Teams are Fenerbahçe, Galatasaray and Besiktas. But recently this number has raised a lot and the number of Brasilian players in Turkey is amazing.

Who remember that Brazilian coach Carlos Alberto Parreira ( better know as Parreira) was in Turkey training Fenerbahçe Soccer Team between 1995 and 1996 and with his work Fenerbahçe won the National Champion in 1996? Does anybody remembers that goalkeeper Tafarel played in the Galatasaray team? 
"Fenerbahçe Spor Kulubu" or "Fenerbahçe Sport Club" is a Turkish Club in Istanbul and was founded in 1907. As well as the other Turkish clubs, Fenerbahce promotes other sport modalities among others such as voleyball, tennis and basketball. Fenerbahçe is one of the most notables Turkish soccer clubs. Winner of the national championship for sixteen times, the club has a global reputation and respected. Today I can say it is one of the best Turkish team.
Brazilian coach Zico trains the team since 2006 and he works together with the Brazilian assistants: Eduardo Antunes Coimbra and Moraci Vasconcelos Santann. The physical coach Eurico of Campos is also Brazilian. Today they are 6 Brazilian soccer players that play in Fenerbahçe. Roberto Carlos is an idol for the Turks and it was contracted in 2007. Another very dear Brazilian Fenerbahçe player is Alex. Verdeson and Aurélio are also two other Brazilian players that obtained the Turkish citzenship and play for Fenerbahçe. To complete the long lists are Edu Dracena and Deivid of Souza. In a team of 11 players it is interesting to notice that 6 are Brazilian, and do not forget the coach and his assistants !

The Turks are great soccer fans ! In Istanbul each team owns a soccer stadium. Although the stadiums are not very big, the fans make any game a emotional one. 
A second club to be mentioned of great importance is "Galatarasay Spor Kulubu". Galatasaray was in a high rank for sometimes, but today it stands behind Fenerbahçe. There is a very big competition among Turkish soccer teams, especially between Galatasaray and Fenerbahçe. Turkish fans are very fanatic! The Brazilian Cassio of Souza Soarez Lincoln is playing for Galatasaray since 2007. 

Ricardinho plays for Besiktas
	

And I also have to add to this list "Besiktas Spor kulubu". This team is also a good Turkish soccer team and had already had great Brazilian players dressing its black and white shirt.

Since 2006 Ricardinho and Bobo play at Besiktas. Its soccer stadium is one of the most beautiful stadiums of Istanbul, the fans can watch the game and also a beautiful view of the strait of Bosphorus.

Fenerbahçe, Galatasaray and Besiktas are districts in Istanbul and usually after a good game, fans commemorate their victory in their own neighborhood with a lot of joy.

After taking the third place at the World Cup in 2006 Turkey had obtained international respect at the international soccer world. Turks do want to win the next World Cup like all the other teams ! Good luck Turkey !

 Five siblings from Turkey who walk on all fours could provide science with an insight into human evolution, researchers have said. The four sisters and one brother could yield clues to why our ancestors made the transition from four-legged to two-legged animals, says a UK expert. Defne Aruoba, a Turkish psychologist founded the Ulas Foundation and wrote an article about the Ulas family. Please have a look below:

The Family and Me by Defne Aruoba
To read more please visit the web site: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/allfours/

It's been over a year since I first met the Ulas family. Now that I'm writing about "these extraordinary people"—as most scientists like to call them—I wish I had kept a journal last summer. But then again, who had the time? Along with the scientists, the film crew, and the local people who were helping us, I was working 14-hour days, dealing with a wide range of problems, obstacles, and intense emotions.

I remember at first they felt "extraordinary" to me as well, but now they are my friends. Well, more than friends—friends usually don't change one as much. This experience has had such an enormous impact on how I think and feel about some of the most important issues in life, both in my personal life and in the life that exists on this planet in general.
The true nature of altruism

I now know from firsthand experience that justice is, in fact, just a concept. Altruism is really not practiced as much as it could be. The Ulas families of this world can be helped and their situation improved with very little effort from the more fortunate. Moreover, everybody is aware of this.
	The true nature of altruism
But somehow our daily lives don't allow us to remember and make room. We all feel the urge to give to others; even the most selfish person thinks about helping someone at some point. But then the phone rings or family or business matters intrude, and we are back in the little individual worlds we have created for ourselves. Those little worlds make us feel safe, as if we could never become ill, get old, or die. Especially in the more civilized parts of the world, the house, the money in the bank, the career, the fit body, the family, the lover make up the safety nets, the silk threads of our cocoons. This illusion of protection is at the root of our separation from the rest of life and, consequently, the cause of our misery.

“I didn’t want to be there as a ‘psychologist.’ I just wanted to be there for them.”

The remarkable thing about "altruism," which I discovered while I was spending time with the Ulas family, is that it is reciprocal. Altruism is not just about giving, or helping, or concern for the welfare of "others." It is also about opening yourself up to foreign territory and feeling that nothing/nobody is really "other" than you. It is about getting past the illusion of separation to a place of union, where it is no longer clear who is helping whom.

A feeling of protectiveness

I have lived my whole life in two of the most hectic, cosmopolitan, ambitious cities in the world: Istanbul and New York City. Just going to the remote Turkish village where the Ulas family resides was a very unusual experience for me.

I was the first one to arrive there, because the rest of the science and film crew were traveling in a different car. I approached the stairs that lead up to the family house dragging a suitcase full of old clothing I had brought for them. I had heard that these people were quite deprived, and I had seen an obscure one-minute video of one of the affected siblings. That was all. I didn't know what to expect—nobody did. As I went up the stairs, my initial feeling was one of fear. Fear of the unusual, and fear of my own boldness. It sounds like a contradiction, but that's how it was. I had no plans, no clue to what I was doing.

At first the family members looked at me with questioning eyes. But as we started checking out the outfits, joking around with the girls, mostly with gestures, we all started to feel at ease and began having fun with one another. I was among friends, visiting them at their family house. These weren't scientific breakthroughs for me. They were Asiye, Miyase, Bayram, Cebrail, Hacer, Emos, Senem, Safiye, Huseyin, Gulin, Zeynep, and their parents. And from that point on my initial fear transformed into, and continues to be, a feeling of protectiveness towards these people. I knew within the first minutes of meeting the Ulas family that I didn't want to be there as a "psychologist." I just wanted to be there for them, in whatever capacity they needed me.

A father's concern

My main motivation for joining the team of scientists and the film crew had always been "How can this international exposure help the affected members of the Ulas family, medically and/or in any other way possible?" For exposure they have been getting.

Indeed, their discovery has caused a huge controversy in the scientific community. Over the past year I have watched each scientist approach the family with his or her own preoccupation, each wishing desperately that the results from the brain scans, neurological tests, DNA tests, and so on would prove his or her theory. I was asked, as a psychologist, to run some tests as well, in order to evaluate their level of intelligence; their cognitive, sensory, and motor skills; and their emotional, social, and behavioral adaptations. I did so, and the tests did reveal some important facts, but none that is conclusive.

“I don’t know what caused their disability. But I am positive that these people can be helped.”

The Ulas family remains a mystery to the scientific community, and the controversy surrounding them continues. Every once in a while, a new scientist appears in the village and offers a new treatment or asks for the father Resit's permission to do more testing. He doesn't say yes, and he doesn't say no. He is in complete surrender to what life brings. His only concern is the welfare of his disabled children after he dies. And he is right. These adult individuals are completely dependent, not because they lack the necessary skills to take care of their own basic needs, but because they haven't been rehabilitated.

Reaching out

If nothing else, I want to emphasize as a psychologist that these people learn, which is the most important, perhaps the only necessary skill for improving their quality of life. I don't know what caused their disability. I don't know if we can ever really know for sure what causes any disability. But I am positive that these people can be helped. We have been able to help in some practical and therapeutic ways, but their physical and living conditions certainly require further improvement. For this, initially they need an occupational therapist who is willing to spend sufficient time in the village with them to teach them how to take care of themselves.

Inspired by their last name "Ulas," which means "to reach" in English, I plan to establish a Ulas Foundation. My aim is to start with the affected Ulas individuals and then reach out to other families who are in need, in any kind of need. I am hoping that the Ulas Foundation will become, in its small way, a bridge of altruism that reaches across social boundaries, uniting the rich and the poor, the proactive and the submissive, the spiritual and the materialist, the educated and the uneducated, the doctor and the patient. In this way, the polarities of existence that we all experience inside and outside will merge into and nourish each other with their inherent wisdoms, reciprocally, without judgment.

To read more please vist the web site: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/allfours/
100 YTL - 100 New Turkish Lira
100 YTL - 100 New Turkish Lira
with Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's picture
	
Since the beginning of 2005 Turkey took out six zeros of its money and has introduced new bill notes. At 2004 you could buy a coke with 1.000.000,00 Turkish Lira, yes one thousand turkish lira ?!?! but now it cost you just 1,00 New Turkish Lira. When Turkish people received their salary they would feel like milioners… some people would earn millions... and think about buying a house, it would cost you billions or trillions… well to much zeros…

The old name of Turkish money was "Turkish Lira" (In turkish "turk lirasi" or TL) and now it was changed to "New Turkish Lira" YTL (In turkish "yeni turk lirasi" or YTL). Turks will use the new money bills for a year and then the government will take out the "new" word from the name converting back the name YTL to TL ( new turkish lira to turkish lira).
At 2004 people would not worry about keeping their change if they got some coins. Now turks might buy a pocket wallet for coins since new coins were also put into market and they are more valuable. Turks must also get used to the term "kurus" which means cents.
The biggest bill there was in the market at 2004 was 20.000,00 TL but now the government has introduced the 50 YTL and 100 YTL bill. The new bills have the picture of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk ( the founder of the Turkish republic) at one side and at its verse the pictures of : Ishak Pasa Palace near Dogubayazit, Cappadocia, Ephesus, Pire Reis Map, Ataturk mausoleum and Ataturk Dam at Sanliurfa. Coins are simple with a picture of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk and the moon and star (from the Turkish flag).

100 YTL - 100 New Turkish Lira
with Efesus' picture
	Central Bank has also started working on a revolutionary quality innovation after the transition to the New Turkish Lira. There are plans that Turkish people will meet "plastic (polymer) bills" instead of paper bills or in some paper bills after the year 2006. Plastic bank notes that can be washed with water will also erase the custom of attaching money with pins to the collars of bride and groom which is a cultural costume in Turkey. Because, although the wear out duration of the plastic bank notes are longer than the paper bills, they become useless if punched with pins.

The short wear out duration of the Turkish Lira has effected the putting on the agenda of the plastic bank notes. As the small amount paper bills wear out in six month and the large amount paper bills wear out in two years, it has been found out that the wear out duration of the plastic bank notes are four times longer than those of the paper ones. It has been reported that the possibility of staying restricted to the small amount bills is higher by the operation of transition to the plastic bank notes.
Australia, the leader of the world plastic banknote technology has produced the first plastic bank note in 1988. In 1966 money in circulation has been transformed to plastic. Mexico has joined the countries that use plastic money in the world in 2002. Cost of plastic money is 50 percent higher but is 4 - 5 times durable. Australia, China, New Zealand, Indonesia, Singapur, Malesia and Thailand are among the countries that use plastic money in the world. Paper bank notes are worn away quickly once getting wet and it is easy to print the counterfeit. Plastic money can be washed. Australian money is made from non-permeable polymer. Specially developed coating is used on the money.
The Piri Reis Map

The Piri Reis map dated 1513 and it is the first surviving map that shows the Americas. The Piri Reis map shows the western coast of Africa, the eastern coast of South America, and the northern coast of Antarctica. The northern coastline of Antarctica is perfectly detailed. The most puzzling however is not so much how Piri Reis managed to draw such an accurate map of the Antarctic region 300 years before it was discovered, but that the map shows the coastline under the ice.

The Piri Reis map was made by a Turkish Admiral Piri Ibn Haji Mehmed. Reis means admiral. His passion was cartography. His high rank within the Turkish navy allowed him to have a privileged access to the Imperial Library of Constantinople.

The map became lost and was only rediscovered in 1929 by a group of historians working in the harem section of the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul. There is a lot of questions about this map because of it's impressive details. Some even believe that it is so perfect that it could only have been made from very high altitude photographs.
	
Piri Reis Map
The Piri Reis map is not made like modern maps with horizontal and vertical grid for location purposes but had a series of circles with lines radiating from them. Their purpose was to guide navigators from port to port and not for the modern idea of find position. This makes it more difficult to compare features from the Piri Reis map with modern maps.


Piri Reis
Piri Reis

 

	

Some unusual findings about the map:

    The map shows that the makers knew the accurate circumference of the Earth.  
    The coastline and island that are shown in Antarctica must have been navigated at some period prior to 4,000 B.C. when these areas were free of ice from the last Ice Age.

    The map is thought to be one of the earliest "world maps" to show the Americas. Early scholars suggested that it showed accurate latitudes of the South American and African coastlines - only 21 years after the voyages of Columbus! Writing in Piri Re'is own hand described how he had made the map from a collection of ancient maps, supplemented by charts that were drawn by Columbus himself. This suggests that these ancient maps were available to Columbus and could have been the basis of his expedition.

    The "center" of the source map projected from coordinates in what is now Alexandria - the center of culture and home of the world's oldest and largest library until its destruction by Christian invaders.

    Piri Reis' own commentary indicates that some of his source maps were from the time of Alexander the Great (332 B.C.).

The Piri Reis map also has a number of notes written on it. These notes cover everything from Columbus discovering the New World to sea monsters. Some interesting notes:

    "This country is inhabited. The entire population goes naked."

    "This region is known as the vilayet of Antilia. It is on the side where the sun sets. They say that there are four kinds of parrots, white, red, green and black. The people eat the flesh of parrots and their headdress is made entirely of parrots' feathers. There is a stone here. It resembles black touchstone. The people use it instead of the ax."

    "This sea is called the Western Sea, but the Frank sailors call it the Mare d'Espagna. Which means the Sea of Spain. Up to now it was known by these names, but Colombo, who opened up this sea and made these islands known, and also the Portuguese, infidels who have opened up the region of Hind have agreed together to give this sea a new name. They have given it the name of Ovo Sano [Oceano] that is to say, sound egg. Before this it was thought that the sea had no end or limit, that at its other end was darkness. Now they have seen that this sea is girded by a coast, because it is like a lake, they have called it Ovo Sano."

    "In this spot there are oxen with one horn, and also monsters in this shape."

The Piri Reis map is in Topkapi Palace and is not usually on display. This map has great value to Turkey and to the world.
Did you know that Troy is located in Turkey?

In 2004, with the release of "Troy" in the movie theaters, people begin to recall the legendary history of this mysterious city. However, many people do not know that this city is located in Turkish territory. Troy was identified at the end of the XIX century by Heinrich Schliemann in the hill of Hissarlik, in Dardanelos, northwest coast of Turkey. This area contains a succession of several cities that were built over each other during centuries, one of these cities is Troy. The legend of Troy is still a mystery with few possibilities of being solved by archeologists, so do not fear … the romantic enigma of Troy will not be destroyed. Today you can not see much at the glory time of Troy, just some ruins of the city can be visited.

Did the war in Troy really happened? The Troy war is one of the most important episodes that have survived in the mythology and from greek legends. Some events that caused the war are known from the two great Homeric poems, the Illiad and the Odyssey.The term "Illiad" comes from "Ilias", that means "regarding Ilion", the name of a city in the Asia Minor coast. In Illiad has 24 songs, with 15 thousand verses. Although it tells Troyan war, it is not a complete narration of what happened. The Illiad tells the second year of the conflict, when a disagreement between Agamenon and Achilles began. The wood troyan horse is considered to be an idea of Ulisses, and the most courageous Greeks got inside the horse. The troyans believed that if the horse never entered Troy, the city would never be taken; and if it was left outside, the Greeks would end up returning and would devastate the city. 
Do you remember Paris, the one who was in love with Helena ? Paris was son of Priamo, king of Troy. When Priamo's wife Hecuba, was pregnant of Paris, she dreamed that she was giving birth to a torch with serpents. After the baby was born, she gave orders to a maid to take him to the Ida hill and kill him. The maid did not kill him but left him at the hill to die. The child was saved by shepherds. After some time, Paris returned to Troy by chance, and his parents were impressed with his ability in athletic competitions and his beautiful appearance. His parents found out who he was and received him with pleasure.

Of course that you remember the beautiful Helena: Helena was the daughter of Zeus and Leda. Helena married with Menelau, king of Sparta, they had a daughter called Hermíone. At that time Paris came to visit them. Menelau received Paris very well in his house, but Paris paid his hospitality kidnapping Helena and escaping with her from Troy. Helena's participation in this situation is explained in several ways: she was kidnapped against her will, or Aphrodite made her fall in love with Paris or she never went to Troy, and because of a ghost the Greeks spent ten long years in war. 
Aereal view of Troy, Turkey
Aereal view of Troy, Turkey
	To recover his wife Menelau, husband of Helena called everybody to help him to set up an expedition against Troy. The leader of the Greek force was Agamenon, king of Micenas and older brother of Menelau. The Greek heroes came to help to sail in the Aegean Sea to Troy. The leaders' names and origins are listed in the ships' catalog of the Iliad.

In the film "Troy" Brad Pitt it is Achilles. The father of Achilles was reluctant in leaving his son to join the expedition, because there was a predestination he would die in Troy. In an attempt of avoid his destiny, they sent him to Ciros dressed as a girl, where he joined the king's daughters, Licomedes. During this stay he married Deidaméia, another daughter of the king. They had a son called Neoptólemo. Ulisses found out that the Greeks would never take over Troy without the help of Achilles. So he went to Ciros to look for his help. Achilles was persuaded to go with Ulisses back to Aulis, where the inland waterway fleet was getting ready to sail.

An interesting detail: Achilles always knew that his destiny was to die in Troy, where he really died. He ended killed by an arrow shot, thrown by the arch of Paris. Tetis Achilles' mother wanted to turn his son immortal, and when he was still a baby, she immersed him in the waters of the river Estige; this made his body immune to any wounds, except for his heel, where his mother hold him. Paris' arrow shot his Achilles' heel. That is why we say "Achilles' heel" meaning a weak point.
Agamenon is seen as the evil character of the film "Troy". Agamenon was the brother of Menelau, who was married with the beautiful Helena. Agamenon made a terrible crime when, after a family fight, he served his own brother Tiestes a plate prepared with part of his own children's members.This action curse the house of Atreu, and the destiny was waiting for Agamenon when he returned from Troy. In his absence, for ten years the government of Micena was in his wife's hands Clitemnestra and her lover Egisto, the only surviving son of Tiestes. After returning to Troy, Agamenon was killed violently with an axe by Clitemnestra. Her reasons for such a brutal murder were complex, but it seems that it was not so much due to her passion for Egisto and the desire of revenge his brother, she killed him because she hated him. Agamenon had murdered brutally Clitemnestra's first husband and their children in front of her eyes; he had also sacrificed her daughter Ifigenia to Aulis. She wanted revenge. 
I cannot forget to mention other important person in this story: Heitor, king's Priamo oldest son. In Homeros' Illiad, Heitor is the greatest warrior of Troy. Heitor is portrayed like a good husband and a brave warrior. As the troyan commander, he was responsible for resisting to the Greek army for nine years and finally to force the Greeks to return to their ships. At the end, Heitor was killed by Achilles to revenge his friend's death Patroclo who was killed by Heitor. Achilles ignored Heitor's request for a funeral after he killed him, he tied his body to a carriage, dragging him around the city walls.

Another important person of this history is the king of Troy: Priamo. He had 50 sons, and 50 daughters, one of his son was Heitor. After his son Heitor was killed by the Greek hero Achilles, Priamo went to the Greek camp to implore to have the body of his son back for a decent funeral. Aquiles preserved the life of Priamo and gave him Heitor's body to be buried. During the Troy attack, Priamo was killed by the son of Achilles, Neoptolemo.

Among so many tragedies… if you still didn't go to see the film, go! It is a good cultural amusement.