





Copyright ® 2000 by Nicholas Boothman
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be
reproduced—mechanically, electronically, or by any other
means, including photocopying—without written permission
of the publisher.
Published simultaneously in Canada by
Thomas Allen & Son Limited.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Boothman, Nicholas
How to make people like you in 90 seconds or less/by Nicholas Boothman.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-7611-1940-X
1. Interpersonal communication. 2. Interpersonal relations. I. Title.
BF637.C45 B655 2000
158.2—dc21 00-043236
Workman books are available at special discounts when
purchased in bulk for premiums and sales promotions as well
as for fund-raising or educational use. Special editions or book
excerpts can also be created to specifications. For details,
contact the Special Sales Director at the address below.
WORKMAN PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC
708 Broadway
New York, NY 10003-9555
www.workman.com
Manufactured in the United States of America
201918 171615 1413 1211
To Wendy, of course.
Acknowledgments
What a glorious piece of synchronicity. My beautiful
friend Kerry Nowensky, who commanded, "Write it down!
Now!" My guardian angel Dorothea Helms, who said, "It's
time to get yourself a great agent." My amazing agent
Sheree Bykofsky, who bombarded me with support and
commitment. The charismatic book publisher Peter
Workman, who brings all his sense to bear on a book and
surrounds himself with the finest talent to be found. And
just when you thought you've seen and heard it all, along
comes the astonishing Sally Kovalchick, who blows you
away with her ability to inhale a manuscript and exhale a
finished book.
I offer you all my heartfelt thanks. You are living
proof that other people are our greatest resource.
vii
ix

xi

The "secret" of success is not very hard to figure
out. The better you are at connecting with other
people, the better the quality of your life.
I first discovered the secrets of getting along with
people during my career as a fashion and advertising
photographer. Whether it was working with a single
model for a page in Vogue or 400 people aboard a ship to
promote a Norwegian cruise line, it was obvious that for
me photography was more about clicking with people
than about clicking with a camera. What's more, it didn't
matter if the shoot was taking place in the lobby of the
Ritz Hotel in San Francisco or a ramshackle hut on the
side of a mountain in Africa: the principles for establishing
rapport were universal.
For as long as I can remember, I have found it easy to
get along with people. Could it be a gift? Is there such a
thing as a natural talent for getting along with people, or
is it something we learn along the way? And if it can be
learned, can it be taught? I decided to find out.
I knew from 25 years of shooting still photographs
for magazines all over the world that attitude and body
language are paramount to creating a strong visual
impression—magazine ads have less than two seconds to
capture the reader's attention. I was also aware that there
xiii
was a way of using body language and voice tone to make
perfect strangers feel comfortable and cooperative. My
third realization was that a few well-chosen words could
evoke expression, mood and action in almost any subject.
With these insights under my belt, I decided to look a little
deeper.
Why is it easier to get on with some people than with
others? Why can I have an interesting conversation with
a person I've just met, while someone else might dismiss
that same person as boring or threatening? Clearly,
something must be happening on a level beyond our
conscious awareness, but what is it?
It was at this point in my quest that I came across the
early work of Drs. Richard Bandler and John Grinder at
UCLA in a subject with the unwieldy name of Neuro-
Linguistic Programming, NLP for short. Many of the
things I had been doing intuitively as a photographer,
these two men and their colleagues had documented
and analyzed as "the art and science of personal excellence."
Among a fountain of new insights, they revealed
that everyone has a "favorite sense." Find this sense and
you have the key to unlock a person's heart and mind.
As my new path became clearer, I set aside my cameras
and resolved to focus on how people work on the
inside as well as how they look on the outside. Over the
next few years, I studied with Dr. Bandler in London and
New York and earned a license as a Master Practitioner
xiv
of NLP. I studied Irresistible Language Patterns in the
United States, Canada and England, and delved into
everything to do with the brain's part in human connectivity.
I worked with actors, comedians and drama teachers
in America and storytellers in Africa to adapt
improvisational drills into exercises that enhance conversational
skills.
Since then I have gone on to give seminars and talks
all over the world, working with all kinds of groups and
individuals from sales teams to teachers, from leaders
of organizations who thought they knew it all to children
so shy that people thought they were dim-witted. And
one thing became very clear: making people like you in
90 seconds or less is a skill that can be taught to anyone
in a natural, easy way.
Over and over I have been told, "Nick, this is amazing.
Why don't you write it down?" Well, I listened, and I
have. And here it is.
—N.B.
XV

like you, the welcome mat is out and a connection is
yours for the making. Other people are your greatest
resource. They give birth to you; they feed you, dress
you, provide you with money, make you laugh and cry;
they comfort you, heal you, invest your money, service
your car and bury you. We can't live without them. We
can't even die without them.
Connecting is what our ancestors were doing thousands
of years ago when they gathered around the fire
to eat woolly mammoth steaks or stitch together the latest
animal-hide fashions. It's what we do when we hold
quilting bees, golf tournaments, conferences and yard
sales; it underlies our cultural rituals from the serious to
the frivolous, from weddings and funerals to Barbie Doll
conventions and spaghetti-eating contests.
3
Even the most antisocial of artists and poets who
spend long, cranky months painting in a studio or composing
in a cubicle off their bedroom are usually hoping
that through their creations they will eventually connect
with the public. And connection lies at the very heart of
those three pillars of our democratic civilization: government,
religion and television. Yes, television. Given
that you can discuss Friends or The X-Files with folks
from Berlin to Brisbane, a case must be made for the
tube's ability to help people connect all over the globe.
Thousands of people impact all aspects of our lives, be
it the weatherman at the TV studio in a neighboring city, or
the technician at a phone company across the continent,
or the woman in Tobago who picks the mangoes for your
fruit salad. Every day, wittingly or unwittingly, we make a
myriad of connections with people around the world.
The Benefits of Connecting
Our personal growth and evolution (and the evolution
of societies) come about as a result of connecting
with our fellow humans, whether as a band of young
warriors setting out on a hunt or as a group of coworkers
heading out to the local pizzeria after work on
Friday. As a species, we are instinctively driven to come
together and form groups of friends, associations and
communities. Without them, we cannot exist.
4
Making connections is what our gray matter does best.
It receives information from our senses and processes it
by making associations. The brain delights in and learns
from these associations. It grows and flourishes when
it's making connections.
People do the same thing. It's a scientific fact that
people who connect live longer. In their gem of a book,
Keep Your Brain Alive, Lawrence Katz and Manning Rubin
quote studies by the McArthur Foundation and the International
Longevity Center in New York and at the University
of Southern California. These studies show that
people who stay socially and physically active have
longer life spans. This doesn't mean hanging out with the
same old crowd and peddling around on an exercise
bike. It means getting out and making new friends.
When you make new connections in the outside
world, you make new connections in the inside world—
in your brain. This keeps you young and alert. Edward
M. Hallowell, in his very savvy book Connect, cites the
1979 Alameda County Study by Dr. Lisa Berkman of the
Harvard School of Health Sciences. Dr. Berkman and her
team carefully looked at 7,000 people, aged 35 to 65,
over a period of nine years. Their study concluded that
people who lack social and community ties are almost
three times more likely to die of medical illness than
those who have more extensive contacts. And all this is
independent of socioeconomic status and health practices
such as smoking, alcoholic beverage consumption,
obesity or physical activity!
Other people can also help you take care of your needs
and desires. Whatever it is you'd like in this life—
romance, a dream job, a ticket to the Rose Bowl—the
chances are pretty high that you'll need someone's help
to get it. If people like you, they will be disposed to give
you their time and their efforts. And the better the quality
of rapport you have with them, the higher the level
of their cooperation.
Connect and Feel Safe
Connecting is good for the community. After all, a community
is the culmination of a lot of connections: common
beliefs, achievements, values, interests and
geography. Rome wasn't built in a day, and neither was
Detroit. Three thousand years ago, in what today we call
Rome, Indo-Europeans connected to hunt, survive and
generally look out for one another. Three hundred years
ago, a French trader turned up to create a safe haven for
his fur business; he started making connections and
pretty soon Detroit was born.
We have a basic, physical need for other people;
there are shared, mutual benefits in a community, so we
6
look out for each other. A connected community provides
its members with strength and safety. When we
feel strong and safe, we can put our energy into evolving
socially, culturally and spiritually.
Connect and Feel Love
Finally, we benefit from each other emotionally. We are
not closed, self-regulating systems, but open loops regulated,
disciplined, encouraged, reprimanded, supported
and validated by the emotional feedback we receive
from others. From time to time, we meet someone who
influences our emotions and vital body rhythms in such
a pleasurable way that we call it love. Be it through body
language, gestures, facial expressions, tone of voice or
words alone, other people make our hard times more
bearable, our good times much sweeter.
We use the emotional input of other humans as
much as we do the air we breathe and the food we eat.
Deprive us of emotional and physical contact (a hug
and a smile can go a long way), and we will wither and
die just as surely as if we were deprived of food. That's
why we hear stories of children in orphanages who
grow sickly and weak despite being adequately fed and
clothed. People with autism may desire emotional and
physical contact but can languish because they are hindered
by their lack of social skills. And how often have
you heard about one spouse in a 50-year marriage who,
7
The Internet has been touted as the ultimate tool for
bringing people together into shared communities of
interest. And it's true: if you're searching for other
teddy bear collectors in Toledo or mud wrestlers in Minsk,
you'll find them on the Web. For people who are housebound
because of disabilities or illness, the Web can also
be a godsend.
Still, we have to remember that spending hours in front
of a screen, typing into cyberspace, is a poor substitute for
the full spectrum of experience offered by face-to-face time
with another person. You might well meet someone in a chat
room who interests you romantically, but would you agree
to marry before meeting a few times in person?
You need to be in a person's presence for a while in order
to pick up all the verbal and nonverbal cues. The atmosphere
created by physical and mental presence is as important as
surface attraction, if not more so. For example, what sort of
environment do the two of you create? How spontaneous are
you? How strong is your need for conversation? What about
your openness, supportiveness and companionship?
If you don't meet each other's emotional needs, you may
be heading for failure. These things can only be determined
by face-to-face contact. Only then can you tell if you're
really "connecting."
despite being medically healthy, dies a few short
months or even weeks after the death of the other
spouse? Food and shelter aren't enough. We need each
other, and we need love.
Why Likability Works
If people like you, they feel natural and comfortable
around you. They will give you their attention and
happily open up for you.
Likability has something to do with how you look but
a lot more to do with how you make people feel. My old
nanny, who brought me up to be passionate about people,
used to talk about having "a sunny disposition."
She'd take me out on the promenade, and we'd spot the
people who had sunny dispositions and all those who
were "sourpusses." She told me we can choose what we
want to be, and then we'd laugh at the sourpusses
because they looked so serious.
Likable people give loud and clear signals of their
willingness to be sociable; they reveal that their public
communication channels are open. Embedded in these
signals is evidence of self-confidence, sincerity and
trust. Likable people expose a warm, easygoing public
face with an outgoing radiance that states, "I am ready
to connect. I am open for business." They are welcoming
and friendly, and they get other people's attention.
9
"Time is precious." "Time costs money." "Don't
I waste my time." Time has become an increasingly
sought-after commodity. We budget our time, make it
stand still, slow it down or speed it up, lose sense of it
and distort it; we even buy timesaving devices. Yet time
is one of the few things we can't save—it is forever
unfolding.
In bygone days, we were inherently more respectful
of one another and devoted more time to the
niceties of getting to know someone and explore common
ground. In the hustle and bustle of life today, we
rush about with so many deadlines attached to everything
that unfortunately we don't have the time, or
take the time, to invest in getting to know each other
well. We look for associations, make appraisals and
assumptions, and form decisions all within a few seconds
and frequently before a word is even spoken.
Friend or foe? Fight or flight? Opportunity or threat?
Familiar or foreign?
Instinctively, we assess, undress and best-guess each
other. And if we can't present ourselves fast and favorably,
we run the risk of being politely, or impolitely,
passed over.
The second reason for establishing likability in 90
seconds or less has to do with the human attention
10
span. Believe it or not, the attention span of the average
person is about 30 seconds! Focusing attention has been
compared to controlling a troop of wild monkeys. Attention
craves novelty—it needs to be entertained and
loves to leap from branch to branch, making new connections.
If there's nothing fresh and exciting for it to
focus on, it becomes distracted and wanders off in
search of something more compelling—deadlines, football
or world peace.
Read this sentence, then look away from the book
and fix your attention on anything that isn't
moving (a great piece of art doesn't count). Keep
your eyes on the object for 30 seconds. You'll
probably feel your eyes glazing over after just
10 seconds, if not before.
In face-to-face communication, it's not enough to
command the other person's attention. You must also
be able to hold on to it long enough to deliver your message
or intention. You will capture attention with your
likability, but you will hold on to it with the quality of
rapport you establish. More and more it comes down to
three things: 1) your presence, i.e., what you look like
and how you move; 2) your attitude, i.e., what you say,
how you say it and how interesting you are; and 3) how
you make people feel.
11
When you learn how to make fast, meaningful connections
with people, you will improve your relationships
at work and even at home. You will discover the
enjoyment of being able to approach anyone with confidence
and sincerity. But a word of caution: we're not
about to change your personality; this is not a new way
of being, not a new way of life. You are not getting a
magic wand to rush out into the street with and have the
world inviting you to dinner—these are connecting skills
to be used only when you need them.
Establishing rapport in 90 seconds or less with
another person or group, be it in a social or community
setting or with a business audience or even in a packed
courtroom, can be intimidating for many people. It has
always amazed me that in this most fundamental of all
life skills, we've been given little or no training. You are
about to discover that you already possess many of the
abilities needed for making natural connections with
other people—it's just that you were never aware of
them before.
12
to make them as natural, fluid and easy as possible, and
above all to make them enjoyable and rewarding.
Obviously, you begin the connecting process by
meeting people. Sometimes you meet someone by
chance—the woman on the train who turns out to share
your passion for Bogart movies. And sometimes it's by
choice—the man your cousin introduced you to because
he loves Shakespeare, fine wines and bungee jumping,
just like you.
If meeting is the physical coming together of two
or more people, then communicating is what we do
from the moment we are fully aware of another's presence.
And between these two events—meeting and
communicating—lies the 90-second land of rapport that
links them together.
13
The Greeting
We call the first few seconds of contact the "greeting."
Greetings are broken into five parts: Open—Eye—
Beam—Hi!—Lean. These five actions constitute a welcoming
program to carry out in a first encounter.
Open. The first part of the greeting is to open your
attitude and your body. For this to work successfully,
you must have already decided on a positive attitude
that's right for you. This is the time to really feel and
be aware of it.
Check to see that your body language is open. If you
have the right attitude, this should take care of itself.
Keep your heart aimed directly at the person you're
meeting. Don't cover your heart with your hands or
arms and, when possible, unbutton your jacket or coat.
Eye. The second part of the greeting involves your
eyes. Be first with eye contact. Look this new person
directly in the eye. Let your eyes reflect your positive
attitude. To state the obvious: eye contact is real contact!
14
Get used to really looking at other people's eyes.
When you're watching TV one evening, note the
eye color of as many people as possible and say
the name of the color to yourself. The next day,
do the same with every person you meet, looking
him or her straight in the eye.
Beam. This part is closely related to eye contact.
Beam! Be the first to smile. Let your smile reflect your
attitude.
Now you've gained the other person's attention
through your open body language, your eye contact and
your beaming smile. What that person is picking up subconsciously
is an impression not of some grinning,
gawking fool (though you may briefly fear you look like
one!) but of someone who is completely sincere.
Hi! Whether it's "Hi!" or "Hello!" or even "Yo!" say it
with pleasing tonality and attach your own name to it
("Hi! I'm Naomi"). As with the smile and the eye contact,
be the first to identify yourself. It is at this point, and
within only a few seconds, that you are in a position to
gather tons of free information about the person you're
meeting—information you can put to good use later in
your conversation.
Take the lead. Extend your hand to the other person,
and if it's convenient find a way to say his or her name
15
two or three times to help fix it in memory. Not "Glenda,
Glenda, Glenda, nice to meet you" but "Glenda. Great to
meet you, Glenda!" As you'll see in Chapter 7, this will be
followed by your "occasion/location statement."
Lean. The final part of introducing yourself is the
"lean." This action can be an almost imperceptible forward
tilt to very subtly indicate your interest and openness
as you begin to "synchronize" the person you've
just met.
Handshakes run the gamut from the strong, sturdy bonecrusher
to the wet noodle. Both are memorable—once
shaken, twice shy, in some cases.
Certain expectations accompany a handshake. It
should be firm and respectful, as it you were ringing a
hand bell for room service. Deviate from these expectations
and the other person will scramble to make sense
of what's happening. There is a feeling that something is
wrong—like hot water coming out of the cold tap. The
brain hates confusion, and when faced with it the first
instinct is to withdraw.
The "hands-free" handshake is a handshake without
the hand, and it is a powerful tool. Just do everything
you would do during a normal handshake but without
using your hand. Point your heart at the other person
and say hello. Light up your eyes and smile, and give off
16
Firing Energy
This is one of the most powerful exercises we do in my
seminars, but even without supervision you can turn it
into a force to be reckoned with!
You'll need a partner to work with. Stand about eight
feet apart, facing each other like two gunfighters in a
cowboy movie. As you say " H i ! " clap your hands together
and slide your right hand off and past the other in the
direction of your partner. Gather up all the energy you
can throughout your body and store it in your heart, then
clap the energy on through your right hand (the one you
use in a handshake) straight into the other person's
heart. This is a long explanation for something that takes
no more than two seconds, but when all six channels—
body, heart, eyes, smile, clap and voice/breath—are fired
at the person in a rapid flash there is a vast transfer
of energy.
Immediately after receiving the energy, your partner
should fire it back at you in the same way. Taking turns,
continue fast and focused, firing at each other. Be sure to
make contact with all six channels at once. Practice on each
other for two minutes.
Now the real fun begins. You're going to start firing
different qualities of energy: logic/head energy, com- ->
17
munication/throat energy, love/heart energy, power/solar
plexus energy and sexual energy. You've already fired
love/heart energy. Now do the same head to head instead of
heart to heart. Keep firing head/logic energy at each other
until you both agree that you can feel and differentiate it
from love/heart energy. After two or three minutes back and
forth, try the other regions: throat to throat, solar plexus to
solar plexus, etc.
It gets even better. Figure out which kind of energy you
want to send, but don't say what it is. Now greet your partner,
shake hands, say "Hi" and fire! Your partner must identify
the kind of energy he or she is receiving. Take turns.
Practice and practice until your body language becomes subtle
and almost imperceptible.
Next, go out and try it on the people you meet. Fire
energy when you say "Hi" to someone in a supermarket,
to your waiter in the cafe, to your sister-in-law or the
guy who fixes the photocopier in your office. They will
notice something special about you—some might call it
"star quality."
that same special energy that usually accompanies the
full-blown shake.
Incidentally, the "hands-free" handshake works wonders
in presentations when you want to establish rapport
with a group or audience.
Establishing Rapport
Rapport is the establishment of common ground, of a
comfort zone where two or more people can mentally
join together. When you have rapport, each of you
brings something to the interaction—attentiveness,
warmth, a sense of humor, for example—and each
brings something back: empathy, sympathy, maybe a
couple of great jokes. Rapport is the lubricant that
allows social exchanges to flow smoothly.
The prize, when you achieve rapport, is the other
person's positive acceptance. This response won't be in
so many words, but it will signal something like this:
"I know I just met you, but I like you so I will trust you
with my attention." Sometimes rapport just happens all
by itself, as if by chance; sometimes you have to give it a
hand. Get it right, and the communicating can begin. Get
it wrong, and you'll have to bargain for attention.
As you meet and greet new people, your ability to
establish rapport will depend on four things: your attitude,
your ability to "synchronize" certain aspects of
behavior like body language and voice tone, your conversation
skills and your ability to discover which sense
(visual, auditory or kinesthetic) the other person relies
on most. Once you become adept in these four areas,
you will be able to quickly connect and establish rapport
with anyone you choose and at any time.
19
Read on, and you'll discover that it's possible to
speed up the process of feeling comfortable with a
stranger by quantum-leaping the usual familiarization
rituals and going straight into the routines that people
who like each other do naturally. In virtually no time at
all, you will be getting along as if you've known each
other for ages. Many of my students report that when
achieving rapport becomes second nature, they find
people asking, "Are you sure we haven't met before?"
I know the feeling; it happens to me all the time. And
it's not just people asking me the question. 1 am convinced
that half the people I meet, I've met before—
that's the way it goes when you move easily into another
person's map of the world. It's a wonderful feeling.
Communicating
Everyone seems to have a different sense of the word
"communication," but the definitions usually go
something like this: "It's an exchange of information
between two or more people" . . . "It's getting your message
across" . . . "It's being understood."
In the early days of Neuro-Linguistic Programming
(NLP), a research project devoted to "the study of excellence
and a model of how individuals structure their subjective
sensory experience," Richard Bandler and John
Grinder created an effective definition: "The meaning of
20
communication lies in the response it gets." This is simple,
and brilliant, because it means that it's 100% up to
you whether or not your own communication succeeds.
After all, you axe the one with a message to deliver or a
goal to achieve, and you are the one with the responsibility
to make it happen. What's more, if it doesn't work, you
are the one with the flexibility to change what you do until
you finally get what you want. In order to give some form
and function to communication here, let's assume that we
have some kind of response or outcome in mind. People
who are low on communication skills usually have not
thought out the response they want from the other person
in the first place and therefore cannot aim for it.
The skills you will learn here will serve you on all levels
of communication from social dealings like developing
new relationships and being understood in your daily
interactions all the way to life-changing moves for yourself
and those in your sphere of influence.
The formula for effective communication has three
distinct parts:
Know what you want. Formulate your intention in the
affirmative and preferably in the present tense. For
example, "I want a successful relationship, I have filled
my imagination with what that relationship will look,
sound, feel, smell and taste like with me in it, and I know
when I will have it" is an affirmative statement, as
opposed to "I don't want to be lonely."
21
Find out what you're getting. Get feedback. You find
that hanging out in smoky bars is not for you.
Change what you do until you get what you want.
Design a plan and follow through with it: "I'll invite 10
people over for dinner every Saturday night." Do it and
get more feedback. Redesign if necessary, and do it again
with more feedback. Repeat the cycle—redesign-do-get
feedback—until you get what you want. You can apply
this cycle to any area of your life that you want to
improve—finance, romance, sports, career, you name it.
Know what you want.
Find out what you're getting.
Change what you do until you get what you want.
This is terrifically easy to remember because a
certain Colonel had the good sense to open a
chain of restaurants using the abbreviation KFC
for a name. Every time we see one of his signs,
we can ask ourselves how well the development
of our communication skills is going.
What's Coming Up . . .
In the following chapters, we'll examine the arena of
rapport in much more detail, as well as the value of a
Really Useful Attitude in projecting a positive image of
22
yourself. You'll learn what happens at first sight on the
surface and below the surface and the importance of
having your body language, your voice tone and your
words be congruent, or all saying the same thing. No
crossed signals, no mixed messages, no confusion.
You'll discover how your body language appeals to
some but not others and how, by making a few adjustments
to your own movements, you can positively affect
the way people feel about you.
Then we'll delve deep into the warm and welcoming
world of synchrony. You'll learn how to align yourself
with the signals other people send you so that they'll
feel a natural familiarity and comfort around you. We'll
also discuss the massive importance of voice tone and
how it influences the moods and emotions we want to
convey.
A whole chapter is devoted to starting and maintaining
sparkling conversation. We'll explore all the ways to
open people up and avoid closing them down. We'll also
deal with compliments, obtaining free information and
being memorable.
Finally we'll go even deeper, down to the very core
of the human psyche. The astonishing truth is that
although we navigate the world through our five senses,
each of us has one sense that we rely on more than the
other four. I'll show you how people are giving clues
about their favorite sense all the time and how you can
23
move onto the same sensory wavelength as theirs. Do
people who rely mainly on their ears differ from those
who rely mainly on their eyes? Darn right they do, and
you'll find out how to tailor your approach to communicate
with them.
Each chapter includes at least one exercise that will
help you realize the power of connecting. Some of these
exercises can be done alone, but others you have to do
with a partner. Let's face it, face-to-face communication
and rapport skills are interactive activities—you can't
learn to do them all by yourself.
So there it is. Connecting. All day long, men, women
and children give away vital keys to what makes them
tick—to how they experience and filter the world—
through their body language, their tone of voice, their eye
movements and their choice of words. They simply cannot
help doing this. Now it's up to you to learn how to use
this wonderful, nonstop flood of information to achieve
improved outcomes and more satisfying relationships.
24

done, the conversation flows, the cop tears up the
ticket. But how often have you found yourself in a
situation where, no matter how hard you try, you
just can't seem to connect with another person—
and it makes no sense? After all, you know you're a
fine, decent human being. Maybe you're even a fabulous,
wildly attractive human being. But no matter
what you say or do, you don't establish rapport and
you can't connect.
You're not alone. Being a decent sort is not enough
to guarantee good rapport with another person. In the
dictionary, "rapport" is defined as "harmonious or
27
sympathetic communication." In our interpersonal
communications, we go through certain routines when
we first meet a new person. If these routines work out
and rapport is established, we can begin to deliver our
communication with some certainty that it will be
accepted and given serious consideration. Serious
consideration is vital because the fundamental outcome
of rapport is the perception of credibility, which
in turn will lead to mutual trust. If credibility is not
established, the messenger and not the message may
become the focus of attention, and that attention will
harbor discomfort.
But when we experience the world through the same
eyes, ears and feelings as others, we are so bonded, or
synchronized, with them that they can't help but know
we understand them. This means being so much like
them that they trust us and feel comfortable with us—
that they say to themselves subconsciously, "I don't
know what it is about this person, but there's something
I really like."
Research has shown that we have approximately
90 seconds to make a favorable impression when we
first meet someone. What happens in those 90 seconds
can determine whether we succeed or fail at achieving
rapport. In fact, frequently we have even less than 90
seconds!
28
Natural Rapport
Attraction is present everywhere in the universe.
Whether you want to call it magnetism, polarity,
electricity, thought, intelligence or charisma, it's still
attraction, and it invests everything—animal, vegetable
or mineral. We form synchronized partnerships naturally,
and although they are hardly noticeable to some,
they are quite tangible to others.
We have always relied on emotional contact and signals
from our parents, peers, teachers and friends to
guide us through our lives. We are influenced by their
emotional feedback, their gestures and their way of
doing things. When your mother or father sat a certain
way, you would do the same; if a cool friend or a movie
star walks a certain way, you might adopt a similar gait.
We learn by aligning ourselves with the signals other
people send us. They impress their way of being on us.
We synchronize what we like about them.
People with common interests have natural rapport.
The reason you get along so well with your close friends
is that you have similar interests, similar opinions and
maybe even similar ways of doing things. Sure, you will
often find plenty to differ on and argue about, but essentially
you are very much like each other.
We human beings are social animals. We live in com-
29
munities. It's far more "normal" and even logical for people
to get along with one another than it is for them to
argue, fight and not get along. The irony is that society
has conditioned us to be afraid of each other—to set up
boundaries between ourselves and others. We live in a
society that pretends to find its unity through love but
in actuality finds it through fear. The media scare us half
to death with headlines and advertisements continually
telling us of earthquakes and airplane crashes and asking
us if we have enough insurance, are we too fat, too
thin, does the smoke detector work and what about
those high funeral expenses? Natural rapport is a prime
requirement for our sanity, our evolution and, indeed,
our survival.
Rapport by Chance
Perhaps you have traveled abroad to a country where
people don't speak your language and you don't
understand theirs. You feel a little uncomfortable—even
suspicious—when you can't be understood. Then suddenly
you meet someone from your own country, maybe
your own state. This person speaks your language, and
whammo, you have a new best friend—for your vacation
at least. You might share experiences, opinions, insights,
where to find the best restaurants and bargains. You will
doubtless exchange personal information about family
30
and work. All this and much more because you share a
language. That's rapport by chance. Maybe your enthusiasm
will lead you to continue that friendship after
returning home, only to discover that apart from language
and location the two of you have nothing in common
and the relationship fizzles out all by itself.
This isn't limited to language and geography. Chance
encounters happen on almost a daily basis to all of us
—at work, in the supermarket, at the Laundromat or the
bus stop.
The key to establishing rapport with strangers is
to learn how to become like them. Fortunately,
this is both very simple and a lot of fun to do. It
allows you to look on each new encounter as a
puzzle, a game, a joy.
Rapport by Design
When the interests or the behavior of two or more
people are synchronized, these people are said
to be in rapport. As we already know, rapport can happen
in response to a shared interest or when you find
yourself in certain situations or circumstances. But
when none of these conditions is present, there is a
way to establish rapport "by design"—and that's what
this book is about.
31
Mark is attending a formal dinner, eight to a table.
He hates coming to these events and as usual
is stuck for words. He's beginning to get that
squirmy feeling. He doesn't know anyone except for his
accountant, who's sitting at the other end of the banquet
hall and making everyone laugh. Suddenly the guest across
from him, a young woman in a shiny blue dress who caught
his eye a few moments ago even though they hadn't spoken,
tells the man on her left that she is an avid stamp collector.
Gust like Mark!
Mark is relieved and overjoyed because chance has given
him an excuse to talk to her. They have something in common—
stamps. Mark speaks up and tells Tanya all about his
rare 1948 Poached Egg stamp and how he found it when his
Pontiac broke down in Cortlandville in upper New York
State. With both elbows on the edge of the table and a -»
When we set out to establish rapport by design, we
purposely reduce the distance and differences between
another person and ourselves by finding common
ground. When this happens, we feel a natural connection
with the person, or persons, because we are akin—
we have become like each other.
As rapport develops between Mark and Tanya in the
32
finger poised gently on her cheek, close to her ear, Tanya
leans toward Mark; her pupils dilate slightly as her shoulders
become softer and more relaxed. Mark too leans forward
on his elbows, smiling as Tanya smiles, nodding as
she nods. She sips her water; he finds himself doing the
same . . .
Mark and Tanya have established rapport. They connected
and initiated a relationship through a common
interest. Their rapport is evident on many levels—the
cues and rhythms they are taking from and sending to
each other, the imperceptible modifications of behavior
they are making without thinking. The shared interest
has given them proximity, and they are adjusting to one
another. Who knows where it will lead? They like each
other because they are like each other, and the dance
of rapport has begun to calibrate itself. They have
made a favorable connection in 90 seconds or less.
story box above, there is a lot more going on than meets
the eye. The average person would perhaps not notice,
but to the trained eye and ear there is plenty happening.
As their shared interest in stamps emerges, so does a
similarity in their behavior toward each other. Body
language, facial expressions, tone of voice, eye contact,
breathing patterns, body rhythms and many more
33
physiological activities come into alignment. Simply put,
they unconsciously start to behave in a like manner.
They start synchronizing their actions.
Rapport by design is established by deliberately
altering your behavior, just for a short time, in order to
become like the other person. You become an adapter,
just long enough to establish a connection. Precisely
what you can adapt and how to do it is what you are
about to learn in the chapters that follow.
All you will need at your disposal is your attitude,
your appearance, your body, your facial expressions,
your eyes, the tone and rhythms of your voice, your talent
for structuring words into engaging conversation
and your about-to-be-revealed gift for discovering
another person's favorite sense. Add to this an ability to
listen to and observe other people and a very large helping
of curiosity. No gadgets, no appliances, no aphrodisiacs,
no pills, no checkbook, no big stick. Just the
wonderful gifts you were born with—and your heartwarming
desire for the company of other people.
34
air and clap your hands, or try to be happy as you
slouch in a chair and let your head droop. Your attitude
controls your mind, and your mind delivers the
body language.
Attitudes set the quality and mood of your thoughts,
your voice tone, your spoken words. Most importantly,
they govern your facial and body language. Attitudes
are like trays on which we serve ourselves up to other
people. Once your mind is set into a particular attitude,
you have very little ongoing conscious control over the
signals your body sends out. Your body has a mind of
its own, and it will play out the patterns of behavior
associated with whatever attitude you find yourself
experiencing.
A Really Useful Attitude
No matter what you do or where you live, the quality
of your attitude determines the quality of your
relationships—not to mention just about everything
else in your life.
I have been using the same bank branch for the last
eight years. From time to time, someone I've never
heard of before sends me a letter (spelling my name
wrong) to tell me what a pleasure it is to have me as a
special customer. No matter how hard they try to
improve their "personalized" service, however, banks
are pretty much the same all over, and my bank is really
no different from the rest. So why do I still bank there
even though two new, competing banks have recently
opened much closer to where I live? Convenience?
Obviously not. Better rates? Nope. More services? No.
It's none of these things. It's Joanne, one of the tellers.
What does Joanne offer that the institution can't? She
makes me feel good. I believe she cares about me, and
other customers feel the same way about her. You can
tell by the way they talk with her. This charming lady
brightens up the whole place.
How does Joanne do it? Simple. She knows what she
wants: to please the customers and do her job well. She
has a Really Useful Attitude or, to be more precise, two
fully congruent Really Useful Attitudes. She is both
36
cheery and interested, and everybody benefits: me the
customer, her colleagues, her company, no doubt her
family and, above all, herself. What Joanne sends out
with her Really Useful Attitude comes back to her a
thousandfold and becomes a joyous, self-fulfilling reality.
And it doesn't cost a cent.
A Really Useless Attitude
Any two people can have wildly different attitudes
toward the same set of experiences. However, when
two people react to the same experience with the same
attitude, they share a powerful natural bond. Attitudes
have the tendency to be infectious, and because they
are rooted in emotional interpretation of experiences,
they can be distorted and shaped; they can be wound
up or wound down.
What happens when people lose control and become
angry? They look belligerent (body language), their
voice tone is harsh and they use menacing words. They
can be very scary to be around. From the point of view
of making people like you, or even getting willing cooperation,
we call this a Really Useless Attitude. How often
have you seen infuriated parents berating their children
for knocking over the bananas at the supermarket? Or
bored, uninterested shop assistants? Or cranky, impatient
doctors? They are all putting out useless attitudes.
37
how to make people like you
I'm not saying whether this is right or wrong; I'm just
pointing out that from a communications standpoint it
doesn't deliver the message very well. Assuming they
have a message. And that's often the point. Useless attitudes
tend to come from people who don't know what
they really want from their communication.
Remember, the "K" in "KFC" stands for "Know
what you want." If you don't know what you
want, there's no message to deliver and no basis
for connecting with other people.
Most people think in terms of what they don't want
as opposed to what they do want, and their attitudes
reflect this. "I don't want my boss yelling at me anymore"
comes with a whole different attitude than "1 want
my boss's job" or "I want to be promoted." Similarly, "I'm
sick of selling neckties all day long" sends a completely
different attitude and set of signals to your imagination
than does "I want to run a charter fishing boat in Honey
Harbor."
Your imagination is the strongest force that you
possess—stronger than willpower. Think about it. Your
imagination projects sensory experiences in your mind
through the language of pictures, sounds, feelings,
smells and tastes. Your imagination distorts reality. It
can work for you or against you. It can make you feel
38
terrific or miserable. So the better the information you
can feed into your imagination, the better it can organize
your thinking and your attitudes and ultimately your life.
It's Your Choice
he good news is that attitudes are yours to select.
And if you're free to choose any one you please, why
not choose a Really Useful Attitude?
Let's say you just flew into Miami International Airport
and you missed your connection for Omaha. You
simply have to get on the next flight at all costs, so you
go up to the airline desk and shout at the representative.
This is a Really Useless Attitude. If what you want is to
get the attendant's maximum help, the best thing you can
do is to find a Really Useful Attitude that will create rapport
and get his cooperation.
I'll probably regret saying this, but I've talked my
way out of dozens of automobile-related tickets (I've
also failed a few times) and not just for parking infractions.
I'm absolutely convinced that if I'd started by
telling the officer his radar was off or by losing my temper
and getting angry and telling him I'm the mayor's
cousin and I'll never visit this town again, I'd be
doomed from the start. If I want the officer to like me,
to be understanding and not give me a ticket, then I
have to assume a Really Useful Attitude like "I'm sorry"
39
or "Fair enough" or "My, what a fool I am" or "Oh wow,
yes, thanks!"
The last time I got stopped, the officer followed me
into the village supermarket parking lot and pulled to
a stop across the back of my car; I got out and walked to
his car. From his physical appearance, with his beard
and body set, I figured he was a Kinesthetic, or feelingbased
person (you'll learn more about this later), so the
first words out of my mouth were "Fair and square."
That's because there was no doubt I was in the wrong.
He gave me a well-deserved speech about what I'd done
and let me off with a warning. The point is that my attitude
set the tone of the encounter—because I knew
what I wanted.
In face-to-face situations, your attitude precedes
you. It is the central force in your life—it controls
the quality and appearance of everything you do.
It doesn't take much imagination to dream up some
Really Useless Attitudes—anger, impatience, conceit,
boredom, cynicism—so why not take a moment to contemplate
and feel a Really Useful Attitude? When you
meet someone for the first time, you can be curious,
enthusiastic, inquiring, helpful or engaging. Or my
favorite—warm. There's something intoxicating about
warm human contact; in fact, scientists have discov-
40
ered that it can generate the release of opiates in the
brain—how about that for a Really Useful Attitude?
Needless to say, all the above are more useful than
revenge and disrespect.
Ask yourself, "What do I want, right now, at this moment?
And which attitude will serve me best?" Remember,
there are only two types of attitudes to consider
41
Triggering Happy Memories
You know how certain sounds can remind you of something
special in your life? When I was eight, my mother
took me to a resort where I stood next to a man making
fresh doughnuts while Paul Anka sang "Diana" in the background.
Now, whenever I hear this song, it triggers the smell
of fresh doughnuts and the memory of that happy holiday.
It's the song that triggers the memory. A trigger can be a
sound or something visual. It can also be a feeling or
action. And believe it or not, it can be a clenched fist.
Follow the steps below, and you'll see what I mean. Use
the hand you write with and clench your fist tightly. Then
release. Repeat the action a couple of times. This will be
your trigger.
1. Pick a Really Useful Attitude—one that you know will be
useful when you first meet someone. It can be curious,
resourceful, warm or patient, or any attitude you think
will work for you. But it must be one that you have
experienced at some time in your life and can recall
on demand.
2. Find a comfortable spot, quiet and not too bright, where
you won't be disturbed for 10 minutes. Sit down, place
both feet on the floor, breathe slowly into your abdomen
(not your chest) and relax. -»
42
3. Now you're ready. Close your eyes and picture a time in
your life when you felt the attitude you have chosen.
In your mind's eye, make a picture of this specific event.
Put in all the detail you can remember. What was in the
foreground and background? Is the picture sharp or fuzzy,
black-and-white or color? Is it large or small? Take your
time and make it as real as you can. Now step into that
picture and look out through your own eyes. Take note of
what you see.
4. Next, bring up the sounds associated with this picture.
Notice where the sounds come from: the left, the right, in
front or behind? How loud or soft are they? What kinds of
sounds are they? Music? Voices? Listen to the tone and
the volume and the rhythm. Listen deeply, and the sounds
will come flooding back. Listen to the quality of each
sound and try to hear how it contributes to your chosen
attitude.
5. Bring in the physical sensations associated with the event:
the feel of the things around you, the air temperature,
your clothing, your hair, what you're standing or sitting
on. Next, notice the feelings inside your body. Where
do they begin? Perhaps they move around in your body.
Move your concentration deep into these wonderful
feelings and enjoy them. Ride with them. Notice any
smells and tastes that want to be included, and savor
them, too. -*
43
6. With your "outside" eyes still closed, look out through
your "inside" eyes again at the scene. Make the pictures
sharper, brighter, bolder and bigger. Make the sounds
stronger, clearer, purer and more perfect. Make the feelings
stronger, richer, deeper, warmer. Follow the intensity
of the feelings if they move from one place to
another, then loop them back to the beginning and
intensify them. Loop them over and over as they get
stronger and stronger. Let the feeling flood all over you.
7. Make everything twice as big and strong and pure. Then
double it again. And again. Now your whole body and mind
are luxuriating in the experience of it all. Seeing it, hearing
it, feeling it. Make the sensations as strong as you can,
and just when you can't make them any stronger, double
them one more time and clench your fist hard and fast as
you anchor the height of the experience to your trigger.
Feel the sensations pour through you. Intensify them
again, then clench your fist at the height of the feelings
and release. Relax your hand and feel the sensations pour
through your body. Do this one more time, then relax your
hand and the rest of your body. Come down in your own
time and relax.
Wait a minute or so, then test your trigger. Make a tight
fist and notice the feelings rush into all your senses. Test it
again after a couple of minutes. You are ready to use this
Really Useful Attitude whenever you want.
44
when we are dealing with fellow humans: useful and
useless.
How many times have you seen a newsmaker give a
TV interview when she's frustrated? Or a salesperson
serve you in a store when he clearly wishes he were
somewhere else, a colleague who is sarcastic to the very
person who can get the photocopying done faster if
desired, or passengers being rude to the cab driver who
is the only person with the means to get them to the
church on time? These are all Really Useless Attitudes.
As far as communication is concerned, they are virtually
guaranteed to fail.
A Really Useful Attitude is one of the major delivery
vehicles of the likability factor—and it works like a
charm. Your posture, your movements and your expression
will speak volumes about you before you even open
your mouth.
The sooner you know what you want and which is
the most useful attitude to help you get it, the sooner
your body language and your voice and your words will
change to help you get it.
The conclusion is obvious. People who know what
they want tend to get it because they are focused and
positive, and this is reflected outward and inward in
their attitude. Take on a cheery attitude the next time
you meet someone new and see how your whole being
changes to the part. Your look will be cheery, you'll
45
how to make people Like you
sound cheery and you'll use cheery words. This is the
full "communication package." Other people make
major adjustments in their responses to you based on
the signals you transmit. The next chapter will take a
detailed look at how these signals combine to present a
positive image.
away from the fact that image and appearance are
important when meeting someone for the first time.
Dressing well goes a long way toward making a positive
impression as you begin to establish rapport, but how
do you make people warm to you? And how do you project
the likable parts of your own unique personality?
Body Language
our body language, which includes your posture,
X your expressions and your gestures, accounts for
more than one-half of what other people respond to and
make assumptions about.
47
how to make people Like you in 90 seconds or Less
When people think of body language, they tend to
think it means what happens from the neck down. But
much of what we communicate to others—and what
they make assumptions about—comes from the neck
up. Facial gestures and nods and tilts of the head have a
vocabulary that equals or exceeds that of the body from
the neck down.
The signals we send with our bodies are rich with
meaning and global in their scope. Some of them are
hardwired into us at birth; others are picked up from our
society and culture. Everywhere on the planet, panic
induces an uncontrollable shielding of the heart with the
hands and/or a freezing of the limbs. A smile is a smile
on all continents, while sadness is displayed through
down-turned lips as often in New York as in Papua New
Guinea. The clenched fists of determination and the
open palms of truth convey the same message in Iceland
as they do in Indonesia.
And no matter where on earth you find yourself,
mothers and fathers instinctively cradle their babies
with the head against the left side of their body, close to
the heart. The heart is at the heart of it. Facial expressions
and body language are all obedient to the greater
purpose of helping your body maintain the well-being of
its center of feeling, mood and emotion—your heart.
Volumes have been written about body language, but
when all is said and done, this form of communication
48
can be broken down into two rather broad categories:
open and closed. Open body language exposes the
heart, while closed body language defends or protects
it. In establishing rapport, we can also think in terms of
inclusive gestures and noninclusive gestures.
Open Body Language
Open body language exposes your heart and body
(within limits of decency, of course!) and signals cooperation,
agreement, willingness, enthusiasm and approval.
These gestures are meant to be seen. They show trust.
They say "YES!"
Your body doesn't know how to lie. Unconsciously,
with no directions from you, it transmits your
thoughts and feelings in a language of its own to
the bodies of other people, and these bodies
understand the language perfectly. Any contradictions
in the language can interrupt the development
of rapport.
In his classic work How to Read a Person like a Book,
Gerard I. Nierenberg explains the value of open gestures.
These gestures include open hands and uncrossed arms
as well as the occasional subtle movement toward the
other person that says "I am with you" and shows
acceptance: an open coat or jacket, for example, both
49
literally and symbolically exposes the heart. When used
together, such gestures say "Things are going well."
Positive, open-body gestures reach out to others.
These gestures are generally slow and deliberate. When
an open person makes contact with the heart of another
person, a strong connection is made and trust becomes
possible. (You know the feeling of a good hug? Or a
heart-to-heart talk?)
When you meet someone new, immediately point
your heart warmly at that person's heart. There is
magic in this.
Other common open gestures include standing with
your hands on your hips and your feet apart, a stance
that shows enthusiasm and willingness, and moving forward
in your chair (if accompanied by other open gestures).
Leaning forward shows interest, and uncrossing
your arms or legs signals you are open to suggestions.
Closed Body Language
Defensiveness is shown through gestures that protect
the body and defend the heart. These gestures suggest
resistance, frustration, anxiety, stubbornness, nervousness
and impatience. They are negative gestures, and
they say "NO!"
50
Crossed arms are common to all manifestations of
defensiveness. They hide the heart and defend one's
feelings. Although you can also be relatively relaxed
with your arms crossed, the difference between a
relaxed crossed-arm position and a defensive crossedarm
position is in the accompanying gestures. For example,
are your arms loosely folded or pressed close to
your body? Are your hands clenched or open?
Defensive gestures are often fast and evasive and
beyond your conscious control. Your body has a mind
of its own and is ruled by your attitude, useful or useless.
In addition to crossed arms, the most obvious
defensive gestures are avoiding eye contact with the
other person and turning your body sideways. Fidgeting
is another negative gesture, which can also show impatience
or nervousness.
Right away, you can see the difference between a person
who faces you squarely and honestly, and someone
who stands sideways to you with crossed arms and
hunched shoulders while the two of you talk. In the first
instance, the person is openly pointing his heart directly
at your heart. In the second, the posture is defensive;
the person is pointing his heart away from you and protecting
it. One is being open with you, the other closed.
Being in the presence of these two postures produces
very different feelings.
51
Smaller Gestures
Hand gestures are also part of the vocabulary of body
language. They, too, can be divided into open gestures
(positive responses) and closed or concealed gestures
(negative responses), except that their range is far more
intricate and expressive. I should point out that individual
gestures, just like the individual words on this page,
don't say much. Only when you're presented with more
than one gesture, perhaps combined with an expression
and topped off with some overall body language, can
you deduce that a particular clenched fist means "Wow,
my horse came in first!" and not "I'm so mad I want to
slap him!"
A similar set of differences occurs in body language
above the neck. The open face smiles, makes eye contact,
gives feedback, shows curiosity and raises the eyebrows
to show interest. In a casual encounter, a quick
look and a lowering of the eyes says, "I trust you. I'm not
afraid of you." A prolonged look strengthens the positive
signal. In conversation, we may use a nod of the head at
the end of a statement to indicate that an answer is
expected.
In contrast, the closed face frowns, purses the lips
and avoids eye contact. And there is yet another negative
category to add to facial responses. We politely call
it the neutral, or expressionless, face. It's the one that
just gawks at you like a dead trout. In the next chapter,
52
you'll find out how to react to this "non-face," which can
be very disconcerting if you don't know how to deal
with it.
Frequently I look around at my audiences and recognize
people who have heard me talk before. I recognize
them because they have "the look of recognition" on
their face when they see me. It's a look, or even an attitude,
of silent anticipation that any minute I'll recognize
them. Well, this look can work wonders—from time to
time—with people you haven't met before. If you're on
your own, try it out right now. Let your mouth open
slightly in a smile as your eyebrows arch and your head
tilts back a little with anticipation as you look directly
at an imaginary person. A variation is to tilt your head
as you look slightly away and then look back at the person
with the bare minimum of a frown and/or pursed
lips. Practice. Then give it a try. Be as subtle as you possibly
can.
Last spring, I rented a bus for my daughter and her
friends to be chauffeured around in on the night of their
prom. While I was paying at the rental office, I noticed a
woman sitting at the next desk over. She had a look on
her face that said she knew me, and I racked my brain to
place her. I couldn't.
In the end I had to say, "I'm sorry, but have we met
before?"
"No," she replied seriously. Then she stood up at her
53
Classic flirting behavior involves letting someone know
you like him or her and that you'd like to pursue it further.
Not surprisingly, body language plays a huge part in
this game, and even less surprisingly, so does eye contact.
Dozens of little gestures are used to send out sexual
messages: the tilt of the head, holding eye contact a little
longer than normal, the angle of the hips and the hands
through the hair. Glancing sideways is a gesture that can suggest
doubt on its own, but combined with a slight smile and
a narrowing of the eyes it is a powerful gesture of flirtation.
A man sends out signals with his swagger; a woman, by
rolling her hips. A man loosens his tie ever so slightly; a
woman moistens her lips. On and on, the parties convey
their interest in each other through their stances, glances
and postures until some small gesture synchronizes and
sends the O.K.
desk, held out her hand to me and smiled. "Hi, I'm
Natalie," she said.
I had been obliged to speak first, and she had done
the polite thing. She had stood up, offered her hand,
smiled and introduced herself. All completely innocent—
or was it? I have no idea. But we had rapport, and she
had me talking.
54
In 1967, Professor Albert Mehrabian, currently professor
emeritus of psychology at UCLA, carried out the
most widely quoted study on communication. He determined
that believability depends on the consistency, or
congruity, of three aspects of communication. In a paper
titled "Decoding of Inconsistent Communication," he
reported the percentages of a message expressed
through our different communication channels in this
way: interestingly, 55% of what we respond to takes
place visually; 38% of what we respond to is the sound
55
Rosa, a waitress, folds up the ad she's torn from a newspaper,
clears off the table where her new computer will
sit and leaves her apartment.
At the electronics store, as Rosa hovers over the latest
desktop model from Megahype, a young salesman notices
the ad in her hand and wanders over to her. He unbuttons
his jacket, spreads his hands out, palms up, and looks her
in the eye. "I see you found it already," he says with a
smile. "Hi, my name's Tony."
For the next 10 minutes, a relaxed and sincere Tony talks
to Rosa. He faces her with his hands exposed and leans forward
from time to time as they discuss the features of the
computer. Rosa listens with interest, her head tilted to one
side and her hand on her cheek, as Tony offers to "throw
in" $95 of extras and even agrees to "eat the tax."
Finally, stroking her chin as she forms a decision, Rosa
nods. "Yes," she says, "this is the model for me."
"Great," says Tony, eagerly rubbing his palms together.
" I t will take about five minutes to take it down and find
some boxes."
Rosa looks sideways at him and frowns. "You don't have
a new one in a box?"
"That might be hard to find right now." Tony's hands
become fists, and he pops them into his pockets. -*
56
"They're such an unbelievable deal—they've just been flying
out of the store." He buttons up his jacket, shrugs his
shoulders and laughs nervously.
"So this is a demonstration model?" Rosa tilts her head,
inquiring.
"Just came on the floor this morning," Tony shoots back
with an insincere smile. He folds his arms in front of his
chest and turns himself sideways to her, pretending to be
distracted by something going on in the TV department
nearby. His voice falters and weakens as he says, " I t has the
same warranty as a new one."
Rosa rubs the side of her nose in doubt. "Came on the
floor this morning? Fine. Can I have that in writing?"
Tony's back is turned to her as he leans over the monitor,
fiddling with the cables—any excuse not to look at her.
He catches a glimpse of himself in one of the wall mirrors.
Oh boy, what an idiot I am, he thinks. He bites his lip and
turns back to face Rosa.
But Rosa is gone.
As a good waitress, Rosa is used to reading body language.
She saw that the salesman's gestures conflicted
(lacked congruity) with his words, and she knew that
she should believe the gestures. The change in Tony's
voice tone from informing to pleading just served to
confirm her feelings of doubt.
57
of communication; and 1% of what we respond to
involves the actual words we use.
The Professor called these the three "V's" of communication:
the visual, the vocal and the verbal. And to
be believable, they must all give out the same message.
This is at the very foundation of rapport by design.
Over one-half of all communication is nonverbal! It is
the look of the communication, our body language, that
counts the most: the way we act, dress, move, gesture,
and so on.
Need proof? Think of the last time you were with
someone who stood with her arms crossed, tapping
her foot and looking annoyed, and then huffed the words
"I'm fine." Which clues did you believe—the words or
the body language and tone of voice? Physical messages
often send a much louder message than spoken words.
Since 55% of your communication occurs as body language,
see how easy it is, whether consciously or not, to
signal either openness or defensiveness to another person
by means of your body language. Gestures, rather
than words, are the true indicators of your instinctive
reactions.
If you want others to believe that you can be trusted,
you must be congruent. Your spoken language and your
body language must say the same thing. If they don't,
the other person's body will signal its discomfort to
your body. In response to this communication, your
58
Words vs. Tone
Say each phrase below with different tonality: anger,
boredom, surprise and flirtatiousness. Notice how your
| body language, facial expression and breathing combine to
alter your emotional state.
"It's late."
"I've had enough."
"Look at me."
"Where were you born?"
To check your tonality, find a friend and say one or two
of these phrases. See if your friend can tell you which of
the four feelings you're expressing. If it's not obvious, keep
working at it until it's clear.
body will signal to your brain by mixing up a chemical
cocktail that corresponds to the discomfort that the
other person is feeling. Then you will both be uncomfortable,
and rapport will be that much harder to
achieve. When they notice a discrepancy between your
words and gestures, other people will believe the gestures
and react accordingly.
So, congruity occurs when your body, voice tone and
words are all in alignment. And when your body, tone
59
and words are communicating the same thing, you
will appear sincere and people will tend to believe you.
This is why a Really Useful Attitude is so important.
Appearing sincere, or congruent, is a key ingredient for
building the trust that opens the door to likability and
rapport.
Make sure that your words, your tonality and your
gestures are all saying the same thing. Be on the
lookout for incongruity in others. Notice how it
makes you feel.
We've all seen those old movies where a couple of
people are driving along in a car, and they're rocking the
steering wheel even though the background shows a
road that's straight as an arrow. It's phony—you know
they're really in a studio being bounced around in a box.
Your senses have told you that something isn't right,
something is out of alignment, and so you can't believe
what you see. Or have you ever had someone get mad at
you and then, in the middle of bawling you out, flash a
sinister little smile that disappears as fast as it came?
Very chilling. This is another example of incongruent
behavior. The smile doesn't belong with the anger; it's
insincere.
Recognizing incongruent behavior is another survival
instinct. If you're on vacation and you're approached
60
by a complete stranger who grins at you while he
rubs his hands briskly together, licks his lips and
says, "Good morning, how would you like to invest in
the world's best time-share deal," the chances are you'll
be on your guard. A quick congruence check is instinctive
and is another reason why first impressions are
paramount.
Frequently a person's emotions and intentions are
misunderstood by those around them. For instance, a
woman at one of my seminars discovered that she
unconsciously used a tone of voice that was incongruent
with her words. "No, I'm not confused, I'm interested,"
she would insist when tested. And again, "No, I'm
not sad, I'm relaxed." This went on and on until she
came to the verge of tears and said, "Now I know why my
kids are always saying, 'Mom, how come you get mad at
us all the time?' And I'm not mad at them. Sometimes I'm
just excited."
The same woman also told us that her coworkers
accused her of sarcasm but that, to her, nothing could
be further from the truth. In fact, sarcasm is simply
words said with conflicting voice tone. It is structured
so the person on the receiving end will believe what's
inferred by the tonality. Suppose you let your team
down and somebody is heard to quip, "That was brilliant,"
with a tonality that communicates annoyance.
It's a very different case when you score a fantastic goal
61
and the same person is heard to say with excitement,
"That was brilliant!"
Congruity, then, has one unshakable rule and it is
this: If your gestures, tone and words do not say the
same thing, people will believe the gestures. Go up to
someone you know, purse your lips and say, "I really like
you," with your eyebrows raised and your arms folded.
Ask them what they think. Even better, go find a mirror
and try it. Well? You get my point. Your gestures are a
giveaway to what you really mean.
Being Yourself
Do you feel nervous when you meet someone new?
Physiologically, being nervous and being excited
have a lot in common: pounding heart, churning tummy,
high chest breathing and the general jitters. But one of
these states might send you hightailing it for the nearest
dark corner while the other one can serve you well and
propel you forward. There is a tendency for panic to
accompany nervousness, and this quite naturally makes
bodily activities speed up. Because much of your nervousness
stems from increased awareness, try redirecting
some of your awareness toward slowing down
and being more deliberate. One great technique is to
imagine that your nostrils are just below your navel
and that your in-and-out breaths are happening down
62
there. The slower you are, within reason, the more in
control you will appear.
The sooner you start telling yourself that you're
excited rather than nervous, the sooner you'll be able to
convince your subconscious that this is actually how
you feel. And, in fact, that's really all that matters.
Change your attitude, and your body language and voice
tone will change to reflect your new attitude. Keep in
mind that most people are as eager as you are to establish
rapport. They will generously give you the benefit of
the doubt.
Don't try too hard! In a study conducted at
Princeton University, students of both sexes were
questioned about their methods of sizing up people
they met for the first time. Overeagerness was
one of the most reported turnoffs. Don't smile too
hard, don't try to be too witty, don't be overpolite
and avoid the temptation to be patronizing.
As you become more at ease with your attitude, people
will begin to notice characteristics that are unique
to you—that set you apart from the others and define
you as an individual. You will naturally and easily project
the likable parts of your own unique personality and
have more conscious control and confidence in your
ability to create rapport at will.
63
It's just about impossible to be incongruent when
you are operating from inside any kind of attitude, useful
or otherwise. Because your attitude precedes you, it
is an essential component of the first impression you
make on new acquaintances.
64
sense of humor. What a relief! My aunt in Scotland is a
medical doctor, and so is her daughter. They think alike.
Another coincidence? The plumber in our village comes
from three generations of plumbers. The woman who sold
me a big ripe Gouda cheese at the Wednesday market in
Leiden, just outside Amsterdam, had her mother and her
daughter working for her. All dressed the same.
What's going on here? Is there some kind of pattern
emerging? How come they are so much alike? They have
all grown up with harmonious behavior on many levels,
physical and mental. They have synchrony.
Since he was only three years old, my neighbor's
youngest son has handled a fishing rod with great
65
respect, just like his dad. He sits a certain way, just like
his dad, and when he's threading the hook, he glances at
his father from moment to moment to see if he's doing it
correctly: a certain, almost imperceptible expression says
continue, another says be careful and yet another says
no, you've got it wrong. The boy uses his own instincts to
learn from his father, along with very subtle guidance
from his father's expressions and body language and at
times his gentle, encouraging voice. Now he can do it, just
like his dad.
our parents, peers, teachers, coaches, TV, movies and
our environment, our behavior is modulated and organized
by synchronizing ourselves with the conduct of
others and adjusting to their emotional feedback. Unwittingly,
we have been synchronizing ourselves with other
people since birth. A baby's body rhythms are synchronized
with those of its mother. An infant's mood is influenced
by his father's mood, a child's favorite toys are
selected to keep pace with her peers, a teen's tastes must
conform to what's cool and an adult's preferences are
influenced by mate, friends and the community.
All day long, we synchronize ourselves with those
66
around us. We do it all the time. We thrive on it, and we
can't exist without it. We are always influencing each
other's behavior; every moment we are with other people,
we make minute adjustments to our behavior, and
they to ours. This is what synchrony is all about. We
process the signals unconsciously and transmit them to
each other through our emotions. It is how we draw our
strength and convictions; it is how we feel safe. It is how
we evolve. And it is why people like, trust and feel comfortable
with people who are just like them.
People hire people like themselves.
People buy from people like themselves.
People date people like themselves.
People lend money to people like themselves.
And so on—ad infinitum.
Perhaps you've noticed that you take to some people
immediately upon meeting them for the first time and
yet feel no rapport at all with other new people. Or you
might even feel an instant dislike for some people. This
is something we've all experienced, but have you ever
stopped to wonder why this happens? Why is it that
with certain people you feel the natural trust and comfort
that comes with rapport? Think back over the last
week to some of the people you met in your adventures.
Go over the meetings in your mind and relive them.
67
What was it about the people you liked that made you
like them? Chances are you shared something—interests
or attitudes or ways of moving. People who get on
well together usually have things in common. Those
who share similar ideas, have the same taste in music or
food, read similar books or like the same holidays, hobbies,
sports or vacation spots will feel immediately comfortable
with one another and like each other better
than those who have nothing in common.
When I lecture, I go over to a large blackboard and
write:
I LIKE YOU!
Then I add the tiny, two-letter word "am" between the
first and second words of that joyous phrase so that it
now reads:
I AM LIKE YOU!
The fact is that we like people who are like us. We are
at ease with people who feel familiar (where do you
think the word "familiar" comes from?). Look to your
close friends. The reason you get along so well with
them is that you have similar opinions, maybe even similar
ways of doing things. Sure, you will often find plenty
to differ on and argue about, but essentially you are like
each other.
People with similar interests have natural rapport. If
you share an interest in motor sports with one of the
guys at the office, this can become a basis for rapport.
Or perhaps you have two toddlers and go to the park
every afternoon to meet up with other mothers in the
same circumstances; this is again a basis for rapport.
You've heard the saying "Birds of a feather flock
together"—well, quite simply, people are comfortable
when they are surrounded by people like themselves.
Rapport by chance holds true not just on the surface
but underneath as well. Shared beliefs, appearance,
tastes and circumstance all contribute to rapport. Perhaps
you feel comfortable around people with fluent,
expressive voices or sensitive people who speak softly
and slowly. Maybe you enjoy the company of people
who share their feelings when they communicate or
those who get straight to the point and don't mince their
words. When you establish rapport by chance, you have
come across someone who grew up with or developed a
style similar to your own.
The Art of Synchronizing
But why wait for rapport to happen naturally? Why
not go straight into synchronizing other people's
behavior as soon as you meet them? Why not invest
90 seconds or less of your time to establish rapport
by design?
Look around any restaurant, coffee shop, mall or
other public place where people meet each other and
look around to see which ones are "in rapport" and
which ones aren't. The ones who have rapport sit
together in the same way. Notice how they lean toward
one another. Notice their leg and arm positions. Those in
rapport are synchronized almost like dancers: one picks
up a cup, the other follows; one leans back, the other
does the same; one talks softly, the other talks softly. The
dance goes on: body position, rhythm, tone of voice.
Now look for those people who are clearly together but
not synchronized, and observe the differences. Which
pairs or groups appear to be having a better time?
I recently gave a speech at an auditorium in London,
and right there, about 10 rows back, was a beautiful couple.
Both were immaculately dressed, with great attention
to color and detail. When I noticed them, they were
sitting in the identical position, leaning to the right with
their hands folded close to their respective armrests.
Then, as if responding to a prearranged signal, they both
transferred their weight onto the other armrest, like synchronized
swimmers, nodding and smiling in unison.
They confirmed everything I was saying. I caught up
with them afterward and learned that they had been
married for 47 years; they were fit, healthy, happy and
totally synchronized.
Our goal, then, is to discover the structure of synchrony
and modify it to apply to the different types of
people we meet. The key to establishing rapport is
70
learning how to synchronize what Professor Mehrabian
called the three "V's" of consistent human communication—
the visual, the vocal and the verbal—in order to
connect with other people by becoming as much like
them as possible.
But doesn't this mean I'm being phony or insincere?
No. Remember that we're only talking about a minute and
a half! You're not being asked to engineer a total and permanent
personality change. All you will be doing is synchronizing
another person to put him or her at ease and
thus speed up what would happen naturally if you had
more time. The idea is not to make your movements, tone
and words obvious copies of the other person's, but
rather to do the same kind of thing you do with a friend.
Synchronizing skills are really nothing more than a
connecting device to our greatest resource: other people.
As we are instinctively drawn toward one another,
be it to get cooperation or emotional feedback or to
have our physical needs met, synchronizing speeds up
our mental unification.
Often, when you travel in a foreign country, the plug
of your hair dryer or electric shaver will just not fit into
the outlet—you need an adapter to make it work, a connecting
device that will let you plug the thing in and
power it up. It's precisely the same thing when you plug
into other people. Like the hair dryer or the electric
shaver, you must have an adapter. So think of synchroniz-
71
ing as an adapting device that allows you to make smooth
connections at will and quickly. Synchronizing is a way to
make the other person become open, relaxed and happy
to be with you. You just do what they do; you become like
them until the other person thinks, I don't know what it is
about this person, but there's something I really like!
Think of synchronizing as rowing your boat alongside
another person's rowboat, pointing it in the
same direction at the same speed and picking up
the other person's pace, stroke, breathing pattern,
mood and point of view. As he rows, you row.
One evening a few years ago, I was sitting in the chalet
of a ski club, waiting for my two youngest children to finish
night skiing. Suddenly in walked a neighbor, a lawyer
who had been on polite "nodding" terms with my family.
When I saw him arrive, I made up my mind to try out
some simple synchronizing on him. I decided on the outcome
I wanted (remember, know what you want) and that
I would continue synchronizing until he made a definite
gesture of friendship. I calmly stood up and he spotted
me. We met in the middle of the large room.
"Hi there," he said with a tight-lipped smile as he
shook my hand.
Matching the tone of his voice, his grimace and his
body stance, I echoed: "Hi there!"
72
He placed one hand on his hip, and with the other
pointed out the chalet window. "Just waiting for my kids
to finish!"
"Me, too," I said, mirroring his gestures. "I'm waiting
for my kids to finish."
I synchronized him, respectfully, for less than 30 seconds
of normal, innocent conversation. Then he suddenly
blurted out, "You know something? We really don't
see enough of you and your family. Why don't you come
by for dinner one night?"
We set the date right there and then. I could almost
read what had happened by the way his mouth twisted.
He was thinking, There's something about this guy I
really like, but I'm not quite sure what it is. Obviously, if
he felt I'd been copying him, he'd have never issued the
invitation!
I had approached him with a Really Useful Attitude
of warmth that, even though I was synchronizing him,
I kept fairly close to the surface. I faced him and immediately
took on his overall posture and used similar
gestures and facial expressions. The vocal part, his
voice tone and speed, was easy to fall in with. And I
used similar words. It sounds more complicated than
it actually was. The whole thing took only a few seconds.
It was fun and it felt good. I really did want to get
to know him better, and this seemed the perfect
opportunity. I'm sure we both experienced the thrill
73
Mr. Szabo, the owner of a large chain of supermarkets,
is well known among the trade for his intimidating
manner. One day, he summoned the product
managers of three competitive, nationally recognized brands
to meet him at one of his outlets. He led the three product
managers to the aisle in which their products were displayed
and proceeded to scold them for what he perceived to be the
disgraceful state of their product facing. As he waved his
arms about, pointing out what was wrong, he raised and lowered
his voice, occasionally pausing to stare at them individually
and even jabbing one of them, Paul, on the shoulder
with his finger. At the end of his tirade, two of the browbeaten
individuals nodded and made excuses, which gave
Mr. Szabo even more ammunition to use against them. ->
that only people can generate in people—the thrill of
making new connections. There is absolutely nothing
in this world as exciting and rewarding as connecting
and developing a rapport that can lead to a new friendship
or relationship.
What about difficult people? I am often asked what
you're supposed to do when you meet somebody who is
all bundled up with defensiveness: tight jaw, arms
crossed defensively or hands jammed into pockets. Or
74
Ever since Mr. Szabo had begun his rant, Paul had been
skillfully synchronizing Szabo's mood and general mannerisms.
When it came time for him to respond to the irate
owner, he almost became Mr. Szabo—but in a completely
nonthreatening way. He used similar arm gestures, tonality,
pauses and attitude, and he even jabbed Mr. Szabo on the
shoulder as he said, "You're absolutely right."
As they talked back and forth for a minute or so, Paul
calmed down his own gestures, and Mr. Szabo followed.
When they finished talking, Mr. Szabo put his arm around
Paul's shoulder and led him to the end of the aisle. There he
collared one of the store staff and said to him, "Give this
man any help he needs."
Paul had successfully joined Mr. Szabo in his world and
led him quickly, skillfully and respectfully to his own
desired outcome.
the best way to handle a bully, a shy person, a cornplainer
or someone who is arrogant or overly aggressive.
It is not the purpose of this book to give detailed
instructions on dealing with difficult people, but here
are some guidelines.
Rule number one when encountering a difficult person
is to ask yourself this question: "Do I really need to
deal with this person?" If the answer is no, then leave
him or her alone. If the answer is yes, ask yourself what
75
it is that you want. What is your desired outcome? Not
what is it that you don't want. (Remember KFC?)
When synchronizing "difficult people," it's vital that
you do it in a nonthreatening way. Once you have
matched your body and tone with theirs, you can begin
to "lead" them out of it. Unfold your arms, relax your
shoulders and check to see if they follow your lead; if
they don't, get back into your original position for a
minute or so and try again.
A word about shy people: try to find out what they're
interested in. Synchronize their body movements and
voice tone, and unhurriedly ask them lots of open-ended
questions (see the next chapter) until you get a glimmer
of enthusiasm. Take on their attitude, and then little by
little lead them out of it. Lean or sit forward and see if
they follow; if not, go back to where you were and synchronize
any little thing you can. You'll be surprised at
how well this works.
When do I start synchronizing? Try not to let more
than two or three seconds go by before you start.
Rememher the sequence in Chapter 2: Open (Really Useful
Attitude and open body language)—Heart (pointed
at the person)—Eye (first with the eye contact)—Beam
(first with the smile)—"Hi!" (introduce yourself)—Lean
(indicate interest as you start synchronizing).
Anything that increases the common ground and
reduces the distance between you and the other person
76
is a good thing. And the quickest way to accomplish this
is to synchronize as many of the other person's aspects
as you can—adopt the same attitude, make the same
motions and speak the same way.
Synchronizing Attitude
Synchronizing attitude—or multiple congruity, to give it
its scientific name—takes into account location and
mood. It is also frequently supportive, as when a friend
is challenged and you "take a stand" with him, or a parent
deeply relates to a child's problem with a class
assignment, or you share the exhilaration your partner
feels over a promotion. When people "go through things
together," they will often be synchronized right down to
primal sighs of despair or shouts of joy.
Pick up on other people's feelings. Synchronize their
movements, breathing pattern and expression as you
"deeply identify" with them. Tune in to the overall mood
suggested by their voice and reflect it back.
synchronizing Body Language
As you already know, body language accounts for 55% of
our communication. It is the most obvious, easiest and
most rewarding feature to synchronize on your way to
rapport. If you get nothing else out of this book but the
ability to synchronize other people's body language,
you'll be miles ahead of where you were last month.
77
DOING WHAT COMES NATURALLY
Dave was out looking for an anniversary present for
his wife. He had whittled his thinking down to two
ideas. It was to be either the very latest palmtop
computer or a painting to hang in their breakfast room.
From where Dave parked his car at the shopping mall, it
was more convenient to visit the computer store first. Fortunately,
it was midmorning and the store wasn't too busy.
Dave approached the counter, where a salesman in a dark
suit was nodding and smiling. So far, so good. As the salesman
started to explain the differences in all the latest
models, he lifted his right leg and plunked it on a low stool
that was somewhere next to him. Then he leaned thoughtfully
on his right knee and continued with his explanations.
Suddenly Dave couldn't wait to get out of there. It
wasn't that he lacked interest, it was just that the macho,
leg-raised position was completely out of sync with his own
posture and it made him feel uncomfortable. -*
Synchronizing body language falls into two loose
groupings: matching, which means doing the same thing
as the other person (she moves her left hand, you move
your left hand), and mirroring, which means, as it implies,
moving as if you were watching the other person in a
mirror (he moves his left hand, you move your right).
78
It was a completely different story at the art gallery.
Dave stopped before a painting that took his fancy and
adopted a contemplative stance: weight on one leg, arms
folded but with one hand on his chin and a finger hooked
around his lips. After maybe a minute, he became aware of
somebody standing quietly next to him and heard a soft,
supportive voice say simply, "Nice, isn't it?"
"Yes, it is," Dave replied in a pensive voice.
"Let me know if I can help you," said the lady at his side.
She withdrew to another part of the gallery.
Within five minutes, Dave had bought the painting. It
seemed the natural thing to do.
Dave felt comfortable just looking at the painting.
The woman had slipped in beside him, taken on the
same body language as his and dropped into the same
attitude. She made a seamless connection by exercising
perfect, effortless synchrony: 55% body language, 38%
voice tone and 7% words—the three "Vs."
Maybe you're thinking, But won't other people notice
that I'm copying their behavior? Actually, they won't,
unless the copying is blatant. Remember, your movements
must be subtle and respectful. If someone sticks
a finger in his ear and you do the same, then yes, he'll
probably notice that. But when a person is focused on
79
a conversation, he or she will not pick up on subtle
synchronizing.
Particular gestures. Hand and arm movements are
especially easy and natural to synchronize by matching
and mirroring. Some folks raise their shoulders when
they talk; others wave their hands around as they
express themselves. Do whatever they do. If you find it
uncomfortable at first, then go at it a little at a time until
with practice you become an expert synchronizer. Just
the fact that you're noticing these different types of gestures
is a big step in the direction of making people like
you in 90 seconds or less.
Body posture. Overall posture is known as the attitude
of the body. It shows how people present themselves
and is a good indicator of emotional state. That is
why we sometimes refer to it as "adopting a posture."
When you can accurately adopt a person's posture, you
can get a fair idea of how he or she feels.
Overall body movements. Whether it's a job interview
or striking up a conversation at the museum fund-raiser,
observe the person's overall body movements, then
gently mirror or match them. If he has a leg crossed, then
cross a leg; if he's leaning against the grand piano, do it,
too. If she's sitting sideways on the banquette, sit sideways;
if she's standing with her hands on her hips, do the
same. Body movements like leaning, walking and turning
are easily synchronized.
80
Head tilts and nods. These are the simplest movements
to synchronize. Fashion photographers know that
most of the "feel" of a terrific cover shot comes from the
"innuendo" created by subtle tilts and nods of the head.
Sure, the face is important, but it's the angles that carry
the message. Pay close attention to them. Most good
physicians and therapists find that they synchronize
tilts and nods without giving it a second thought. It says
"I hear you, I see what you're saying and I feel for you."
Facial expressions. Along with tilts and nods, synchronized
facial expressions show agreement and
understanding. They come naturally. When he smiles at
you, your natural inclination is to smile back. When she
shows wide-eyed surprise, give it back to her. Look
around at the next luncheon or dinner you attend, and
notice how those with the deepest rapport are doing it
all the time. It's an easy and natural, surefire way to
make someone like you in 90 seconds or less. You can
match the same amount and same style of eye contact.
It may be fleeting, or direct or coy; whatever it is, pick
up on it and return it in the same way.
Breathing. Pay attention to breathing. Is it fast or
slow? Is it high in the chest, low in the chest or from the
abdomen? You can usually tell how people are breathing
by watching their shoulders or the folds in their clothing.
Synchronizing their breathing can be soothing and
comforting to them.
81
In and Out of Sync
For this exercise, you will need two other people: A and B.
A is the first to do the actions; B synchronizes with A's
actions. You start off as the director.
Sitting, standing or walking, A and B converse casually
about anything they want. A makes a point of moving
about enough to give B some body movements and gestures
to synchronize. After about a minute, tell them to
break synchrony. At this point, B deliberately mismatches
A's movements. After another minute or so, instruct B to
get into sync again. Then, after another minute, get them
to break once more. Finally, have them get back in sync
before finishing.
Now switch places with A or B. Keep rotating so that each
one of you assumes a different role in the exercise. Compare
notes at the end of each rotation. The comments will
most likely be similar to these: "When I broke synchronization,
it was as if a huge wall had been erected between us"
and "When we stopped synchronizing, the level of trust
plummeted."
You can also try this out on your own. Synchronize someone
for a couple of minutes, then deliberately mismatch his
or her movements for one minute before getting back -*
82
into synchrony again. Go in and out at will and notice the
difference; it will be tangible.
Leading
When you're sitting and talking with a friend, one of you
might cross a leg and the other might do the same without
thinking. This means that one of you is following
the other's lead, which is a sure sign that the two of you
are in rapport.
As you quickly become proficient at synchronizing, you
can test to find out just how well your rapport is going.
After three or four minutes, regardless of what has gone
before and without the other person being aware of what
you're doing, make a subtle move that's independent of
your synchronizing—lean back or cross your arms and perhaps
tilt your head. If the other person follows, then you
are synchronized and have rapport and the other person is
now subconsciously following your lead. If you tilt your
head, she tilts hers. If you cross your legs, he crosses his.
Just change what you're doing—make a movement, alter
your vocal tone—and observe whether the other person
matches or mirrors you. This way you can check to see if
you are in rapport. If the other person doesn't follow your
lead, go back to synchronizing his or her movements for a
few minutes and try again until it works.
83
I teach volunteers who sit with cancer patients how
to have rapport with those in their care. This is the first
thing I stress. Breathe in and out with them. Then, when
you speak, you're doing it on their "out" breath, and this
has a very calming effect.
Rhythms. The same rule applies for anything rhythmic.
If she taps her foot, tap your pencil; if he nods his
head, pat your thigh. In the right circumstances and
with judicious application, this works well as long as it
is beyond conscious awareness. If not, the next sound
you hear may be the door slamming shut—or worse.
Just use common sense and discretion.
Synchronizing Voice
Voice accounts for 38% of face-to-face communication.
It reflects how a person is feeling; in other words, his
or her attitude. People who are confused will sound confused,
and people with a curious attitude will sound
curious. You can learn to synchronize these sounds.
Tone. Notice the emotions conveyed by the tone of
voice. Tune in to these emotions, get a feel for them and
use the same tone.
Volume. Does the other person speak in a quiet voice
or a loud voice? The value of synchronizing volume is
not so much in doing it, but more in what can happen if
you don't do it. If you are naturally loud and excitable
and you meet someone who is more soft-spoken and
84
reserved, it goes without saying that the other person
would feel much more at ease with someone who spoke
in the same tender tones. Conversely, a jovial, backslapping
loudmouth would surely find lots of common
ground with someone who radiated a comparable
degree of exuberance.
Speed. Does the other person speak quickly or
slowly? A thoughtful, slow-speaking individual can be
completely unsettled or flummoxed by a speed talker,
just as much as a slow, ponderous talker can drive a
quick thinker to the point of distraction. Talking at the
same speed as someone else makes as much sense as
walking at the same speed.
Pitch. Does the voice go up and down? Voice pitch is
one way to change someone's energy level. When you
raise pitch and volume, you become more excited. When
you lower them, you become calmer, right down to the
intimacy of a whisper.
Rhythm. Is the voice flowing or disjointed? Some people
have a melodic way of speaking, while others have a
more pragmatic, methodical output.
Words. There is yet one more powerful area we can
synchronize, and that is the use of a person's preferred
words. We will be covering this fascinating world in
Chapter 9.
Synchronizing allows you to deeply identify with
other people and get a better understanding of where
85
they're coming from. Practice synchronization in all
your activities, whether you're in an interview, at a bus
stop, dealing with your children, calming an unhappy
customer, or talking to the teller at the bank, the flower
seller, the barman at the pub. You're not likely to run out
of partners. Make it a part of your life for the next few
days until you are competent without trying—until it
becomes second nature.
86

were first with the eye contact and first with the smile.
You introduced yourself, and miracle of miracles—
three seconds have gone by and you can still remember
the other person's name. You've begun synchronizing,
and you feel confident that rapport is building.
But now what?
It's conversation time! Conversation is one very significant
way to build rapport and forge the bonds of friendship.
It comes in two equally important parts: talking
and listening. Or, as you'll soon see, asking questions
and actively listening.
You may have found yourself in a situation where
you wanted to talk to someone but suddenly felt tongue-
89
tied and self-conscious about doing so. Or maybe you've
felt your stomach sink as you take your seat on an airplane
next to some interesting-looking person and
can't think of a way to start talking without feeling
self-conscious. What will they think of me? Am I boring?
Am I intruding? And most important: How shall I start?
The idea is to get the other person talking, then find
out what matters to him or her and synchronize yourself
accordingly. This is the realm of small talk, the hunting
ground for rapport. It is here that you will search for
common interests and other stepping-stones to rapport.
While big talk is serious stuff like nuclear disarmament
and politics, small talk is everything else: your personal
Web site, renovating the bathroom, a speeding ticket or
the color of cousin Marisa's new sports car.
Stop talking and start asking!
onversation is how we open other people up to see
what's inside, to deliver a message, or both. And
questions are the spark plugs of conversation. Be aware,
however, that there are two types of questions: those that
open people up and those that close them down. Questions
work with incredible ease and the results are virtually
guaranteed, so be sure you know which is which.
Here's the difference. Open questions request an
explanation and thus require the other person to do the
90
talking. Closed questions elicit a "yes" or "no" response.
The problem with closed questions is that once you've
been given a response, you're back where you started—
and you'll have to think of another question to maintain
some semblance of conversation.
A simple formula for striking up a conversation:
Begin with a statement about the location or
occasion, then ask an open question.
It's a good idea to precede an open question with an
opening statement. The best type of rapport-inducing
statement is one linked to something you already have
in common with the other person: the meeting or party
you're attending, some fascinating current event—even
the weather will do in a pinch! We call this a location/
occasion statement. Examples include: "What an elegant
room." "Look at all that food." "It was a wonderful
service." "My wife knows a few of your piano pieces by
heart." "He never knew what hit him." That sort of thing.
Next comes the open question: "Where do you think
those vases came from?" "How well did you know him?"
The very fact that your question is open will guarantee
that you quickly receive free information.
Use opening-up words. Good conversation is like a
leisurely game of tennis with the words being pitched
backward and forward for as long as there is mutual
91
interest. When the words go off the court, it's time to
serve again. An open question is the equivalent of a wellaimed
serve.
Open questions begin with one of six conversationgenerating
words: Who? When? What? Why? Where? How?
These words invite an explanation, an opinion or a feeling:
"How do you know that?" "Who told you?" "Where do
you think this information comes from?" "When did you
come to that conclusion?" "Why should I be interested?"
"What good do these words do?" They assist us in establishing
rapport and making connections because
they oblige the other person to start talking and begin
opening up.
You can boost these conversation generators by
adding sensory specific verbs: see, tell and feel. In doing
this, you're asking the person to go into his or her
imagination and bring out something personal to show
you. "Where do you see yourself by this time next year?"
"Tell me why you decided on Bali for your vacation."
"How do you feel about calamari?"
Avoid closing-down words. These words will have you
playing tennis all on your own against a brick wall. The
opposite of opening-up words are these interrogatives:
Are you . . . ? Do you . . . ? Have you .. . ?
In other words, any questioning forms of the verbs
"to be," "to have" and "to do" will close off your chances
of rapport-inducing conversation. They elicit a one-word
92
reply: "yes" or "no." Then what? You have to ask another
question. You're going nowhere:
"Are you sure?"
"Yes."
"Do you come here often?"
"No."
"Have you ever thought how wonderful it would be
to just drop everything and go bungee jumping in the
middle of the afternoon?"
"Yes."
"Did you realize that no matter how long and interesting
you make your questions, if they begin with closingdown
words you're more than likely going to end up with
a one-word answer?"
"Oh."
For one whole day, do nothing but ask questions
and answer questions with a question. For variety,
ask only open questions. You'll soon get the idea.
In fairness, closing-down words do have their place—
police, customs officials and certain other regulators of
the people are taught to use them to get "straight"
answers. However, I'd like to remind any of you who have
had the pleasure of being on the receiving end of this
type of "conversation" that it probably didn't make you
like the person in 90 seconds or less!
93
There are times when you find yourself suddenly thrust
into the presence of someone who's just too good to
pass up. These delicious moments seem to coincide
with the exact second that your brain freezes over and
you go gaga: Help, what do I say? What do I do? Where
shall I look? What will people think? Keep going with this
line of self-questioning and you'll get the sweats, a palpitating
heart, a beet-red face and goofy body language.
The easiest of these situations is when the two of you
are thrust together: sitting next to each other on a train,
plane or bus; riding in an elevator; waiting in a Laundromat
or the lobby of a hotel; working in adjacent booths
at a trade show; or checking out the fruit to see if it's
ripe at the same counter at your local supermarket. In
these situations, you already have quite a bit in common
with which to work.
"Hi," "Hello" and "Good morning," accompanied by a
smile, are all good ways to begin and a great way to get
feedback. A returned smile is a good indication that
you're on the right track. Keep it simple and unimposing;
keep it courteous, happy and light. Don't get too
close and personal right up front, or you might get
excluded. You want people to say to their friends, "I met
this really nice guy this morning," not "This disgusting
pervert tried to hit on me."
94
Once you're sure the other person is responding
favorably to the interaction, you can try some more specific
opening lines. Not surprisingly, an opening line
works better if it's an open question, but you may not
always be able to find one that sounds natural. Sometimes
you might have to start with a closed question or
a location/occasion statement: "Do you know what time
this bank closes today?" or "Phew, that's quite a storm."
So make sure you have an open question ready for the
follow-up in case all you get in response is a yes or no.
Below are some examples of "openers" to try once
you've said hello or exchanged smiles. Precede them all
with a location/occasion statement.
Anywhere
Where are you from?
I've never been there. What's it like?
How did you end up here?
On a train, plane or bus
How long are you going to be in Duluth/Stratford/
Majorca?
Where are you from?
Have you always lived there? If yes, try: I've never
been there. What's it like? If no, then: So where else have
you lived?
95
How long will you be traveling for?
What do you think of Amtrak/Air Italia/these new
Greyhound buses?
An interesting aside: When meeting someone for the
first time, North Americans tend to ask, "What do you do?"
whereas Europeans prefer "Where are you from?"
At the supermarket
If you're both standing in the fresh-fish line, staring at a
pasta display or checking out avocados, you already have
something in common.
How can you figure out if there are enough mussels
in that bag for two people?
Can you tell me the difference between fresh pasta
and the stuff in a packet?
How can I tell if these are ripe?
Do you know where they keep the bags for the
produce?
Have you ever tried this kind of sauce/frozen dessert/
mushroom before? If yes, then: How does it taste?/What is
it like? If no: Is there another kind that you'd recommend?
How long would you cook a chicken this big?
I forgot to pick up some pickled octopus. Do you
mind saving my place in line? (This can be a good icebreaker
because you'll have an excuse to chat when you
get back—if only about the octopus. Don't be gone long,
though, or you'll risk annoying the other party.)
96
In a hotel/motel lobby
Do you know where I can I get a map?
Have you stayed here before? If yes: What's it like? If no:
Neither have I. So how did you come to choose this hotel?
Do you know this city at all? If yes: I've got only one
day here. What do you think is a must-see? If no: So what
brings you here?
At a convention
So where are you from?
What seminars have really grabbed you so far?
Do you know of any good restaurants outside of the
hotel?
What did you think of the keynote speaker?
I'm going to get a coffee. Can I bring you one, too?
(Note: This gambit works in countless situations as a way
to sound out other people's level of interest. Usually, if
they're not interested, they will refuse your offer. If they
accept, it often means they're willing to interact further.)
At the Laundromat
Where can you get change around here?
Do you know where I can buy some postage stamps/
orange juice/cat food?
I'm going to get a coffee—can I bring you one, too?
(See above.)
Does it really matter if you mix whites and colors?
97
In line at a movie/play/concert
Why did you pick this movie/play/concert?
So are you here to see Neve Campbell or what's her
name, the other star?
What did you think of the actor/author/performer's
last film/play/CD?
In a long waiting line: Can you save my place so I can
get a coffee? Can I get you one?
At an exhibition/museum/trade show/county fair
Wow, what do you think of that?
Do you know where the vintage locomotives are?
What's your favorite event/display/ride so far?
Have you seen the giant pumpkin yet?
Walking your dog or watching others walk theirs
He's adorable. What breed is he?
Great leash. Where did you get it?
So what are Chihuahuas really like, anyway?
Tip: Dog owners often end up socializing in public
places, but don't get a dog unless you truly love animals!
Running into someone you're familiar with but have
never plucked up the courage to talk to
Hi, I have a couple of tickets to a play/the circus/
a recital, and I was wondering if you'd like to join me.
Hi, I'm really nervous but I'd love to buy you a coffee.
98
In all of these situations, give the other person about
three chances to interact. If after three questions or
comments, he or she is clearly not responding enthusiastically,
don't make a pest of yourself. Disentangle graciously
by saying something simple like "Have a nice
day," "Enjoy the show," "Enjoy the rest of your flight/
trip/holiday," or whatever else is appropriate.
Free Information
It's actually easy to get free information from a stranger.
This doesn't mean trying to learn someone's credit-card
number. What it means is learning the other person's
name, interests, personal situation, and more. As you
will see, almost everybody is more than eager to give
away this information if it's requested in the proper way.
In fact, people will tend to follow your lead in offering
information. That's why you say your name first. And
the more you give, the more they will, too.
If you say, "Hi, I'm Carlos," you're likely to get "Hi,
I'm Paul."
If you start with "Hi, I'm Carlos Garcia," you'll probably
get "Hi, I'm Paul Tanaka."
And if you start with "Hi, I'm Carlos Garcia, I'm a friend
of Gail's," Paul will probably respond in a similar way:
"Hi, I'm Paul Tanaka, and I work with Gail's husband."
When you add information tags to your name, people
tend to respond to them because you've offered
99
Mike arrives at the train station five minutes earlier
than usual. It's a warm, misty morning, and there
are about 20 other people on the platform. Most
of the usual commuter crowd hasn't shown up yet. Mike
tucks his newspaper under his arm, stirs his coffee with a
plastic stirrer, then turns and flicks the stirrer successfully
into the garbage can just behind him. As he moves back to
his spot, he notices an auburn-haired young woman in a
dark gray suit walking toward him. The woman stops about
10 feet away and sits on a bench. She carefully places her
briefcase next to her and looks at her watch.
Mike casts a sideways glance at her, half closing his eyes
and pursing his lips slightly in appreciation. He has found
himself in this type of situation almost more often than he
cares to remember: eyeing someone, longing to approach
her and yet scared stiff at the prospect of making the connection.
This time, he reminds himself that all he wants to
do is start a conversation and get the young woman talking.
His objective is not to have dinner with her tonight, not
to go on holiday with her next Saturday, not to marry her
by the end of the month. Just to say a few words to see if
she wants to be friendly. He says the most obvious thing he
can think of:
"Hi, do you mind if I sit here?" -»
100
The woman moves slightly to her left. "No, I don't mind,"
she murmurs, and Mike sits down.
"I haven't seen you at the station before," he says.
"This is my first day," she responds. "I'm starting work
in an ad agency in town."
"The train gets pretty crowded at this time," Mike says,
"but sometimes you can get a seat all the way."
Mike missed out on the free information. First day,
ad agency. He should have picked up on this and used
the conversation starters: where, what, why, when, who
and how. What will you do there? Who are your main
clients? Where is the agency? How did you get the job?
All right, let's try it from a woman's point of view:
Dorita, a Web site designer, is walking along the platform
and sees an attractive if rather tired-looking man seated on
a bench. She sits down beside him and notices he's reading
the latest P.D. James mystery. P.D. James is her favorite
author! He smiles at her as she sits, and knowing that they
have the book in common, she smiles back.
But the man has gone back to reading. Dorita decides to
plunge ahead.
"So, are you a P.D. James fan?"
"No," says the man. "Would you believe this is only the
second mystery I've ever read?" -»
101
"Why is that?"
"I don't get much time for reading. I'm a resident at a
hospital in the city."
"Well, I've read all her books. She's my favorite mystery
author. Although I also like Dick Francis a lot."
What response can Dorita expect? The last thing out
of her mouth is a series of statements, not questions.
Dorita was on track with her second query, a "why"
question, but then she ignored the free information
that Joel had given her. Instead, she went on to talk
about herself. If she'd been tistening actively, she
would have followed up with "Which hospital? A resident
in what? Why did you pick that specialty?"—
the "where," "what" and "why" that would have led to
further conversation.
them the opportunity. If they don't respond, you've at
least set up the situation. They know what you want, so
give them a little encouragement. A raised eyebrow or a
straight-out "And you?" will spur them on.
The idea is to respectfully gather as much information
as possible by first offering information about yourself.
You can use this information to broaden and
deepen your rapport. This is something to get your
teeth into. You are building momentum.
102
Active Listening
istening is the other side of the conversation coin.
As a good active listener, you must demonstrate
that you're truly interested in the other person. The key
to being an active listener lies in making a sincere effort
to absorb what that person is saying and feeling.
Listening is different from hearing. You may hear
a cello as part of an orchestra, but when you actively
listen to that same cello, you're consciously focused on
every note and absorbing the emotion.
Active listening is an active attempt to grasp and
understand the facts and the underlying feelings of what
is being said. It does not mean giving up your own opinions
and feelings, but it does mean that you're there
to empathize as much as possible. You can show how
much you understand by giving the appropriate feedback.
Listen with your eyes. Listen with your body. Nod
your head. Look at the person. Keep your stance open
and leaning. Encourage the other person verbally.
A distinction should be made here between the
"parrot phrasing" school of listening and the "active"
school. Parrot phrasing, or paraphrasing, involves giving
back a more or less accurate version of what another
person has just said.
weaPthauelr: w"eH'voew b heaevne h ayvoiun gb?e"en affected by the terrible
103
Cathy: "I love heat waves like this, but the man I'm
seeing is threatening to move to Alaska without me and I
think he's actually serious."
Paul: "Sounds like even though you love heat waves,
you might have to move to Alaska if you want to stay
with the man you're seeing."
The active school means responding to feelings:
Paul: "Sounds like you have some big decisions to
make. Isn't it upsetting? How will you handle it?"
Simply put, with "parrot phrasing" it only sounds like
you're listening, whereas with active listening people
feel that you're listening and feel that you care.
Give spoken feedback. Get inside what the person is
saying. This kind of feedback ranges from "Primal Sighs"
and "International Grunts" like "Wow," "Aha," "Oh" and
"Hm" (as you can imagine, these are difficult to demonstrate
in a book) all the way to full-blown reactions like
"Oh, really," "And then what?" and "You're not serious.
So, what did she do?" Any kind of encouragement is welcome
in a conversation; it keeps the ball rolling and
shows that you're listening even though you're not saying
much.
Give physical feedback. Use open, encouraging body
language. Nod in agreement and use plenty of eye contact,
but don't stare. Look away in thought (looking at
your hands from time to time gives the impression of
participation). If you're sitting in a chair, move to the
104
front edge of your seat and look interested or enthusiastic.
If you're standing, point your heart at the other person,
nod from time to time, and look thoughtful,
surprised or amused, or whatever your Really Useful
Attitude inspires as an appropriate response to what the
person is saying.
Give and Take
With practice, easy, natural conversation will become
second nature to you. Here are some handy tips to
work on as you develop and improve. First, as ever,
assume a Really Useful Attitude. Be curious and show
concern for others. Encourage them to talk with you by
giving sincere feedback. Work toward finding common
interests, goals and experiences, and communicate with
enthusiasm, knowledge and interest.
Futility is doing the same thing over and over
again and expecting different results.
At the same time, hold up your own end of the conversation.
Speak clearly and deliberately. Slowing down your
rate of speech will make you feel more confident; so will a
low-key display of your sense of humor. It helps if you keep
abreast of current events and the issues that affect our
lives, so read a newspaper every day and be up to date on
105
All conversation, big or small, is about painting word
pictures of your experiences for other people. The
more vividly you can convey these experiences, the
more interesting people will think you are.
Here's a serviceable description of an everyday event:
"We stood in line for the streetcar for more than 20 minutes.
I was so fed up."
There's nothing here to engage the other person's imagination.
Instead of talking in black and white, learn to talk
in color. Involve as many senses as you can in your conversation.
Describe what things look like, what they sound like,
how they make you feel and, if appropriate, what they smell
and taste like:
" I t was amazing standing there in silence among all
those people. The rain had just stopped, and my collar was
wet. The lights of the buildings were shining in the puddles,
and the hot dog vendor behind us was wringing o u t . . . "
This is sensory-rich language, and the imagination—
yours and theirs—revels in it.
what's going on in the world—the big issues, at least. In
my seminars I have the participants prepare their own
"10-second commercial." It's really just a way of telling others
who you are and what you do in a few short sentences.
106
Be yourself. People will like you for who you are. The
more you learn to relax, the easier this will become.
Handling Compliments
Accept all compliments graciously. Do it simply. Do
it directly. Avoid the temptation to be too modest or
self-effacing. The standard two-word response to a compliment
is "Thank you." Then, if you choose to convert it
into a conversation, go ahead and do so. A compliment
with an interesting but less than gracious acknowledgment
might go as follows:
"Marion, that's a beautifully tailored skirt."
"Thanks, I got it for six bucks down at the Salvation
Army store."
A much simpler and rapport-enhancing response
would be "Thank you, it's nice of you to notice." Such a
compliment should also be acknowledged with eye contact,
a smile and a pleasant tone of voice.
Compliments are fine as long as they are sincere.
Exaggerated or false compliments destroy credibility
and endanger whatever rapport has been established.
Cheap flattery, tired cliches and patronizing remarks
reek of insincerity and can be insulting. On the other
hand, an honest expression of praise can reinforce selfconfidence
and even lift the rapport onto a more heartfelt,
personal level.
If you notice something good or interesting about
107
Sound Effects
Your tone of voice tells other people how you're feeling,
and a pleasing tonality can positively affect the way
they respond to you. Pleasing tonality occurs when your
voice comes from deep down in your body, from your
abdomen. It is deep, rich and infectious, compared to a
monotonous voice or high-pitched braying.
To improve your own tonality, practice breathing and
speaking from your abdomen. "Belly breathing," which uses
your lungs to the fullest, is the most calming and healthy
way to breathe. You breathe more slowly and with less
stress. Contrast this to chest breathing, which is the way
about 60% of the population get their air. Chest breathing
is panicky, fight-or-flight breathing—just a series of •*
someone, or a praiseworthy performance, then a compliment
is in order. Avoid general words like "nice,"
"good" and "great." "Nice suit"—big deal! "Blue really
suits you" sounds better. "You're such a good person"
sounds like a buildup to being dumped. "You bring out
the best in everyone"—now, that's a compliment.
Specific compliments usually come across as being
more sincere than general compliments. "Great soup"
won't stimulate your host or hostess as much as "Was
108
long pants. Naturally, if you breathe from your chest, you
will speak from the chest.
Put the palm of one hand gently on your chest and the
palm of the other gently on your abdomen. Practice breathing
until the hand on your chest doesn't move in and out and
the hand on your abdomen does. When you've got it, take
away your hands and just keep breathing that way—for the
rest of your life. You'll notice that when you get nervous or
excited, your breathing will return to your chest. Be aware of
this, and take it back down; you'll immediately feel calmer.
Repeat this exercise with your hands on the place where
your voice originates. Move your voice from your chest to
your abdomen. It should sound lower, richer and a little
slower—which is exactly the way you want it to be for
establishing instant rapport and making people like you in
90 seconds or less.
that the tiniest hint of fresh dill I just tasted? You've
done it again!" If you're complimenting performance,
take the trouble to go into detail. "You were wonderful
today" is not half as powerful as "You handled that question
about the nursing home without flinching. That was
an impressive strategy."
Deliver your compliment the same way you do your
greeting: open your heart and your body, look directly
at the person, speak with a clear, enthusiastic voice, give
109
specific praise and remember to give the person time
to respond.
Avoiding the Pitfalls
Read the list of "don'ts" below. If you catch yourself
doing any of them, you may have abandoned your Really
Useful Attitude or chosen a useless attitude by mistake:
Don't interrupt, and don't end other people's sentences
for them, no matter how enthusiastic or impatient
you might be.
Take Dale Carnegie's advice. Don't complain, don't
condemn and don't criticize.
Whenever possible, avoid giving one-word answers;
they don't usually qualify as conversation, and they put
a heavy strain on rapport. People who monopolize conversations
also trample all over rapport because there
is little or no room to find common ground. They just
come off as being rude or boring.
There's nothing quite so disconcerting as talking to
someone who is looking elsewhere. If this happens to
you, excuse yourself as fast as possible. People who do
this are incongruent and, frankly, just plain rude.
Finally, look out for bad breath and all the other
nasty personal hygiene stuff. No excuses here. Dragon
breath, BO and spinach in the teeth might not make you
any less lovable in the eyes of your golden retriever, but
they won't do anything for you at the office party.
no
What good is meeting someone for the first time, creating
a favorable impression and establishing rapport if two
weeks later the person has forgotten you? It's like writing
a terrific story on your computer and forgetting where
you filed it. Give other people a reason to remember you,
and they will. The mind delights in making connections.
You'll remember from Professor Mehrabian's work
on believability that face-to-face communication was
broken up into 55% the way we look, 38% the way we
sound and 7% the actual words we use. Something similar
holds true for memory. Other studies show that what
people see has about three times as much impact as
what they hear.
Ask yourself these questions: How can I stand out
from the rest? Is there a persona or some little touch of
style I can create for myself? All kinds of things can give
you an image: a fresh cornflower worn in the lapel or discreet,
very expensive frames for your eyeglasses; beautiful
vests, impeccable shoes, a bow tie, the Galloping
Gourmet's suspenders; Gillian Anderson's hair or Goldie
Hawn's laugh.
A friend of mine works for a national chain of megastores
that sell computers and stereos. "I used to spend
half an hour explaining the features of a product," she
told me, "and then the customer would go away to think
about it. He would come back another day, go up to the
i
Jill and Robin, two middle-aged ladies, are sitting
across from each other at a table in a French restaurant.
They're halfway through lunch when several people
are shown to a table nearby. A young woman in the
group recognizes Jill and lets out a gasp of delight. She had
been a student in one of Jill's classes several years ago.
After many hugs and exclamations,. Jill turns to her lunch
companion: "Robin, this is Edwina. She was one of my most
wonderful students back in my days irs Stratford. I'll never
forget—she had these rituals for organizing herself and her
work. Everything had its own special place and order at her
desk. Sometimes she drove me crazy, but it always used to
fascinate me how meticulous she was."
"Nice to meet you," Robin says, taking Edwina's hand.
"So tell me, Edwina, what are you doing these days?"
Jill asks.
Edwina proceeds to tell Jill about her work as associate producer
on a local TV show, and then adds: "There are quite a few
of us there from school. Do you remember Suzanne Sparks?"
"No, I'm sorry, I can't quite picture her," Jill says, searching
about with her eyes.
"You know, the one who always came to class in those
crazy leather vests."
"Oh yes, of course." Jill turns to Robin, including her -»
112
in the picture. "Suzanne was a terrific painter. I believe she
spoke Spanish and German, too. Does she still have that
mop of spiky red hair?" she asks, turning back to Edwina.
"No. She's long and blond now, and she's our director of
programming. And what about Torn"?" Edwina continues.
"She's at the station, too."
"Now, which one was Toni?" Jill asks.
"Toni March. She was always really friendly. Lived out in
Malton." When Jill gives no sign of recognition, Edwina
says: "She was such a hard worker."
"Sorry, dear, I can't quite place Toni. Who else?"
"Greg Cuddy. He's our sales manager."
"No! Not Greg with the nose ring?" Jill shakes her head
in disbelief. "Greg Cuddy was such a nervous young man. He
drove his mother's pickup truck everywhere. If memory
serves me correctly, he ran a train-spotting site on the Internet.
He published a newsletter and had people from . . . "
Jill invites Edwina to join them at their table, and her
friends at the other table order lunch without her as the
reminiscing continues.
The point of this story is that it's easy for Jill to recall her
former students when her memory is triggered by an image.
People are more likely to be remembered if they have some
kind of handle—some kind of device that makes them stand
out from the crowd.
113
first salesperson he saw and make the purchase. It
didn't matter that he had my card or that I gave him so
much time; the chances of his coming back to me personally
were slim. Then I hit on a way to be memorable.
Since I'm from Newfoundland, I tell customers to ask for
the 'Newfie' when they come back or phone the store."
In Canada, a "Newfie" is often the target of dumb,
stereotypical jokes, but my friend used this verbal
image to her advantage. It is a handle or, if you prefer, a
container to hold and access a whole package of previously
stored information.
Find something to set you apart from the rest. Give
them something to remember you by.
114
sensory input, and then we explain our experiences to
ourselves and to others. That's it. We go to bed and get
up the next day and experience all over again. This is
how we evolve. Obviously this is a major oversimplification,
but for the purpose of this chapter it gives us a
basic foundation on which to build.
This is where our Really Useful (or Useless) Attitude
originates. There are two ways of explaining our experiences
to ourselves and others. We call them explanatory
styles. Upon waking up in the morning and seeing that
it's raining outside, an individual with a negative
explanatory style might say, "Oh, heck, it's raining. It's
going to be a lousy day," whereas someone with a positive
explanatory style might say, "Hey, free car wash,
and great for the garden." The point is that the nature of
115
our explanations determines our attitudes, and people
have differing responses to the same external reality.
We can loosely categorize these responses into familiar
mind-sets and patterns. In the 1970s Richard Bandler
and John Grinder, the founders of Neuro-Linguistic Programming,
noticed in their early work with clients that
people could be roughly divided into three types,
depending on how they filtered the world through their
senses. They called these types Visual, Auditory and
Kinesthetic. For example, let's say three students go to a
rock concert. Judy is primarily Visual, Phyllis is Auditory
and Alex is Kinesthetic. When they later describe
their experience to their friends, Judy will paint word
pictures to tell what the concert looked like: "Oh, wow,
you should have seen it—all these people jumping about
and the singer ripped his pants and his toupee flew off!"
Phyllis will say what the concert sounded like: "The
music was incredible. The beat was deafening; everyone
was yelling and singing along. You should have heard it.
It was a real screamer!" Alex, who relates to feelings and
touch, will describe what it felt like: "Oh man, you could
just feel the energy. The place was packed. We could
hardly move, and when they played 'Blue Rodeo' the
whole place erupted."
In other words, Visuals tend to use picture words,
Auditories choose sound words and Kinesthetics favor
physical words.
116
the three ways in which we can be inspired: by something
we see externally, or internally in our mind's eye
as an image or a vision; by something we hear either
externally or emanating from that little voice inside; or
by something we feel or touch. Usually it's a combination
of these experiences that helps us interpret the
outside world, but one of these three senses—sight,
sound or touch—tends to dominate the other two.
To the untrained eye (or ear), all of us look, sound
and feel just like ordinary folks; however, to the trained
person there are subtle but important differences. As
you might imagine, an individual who gives primary
importance to the way things look will be concerned
with and influenced by appearances. Similarly, someone
to whom sound is important will respond to the
way things sound, and a person who experiences the
world through physical sensations will be concerned
117
What we are talking about here is a new dimension
of synchrony and rapport. This chapter will go beyond
attitude, body language and voice tone to the very way
our senses take in and literally make sense of the world
around us.
with the way things feel, both internally and externally,
through touch.
Last year I was listening to two politicians being interviewed
on the radio. They were both thinking of running
for the leadership of their party. When the interviewer
asked them to "voice their plans," one said, quite thoughtfully,
"I'm leaning heavily toward giving it a shot." The
much quicker response from the other man was "Now that
we have a clearer view of the future, I can see the possibilities."
The interviewer responded, "Sounds like you're
both ready to announce your intentions."
What do you reckon? Can you grasp the distinction?
The interviewer, using phrases like "voice your plans"
and "announce your intentions," was probably Auditory.
(In all fairness, that would be natural language to use on
the radio, but still a surprising number of radio hosts
turn out to be Auditory.) The first aspiring leader used
physical language—"lean heavily," "give it a shot"—and
spoke deliberately, indicating a Kinesthetic inclination.
The second hopeful candidate had "a clearer view" and
could "see the possibilities," and therefore came across
as pretty Visual to me.
Of course, no one is totally Visual, utterly Auditory
or 100% Kinesthetic. Naturally, we are a mixture of all
three. Yet, in every person, one of these systems (rather
like left- or right-handedness) dominates the other two.
118
Studies have shown that as many as 55% of all people in
our culture are motivated primarily by what they see
(Visual), 15% by what they hear (Auditory) and 30% by
physical sensation (Kinesthetic).
Take the self-test on pages 120-123, and you'll begin
to see why you connect easily with some people when
you first meet them but not at all with others, and why
you feel as if you know certain people even though
you've never seen them before. It comes down to natural
sensory harmony. When two Visuals meet, they are familiar
to each other because they see things the same way
(this doesn't mean they agree) and express their experiences
in the same way. The same goes for two Auditories
or two Kinesthetics. On the other hand, if the person you
meet sees, hears or feels the world in a different way
from yours, you need to learn how to recognize that fact
and how to adapt and tune in to his or her wavelength to
119
you'll probably say, "Oh, I'm a Visual, for sure." But you
might be in for a big surprise. Take the following test to
see how you tune in to the world. Choose only one answer
from each question, and circle the letter next to your
answer.
1) If only three rooms are left at a beach resort,
I'll choose the room that offers
a) An ocean view but lots of noise.
b) Sounds of the ocean but no view.
c) Comfort but lots of noise and no view.
2) When I have a problem,
a) I look for alternatives.
b) I talk about the problem.
c) I rearrange the details.
3) When riding in a car, I want the inside to
a) Look good.
b) Sound quiet or powerful.
c) Feel comfortable or secure. -*
120
4) When I explain a concert or event I've just attended,
I first
a) Describe how it looked.
b)Tell people how it sounded,
c) Convey the feeling.
5) In my spare time, I most enjoy
a) Watching TV or going to the movies.
b) Reading or listening to music.
c) Doing something physical (crafts/ gardening)
or playing a sport.
6) The one thing I personally believe everyone
should experience in his or her lifetime is
a) Sight.
b)Sound,
c) Feeling.
7) Of the following activities, I spend the most
time indulging in
a) Daydreaming.
b) Listening to my thoughts.
c) Picking up on my feelings.
8) When someone is trying to convince me of something,
a) I want to see evidence or proof.
b) I talk myself through it.
c) I trust my intuition. ->
121
9) I usually speak and think
a) Quickly.
b) Moderately.
c) Slowly.
10) I normally breathe from
a) High in my chest.
b) Low in my chest.
c) My belly.
11) When finding my way around an unfamiliar city,
a) I use a map.
a) I ask for directions,
c) I trust my intuition.
12) When I choose clothes, it is most important
to me that
a) I look immaculate.
b) I make a personal statement
about my personality.
c) I feel comfortable.
13) When I choose a restaurant, my main
concern is that
a) It look impressive.
b) I can hear myself talk.
c) I will be comfortable.
122
14) I make decisions
a) Quickly.
b) Moderately.
c) Slowly.
Tally:
a's =
b's =
c's =
a) is Visual, b) is Auditory and c) is Kinesthetic. The
higher the number in each category, the stronger the
tendency.
By taking this test, not only will you now have a
strong indication of how your three main senses stack
up, but you'll also begin to understand how people can
have differing priorities. However, there are many variables
at work here, not the least of which is that you
already knew the purpose of the test before you took it.
In my seminars, I generally have people complete this
test before they realize its significance.
Try it on a few friends and see how they fare. Use
their results to further your insight into being able to
recognize sensory preferences.
123
establish rapport that can lead to a meaningful friendship
or relationship.
To give you an idea of how sensory preferences impact
on our day-to-day life, let me tell you about my own situation.
I am Auditory and my wife is Kinesthetic. If we have a
falling out, Wendy knows to connect to me in my "language,"
with Auditory words. She gets my immediate
attention by saying, "Nick, you're not listening to me.
You're not hearing a word I'm saying." If she were to say,
"Can't you see what I'm saying" or, even worse, "Can't you
see how that makes me feel?" the truth is no, I could not.
Sure, I make the obvious intellectual connection, but
I have to stop and think about it; my brain has to take
the extra step of translating her language into something
I can relate to. When she sends a message on my Auditory
wavelength, she makes a direct connection—fast.
Conversely, if I want to connect directly to her sensibilities,
I say, "I know how you feel when that happens."
In other words, I use a touchy-feely, Kinesthetic approach.
Simple, yet extraordinarily effective.
Tuning In to Sensory Preferences
What do sensory types have to do with making
people like you in 90 seconds or less? More than
you might expect. When you can figure out other people's
sensory preferences, you can communicate on
124
The words "I have scoured the four corners of the
earth" tell a lot more than "I've looked everywhere";
they force the connection to scrutiny, diligence,
detail, determination and more. They also easily involve
sight, sound and feeling, and this is why metaphors appeal
simultaneously to Visuals, Auditories and Kinesthetics.
Visuals can picture them. Auditories can hear them and
Kinesthetics can get a feel for what's happening.
Metaphors are containers for ideas. They link our internal
imagination to external reality. We use metaphors regularly,
often unconsciously, to explain our thinking. We also use
them to make things more interesting. Parables, fables,
storytelling and anecdotes are some of the oldest and most
powerful communication tools we have, and their metaphorical
aspects are effective in virtually every setting. They fire
up the imagination and appeal to all the senses.
In short, metaphors help to make understanding easier,
quicker and richer.
their wavelength. If you want to better relate to your
spouse, win a judge over to your side of an argument,
make that sale, land that job or impress somebody at a
party, recognizing Visual, Auditory and Kinesthetic people
can be invaluable.
125
The day after one of my seminars, I received an
excited phone call from a woman who had been sitting in
the audience. Her name was Barbara, and she owned a
flooring store.
"It's incredible!" she said. "It's nine-thirty, we've been
open for an hour and I've just sold to my fifth out of five
customers. I've never done that before!
"This is perfect for my business," she continued,
referring to my lecture on figuring out the Visual, Auditory
and Kinesthetic people we come across in the
course of our daily adventures. "The first four sales were
probably normal, even though I was aware of what I'd
learned. But the fifth . . . This lady came into the shop
dragging her husband along with her. It was obvious that
he didn't want to be there. I figured out immediately that
he was a feeler, a Kinesthetic, and within 30 seconds
I had him on his hands and knees feeling the carpet.
And they bought it.
"I just knew that if I'd said to him, 'Imagine how this
will look in your house,' he couldn't do that because he's
not Visual. Or if I'd said, 'You'll discover just how quiet
it'll be when your kids run around on it,' he wouldn't
connect to that, either, because he doesn't think that
way—he's not Auditory. I knew by the way he dressed
and moved and spoke that he was Kinesthetic, so I said,
'Just feel it.' And he did. Just like that. He got down on
the floor and felt it."
126
Find out what you're getting. Change what you do
until you get what you want. These are the "F"
and "C" in our KFC. Figure out which sense a
person relies on most and change your approach
to take this into consideration.
If you're not sure how to handle a situation, don't
worry. Be prepared to include all three preferences in
your approach. Look good for the Visuals; after all, they
make up over half the people you're likely to see during
your day. Sound good; develop your pleasing tonality
for the Auditories to whom you'll be speaking. And be
sensitive and flexible for the Kinesthetic folk you'll be
bumping into. And, of course, if you're dealing with a
group, the same thing applies. Your group will be made
up of all three categories, and you'll want to appeal to
all of them.
Above all, remember that the ability to tune in to the
way other people experience the world can be one of the
most important discoveries of your life.
A few months ago I gave the opening address at a
home builders' convention. During my talk, I used roleplaying
(with me playing all the roles) to illustrate some
of the behavioral differences that Visual, Auditory and
Kinesthetic people display in face-to-face communication.
At the end of the talk, a big, tough-looking but well-
127
Despite the good Colombian coffee and fresh croissants,
the O'Connors are not enjoying a very pleasant
breakfast.
"It's a bright yellow Maseratii" exclaims John. "It's gorgeous!
Can't you just picture the two of us blazing down the
highway to the coast?"
"Actually, I can't," says Lizzie icily, "All I can hear are
the monthly car bills dropping through our mail slot. I don't
think you ever listen when I tell you we have more important
things to spend money on . . ."
John stomps out of the house in a rage, but that evening,
after leaving work, he buys a luxurious, multicolor silk scarf
for Lizzie in an attempt to win her over. Arriving home, he
finds her in the living room and hands her the exquisitely
wrapped box.
"And what is this for?" Lizzie asks distantly as she
removes the scarf from its box. "What's the occasion?"
"Why, it's just to show how much I love you!" protests
John, feeling rejected.
"A scarf doesn't tell me anything!" Lizzie snaps. She
walks crisply out of the room.
John slumps down on the couch, slowly winding the
expensive scarf around his hand and tightening it until his
fingers throb with pain. -»
128
What happened here? John is Visual. He makes sense
of the world primarily through what he sees: the yellow
Maserati, his "picture" of them in the car, the multihued
scarf. Lizzie is Auditory. She hears the car bills dropping
through the mail slot; she doesn't think John "listens"
when she "tells" him something.
Can this marriage (or at least the hoped-for Maserati
purchase) be saved? You bet. A pair of concert tickets to
Lizzie's favorite band— something that appeals to her
ears—would sound much better to her. Here's how John
could have handled it had he been more sensitive to the
way Lizzie hears the world:
"I'm really sorry, Lizzie," declares John in a soft, pleasant
voice (after giving her the tickets). He proceeds to use
some "auditory" words with his wife. "I'll tell you what—
let's put some harmony back in this house and talk it
through a bit. Does that sound okay to you?"
Lizzie nods, taking in the suddenly more acceptable
words and the meaning they convey.
"Have I told you how the Maserati purrs like a kitten and
shifts so quietly you can barely hear it?" John asks
sweetly. "And wait until we discuss the surprisingly reasonable
payments."
"Oh, I finally see the picture you're painting, John," says
his wife. "It's all so clear to me now!"
129
groomed man pulled me to one side. He was very emotional
and looked like he was on the verge of tears. Shaking
his head from side to side, he began, "I don't know
what to say. I'm leaving right now to go to my son's
school and give him a hug." He was choking up. "For
years, I've been furious with him. When I talk to him, he
turns his head away and doesn't look at me. It drives me
crazy, and I yell at him, 'Look at me when I'm talking!' He
hardly ever looks me straight in the eye when I'm giving
him instructions. From everything you've said, you've
made me realize that he's Auditory, and he's not ignoring
me when he looks away. He's turning his ear toward me
so he can concentrate. And me, I'm Visual, I need eye
contact." He pumped my hand and left.
It's amazing. Things like this go on right under our
noses every day of our lives and we never realized—
until now, that is.
130
how they respond to you. This chapter deals with picking
up the initial cues that other people give us without
knowing it. Whether Visual, Auditory or Kinesthetic,
their signals are there for us to interpret and utilize in
establishing rapport.
In the question period at the end of one of my seminars,
a middle-aged woman in the second row asked
slowly, "Do you feel that it's hard to put your finger on
what a person's sensory preference is?" This delightful
woman wore a big, comfortable knit coat and was
twiddling her finger slowly through her hair as she
spoke. I thanked her for the question and immediately
asked her not to move. Obviously a very good-natured
131
person, she froze in position. "I'm going to ask you to
repeat your question in exactly the same way," I said
to her. "But I want the rest of the audience to observe.
Is that okay?" She nodded, paused and repeated her
question, complete with hair twiddling. There was a
collective smile from the other people in the audience
as they understood what they had just witnessed. Then
the lady herself looked up toward the top of her head
and chuckled.
Her choice of the words "feel," "hard" and "put your
finger on," her easy way of speaking, her comfortable coat,
her slightly full figure and her habit of playing with her
hair were quite the giveaways. She had dropped enough
clues to give the whole audience a strong indication as to
what this woman's sensory preference might be.
You weren't there, but what sense do you think she
most relies on?
You're right on if you said Kinesthetic.
Sensory Preference Profiles
Each group displays subtle differences in physical and
mental makeup. These are definitely not hard-andfast
distinctions. They are simply indicators. Visuals,
Auditories and Kinesthetics can come in all shapes and
sizes. We are dealing with people here, unique individuals
with unlimited beliefs and values, opinions and
132
talents, shades and sparkles, innuendos and dreams.
Each one is different; yet, deep down, there are fundamental
similarities. Find a person who strongly favors
one sense in a number of the areas discussed in this
chapter, and chances are that he or she will be signaling
a personal sensory preference.
A quick tip:
Visuals usually talk very fast.
Kinesthetics tend to talk slowly.
Auditories fall somewhere in between.
As you become aware of the differences among these
three groups of people, Visual, Auditory and Kinesthetic,
what seems subtle at first will become more and more
obvious to you.
Perhaps you've had the experience of buying a new
car. Let's say you bought a nifty little blue Miata. Very
unique? Not quite. Suddenly blue Miatas are everywhere.
Whereas before you only noticed them once in a great
while, you start to see them all over the place. Of course,
these cars were there all the time—they just held no
interest for you.
When you become more accomplished at distinguishing
one person from another, the same thing will happen.
The distinctions will reveal themselves before your eyes.
And yet they've been there all the time.
133
TV talk shows are a great place to brush up on your
preference-spotting talents. The late shows, where
everyone tends to overdress, are usually not the best
venues for this exercise. Far better are the interview shows
with hosts like Charlie Rose or Larry King or local talk shows
where people are more themselves.
Turn down the volume and try to figure out—through
physical appearance, hand gestures, eye movements and
clothing—whether the person is a V, an A or a K. Then turn
up the volume and listen to the words, the pace of speech
and the tonality of the voice.
You can do the same with radio interviews. Concentrate
on the words. Radio talk shows are a mine of information
about sensory preferences. You can practice while you're
stuck in traffic.
Take it slowly. Have fun.
Visuals
Visual people care a lot about how things look. They
need to see proof, or evidence, before they take anything
seriously. Being visualizers, they think in pictures
and wave their hands around, sometimes touching their
pictures when talking. Pictures come quickly into their
mind's eye, so they think clearly; this makes them the
134
fast talkers among us. Sometimes they are the ones with
the monotonous voices. Visuals frequently look up to
the left and right when they speak. When it comes to
their wardrobe, they tend to be snappy, impeccable
dressers who put a lot of work into looking good and
surrounding themselves with good-looking stuff. Physically,
because they are concerned with appearances,
they aim to be trim and tidy. When they stand and sit,
their body and head will usually be upright.
You will find Visuals working where confident, fast
decisions are needed or where specific procedures are
to be followed. They want to have control because they
probably have some kind of vision of how things should
be. Many—but definitely not all—visual artists fall into
this category.
Auditory people respond emotionally to the quality of
sound. They enjoy the spoken word and love conversation—
but things must sound right for them to tune in
and give their attention. They have fluid, melodic, sensitive,
persuasive, expressive voices. "Audis" move their
eyes from side to side as they talk and gesture somewhat
less than Visuals; but when they do, it's from side to side,
like their eye movements. When it comes to clothes, they
think they are snappy dressers. They like to make a statement
with their clothing—and sometimes they don't
135
quite make it. Physically, they are somewhere in between
the trim Visuals and the comfortable Kinesthetics.
Audis work where words and sound are the currency.
Many broadcasters, teachers, lawyers, counselors and
writers are Auditory.
Kinesthetics
For our sensitive "Kinos," things have to be solid, well
constructed and right-feeling in order for them to go
along. They have lower, easygoing voices and gestures.
Some Kinesthetics have been known to speak unbelievably
slowly and add all sorts of unnecessary details that
can drive Visuals and Auditories to the point of wanting
to yell, "Please, for heaven's sake, get to the point!"
That's just the way many of them are. The fact of the
matter is that it takes longer to put feelings into words
than it does to translate pictures or sounds into words.
When they speak, Kinos will look down, toward their
feelings. They enjoy the ways things feel. They like textured
clothing with quiet tones. Any man with permanent
facial hair may well be Kinesthetic. You'll find Kinos
in hands-on positions: plumbers, electricians, carpenters,
product salespeople and workers in the arts, medicine
and the food business.
Physically, there are two types of Kinos: in one group
are the athletes, dancers, emergency services and
trades folk, the superfit types for whom the physicality
136
This simple technique has proved helpful in determining
a person's sensory preference. Start by asking a
couple of nonspecific questions: "Do you live in the
city or out in the suburbs?" followed up, after the response,
by "Do you like it?"
If the answer is yes, ask, "What do you like most about
it?" (If the answer is no, follow with "What don't you like
about it?")
As the reasons are given, push for more. Expanding on
answers tike "Well, for one thing, it's peaceful" can be
encouraged by the question "What else?" And don't stop
there. Pursue your line of questioning until you have enough
verbal cues to get a handle on the person's favorite sense.
of touch and contact are paramount; in the other group
are the sensitive, laid-back, down-to-earth, bighearted
types who may have a higher proportion of heavier bodies
among their number.
Matches and Mismatches
You can probably see for yourself that the chances of
establishing a loving relationship with someone "like"
you are high. But is this always a good idea? Yes and no.
If you want to spend your life with someone very much
137
like you, then yes. But what if you want some spark and
excitement?
I am frequently asked whether there is any validity in
the age-old aphorism that opposites attract. The answer
is yes, they most definitely do. But how? And what do
they attract?
First let me say that this book is about establishing
rapport and making people like you. If rapport and liking
lead to friendship and romance, that's up to you. I like,
trust and care about a lot of people, but they are not all
my friends and they are definitely not my partners.
Falling for someone romantically is more complex. Many
of the old classic languages refer to three different types
of love or affection. Roughly translated, they include
general, brotherly and sexual love. When all three are
present, a relationship is indeed rich.
In my opinion, and it has no scientific basis other
than my close enough acquaintanceships with more
than 35 couples whose relationships have lasted more
than 20 years and are still vibrant, the following observation
holds true. Relationships that have endured more
than 20 years have an interesting pattern of sensory
preference. They are complete opposites.
You'll remember from the self-test in Chapter 8 that
the tally at the end allowed you to rank your preferences.
Let's use my own rating as an example. I ranked
first A, then V and last K, or AVK. The complete opposite
138
of my ranking would be KVA. Stack these side by side
and they look like this:
A K
V V
K A
This would give us opposites at the top, A and K,
for spark and interest, but the same in the middle—
in this case, V. The relationship is held together by the
common visual link, a mutual subconscious sharing
of the same wavelength. And the relationship is kept
vital by the opposing A and K as primary personal sensory
preferences.
My observation is that when two people "meet in the
middle" and share a central sensory preference, whether
Visual, Auditory or Kinesthetic, it is that bond that will
get them through the rough times and add sparkle to the
good times. Any shared sensory preferences, be they primary,
secondary or tertiary, will work in the favor of the
relationship when the going gets tough.
Visual Words
A tendency to favor "picture" words and metaphors—
"if we look more clearly," "the difference was like night
and day"—may be a strong indication that the person
relies mainly on the visual sense.
For one entire day—from dawn to dusk—focus on
the Visual words and phrases that you hear in other people's
vocabulary. Notice them until they appear as clear
as the three extremely visual words I just used in this
one sentence. The list of picturesque words below will
give you perspective and focus as you observe people
who scrutinize the world with their eyes. Then demonstrate
how well you can use these Visual words. Make
the effort in your conversations with other people to
"talk in color" by painting word pictures. Describe your
experiences vividly so other people can "see" them.
analyze colorful focus
angle conspicuous foresee
appear dark fuzzy
aspect diagram glance
blind dim view glare
bright dull glimpse
brilliant enlighten glow
clarity envision hide
clear examine hindsight
140
illuminate oversight scrutinize
illusion notice show
imagine peek sketch
inspect perception staring
light perspective survey
looks great picture view
mental picture plainly vision
mind's eye portray vivid
obscure reflect watch
observe reveal witness
outlook see zoom in
141
announce divulge outspoken
articulate earful overtones
babble earshot phrase
blabbermouth express yourself proclaim
boom gossip pronounce
call (me) harmonize question
chime hear quiet
clang hidden message rasp
clash hush remark
click idle talk report
converse inquire resonate
crashing (bore) listen resounding
deaf loud roar
debate manner of speaking rumor
describe in detail mention say
discuss noisy scream
142
shout talk utter
shrill tell vocal
silence tinkling well-informed
speak tone whine
speechless tongue-tied word-for-word
squawk tune in/out yell
state unheard of
143
Kinesthetic Words
The following physical words are the currency of the
Kino. Tap into the emotions around you until you get a
handle on how they flow. Overcome any and all stumbling
blocks. Build a firm foundation on which you can
base your own contact with other people. Use those
concrete, touching words that move Kinesthetic people,
thanks to their sensitivity to feelings.
bearable grasp push
boils down to hand-in-hand rush
break handle sensitive
catch on hard set
cold heated shallow
come to grips with hold sharp
concrete hunch shift
connect hurt shocking
dig intuition smooth operator
emotional light-headed softly
explore make contact solid
feel motion sort through
firm muddled squeeze
(go with the) flow nail stir
foundation pain in the neck strain
freeze pressure stress
144
stretch throw out underhanded
structured tied up unfeeling
support topsy-turvy unravel
tap into touch unsettled
tension unbearable warm
145
Over the years, I have shot more fashion magazine
covers with more models in more countries than I
can remember, and frequently the models' first language
was not English. When all you have to work with is a
face, neck and shoulders (and, of course, the extraordinary
talents of hair, makeup and fashion stylists), you
soon realize that, besides subtle tilts and leans, most of
the "innuendo" suggested by this kind of close-up comes
from facial expression—from the eyes and mouth. When
you want a model to smile, you don't tell her to smile.
You make her smile.
To initiate eye movements, there are a few code words
that always seem to work in any language. When you
want your subject to look up and to the side, it's enough
to say, "Just dream," and up go the eyes to one side or
the other. Words such as "secret" or "telephone" will send
the eyes sideways toward the ears, and "sad," "romantic"
or "thoughtful" will normally send the eyes down and to
the left or right.
Once again, the originators of NLP had observed
these phenomena of eye movements and codified them
into an intriguing paradigm. On the basis of their findings,
we can think of the human eyeball as a six-way
switch that must be flicked into any one of six positions
as it searches for information—each position activating
146
a sense, sometimes to remember, sometimes to create
an answer.
If you ask a man to tell you the color of his favorite
shirt, you may see him look up and to his left as he pictures
the shirt before he gives you an answer. Ask a
woman to tell you what silk feels like, and chances are
she'll look down and to her right as she remembers how
silk feels in her mind. In other words, when asked a
question, people often have to look away in order to generate
the answer. The reason is quite simple: they are
accessing their senses.
Keep your eye on the ball. Turn down the sound
on your TV during an interview and watch the
guest's eyes hunt about for answers to the interviewefs
questions.
Before you read any further, go and ask someone
a question. Without telegraphing your intent, look
the person in the eye and ask a nonspecific question
such as "What did you like most about your last holiday
(or birthday or job)?" Then watch as the person's eyes
dart off to get the information. This will give you a fairly
good idea of how he or she stores and accesses information,
i.e., as pictures, sounds or feelings. Consistent
references to one sense are also an indication of sensory
preference.
147
People who answer such questions while looking up
to the left or right are most likely visualizing their
answer. If they look left or right toward their ears, they
are probably recalling sound information. If they look
down to the left, they may well be accessing their feelings,
and down to the right indicates some type of
internal dialogue. Research has varying views as to the
validity of these NLP eye cues, but I find them fairly
accurate, and most importantly they lead to proactive
eye contact for many people who are often too shy to
look another person directly in the eye without discomfort.
Another valuable detail to be aware of here is that
when we look to the left, we are remembering information,
while looking the other way, to the right, means we
are constructing it.
Keep in mind that when you converse with someone,
there may be several mental activities going on at once.
For example, a fellow asks a young woman, "Seen the latest
Bruce Willis movie?" "Yes, I have," she says, going
into her mind and picturing herself in the waiting line
as she remembers. But at the same time she's having
an internal dialogue: "What a boring twit. Am I judging
too quickly? No, he's a bore. How can I dump him?"
Then he says, "Wanna go out Saturday night?" Grasping
for any excuse, she finally mutters, "Gosh, I can't,
I have to, er, finish off a report for a Monday morning
148
Brain Lock
Challenge a friend to answer the following questions
without moving his eyes. Tell him to look directly at you
at all times and to keep his eyeballs perfectly still. Then
ask the first question:
"Do you like the house (apartment or whatever) you
live in?"
Depending on whether he answers yes or no, ask this
follow-up question:
"Quickly list six things you like (or don't like) about
where you live."
Either your friend will be completely tongue-tied, or he'll
find himself struggling to think of his answer. Searching for
how things look, sound or feel without any eye movement is
almost impossible. He'll be like a rabbit paralyzed in the
grip of a car's headlights.
Hypnotists know that if they can stop your eyeballs from
moving, you won't be able to think. A meditative state is
easily accessed in the same way. Stare at a stationary spot
with your eyes open, or place your attention in one spot—
your forehead, for example—with your eyes closed. Provided
you can keep your attention fixed, you will stop your inner
dialogue and lose all sense of time.
149
deadline," her eyeballs dart off to the other side as she
constructs a picture of herself at the kitchen table with
her laptop.
Feeling a bit confused? Look at this diagram:
To avoid all confusion, imagine that this diagram is
pasted on the forehead of the person you're facing.
Don't worry about the person's left vs. your right; simply
look at the diagram as if you were directly facing the
other person. (In general, the directions apply to righthanded
people, who make up 90% of the population.)
Incidentally, these actions are not the same as the
movements your eyeballs make when you look around a
room or across a landscape—they are totally independent
of the requirements of the ability to see. Your eyeballs
serve two purposes: 1) roving about to see what's
going on; 2) activating sensory memory channels.
150

It's her 40th birthday, and Ingrid has decided to treat
herself to an all-inclusive holiday in Portugal. She's
wandering through her neighborhood mall when she
discovers a travel agency that she hasn't noticed before.
There she meets Sheldon, who runs the place, and tells him
of her exciting plans.
"I just feel I need to get away and pamper myself at
long last!" Ingrid says to Sheldon as she sits down in a
chair facing his desk. She smooths out her dress over her
knees and looks down to her right. "I'm under so much
pressure at work that I really need to unwind." Sighing,
she crosses one leg over the other, leans forward and
shakes her head slightly. "The tension at the office is eating
me alive."
Sheldon is delighted. An obvious sale is sitting right
there in front of him. He leans back in his chair, opens ->
When you first begin looking for eye cues, people's
eyes may appear to dart about randomly. All you need is
a little practice at reading these movements.
Have fun, let it happen naturally and, above all, never
tell anyone what you're doing. That would, quite rightly,
make people self-conscious and embarrassed. Keep
these skills to yourself.
152
his arms wide, then slaps his hands together sharply and
smiles at Ingrid.
"Oh boy," he says, "have I got the dream vacation for
you." He riffles through a pile of brochures on his desk.
"Just feast your eyes on this!"
He hands Ingrid a colorful brochure plastered with the
usual palm trees and bright blue skies, then continues his
pitch without waiting for her reaction:
"Looks fantastic, eh? Check out the color of the water—
brilliant turquoise! Look at these cute villas with their redtiled
roofs! And cant you just see yourself on that long white
stretch of beach?" He looks up and to his right, just imagining
the view.
Ingrid slides back in her chair, her heart sinking. Somehow,
despite the gorgeous pictures in the brochure, despite
Sidney's passionate descriptions, Portugal feels farther
away than ever.
What's the problem? -»
You guessed it. Ingrid understands the world through
her feelings. Look at her words: she "feels" that she
wants to "pamper" herself; she longs to "unwind" from
the "pressure" and "tension" at her office. Her language,
intonation and gestures are a giveaway. She
looks down toward her feelings. What counts most to
Ingrid is the way things feel.
If Sheldon had been watching for cues, he would have
gently led her toward a feeling of confidence and anticipation
and warmth. "Okay, Ingrid," he would have said.
"I follow you. I know what you mean about pressure, and
I have just the place for you. I've actually been there
myself. The sand is warm and soft, and, oh, the feet of
those gentle waves as they break over you and around
you! And the beds in these particular villas are amazingly
comfortable and cool..." He would have accessed the
same channel that Ingrid has been tuned in to for the
past four decades.
Sheldon should have taken the four steps of rapport
by design to "connect" with his customer: 1) adopting
a Realty Useful Attitude to lead her toward his goal;
2) synchronizing her body language and voice tone during
their conversation; 3) using open questions and
actively listening to her responses; and 4) picking up
on her sensory preferences along the way.
154
you will be able to communicate with him or her on a
more appropriate wavelength, be it Visual, Auditory or
Kinesthetic.
In this way, you will be hours—sometimes years—
ahead of where you would have been if you had
not known how to figure out an individual's sensory
preference.
Developing a knack for detecting sensory preferences
means paying close attention to others—
and this alone makes you more people-oriented.
On the next pages you will find four quick, written
exercises that will help you consolidate your learning.
Photocopy these pages or just write in the book. Fill in
what you can without referring back to this chapter or
to the chapter before it.
Auditories will want to talk their way though these
exercises and tell themselves the answers, and Visuals
will want to picture the answers in their head, but the
answers must be written down. Writing down the
answers will oblige you to use all three senses—and
that's the quickest way to incorporate this information
into your memory and your life skills.
After you've filled in as much as you can, flip back
over the previous pages to add to your answers.
155
156
157
158
159
The foregoing "clues" in spotting sensory preferences
are generalizations, of course. But when several of these
generalizations point in the same direction, the chances
are pretty good that you have discovered the primary
way a person perceives the world. This will be your most
effective tool in establishing rapport and connecting with
others.
160
what they do for granted. It's in the "letting go" that the
people, things and events in your life flow easily. This is
the difference between those who struggle and get
nowhere, and those who appear to do very little and
have everything.
The more you act upon what you have learned here,
the more you will effortlessly just assume rapport with
other people. Of course, you must practice, but soon
it will be as natural as riding a bike or swimming—
two other skills you only accomplished on the day you
let go of worrying and had faith.
This book is about connecting with your greatest
resource: other people. It's about establishing rapport,
an instant bond, with them as you join together mentally.
You have seen that rapport is the link between
161
meeting and communicating, and how the quality and
depth of the rapport you establish can affect your outcome.
Rapport can happen naturally or by design.
We have looked at the meaning of communication as
the response you get and how, in order for your communication
to achieve its desired outcome, a little KFC can
go a long way—in fact, not just in communication but in
all areas of your life where you want a positive result.
The basic template for greeting someone new is:
Open—Eye—Beam—"Hi!"—Lean. You are first with the
open body language, eye contact, smile and "Hi," and
the lean sets you up for synchronizing. You can remember
that when you point your heart at another person
you convey your openness.
You can choose your attitude. A Really Useful Attitude
is paramount to how others perceive you and how
you feel about yourself. You know that your attitude
keeps you congruent, or believable, according to the
three "V's" of communication. In other words, when you
have a Really Useless Attitude like anger, you look angry,
sound angry and use angry words—all unappealing.
Conversely, it's easy to make yourself likable when you
adopt a Really Useful Attitude, let's say, welcoming,
because you will look welcoming, sound welcoming and
use welcoming words.
We have covered body language, open and closed,
and seen how, along with facial expressions and ges-
162
tures, it makes up 55% of what other people get from us.
That's why it is so valuable in synchronizing for rapport
by design.
When we say "I like you" to someone, what we really
mean is "I am like you." In rapport by design, we don't
wait hopefully to see if we have things in common; we
move straight into synchronizing the body language,
voice tone and words of the person we are meeting. We
know that we have unconsciously been synchronizing
emotional feedback all our lives from the people who
have influenced us—parents, peers, teachers, and so
on—and therefore it's easy and natural to synchronize
other people in order to make them feel comfortable
with us.
In terms of talking with a new acquaintance, we have
seen that questions are the generators of conversation
and that they fall into two categories: open and closed.
Open questions open people up, and that's the goal of
conversation. You know that giving physical and spoken
feedback will "keep the ball in play." Conversation is
about describing your experiences to others, and the
more colorfully you can do it, the more you can "talk in
color," the better they can imagine and share your experiences—
and as a consequence increase the bonding
and rapport you are creating by design.
You have learned, to your surprise and delight, that
every person you meet or already know presents you
163
with a sensory puzzle. Do they prefer to connect on a
Visual, Auditory or Kinesthetic wavelength? You have
begun developing insight into their perceptions of the
world around them.
In fact, even if you have begun to implement the techniques
in this book and gotten it all wrong—you are still
getting it right! You are being proactive with people, as
opposed to reactive or passive. There is no downside;
you can't lose. If you are carefully observing people's
body language and expressions, listening to their words,
watching their eye movements, giving feedback and
making conversation—you are being proactive and they
can't help but like you. As long as you have a Really Useful
Attitude.
Where Do I Start?
Let me reiterate that this is not a new way of being,
not a new way of life. I haven't given you a magic
wand to rush out into the street with and start tapping
people over the head to make them like you. These are
tools and techniques that help you establish rapport
quickly.
We have covered the four basic areas of making
people like you in 90 seconds or less: attitude, synchronization,
conversation and sensory preferences. Improvement
in any one of these areas will increase your ability
164
to communicate effectively and quickly with other people.
As you learn to incorporate all four stages into your
face-to-face encounters, the effects will become more and
more apparent.
You know why you connect naturally with some people
and not with others, and since starting the book you
have probably already begun to improve your relationships
at home and at work. You are approaching people
with increased confidence and sincerity and enjoying
each new experience. And you have realized that you
already possessed most of the skills needed for making
natural connections with other people.
The more you use the many tools we have shared
throughout this entire book—from the image you project
with a Really Useful Attitude to the sincerity and
charisma you impart in your greeting, from the comfort
and empathy generated by synchronizing to the ability
to recognize which sense a person most relies upon—
the more you'll be able to establish rapport with ease
and make people like you in 90 seconds or less.
If I had to assign a priority to these four aspects, a
Really Useful Attitude stands alone in its power to generate
good feelings in yourself and in others. Attitude is
infectious and obvious, and it precedes you. Your attitude
carries the coherent focus of your body language,
your voice tone and the words you use. You will notice
an immediate improvement in your rapport skills the
165
moment you begin to manage your attitude. On the
flip side, if not properly managed, your attitude will
work against you—just as fast. Attitude can attract
or repel.
Next, without doubt, is the amazing power of synchronizing.
As you have seen, synchronization is part of
our natural makeup, and it's what we already do unconsciously
with those people we like. When you meet
someone and you want to establish quick rapport, start
synchronizing immediately. It will feel odd at first unless
you've done the exercise on synchronizing in groups of
three (see page 82), in which case you'll wonder how
you ever got along without it. Two or three days are
ample to become proficient, even brilliant, in this
department. After all, you've been doing it your whole
life, in one way or another, with the people who are close
to you.
As your conversation skills improve and you encourage
the other person to do plenty of talking, you will find
yourself having time to make observations about sensory
preferences. Let this come gently. Do you remember
those Magic-Eye books from the early '90s? You'd
gaze at some weird-looking picture and slowly, eventually,
your eyes would refocus and you'd see a picture in
3-D. Discovering sensory preferences is like that. You
look and you search, and you get frustrated, and then
suddenly you refocus on people and they start to look
166
different as you establish an elegant, deep rapport at the
subconscious level, where true unity is achieved. The
unfolding and detection of someone's sensory preference
will continue after your 90 seconds and give you the
vehicle to travel much deeper into rapport by design
with your new person—your newest great resource.
So, you're at a conference and you've just met Sylvie
Clairoux, the head of the department you'd like to work
for. The connecting is smooth, warm, sincere and
respectful; your Really Useful Attitude and openness
made for a perfect "greeting." Although there are seven
people at the meeting, you synchronize her body movements
but with no excess eye contact. Her subconscious
picks it up. There is chance eye contact, she smiles
politely, you acknowledge—BINGO! You've been practicing
this daily and have easily realized by her dress, her
voice, her choice of words, eye movements and tonality
that she's probably Auditory. When you speak, you
synchronize her voice tone and use Auditory words
("That sounds great!" . . . "Everybody on the team has
voiced an opinion"). How can this stranger not like you
when you look, sound and move so much like her? At the
break, you get her to one side.
"I'd like to hear more about the proposal," you begin.
"Haven't we met before?" Ms. Clairoux asks.
"I think she likes you!" whispers the little voice in
your head.
167

Assumptions at their best are great for learning, but
at their worst they lead to biased, unfair, limiting and
dangerous fantasies. If your imagination has been distorting
information to scare you away from people,
all I ask is your understanding that your imagination
is tricking you into making negative assumptions
about people based on past experience. In this case,
your imagination is running the show and the score is
Imagination one, You zero.
Get your imagination under control. See it for the fun
vehicle it is and use it to install some Really Useful
Assumptions. Here are a few to get you going. After
reading them, close your eyes and see what they will
look, sound and feel like:
Assume rapport and trust between yourself and
other people.
Assume/trust that you will like them and that they
will like you.
Assume that what you'll be doing with other people
—connecting, synchronizing, etc.—will work.
Assume that others will give you the benefit of the
doubt, and you will do the same for them.
Assume that what you've learned from this book will
work for you because it's worked for thousands of other
people.
Assume that you are making a difference in the lives
of the individuals you meet.
169
Assume that this difference is for the better, not just
in their lives but also in your community as a whole.
Assume that a connected community is a place
where we encourage, uplift and promote each other.
People who connect live longer; people who connect
get cooperation; and people who connect feel safe and
strong. People who connect evolve. Together we rise
and fall, together we sink or swim, together we laugh
and cry. And when all is said and done, it's people that
make the hard times bearable and the good times much,
much sweeter.
summer employment, and they need to sharpen their
job-seeking and people skills. I'll never forget one particular
student who sullenly interrupted my talk.
"Hey, man, I've gone to lots of job interviews and
they never hire me," he griped. "I tried at a grocery
store, a drugstore, an office . . . "
Other students around him began to snicker. The reason
was pretty clear. The young man was wearing torn
army pants and a T-shirt with the word "Rancid" splashed
across the front (that's the name of a thrash-punk band).
His left ear was pierced in three places and he had a nose
170
ring, too. Even more to the point, he sported a bright
green Mohawk that stood up six inches high on his otherwise
shaved head.
"What do you want?" I asked him.
"A job, whaddya think?"
"Have you thought of changing what you're doing
to get it?"
He glared at me, his arms crossed tightly over his
chest. "Changing what?"
"How about the way you look?" I asked, leaning
forward.
"No way, man!" he practically hollered. "If they don't
like how I look, that's discrimination!"
"Look, I see your point," I said. (He was a Visual.)
"But we both know how the world works. So what do
you want? The job or the haircut?"
There was a long silence. Finally he uncrossed his
arms and rolled his eyeballs upward. "The job, I guess,"
he muttered. Some of the other students laughed goodnaturedly.
Slowly, he began to laugh, too. Then we all
laughed. That's what it's all about.
171
