Nine Things Successful People Do Differently
Why have you been so successful in reaching some of your goals, but not others? If you aren't sure, you are far from alone in your confusion. It turns out that even brilliant, highly accomplished people are pretty lousy when it comes to understanding why they succeed or fail. The intuitive answer — that you are born predisposed to certain talents and lacking in others — is really just one small piece of the puzzle. In fact, decades of research on achievement suggests that successful people reach their goals not simply because of who they are, but more often because of what they do.

1. Get specific. When you set yourself a goal, try to be as specific as possible. "Lose 5 pounds" is a better goal than "lose some weight," because it gives you a clear idea of what success looks like. Knowing exactly what you want to achieve keeps you motivated until you get there. Also, think about the specific actions that need to be taken to reach your goal. Just promising you'll "eat less" or "sleep more" is too vague — be clear and precise. "I'll be in bed by 10pm on weeknights" leaves no room for doubt about what you need to do, and whether or not you've actually done it.

2. Seize the moment to act on your goals. Given how busy most of us are, and how many goals we are juggling at once, it's not surprising that we routinely miss opportunities to act on a goal because we simply fail to notice them. Did you really have no time to work out today? No chance at any point to return that phone call? Achieving your goal means grabbing hold of these opportunities before they slip through your fingers.

To seize the moment, decide when and where you will take each action you want to take, in advance. Again, be as specific as possible (e.g., "If it's Monday, Wednesday, or Friday, I'll work out for 30 minutes before work.") Studies show that this kind of planning will help your brain to detect and seize the opportunity when it arises, increasing your chances of success by roughly 300%.

3. Know exactly how far you have left to go. Achieving any goal also requires honest and regular monitoring of your progress — if not by others, then by you yourself. If you don't know how well you are doing, you can't adjust your behavior or your strategies accordingly. Check your progress frequently — weekly, or even daily, depending on the goal.

4. Be a realistic optimist. When you are setting a goal, by all means engage in lots of positive thinking about how likely you are to achieve it. Believing in your ability to succeed is enormously helpful for creating and sustaining your motivation. But whatever you do, don't underestimate how difficult it will be to reach your goal. Most goals worth achieving require time, planning, effort, and persistence. Studies show that thinking things will come to you easily and effortlessly leaves you ill-prepared for the journey ahead, and significantly increases the odds of failure.

5. Focus on getting better, rather than being good. Believing you have the ability to reach your goals is important, but so is believing you can get the ability. Many of us believe that our intelligence, our personality, and our physical aptitudes are fixed — that no matter what we do, we won't improve. As a result, we focus on goals that are all about proving ourselves, rather than developing and acquiring new skills.
Good points but I would suggest a 10th: Review and celebrate successes, even small ones. This is a discipline of regularly, say weekly, listing all the small steps you took that worked well or that you are pleased about. One problem with highly motivated people, in my experience, is that nothing they do is ever good enough, so they are always beating themselves for what they haven't managed to get done yet, while they are actually getting a lot more done than most people. To avoid getting discouraged, I think it helps to rigorously list all the positive steps you have taken. We need a sense of making progress, not just a feeling that there is so much more to do.
Success, however you define this term, is measured at a snapshot in time! That is normally 'now' yesterday is history and tomorrow is a mystery. Successfull people are without exception problem solvers. Really sucessful people are planners, problem solvers and have a talent to look beyond the horizon. They know they have something good and nobody else can see it yet.. but they can.. it might only be in their minds eye but they are going to make it tangible. Remember you can either catch the wind or blow your idea along using your own. If your ship hits the rocks, swim ashore, look for another treasure map and start digging again. Out of the numerous success stories I have studied Carnegie, Edison, George and Robert Stephenson, Parsons, Armstrong, Charles Goodyear and many many more the abiding quality they all had was indomitable self belief and vision. They could look into the future and see demand for their products and inventions because what they had was the future and a logical step, even if to start with they were the only ones to see it! Bill Gates created an operating program for a computer before the creation of a computer that it could run on. The most important ingredient they all needed was a 'turn on a dime' piece of good luck and without exception they all had one! Don't let your friends pull you back. Most people are selfish and are reluctant to congratulate others on their success. Don't look upon set backs as failures they provide valuable experience and insight that will help you in the future, as long as you learn from them. think of the first person to try and ride a bicycle. Why didn't they give up? What sort of determination must they have had  balance on you wheels somehow and do your best to keep the momentum going. As long as you start your enterprise and can take the knocks and tack your 'yacht' in your wind then you are on the journey of a lifetime. You might just amaze yourself as to where you can go and the experiences you can have. Look for the opportunity in the difficulty and not the other way around! Anyone brave enough to start such a journey is brave in my eyes. don't sell your soul for peace of mind.
A brilliant addition to the original blog. Your most catching phrase for me was,. "don't sell your soul for peace of mind." I think that is really deep, really relevant in today's world and worthy of more debate. 
Chemistry.  Everyone on the planet is a slave to chemistry and how it affects the human condition.  Aside from all the external issues of pollution and processed food, we have an engine, the body, and it is still a mystery.  People react to situations, good or bad, fight or flight and a million other words of description.  The point is that words dont capture the reality of the chemistry of the human body.  Why does one feel good, or bad, chemistry, or the effect  of the release of endorphins, and other chemicals in our body can enhance or tear down a good idea, or a good day.  Some consume little bottles of chemicals, a 5 hour jolt, or soda with sugar or fast food with even more sugar.  I think that many good ideas and thoughts find their way to the human garbage disposal wrapped in these chemicals.

People do drugs of all kinds in search of a HIGH.  The most powerful drug is the one that we create internally and it is natural.  We seek for that high by adding chemicals to the mix that have a down side far worse than anyone wants to discuss.

I wished I understood this subject better, and could offer more but I am sure that the people in this discussion can add more to the concept and thoughts.

You are what you eat, breathe and consume.  Business, ideas, projects are done better when humans are clear, have the ability to focus and have the power to nurture that internal chemical that can push us to a good natural high and achieve more than we might even imagine we could.

Better living thought chemistry, I heard that someone in the past.  So far, it has not worked out.  A few hundred years ago the Oxygen environment that our ancestors lived in was amazingly rich, many times greater than we have today.  Imagine with our technology that we have, what we could do if we just had real oxygen to breathe, I wonder what marvels would be on our doorstep for tomorrow.  Humans need air, water, food and shelter.  We have pretty much messed up the first three and the banking system is trying hard to mess up the fourth one.  I am not a tree hugger per se, but maybe a few more trees and a walk in the park could do more good than a bag of fries.
Will power is determined by the 'wiring' in the pre-frontal lobes of the brain. Big dreams without talent will always remain 'dreams'; but a Billions $ industry has been created by the merchants of hope, to make people who have little or no talent part with their $'s to read 'The Secret' and all the other 'comforting' stories, which inevitably end in disappointment and despair. They are insidious and damaging money-making schemes, fuelled by desperate people hoping to be successful too. Be honest; tell them the truth instead of pie-in-the-sky; and spare them the addtional pain of feeling like failures after they 'chased their big dream' and got nowhere. 
I really enjoyed reading your piece which contains some warm and wise insights about success and is very encouraging for anyone who has ideas of who they can be and what they can achieve in their lives.

From my experience of having a small consulting business, persistence and determination are incredibly important when you feel like giving up because it's just too hard and you need to pay the rent this week!! If we remember that one piece of luck such as meeting the right person could be just around the corner and only one minute away....keep up your deep thoughts and excellent writing, cheers from Brisbane, Australia. 
Are you sick of looking forward whilst always just behind
Never having quite enough no matter how hard you try?

Still chasing that extra second that's so impossible to find?
Why look outside for answers it's there inside your mind!

It will be your time to shine if you grab it from within
Have belief in yourself and confidence will help you win!

One thinks I will but two never seems to know
One is always focussed but two just lets it go

You must find another second to make another second
Find that second from within and exchange it for a win

So go chase the wind through your hair
Show the whole world, feel the glare, earn their stares

It’s not beyond any of us to make it
If we can just reach deep inside and take it!

Yes you can it’s not about them
it’s about you believe in yourself!
Nice article, Heidi, sparking off a great discussion. I’m coming at this from the point of view of someone who trains actors in a top British drama school (Guildhall). Over the decades I’ve trained about 1,000 actors there, but only a handful have gone on to become A-list internationally famous names. What fascinates me is: what were they doing that the others were not? You cover some of the answers in your article, Heidi, and Mitch, your ‘celebrate successes’ is of course very important.
What I’ve also found effective, elaborating on your first point, Heidi, is to visualise your goal as vividly as possible. That gives it an emotional as well as an intellectual connection. For example, if you wanted to play Hamlet at the National Theatre, you might mock up a poster with your name on it. I’m sure you all have lots of anecdotal evidence to prove the effectiveness of this approach. I’ll share one with you. One of my acting students had just been awarded Guildhall’s Gold Medal by the Lord Mayor of London. After the ceremony she told me, “From the first day I came in the building I looked up at the honours board and said to myself, ‘One day, my name’s going to be there.’ And here I am.“
This is a great point and one that I can say wholeheartedly I agree with. Having worked for a number of years with Deloitte in Australia, their current CEO encouraged this behavior; and as such the Australian firm has 7 signal (maxims), the last being "Have fun and celebrate". This signal was described as follows:



We acknowledge the great results achieved each day by the people
around us; we build the Deloitte community and contribute to the
community outside the firm.
To do this we:


- always take the opportunity to celebrate accomplishments- bring a positive attitude to everything we do- catch others doing something right and reward achievement- seek opportunities to contribute to the community.
I think that Deloitte is a perfect example to highlight what you have said and would be a exceptional case study.At Deloitte they had many opportunities to celebrate success such employee of the month, financial recognition for passing CA/CPA exams, public recognition of staff who had been with the company 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 years etc. These achievements both small and great was always recognized through an end of month meeting of the whole firm (otherwise known as "End of Month Drinks") where these staff were publicly recognized in front of their peers.

"Have fun and celebrate" along with the other signals were also recognized at the end of the year where all the staff voted on their colleagues as to who typified  and lived each of the signals - and they were presented with a small trophy as reward! It may seem kitschy, but these intrinsic motivators were a significant driver of the company's successes.

Another point to note is that programs like the one at Deloitte will work best when driven from the top. It worked because the CEO had/has all nine; no all ten of these attributes. And so he would end all of his firm wide voice messages by saying "Have a bit of fun today"!
Pang, My point is that regular monitoring of progress must first review what has worked well. Too many such reviews over emphasize what hasn't worked, what is going wrong and what remains to be done. The danger of such one-sided, negative reviews is that they demoralize people and create a failure mindset. I am saying that both are needed but that a special effort should be made to list all of the positive steps achieved as they are too easily taken for granted and overlooked. What we find easy to do, we discount, thinking it was just part of the job or that anyone could have done it. We say it was nothing, thus discounting our successes and over emphasizing our failures. We are told to play to our strengths but these are things that are so easy for us to do that we think they are really nothing to feel especially good about. This is distorted thinking that leads us to discount our strengths and over emphasize our weaknesses
Quite Right. I have been reading the new book from The Business Leaders Book Club titled Lessons learned from the recession. In it 60 business leaders from all around the world talk about their recession experience and the strategies that helped them survive and thrive.

One of the things they mentioned was how imprtant it was to SMILE, LAUGH and rember LIFE GOES ON and that sometimes its BEYOND YOUR CONTROL.

Fortunately, decades of research suggest that the belief in fixed ability is completely wrong — abilities of all kinds are profoundly malleable. Embracing the fact that you can change will allow you to make better choices, and reach your fullest potential. People whose goals are about getting better, rather than being good, take difficulty in stride, and appreciate the journey as much as the destination.

6. Have grit. Grit is a willingness to commit to long-term goals, and to persist in the face of difficulty. Studies show that gritty people obtain more education in their lifetime, and earn higher college GPAs. Grit predicts which cadets will stick out their first grueling year at West Point. In fact, grit even predicts which round contestants will make it to at the Scripps National Spelling Bee.

The good news is, if you aren't particularly gritty now, there is something you can do about it. People who lack grit more often than not believe that they just don't have the innate abilities successful people have. If that describes your own thinking .... well, there's no way to put this nicely: you are wrong. As I mentioned earlier, effort, planning, persistence, and good strategies are what it really takes to succeed. Embracing this knowledge will not only help you see yourself and your goals more accurately, but also do wonders for your grit.

7. Build your willpower muscle. Your self-control "muscle" is just like the other muscles in your body — when it doesn't get much exercise, it becomes weaker over time. But when you give it regular workouts by putting it to good use, it will grow stronger and stronger, and better able to help you successfully reach your goals.

To build willpower, take on a challenge that requires you to do something you'd honestly rather not do. Give up high-fat snacks, do 100 sit-ups a day, stand up straight when you catch yourself slouching, try to learn a new skill. When you find yourself wanting to give in, give up, or just not bother — don't. Start with just one activity, and make a plan for how you will deal with troubles when they occur ("If I have a craving for a snack, I will eat one piece of fresh or three pieces of dried fruit.") It will be hard in the beginning, but it will get easier, and that's the whole point. As your strength grows, you can take on more challenges and step-up your self-control workout.

8. Don't tempt fate. No matter how strong your willpower muscle becomes, it's important to always respect the fact that it is limited, and if you overtax it you will temporarily run out of steam. Don't try to take on two challenging tasks at once, if you can help it (like quitting smoking and dieting at the same time). And don't put yourself in harm's way — many people are overly-confident in their ability to resist temptation, and as a result they put themselves in situations where temptations abound. Successful people know not to make reaching a goal harder than it already is.

9. Focus on what you will do, not what you won't do. Do you want to successfully lose weight, quit smoking, or put a lid on your bad temper? Then plan how you will replace bad habits with good ones, rather than focusing only on the bad habits themselves. Research on thought suppression (e.g., "Don't think about white bears!") has shown that trying to avoid a thought makes it even more active in your mind. The same holds true when it comes to behavior — by trying not to engage in a bad habit, our habits get strengthened rather than broken.
If you want change your ways, ask yourself, What will I do instead? For example, if you are trying to gain control of your temper and stop flying off the handle, you might make a plan like "If I am starting to feel angry, then I will take three deep breaths to calm down." By using deep breathing as a replacement for giving in to your anger, your bad habit will get worn away over time until it disappears completely.

It is my hope that, after reading about the nine things successful people do differently, you have gained some insight into all the things you have been doing right all along. Even more important, I hope are able to identify the mistakes that have derailed you, and use that knowledge to your advantage from now on. Remember, you don't need to become a different person to become a more successful one. It's never what you are, but what you do.
Yes - clear elevating goals in collaborative environments with open communications, adequate resources, external support, recognition of success and the power of positive thinking has been argued and suggested since the 1960s.  But how do we find ourselves with assassinated presidents like JFK, leaders like MLK and Bobby while the middle class is on the ropes fifty years later.  At what point do we address the failed Reaganomics and change course?  The decisions made by the Millennial Generation will determine if America is a 70 year power or 700.    

Since it's American Football season I'll use an America Football analogy.  I am betting more non-Americans understand American Football  than Americans who understand football mondial. 

The American Management team has forgotten to invest in the "offensive and defense line positions" for love of specialty players.  With US competitive advantage falling behind in technology and ongoing lack of corporate governance, small innovative businesses have been undercut since the Reagan Revolution.  Packaged and sold as efficiency seeking market consolidations by Nobel Prize winning Milton Friedman proves the prevailing American Management model sells the hype but doesn't track project success and failure for learning opportunities.  In reality the consolidations we are seeing again are simple consolidating revenue streams for the already wealthy corporatists (Schumpeter).  Productivity gains by "cost cutting" has failed as evidenced by an ever falling GDP since 1981.  Starting with the American Management Team's  "American K-Car for Quality" as a competitive response to the Honda Accord in 1980 should have raised eye brows but instead Business Minds cheered and danced as Lee Iaccoca told skeptics to get on board and be positive "because quality was back in America!".   This was 1981 (Unemployment 10%).  Hello - history knocking.

I am Generation X so I lived this period and the Honda Accord seems to have won that contest in the marketplace but prevailing American Management model has not documented lessons learned.  Instead they avoid accountability play golf and blame the unions or health care.    As another example, Robert McNamara was from Harvard and Ford and counted everything under the sun in terms of performance as "Body Counts".   McNamara is an example of a good man with a failed strategy. America lost the Vietnam War as well as the trust of the average G.I.    GIs are the middle class and lower classes that actually fight and work on the front lines of US War and Commerce.  Some may know the middle class as the "cattle" as President Hoover of Stanford referred to them.    With all the Koetler arguments for design around the customer I see very few of the  prevailing American Management team that have actually been to the front line of a war or business at the point of every day sales.  

"Agreements of truthiness" ensure the privileged remain privileged and has not resulted and will not result in positive national planning or a more unified nation.  Cheer-leading for the already wealthy is the siren cry of Reaganomics in a nutshell.  This is the Great American Cop Out.  

The prevailing American Management team members are fed but their wealth is not a mark of leadership or promoting the better parts of the Judeo-Christian tradition.  As an alternative hypothesis I propose the inverse of skulduggery economics.   As a mental model, the Ancient Greeks promoted education and "artistic technologies of practical use" that aspired for Beauty, The Good and Wisdom aka "Sustainability".  

The idea is if you create objects of practical beauty the standard of living will increase.  This is the opposite of the K-Car and the 20th Century American Management's business plan.Until the business model of the US includes "monitization" of the Public Good, as measured by GDP no amount of positive thinking or detailed measurements will make a bad strategy succeed.  Blind support for the blunt and hypothetical construct of supply and demand that results in "shifting the burden" to the backs of the bruised fails due to a design flaw not a lack of effort as ever increasing productivity measures posted by the American Worker empirically demonstrates.  To have ever increasing productivity in labor and falling GDP is a management problem.   Not a dumb and lazy middle class problem as argued by the US Management Team.  The privileged class has failed to manage America despite the best cheer leading squad and a liberal economic structure.  The continuing reflection of American Economic Policy with trends echoing Bank of England policy is disturbing.  Are we actually following "Red Coat" management practice?  Tisk Tisk ...

The American Economy looses $333Billion/yr in opportunity costs as measured over a fifty year period. (economicgps.com) This consistent loss of US GDP correlates with each year a Republican is elected over a Democratic presidential candidate.  Only Democrats have delivered budget surpluses (LBJ and Clinton) and the US has a $2.5 Trillion inventory of fighter jets that create no tangible benefit.  

I invite all business majors to take at least one classics course and then lay over the economics of your most recent business plan with a positive national plan.  You will see that when you account for "externatilties" your business is likely a Thievery Corporation that costs more to the economy than it produces over time.  The solution has been the same since students were shot at Kent State  for opposing Vietnam.  (economicgps.com) 
Reading your post has some very dangerous fact challenges. You state that ( Only Democrats have delivered budget surpluses (LBJ and Clinton) These 'facts' are false and misleading to the reader. Therefore we must surmise your entire post is peppered with misleading falsehood.

 Clinton's record promoted as having generated a surplus. It never happened. There was never a surplus and the facts support that position. In fact, far from a $360 billion reduction in the national debt in FY1998-FY2000, there was an increase of $281 billion.

Verifying this is as simple as accessing the U.S. Treasury website where the national debt is updated daily and a history of the debt since January 1993 can be obtained. Considering the government's fiscal year ends on the last day of September each year, and considering Clinton's budget proposal in 1993 took effect in October 1993 and concluded September 1994 (FY1994)
 In no year did the national debt go down, nor did Clinton leave President Bush with a surplus that Bush subsequently turned into a deficit. Yes, the deficit was almost eliminated in FY2000 (ending in September 2000 with a deficit of "only" $17.9 billion), but it never reached zero--let alone a positive surplus number. And Clinton's last budget proposal for FY2001, which ended in September 2001, generated a $133.29 billion deficit. The growing deficits started in the year of the last Clinton budget, not in the first year of the Bush administration.Keep in mind that President Bush took office in January 2001 and his first budget took effect October 1, 2001 for the year ending September 30, 2002 (FY2002). So the $133.29 billion deficit in the year ending September 2001 was Clinton's. Granted, Bush supported a tax refund where taxpayers received checks in 2001. However, the total amount refunded to taxpayers was only $38 billion .
Many of my friends (and many Americans, for that matter) are in the process of searching for new jobs. Of course, I changed “career paths” last year when I left a television network to work for myself. I find that while many folks are looking for what to do, not as many know exactly what they’re looking for. What are you doing with your life? I mean, what are you really doing?

When I meet new people, “What do you do?” is usually among the first questions I am asked. I know lots of people have a go-to answer: I’m a lawyer, I work in real estate, I create the programming schedule for the Disney XD channel, I’m a stocker at Duane Reade, I manage a Starbucks, I’m unemployed. Sometimes I get jealous of the ease with which those answers flow. How would I answer it? I develop websites for some organizations, I maintain websites for others, I coordinate the social media strategy for a few, I write a personal blog, I spent three weeks in Michigan producing a documentary which I was not paid for, but I hope one day will reach a wide audience, change hearts and minds, and generate income along the way. In my spare time I toy around with designing t-shirts, I co-founded a non-profit….?

Then I remember: I know what I do, I found my thing: I tell stories and connect with people. That’s really what gets me going and what I look forward to. That’s even a part of why I love web development: I get to facilitate telling stories online and take the awesome work that my clients are doing (and all of my clients are doing awesome things!) and help spread the word even farther.
Looking for a job vs Pursuing a vocation

Many of the people I know who are looking for work are looking for new jobs; usually in similar fields, often even if similar positions, as what they have now or had recently. When I ask “What do you want to do?” the response is normally in the form of a job title. My mom is famous for refusing that answer from me: “But why?” What will that do for you?” “Where will that take you next?” “What will you gain from that?” My mom knows that I–and anyone else for that matter–will bring quality to a job, but that’s not enough. Just because we can do something and even do something well does not mean that we should or that it will be enough to fulfill us.

So whether you are looking for new work or steadily (and even happily) employed, ask yourself today: What am I doing with my life?

When you look back in five, ten, forty years, you will probably not say “I’m glad I put in those extra hours at the office in July 2010.” You might say I’m glad I took risks, or that I pursued my love of music, or that I spent quality time with friends and family, or that I traveled the world, or that I taught myself something new.

When you figure out what you’re doing with your life, then you can find jobs, careers, and vocations which will fulfill you and enable your success. Perhaps that’s working for yourself as a web designer, perhaps that’s working part-time at an auto repair shop, perhaps that’s working as a corporate executive. I don’t know, but you will. And that’s what matters.
After the death of Sani Abacha in June 1998, Maryam Abacha attempted to leave Nigeria with suitcases filled with money.[1] She was arrested, placed on 24-hour surveillance, and banned from leaving Nigeria.[2] In
Culture (Latin: cultura, lit. "cultivation")[1] is a term that has many different related meanings. For example, in 1952, Alfred Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn compiled a list of 164 definitions of "culture" in Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions.[2] However, the word "culture" is most commonly used in three basic senses:

    Excellence of taste in the fine arts and humanities, also known as high culture
    An integrated pattern of human knowledge, belief, and behavior that depends upon the capacity for symbolic thought and social learning
    The set of shared attitudes, values, goals, and practices that characterizes an institution, organization, or group

When the concept first emerged in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe, it connoted a process of cultivation or improvement, as in agriculture or horticulture. In the nineteenth century, it came to refer first to the betterment or refinement of the individual, especially through education, and then to the fulfillment of national aspirations or ideals. In the mid-nineteenth century, some scientists used the term "culture" to refer to a universal human capacity. For the German nonpositivist sociologist Georg Simmel, culture referred to "the cultivation of individuals through the agency of external forms which have been objectified in the course of history".[3]

In the twentieth century, "culture" emerged as a concept central to anthropology, encompassing all human phenomena that are not purely results of human genetics. Specifically, the term "culture" in American anthropology had two meanings: (1) the evolved human capacity to classify and represent experiences with symbols, and to act imaginatively and creatively; and (2) the distinct ways that people living in different parts of the world classified and represented their experiences, and acted creatively. Following World War II, the term became important, albeit with different meanings, in other disciplines such as cultural studies, organizational psychology and management studies.[citation needed]
Contents
[hide]

    1 Early modern discourses
        1.1 Etymology
        1.2 German Romanticism
        1.3 English Romanticism
    2 20th century discourses
        2.1 American anthropology
            2.1.1 Biological anthropology: the evolution of culture
            2.1.2 Archeological approaches to culture: matter and meaning
            2.1.3 Language and culture
            2.1.4 Cultural anthropology
                2.1.4.1 1899–1946: Universal versus particular
                2.1.4.2 Structural-Functionalist challenge: Society versus culture
                2.1.4.3 1946–1968: Symbolic versus adaptive
                2.1.4.4 1940–present: Local versus global
        2.2 Cultural studies
    3 Cultural change
    4 See also
    5 Notes
    6 References
    7 External links

[edit] Early modern discourses
[edit] Etymology

The etymology of the modern term "culture" has a classical origin. In English, the word "culture" is based on a term used by Cicero, in his Tusculan Disputations, wrote of a cultivation of the soul or "cultura animi", thereby using an agricultural metaphor to describe the development of a philosophical soul, which was understood teleologically as the one natural highest possible ideal for human development. Samuel Pufendorf took over this metaphor in a modern context, meaning something similar, but no longer assuming that philosophy is man's natural perfection. His use, and that of many writers after him "refers to all the ways in which human beings overcome their original barbarism, and through artifice, become fully human".[4]

As described by Velkley[4]:

    The "term "culture," which originally meant the cultivation of the soul or mind, acquires most of its later modern meanings in the writings of the eighteenth-century German thinkers, who on various levels developing Rousseau's criticism of modern liberalism and Enlightenment. Thus a contrast between "culture" and "civilization" is usually implied in these authors, even when not expressed as such. Two primary meanings of culture emerge from this period: culture as the folk-spirit having a unique identity, and culture as cultivation of inwardness or free individuality. The first meaning is predominant in our current use of the term "culture," although the second still plays a large role in what we think culture should achieve, namely the full "expression" of the unique of "authentic" self.
The German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) formulated an individualist definition of "enlightenment" similar to the concept of bildung: "Enlightenment is man's emergence from his self-incurred immaturity."[5] He argued that this immaturity comes not from a lack of understanding, but from a lack of courage to think independently. Against this intellectual cowardice, Kant urged: Sapere aude, "Dare to be wise!" In reaction to Kant, German scholars such as Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803) argued that human creativity, which necessarily takes unpredictable and highly diverse forms, is as important as human rationality. Moreover, Herder proposed a collective form of bildung: "For Herder, Bildung was the totality of experiences that provide a coherent identity, and sense of common destiny, to a people."[6]

In 1795, the great linguist and philosopher Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835) called for an anthropology that would synthesize Kant's and Herder's interests. During the Romantic era, scholars in Germany, especially those concerned with nationalist movements—such as the nationalist struggle to create a "Germany" out of diverse principalities, and the nationalist struggles by ethnic minorities against the Austro-Hungarian Empire—developed a more inclusive notion of culture as "worldview." According to this school of thought, each ethnic group has a distinct worldview that is incommensurable with the worldviews of other groups. Although more inclusive than earlier views, this approach to culture still allowed for distinctions between "civilized" and "primitive" or "tribal" cultures.

In 1860, Adolf Bastian (1826–1905) argued for "the psychic unity of mankind". He proposed that a scientific comparison of all human societies would reveal that distinct worldviews consisted of the same basic elements. According to Bastian, all human societies share a set of "elementary ideas" (Elementargedanken); different cultures, or different "folk ideas" (Völkergedanken), are local modifications of the elementary ideas.[7] This view paved the way for the modern understanding of culture. Franz Boas (1858–1942) was trained in this tradition, and he brought it with him when he left Germany for the United States.
In the nineteenth century, humanists such as English poet and essayist Matthew Arnold (1822–1888) used the word "culture" to refer to an ideal of individual human refinement, of "the best that has been thought and said in the world."[8] This concept of culture is comparable to the German concept of bildung: "...culture being a pursuit of our total perfection by means of getting to know, on all the matters which most concern us, the best which has been thought and said in the world."[8]

In practice, culture referred to an élite ideal and was associated with such activities as art, classical music, and haute cuisine.[9] As these forms were associated with urban life, "culture" was identified with "civilization" (from lat. civitas, city). Another facet of the Romantic movement was an interest in folklore, which led to identifying a "culture" among non-elites. This distinction is often characterized as that between "high culture", namely that of the ruling social group, and "low culture." In other words, the idea of "culture" that developed in Europe during the 18th and early 19th centuries reflected inequalities within European societies.[10]

Matthew Arnold contrasted "culture" with "anarchy;" other Europeans, following philosophers Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, contrasted "culture" with "the state of nature". According to Hobbes and Rousseau, the Native Americans who were being conquered by Europeans from the 16th centuries on were living in a state of nature; this opposition was expressed through the contrast between "civilized" and "uncivilized." According to this way of thinking, one could classify some countries and nations as more civilized than others and some people as more cultured than others. This contrast led to Herbert Spencer's theory of Social Darwinism and Lewis Henry Morgan's theory of cultural evolution. Just as some critics have argued that the distinction between high and low cultures is really an expression of the conflict between European elites and non-elites, some critics have argued that the distinction between civilized and uncivilized people is really an expression of the conflict between European colonial powers and their colonial subjects.

Other 19th century critics, following Rousseau, have accepted this differentiation between higher and lower culture, but have seen the refinement and sophistication of high culture as corrupting and unnatural developments that obscure and distort people's essential nature. These critics considered folk music (as produced by working-class people) to honestly express a natural way of life, while classical music seemed superficial and decadent. Equally, this view often portrayed indigenous peoples as "noble savages" living authentic and unblemished lives, uncomplicated and uncorrupted by the highly stratified capitalist systems of the West.

In 1870 Edward Tylor (1832–1917) applied these ideas of higher versus lower culture to propose a theory of the evolution of religion. According to this theory, religion evolves from more polytheistic to more monotheistic forms.[11] In the process, he redefined culture as a diverse set of activities characteristic of all human societies. This view paved the way for the modern understanding of culture.
[edit] 20th century discourses
[edit] American anthropology

Although anthropologists worldwide refer to Tylor's definition of culture, in the 20th century "culture" emerged as the central and unifying concept of American anthropology, where it most commonly refers to the universal human capacity to classify and encode their experiences symbolically, and communicate symbolically encoded experiences socially. American anthropology is organized into four fields, each of which plays an important role in research on culture: biological anthropology, linguistics, cultural anthropology and archaeology. Research in these fields have influenced anthropologists working in other countries to different degrees.
Discussion concerning culture among biological anthropologists centers around two debates. First, is culture uniquely human or shared by other species (most notably, other primates)? This is an important question, as the theory of evolution holds that humans are descended from (now extinct) non-human primates. Second, how did culture evolve among human beings?

Gerald Weiss noted that although Tylor's classic definition of culture was restricted to humans, many anthropologists take this for granted and thus elide that important qualification from later definitions, merely equating culture with any learned behavior. This slippage is a problem because during the formative years of modern primatology, some primatologists were trained in anthropology (and understood that culture refers to learned behavior among humans), and others were not. Notable non-anthropologists, like Robert Yerkes and Jane Goodall thus argued that since chimpanzees have learned behaviors, they have culture.[12][13] Today, anthropological primatologists are divided, several arguing that non-human primates have culture, others arguing that they do not.[14][15][16][17]

This scientific debate is complicated by ethical concerns. The subjects of primatology are non-human primates, and whatever culture these primates have is threatened by human activity. After reviewing the research on primate culture, W.C. McGrew concluded, "[a] discipline requires subjects, and most species of nonhuman primates are endangered by their human cousins. Ultimately, whatever its merit, cultural primatology must be committed to cultural survival [i.e. to the survival of primate cultures]."[18]

McGrew suggests a definition of culture that he finds scientifically useful for studying primate culture. He points out that scientists do not have access to the subjective thoughts or knowledge of non-human primates. Thus, if culture is defined in terms of knowledge, then scientists are severely limited in their attempts to study primate culture. Instead of defining culture as a kind of knowledge, McGrew suggests that we view culture as a process. He lists six steps in the process:

    A new pattern of behavior is invented, or an existing one is modified.
    The innovator transmits this pattern to another.
    The form of the pattern is consistent within and across performers, perhaps even in terms of recognizable stylistic features.
    The one who acquires the pattern retains the ability to perform it long after having acquired it.
    The pattern spreads across social units in a population. These social units may be families, clans, troops, or bands.
    The pattern endures across generations.[18]

McGrew admits that all six criteria may be strict, given the difficulties in observing primate behavior in the wild. But he also insists on the need to be as inclusive as possible, on the need for a definition of culture that "casts the net widely":

    Culture is considered to be group-specific behavior that is acquired, at least in part, from social influences. Here, group is considered to be the species-typical unit, whether it be a troop, lineage, subgroup, or so on. Prima facie evidence of culture comes from within-species but across-group variation in behavior, as when a pattern is persistent in one community of chimpanzees but is absent from another, or when different communities perform different versions of the same pattern. The suggestion of culture in action is stronger when the difference across the groups cannot be explained solely by ecological factors ....[19]

As Charles Frederick Voegelin pointed out, if "culture" is reduced to "learned behavior," then all animals have culture.[20] Certainly all specialists agree that all primate species evidence common cognitive skills: knowledge of object-permanence, cognitive mapping, the ability to categorize objects, and creative problem solving.[21] Moreover, all primate species show evidence of shared social skills: they recognize members of their social group; they form direct relationships based on degrees of kinship and rank; they recognize third-party social relationships; they predict future behavior; and they cooperate in problem-solving.[21]
Nevertheless, the term "culture" applies to non-human animals only if we define culture as any or all learned behavior. Within mainstream physical anthropology, scholars tend to think that a more restrictive definition is necessary. These researchers are concerned with how human beings evolved to be different from other species. A more precise definition of culture, which excludes non-human social behavior, would allow physical anthropologists to study how humans evolved their unique capacity for "culture".

Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes and Pan paniscus) are humans' (Homo sapiens) closest living relative; both are descended from a common ancestor which lived around five or six million years ago. This is the same amount of time it took for horses and zebras, lions and tigers, and rats and mice, to diverge from their respective common ancestors.[22] The evolution of modern humans is rapid: Australopithicenes evolved four million years ago and modern humans in past several hundred thousand years.[23] During this time humanity evolved three distinctive features:

    (a) the creation and use of conventional symbols, including linguistic symbols and their derivatives, such as written language and mathematical symbols and notations; (b) the creation and use of complex tools and other instrumental technologies; and (c) the creation and participation in complex social organization and institutions.[24]

According to developmental psychologist Michael Tomasello, "where these complex and species-unique behavioral practices, and the cognitive skills that underlie them, came from" is a fundamental anthropological question. Given that contemporary humans and chimpanzees are far more different than horses and zebras, or rats and mice, and that the evolution of this great difference occurred in such a short period of time, "our search must be for some small difference that made a big difference – some adaptation, or small set of adaptations, that changed the process of primate cognitive evolution in fundamental ways." According to Tomasello, the answer to this question must form the basis of a scientific definition of "human culture."[24]

In a recent review of the major research on human and primate tool-use, communication, and learning strategies, Tomasello argues that the key human advances over primates (language, complex technologies, complex social organization) are all the results of humans pooling cognitive resources. This is called "the ratchet effect:" innovations spread and are shared by a group, and mastered "by youngsters, which enables them to remain in their new and improved form within the group until something better comes along." The key point is that children are born good at a particular kind of social learning; this creates a favored environment for social innovations, making them more likely to be maintained and transmitted to new generations than individual innovations.[25] For Tomasello, human social learning—the kind of learning that distinguishes humans from other primates and that played a decisive role in human evolution—is based on two elements: first, what he calls "imitative learning," (as opposed to "emulative learning" characteristic of other primates) and second, the fact that humans represent their experiences symbolically (rather than iconically, as is characteristic of other primates). Together, these elements enable humans to be both inventive, and to preserve useful inventions. It is this combination that produces the ratchet effect.
The kind of learning found among other primates is "emulation learning," which "focuses on the environmental events involved – results or changes of state in the environment that the other produced – rather than on the actions that produced those results."[26][27][28] Tomasello emphasizes that emulation learning is a highly adaptive strategy for apes because it focuses on the effects of an act. In laboratory experiments, chimpanzees were shown two different ways for using a rake-like tool to obtain an out-of-reach-object. Both methods were effective, but one was more efficient than the other. Chimpanzees consistently emulated the more efficient method.[29]

Examples of emulation learning are well documented among primates. Notable examples include Japanese macaque potato washing, Chimpanzee tool use, and Chimpanzee gestural communication. In 1953, an 18-month-old female macaque monkey was observed taking sandy pieces of sweet potato (given to the monkeys by observers) to a stream (and later, to the ocean) to wash off the sand. After three months, the same behavior was observed in her mother and two playmates, and then the playmates' mothers. Over the next two years seven other young macaques were observed washing their potatoes, and by the end of the third year 40% of the troop had adopted the practice.[30][31] Although this story is popularly represented as a straightforward example of human-like learning, evidence suggests that it is not. Many monkeys naturally brush sand off of food; this behavior had been observed in the macaque troop prior to the first observed washing. Moreover, potato washing was observed in four other separate macaque troops, suggesting that at least four other individual monkeys had learned to wash off sand on their own.[31] Other monkey species in captivity quickly learn to wash off their food.[32] Finally, the spread of learning among the Japanese macaques was fairly slow, and the rate at which new members of the troop learned did not keep pace with the growth of the troop. If the form of learning were imitation, the rate of learning should have been exponential. It is more likely that the monkeys' washing behavior is based on the common behavior of cleaning off food, and that monkeys that spent time by the water independently learned to wash, rather than wipe their food. This explains both why those monkeys that kept company with the original washer, and who thus spent a good deal of time by the water, also figured out how to wash their potatoes. It also explains why the rate at which this behavior spread was slow.[33]

Chimpanzees exhibit a variety of population-specific tool use: termite-fishing, ant-fishing, ant-dipping, nut-cracking, and leaf-sponging. Gombe chimpanzees fish for termites using small, thin sticks, but chimpanzees in Western Africa use large sticks to break holes in mounds and use their hands to scoop up termites. Some of this variation may be the result of "environmental shaping" (there is more rainfall in western Africa, softening termite mounds and making them easier to break apart, than in the Gombe reserve in eastern Africa. Nevertheless it is clear that chimpanzees are good at emulation learning. Chimpanzee children independently know how to roll over logs, and know how to eat insects. When children see their mothers rolling over logs to eat the insects beneath, they quickly learn to do the same. In other words, this form of learning builds on activities the children already know.[27][34]
The kind of learning characteristic of human children is "Imitative learning," which "means reproducing an instrumental act understood intentionally."[35] Human infants begin to display some evidence of this form of learning between the ages of nine and twelve months, when infants fix their attention not only on an object, but on the gaze of an adult which enables them to use adults as points of reference and thus "act on objects in the way adults are acting on them." [36] This dynamic is well documented and has also been termed "joint engagement" or "joint attention."[37][38] Essential to this dynamic is the infant's growing capacity to recognize others as "intentional agents:" people "with the power to control their spontaneous behavior" and who "have goals and make active choices among behavioral means for attaining those goals."[39]

The development of skills in joint attention by the end of a human child's first year of life provides the basis for the development of imitative learning in the second year. In one study 14-month old children imitated an adult's over-complex method of turning on a light, even when they could have used an easier and more natural motion to the same effect.[40] In another study, 16-month old children interacted with adults who alternated between a complex series of motions that appeared intentional and a comparable set of motions that appeared accidental; they imitated only those motions that appeared intentional.[41] Another study of 18-month old children revealed that children imitate actions that adults intend, yet in some way fail, to perform.[42] Tomasello emphasizes that this kind of imitative learning "relies fundamentally on infants' tendency to identify with adults, and on their ability to distinguish in the actions of others the underlying goal and the different means that might be used to achieve it."[43] He calls this kind of imitative learning "cultural learning because the child is not just learning about things from other persons, she is also learning things through them — in the sense that she must know something of the adult's perspective on a situation to learn the active use of this same intentional act."[44][45] He concludes that the key feature of cultural learning is that it occurs only when an individual "understands others as intentional agents, like the self, who have a perspective on the world that can be followed into, directed and shared."[46]

