    Worried about gaining unwanted weight from high calorie foods?
    This cool little tool allows you to sort through hundreds of restaurant chain menus so you can always keep your weight gain to a minimum. Some of the features are really neat and I can even embed it in TowerOfEnglish.com and it works great.

    -Track calories from all your favorite restaurants
    - Easily sort and add menu items to your cart and calculate totals for your meals
    - Click FULL SCREEN and it’s very easy to see if you have bad eyes
    - Print out your customized menu items
    - Share this tool easily with your friends or post it on your schools blog for students to see.

    Your Turn:
    Get 3 meals for yourself from 3 different restaurants. You cannot eat 2 meals at the same restaurant so you must print out the different restaurant menus. The catch is you cannot exceed 2000 calories for all meals combined.
    Feeling hungry? Here's a fantastic site to practice your reading and learn some great new recipes. At this easy-to-use site you can...

    -Find hundreds of recipes for chicken, pasta, soup, bread, cookies, and lots more! (Use the icons at the bottom of the page.)
    -Print out recipes to make recipe cards.
    -Use a glossary if you're not sure about some of the ingredients.
    -Use the U.S. standard or metric measurements.
    -Send in your own recipe or request a special recipe (Recipe Exchange).
    -Read some advice about how to cook (Hints).

     
    Your Turn:
    Create a class cookbook. Write 2 or 3 of your favorite recipes from your country. Use the recipes on this site as an example. Collect all of the recipes in your class and put them together to make your class cookbook. Now for the fun part! Try cooking some of the recipes and sharing them with your friends!  

Healthy Dining Quiz

 
    Are you a healthy eater? When you go to a restaurant, do you try to eat low-fat dishes? Sometimes it's hard to know if a certain kind of food is healthy or not. At this site, you can take a quiz to find out how much you know, and maybe learn some new things, too! You can't click on an answer with this quiz. Just guess the answer, and then click on NEXT to find the correct answer.

     
    Your Turn:
    Keep a food diary for one week. Write down everything that you eat everyday. At the end of the week, look at the diary and decide if you're a healthy eater. Write a few ideas about how you could improve your diet! 

The History of Ice Cream

 
    One of my favorite things to eat in the summer is ice cream. I like all kinds, but my favorite is chocolate chip. What's your favorite kind of ice cream?

     
    Your Turn:
    Here are some very interesting facts about the history of ice cream. Scan the article to find the year that each of these events happened:

    What year did...

     
    1) the first ice cream parlor open in America? 
    2) the World's Fair start selling ice cream cones? 
    3) a housewife invent the ice cream churn? 
    4) Cookies 'N Cream ice cream become very popular?

    Click here for more fun ice cream facts and trivia.

     

    Peanut Butter

     
        Do you like peanut butter? Which kind do you prefer, creamy or crunchy? Do you like peanut butter with jelly or by itself? At this site you can learn a lot about peanut butter. You can learn how it's made and the history of one of America's favorite foods. You'll also find some great recipes, so you can learn some new ways to eat peanuts and peanut butter.

         
        Your Turn:
        After you read about peanut butter, click on PLAY TO WIN to play the PEANUT BUTTER TRIVIA GAME. If you don't know the answer, go back to the text and try to find it. 

    Plant-Parts Salad

     
        Can you name the 5 parts of a plant? How many parts can you eat? Actually, you can eat all of them! At this site, you can make a salad out of all the parts of different plants! First, click on one of the plant parts at the top of the page. Then, try to guess which part it is by clicking on the name.

         
        Your Turn:
        Try to make your own salad with plant parts. Use this guide to help you find some delicious plants for your salad. 

    Project Denny's

     
        This is a very interesting site written by a person who wants to visit every Denny's restaurant in the world! Each entry includes the name and address of the restaurant, who he was eating with, the name of the waitperson, what they ate, and a review of the restaurant.

         
        Your Turn:
        Make your own Restaurant Journal! Keep a record of each restaurant you visit in the next 2 weeks. Be sure to write the information above (name, address, etc.). Your review can include what you thought about the food, the service, the atmosphere, the prices, or any other thoughts you have about the restaurant. 


    A Tea Time Reader

     
        Do you drink tea? Tea is a very popular drink in many countries. At this site, you'll find some short stories and poems about tea or about drinking tea.

         
        Your Turn:
        What's your favorite drink? How often do you drink it? How does it make you feel? Do you have a special memory that is related to your favorite drink? Write a short story or poem about it and share it with your classmates. 

     
        A, An, and The...three very short words that can be very difficult to learn how to use correctly. This site will teach you the two key English grammar concepts you need to understand when using these words in your writing: countability and definiteness. This is a great study guide. I would recommend that you print it out and keep it handy.

         
        Your Turn:
        After studying the material, try the exercise at the bottom of the screen. The answers follow the grammar exercise and explain in detail the reason for each answer. To use other study guides from The Writing Center, click on HANDOUTS. 

Daily Grammar

 
    Here's a great English grammar site where you will find (so far) 440 short online lessons! Just choose which grammar point you want to study. Then you'll find an explanation and example of the grammar point and a quiz to test your understanding.

     
    Your Turn:
    Sign up for the Daily Grammar email lessons, and they'll send you a grammar lesson 5 days a week, plus a quiz on the 6th day! 

John's ESL Grammar

 
    Here's another great site where you will find 33 online grammar lessons! Just choose which grammar point you want to study. Then you'll find an explanation and example of the grammar point and a quiz to test your understanding.

     
    Your Turn:
    Choose grammar point to study. When you think you have mastered the grammar point, take the quiz and send the results to your teacher. 

Grammar and Vocabulary Assessment Tests

 
    Here's an easy way to check your English grammar and vocabulary progress. You can choose a test from 4 different levels. Each test has several sections. Enter your name and email address before you take the test and they will email your results to you. Take the test again in several weeks. Did your score improve? 

English Grammar Goofs

 
    Everybody makes mistakes when they are learning English. Some mistakes can be pretty funny! At this site, you'll find lots of amusing English mistakes, plus some funny English signs from around the world.

     
    Your Turn:
    Can you find the mistakes on this site? Why are the mistakes funny? How do the mistakes change the meaning of the sentences? 

Grammar Gorillas

 
    This is a fun game for you to practice your parts of speech. It's easy to play. First, choose Beginner or Advanced. (Beginner is only nouns and verbs, Advanced is all parts of speech.) To play the game, read the sentence. You'll see several highlighted words. Click on the correct form of speech. If you're correct, you'll win a banana for the English Grammar Gorilla! If you're not sure, look at the Help section. It gives you a short definition of each part of speech. 

NetGrammar

 
    NetGrammar is an excellent new free online grammar course for intermediate students. The course has 15 units. Each unit includes a grammar lesson, and listening, reading, and writing activities. NetGrammar is great for home study, but if you're doing the course as part of a class, it's easy to send your answers to your teacher. The course is easy to use, with lots of help if you get confused. 

The Online English Grammar

 
    Grammar can be really confusing (even for teachers)! Sometimes it's hard to find a quick and easy answer to a question about grammar. Here's a great site to visit when you need an answer fast! It's very well-organized and easy to use. Just click on the category that you need. You'll get a short and easy-to-understand explanation of that grammar point and several examples.

     
    Your Turn:
    When you find a grammar point that's difficult for you, carefully study the explanation and examples. Then try to write your own sentences, using the examples as models. 

Boggler

 
    Here's a classic word game for you to play! There are 3 different Boggler games for you to choose from. Read the directions and look at the examples. Then choose the game you want to play. To play Boggler, you have 3 minutes to find as many words as possible in a square. All the letters have to be connected. You can go up, down, left, right, or diagonally. Just type your words in the box.

     
    Your Turn:
    This is a really fun game to play. It will test your vocabulary and make you think fast! Challenge your friends to a game. Who's the best Boggler player in your class? 

Castaway

 
    What would you do if your cruise ship wrecked and you were stranded on a desert island? Play this fun game to find out if you would be a survivor! Read about each situation and then make a decision. But be careful. If you make a bad decision, you could be killed! (Hint: if you are killed, use the GO BACK button to change your decision.) Can you find your way back to civilization?

     
    Your Turn:
    Imagine that you are stranded on a desert island for two weeks. If you could have only 5 things (not including food), what would you choose? Why? 

Enchanted Forest

 
    The Enchanted Forest is a fun adventure and fantasy game that's easy to play. First, read the instructions. Then, choose a nickname and password. You start the game in the middle of the Enchanted Forest. Choose a direction to move in, then read what happened to you. If you meet a monster, you have to choose to fight, run away or give him a bribe (if you have enough gold). The object of this game is to score as many points as possible. Check the High Scores list to see how you compare to other players. If you can find the magic Blackstone, you'll get a lot of bonus points! But be careful! If you run out of points, you'll die. Good Luck! 


Fast Hangman Games

 
    Hangman is one of the most popular English word games. At this site, you can play 18 different hangman games. Each game provides a great way to review vocabulary. Just click on the letters to make your guesses. If you want to play the regular Hangman game, click on "Way Cool Hangman."

     
    Your Turn:
    Hangman is traditionally played with paper and pencil. It's very easy and convenient to play. Use Hangman to review your vocabulary by challenging your friends and classmates whenever you have free time. 

A Game a Day

 
    Here's a fun site where you can play a different word game every day. Word games are a great way to improve your vocabulary. Click on December 2001 to find more games!

     
    Your Turn:
    You'll probably find lots of new words while playing these games. Check your dictionary if you're not sure of the meanings, and be sure to write them in your vocabulary notebook. Then write an example sentence for each word. 

Grammar Gorillas

 
    This is a fun game for you to practice your parts of speech. It's easy to play. First, choose Beginner or Advanced. (Beginner is only nouns and verbs, Advanced is all parts of speech.) To play the game, read the sentence. You'll see several highlighted words. Click on the correct part of speech. If you're correct, you'll win a banana for the Grammar Gorilla! If you're not sure, look at the Help section. It gives you a short definition of each part of speech. 

Harry Potter Games

 
    Do you know how to play Quidditch? Do you know what a "Nimbus 2000" is? If you do, you must be a Harry Potter fan! People around the world are talking about the adventures of Harry Potter, the boy wizard! This a great Harry Potter website! You'll find lots of trivia games and word games to play. Follow the links to read excerpts and reviews of all the books. (The audio links don't work.) You'll also find a very interesting interview with the author, J.K. Rowling. Click on "Who's Who" to learn about the people in the books and "What's What" to learn all the Harry Potter vocabulary.

     
    Your Turn:
    Have you read any Harry Potter books? Did you see the movie? If you have done both, which one did you like better? Why? Do you prefer to read books or watch movies? Why? 

Treasure Hunts

 
    An Internet Treasure Hunt is a fun game to play that will test your ability to find information on the Internet. To win the game, you must find the answers to questions by searching for them on the Internet. This game is great for practicing how to use search engines!

     
    Your Turn:
    After you try to solve a Treasure Hunt, try to make your own. Think of 10 trivial questions with answers that can be found on the Internet. (Make sure that the answers are on the Internet!) When you finish, have your classmates try to solve it! 

The Un-Matching Game

 
    Check your vocabulary with this fun word game. It's easy to play. You'll see four words. Just click on the word that's different than the other three.

    For example: Which word is different?

    VIOLIN TRUMPET HARP GUITAR

    The answer is TRUMPET, because VIOLIN, HARP and GUITAR are musical instruments that have strings. A TRUMPET doesn't have strings. After you read the correct answer, you can play again by clicking on EASY or HARD.

     
    Your Turn:
    Try to make your own un-matching games. Choose four words. Three of them should have something in common. The fourth one should be similar, but have something different than the others. Let your friends or classmates try to solve your puzzles. 
Where Were You?

 
    When something really important happens in your country or in the world, you can usually remember exactly what you were doing at that time many years later. The day that a man first walked on the moon is one of those times. This site has some very interesting stories from people who remember what they were doing on July 20, 1969. Here's an example:

    "On July 20, 1969 we were at my father's house watching the event on TV. The reason I remember this so well is that while we were watching Buzz walk on the moon, our first child, Luanne, exactly 10 months old (born Sept. 20, 1968) took her first steps. She began walking at the same time we walked on the moon."

     
Your Turn:
Maybe you're too young to remember the first moon walk. What major events have taken place in your lifetime that you have strong memories of? Make a list of those events. Then write a short essay about what you were doing that day.

A White House History

 

    The White House is where the President of the United States lives with his family. It is also a big house that is full of important and interesting history. At this site, you can take a tour of all the beautiful and historical rooms in the White House. To start the tour, just click on one of the rooms. Then you can read about the room and the history of the room. You'll also see a picture of the room. (Click on the picture to make it bigger.) In each room, you can find out about some of the paintings or furnishings in the room. You can also see some pictures of how the room used to look over 100 years ago! Enjoy the tour! 
Brain Bowl

 
    Do you keep up with current events? Do you read newspapers, watch TV news, or read the news on the Internet? At this site, you'll find 6 questions that will test your current events knowledge. You can play by yourself or against a friend. The quiz changes weekly.

     
    Your Turn:
    After you take this quiz, write your own current events quiz for your class- mates. Check the Internet or a newspaper for some ideas, and make sure you know the correct answers. Don't make the questions too hard, but don't make them too easy, either. 

Movie Poster Quiz

 
    If you like movies, you'll enjoy this fun game. To play, just look at the movie poster, and then guess which movie it is. If you want to change categories, just click on the category you want to play. But be careful; 3 strikes and you're out! Keep playing until you strike out. If you have a good score, you can put it into the Hall of Fame! 

Optimist or Pessimist?

    When you look at a half-glass of water, do you think the glass is half-full or half-empty? Are you the kind of person who thinks the future will be great (an optimist) or not so great (a pessimist)? How do you look at life? Are you excited about the future or worried about the future?

     
    Your Turn:
    Before you take this quiz, decide if you're an optimist or a pessimist. Then take the quiz. Answer the 20 questions as honestly as possible. The computer will then tell you if you're an optimist or a pessimist. Were you right about yourself? 
2002 Best Inventions

 

 

    Level: Intermediate/Advanced

    Here is a list of some of the most exciting inventions of 2002! Read about the "Hy-wire Car." It's a completely non-polluting car. Or take a look at the "Musical Jacket." It has a mini-disc player sewn into the jacket. You can also learn about the "Dog Translator," the "Ultra-Bubble," and the "Spin Vacuum." To learn more about these inventions, you can click on the company's website.

     
    Your Turn:
    Choose an invention that looks interesting. Look at the picture and try to imagine what it is and what makes it special. What special features do you think it has? Then read about the invention. Were you right? 

All About Ceiva

 
    These days lots of new products that are related to the Internet are being invented. This very interesting product is called Ceiva.

     
    Your Turn:
    Look at the headline and the pictures on this page. What do you think this product is? How does it work? Now read the text on the page. Do you understand more about the product now? Next, make a list of questions that you would like to know the answers to. Then click on the MORE INFORMATION link at the bottom of the page. Finally, try to find your questions on this list. Can you find the answers to your questions? Would you like to buy this product? Why or why not? 

The Moller Skycar

 
    Do you hate getting stuck in traffic? Do you sometimes wish that your car could take off and fly above everybody else? Well, maybe soon it can! Moller International is working on two Skycars, the M400 and the M150. These cool flying cars go up into the air like a helicopter and then fly like an airplane. They may be the way everybody goes to work or school in the future.

     
    Your Turn:
    Explore the site and try to answer these questions:

     
    1) Which Skycar holds 4 people? 
    2) How much will the Skycars cost? 
    3) What does VTOL mean? 
    4) How fast can the Skycars go? 
    5) How soon will the Skycars be ready to fly? 
    6) Do you want one? 

PawSense

 
    PawSense is a new product for people who have computers and cats.

     
    Your Turn:
    Look at the picture on this site and read the headline:

    PAWSENSE HELPS CATPROOF YOUR COMPUTER

    Before you read about PawSense, try to guess the answers to these questions:

     
    1) What is the meaning of the headline? 
    2) What kind of problems could a cat cause for a computer? 
    3) What kind of product could solve those problems?

    After you answer the questions, read about this unique product. What do you think about PawSense? Would you buy this product?

The Toaster Museum

 
    What's the most popular food in the whole world? Toast, of course! Everybody loves toast! And you can't have toast without toasters! Visit The Toaster Museum to see all kinds of toasters from the last 100 years! Read the introduction and then click on a time period to see and read about the toasters.

     
    Your Turn:
    Do you have any interesting appliances in your kitchen? Write a short description of one appliance. What does it look like? What is it used for? Read the description to your classmates. Can they guess what it is? 

Totally Absurd

 
    Do you need more space in your house? Get some floating furniture. It's filled with air and floats on the ceiling. When you need to use it, just pull it down! Floating furniture is just one of the crazy inventions you'll find at this site. These are real inventions from the U.S. Patent office.

     
    Your Turn:
    Click on one of the Totally Absurd inventions and look at the drawing. Try to guess what it is, and how it works. Write a few sentences explaining the invention. Now read about the invention. Were you right? 

The 1900 House

 
    You probably live in a comfortable, modern house or apartment. Try to imagine how your life might have been different if you had lived 100 years ago, in the Victorian Era. The 1900 House is an actual Victorian house in London. It's also the name of a TV show where a modern family moves into The 1900 House and lives exactly the way people did 100 years ago. At this site, you can tour each room in The 1900 House. Just click on the house or take the Virtual Tour. You'll find lots of interesting information about how people lived 100 years ago! (You can also watch parts of the TV show by clicking on the videos.)

     
    Your Turn:
    Before you look at this site, make a list of things that you think would have been different if you had lived in The 1900 House 100 years ago. For example...no electricity, no television, etc. Think about things in each room of the house. After you finish your list, look at the site and compare your answers with the information you find. Would you like to travel back in time and live 100 years ago? 

Be an Architect!

 
    Have you ever thought about your dream house? What kind of house would you like to live in? At this site, you can be an architect and design your own house!

     
    Your Turn:
    Read about the different kinds of houses and do the exercises. After that, decide what rooms you want to have in your house. Then find out about how to make a floorplan. You can make it online or on a piece of paper (graph paper works great). After you've designed your new house, show it to your classmates, and describe the different features! 

Dating Ideas

 
    For many people, deciding where to go on a date is a big decision. It's especially important when it's the first date, because you want to impress your date. In North America, the "Big Three" things to do on a date are:

    -Go to a movie.
    -Have a nice dinner at a restaurant.
    -Go to a school dance or game.

    At this site, you can find a long list of other dating ideas. How about renting a boat and taking it out on a lake? Or maybe you could go rollerblading in the park.

     
    Your Turn:
    What's the most interesting or fun date that you've ever had? Where did you go? What did you do? What's the worst date that you've ever had? What happened? 

Dear Abby

 
    "Dear Abby" is a popular advice columnist in the USA. She answers letters from people who are having problems, and gives them some advice. At this site, you can read lots of letters and "Dear Abby's" advice. To read more letters, use the calendar on the left side of the screen. Just click on a day.

     
    Your Turn:
    Find an interesting letter. What kind of advice would you give to the letter writer? Write your advice, and then read "Dear Abby's" advice. Did you have the same advice? Do you agree or disagree with "Dear Abby"? Why? 

Hawaiian Shirts

 
    Some people think Hawaiian shirts are beautiful and some people think they are really ugly. At this site, you can look at one man's personal collection of more than 100 Hawaiian shirts and read his personal comments about each one. Just click on "Cotton & Silk Shirts" or "Rayon Shirts" to view the photos. (Start with Image 1 and then use the NEXT button. The images load pretty quickly.)

     
    Your Turn:
    What kind of clothes do you like to wear? Write a short report about your favorite pieces of clothing (or style of clothing). Why do you like them? How do you feel when you wear them? Does your clothing match your personality? How often do you change your style? 

Hazardous Waste in the Home Quiz

 
    Do you know how to throw away things in your house like batteries, light bulbs, or cleaning products? Should you recycle them, treat them as hazardous waste, throw them in the trash can, or pour them down the drain? To take the quiz, click on one of the products and read about it. Then choose the best method of disposing of it. Finally, check your answers by clicking on HOW DID I DO?

     
    Your Turn:
    Read more about garbage and ways that you can reduce waste. 

Life Magazine Dream House

 
    What kind of place do you live in? Is it a house or apartment? Is it comfortable? What's the best thing about it? At this site, you can tour the 1999 Life Dream House. Read about the different rooms, and look at the pictures. You can also watch a movie of each room. When you've finished touring the house, you can tour the dream houses from 1994-1998.

     
    Your Turn:
    Get some ideas from this site for your own dream house. Then find a partner and design a house that you would like to live in. Draw a diagram on a large sheet of paper and put in as much detail as you can. What special features will your dream house have? Which features will be practical (useful), and which ones will be just for fun? Show your dream house to your classmates and explain all of its features. 

The Longevity Game

 
    How long do you think you will live? This site will tell you how long you can expect to live! Just answer a few questions about your lifestyle, family history, and driving habits and the computer will tell you how many more years you can look forward to. I found out that I can expect to live to be 87 years old. I'm going to go celebrate with a Big Mac!

     
    Your Turn:
    Are you happy or unhappy about how long you might live? If you're not happy, write a short report about how you could change your lifestye to live a longer life. 

SeaRoom Habitats

 
    I've found my dream house! This very cool residence floats on the water. The lower floor is underwater, so you have a beautiful underwater view from your living room window. The bedroom has a periscope mirror and a jacuzzi with one side providing an underwater view! The upper deck of the house is above water, so you can relax and enjoy outdoor activities like barbeques or sunbathing.

     
    Your Turn:
    Read about one couple's description of their SeaRoom Experience. Would you like to live in this kind of house? Why or why not?

     

Silly Survey

 
    -If you had a baby, would you want a boy or a girl?

    -Would you rather go skiing or snowboarding in the winter? -Do you prefer to use a staple or a paper clip?

    These are some of the questions on the "Silly Survey." This is a fun survey that's easy to use. Just click on your answer and then compare your answer with what other people think. Each question also has a related "Silly Tidbit." For example, did you know that the depression made in the snow by a skier who has fallen backward is called a "sitzmark?" Well, now you do!

     
    Your Turn:
    All of the survey questions are very short. For example:

    -Free Time......TV or Book?

    For each short question, try to ask a complete question.

     
    -Do you prefer to watch TV or read a book in your free time? 
    -Would you rather watch TV or read a book in your free time?

    Now write your own silly survey for your classmates. Try to write them using the short questions.

Things Sold in Vending Machines

 
    Did you know that there are some places where you can buy poetry from a vending machine? There are other vending machines that sell frogs! At this site, you'll find a long list of things that have sold in vending machines. Just click on the item that you want to read about. Follow the links to find more detailed information about some of the items.

     
    Your Turn:
    Make a list of things that you have seen sold in vending machines. Make another list of things that you haven't seen sold in vending machines, but would like to see sold. 

Animal Crackers

 
    Here's a collection of very strange animal pictures. At first, they look like real pictures, but if you look carefully, you can see that there's something strange about them. The animals seem to be in the wrong place! You'll find more pictures on page 2.

     
    Your Turn:
    Find your favorite picture. Why do you like this picture? Why is this picture unusual? Write a description of the picture. How would you change the picture to make it a "normal" picture? 

Ditto

 
    Ditto is a great search engine that has millions of pictures. It's easy to find just the picture that you're looking for. To use Ditto, just enter whatever it is that you want to see a picture of. Then Ditto will give you lots of different pictures to choose from. Click on any picture to see a larger view of it, and to go to the website that contains the picture. You can also browse through some of the pictures by choosing a category.

     
    Your Turn:
    Pictures are great for guessing games. Use Ditto to find an unusual picture. Then have your classmates guess what it is. If they don't know, they should ask YES or NO questions, and then try to guess! 

Full Moon

 
    What do you think about when you look up at the moon? Romance? Poetry? Beauty? If you could, would you like to travel to the moon? Now you can...at this beautiful site! NASA has released 1200 of its amazing photos from the Apollo moon missions. They are presented here in a wonderful multimedia show. Just click on the moon and sit back and enjoy. 

     
    Your Turn:
    Discuss these questions in class:

    Do you think it is important for men and women to explore space? Why or why not?

    Do you think that everyone will be able to travel to the moon someday? Would you go if you had the chance?

How to Photograph Gardens

 
    Do you like to take photos? Are you a good photographer? At this site, you can visit some beautiful Asian gardens and learn some tips on how to photograph them. (Click on the photos for a bigger picture.)

     
    Your Turn:
    After you look at these photos, make an outline of the photo tips. What are the main points? Can you understand the tips by looking at the photos? The next time you visit a garden, be sure to take your camera, and try out these tips! 

IPIX Images

 
    Now you can see the world with these really cool 360 degree pictures. At this site, you can visit beautiful places from countries all over the world. You can see the Taj Mahal, visit an Irish castle or explore a Japanese castle! You'll find 55 different places to visit! With this camera, you can use your mouse to turn around in a complete circle. You can move the camera up or down, and even zoom in or zoom out.

     
    Your Turn:
    Find your favorite picture. Use the camera to completely explore the site. Now write a short report describing what you see in the picture. Try to use as many descriptive adjectives as possible. 

A Picture is Worth a Thousand Words

 
    It's true that sometimes pictures can communicate more than words! Here's a fun site where you can show everyone your sense of humor!

     
    Your Turn:
    You'll find a lot of funny pictures at this site. It's your job to write a funny caption for the picture. First, get some ideas by taking a look at past photos to see what other people have written. Which ones do you think are funny? Now look at the new photos and try to think of a funny caption. When you have one that you like, send it in an email with your name and country. 

The Snowflake Man

 
    What does snow make you think of? Snowmen, skiiing, blizzards? Wilson "Snowflake" Bentley was the first person to take a photograph of a single snowflake. He took over 5000 photographs of snowflakes. (Did you know that every snowflake is different?) Read about "The Snowflake Man." Then look at some of his beautiful photos by clicking on the word "snowflakes" at the top of the screen. (Click on the photo to make it bigger.)

     
    Your Turn:
    Write a short essay about your happiest memory of snow. Maybe it was a ski trip or maybe it was making a snowman or throwing snowballs when you were a child. Share your essay with your classmates. 

The Streetplay Galleries

 
    When you were a child, did you play outside a lot? What kind of games and activities did you enjoy? At this site, you'll find lots of interesting pictures that show what kids in different countries like to do outside. You'll see kids on the playground, riding on skateboards, flying kites, and many other fun activities.

     
    Your Turn:
    What did you like to do outside when you were a child in your country? Did you have a special game, sport, or activity that was your favorite? How did you play it? Why did you enjoy it? Tell your classmates about it. 

Banned for Life

 
    Do you try to read English newspapers and magazines whenever you can? It's a great way to improve your English ability! This site is a long list of cliches (words or phrases that are used too much) and words that are used incorrectly, which are found in print. They were sent to the site from professional writers.

     
    Your Turn:
    Try to do a little detective work yourself. See how many of the words or phrases from the list you can find in newspapers, magazines, or on the Internet. Add any other cliches or mistakes that you find in your reading. 

The Book of Clich?

 
    A cliche is an expression that is so popular that people use it a lot.....maybe TOO much! Can you guess what these cliches mean?

    -Rome wasn't built in a day.
    -When the going gets tough, the tough get going.
    -No guts, no glory.
    -There are plenty more fish in the sea.

    To use this site, click on the time you want to use a cliche. For example:

    -For when you feel really bad

     
    Your Turn:
    Ask some native speakers to tell you 2 or 3 cliches that they use (and the meanings). Make a list of them. Then ask your classmates to guess the meanings of the cliches. 

Idioms By Kids

 
    Idioms By Kids is a website with over 1000 high quality (kid drawn) drawings of the literal meaning of a number of idioms.For example Big Apple is simply a drawing of a big apple. Many of these are extremely humorous.?There is also an extensive list of over 3000 kid safe idioms, with suggestions for "kids" to add their drawings to this website.

     

    Dave Sperling's ESL Slang Page

     
        Here's an excellent slang dictionary. Next time you see or hear a slang word that you're not sure about, try looking it up on this page! 

    GoEnglish.com Pocket English Idioms Dictionary

     
        Here's a really excellent idioms dictionary. Each entry has a great drawing to illustrate the idiom. You'll find easy-to-understand definitions and examples. Use the search box or click on one of the keywords to find an idiom.

         
        Your Turn:
        First, read an idiom and look at the illustration. Then, try to guess what the meaning might be. Next, look at the definition and example. Finally, write your own sentence using the idiom. 

    The Idiom Connection

     
        This site is a combination of an idioms dictionary and idioms quizzes. The idioms are organized alphabetically or by theme. Just click to get a complete list of idioms.

         
        Your Turn:
        Before you look at all the idioms on a page, try the quiz first. If you're not sure of an answer, look for the answer in the dictionary. When you find an idiom that you think might be useful for you, try writing 2 or 3 sentences using that idiom. Then try to use it in conversation whenever you have a chance. 

    Paint by Idioms

     
        Idioms are special words or phrases that have their own meaning. For example, if I say "It's a piece of cake," I mean it's very easy. The meaning doesn't really have anything to do with cake. There are many idioms in English. If you learn to use idioms, your English will be much more colorful and interesting. At this site, you can learn lots of new idioms. Just choose a theme (easy or hard) and what kind of exercise you want to try. Finally, choose a character that you can paint if you choose the right answers.

         
        Your Turn:
        After you learn some new idioms, write a short conversation betweeen two people. See how many idioms you can use in the conversation. 

    The Simile Satellite

     
        Do you know what a simile is? In English, we use similes to compare things and to make our language more colorful. Similes use "like" and "as...as."

        For example:

        -Her voice was like a songbird!
        -He was as tall as a mountain!

        At this site, you can learn about similes and practice writing your own!

         
        Your Turn:
        First, read about similies and take the short quiz. Then, read and listen to some simile poems. Finally, you'll see 3 exercises that let you practice writing your own similes. My favorite is the Simile Riddle. Write about an object with similes and see if your classmates can guess what it is! 
Biography.com

 

 

    A biography is the story of somebody's life. At this site, you can find over 20,000 short biographies of famous people! You can use this site to find out about your favorite movie star, singer, or even someone from history! To find a biography, just type the name of the person you're looking for into the search box at the top of the page.

     
    Your Turn:
    After you read a few biographies, write a biography of your friend or classmate. First, make a list of questions to ask. For example, you might ask where he/she was born, or what their childhood was like. Or maybe you can ask about their family or an interesting hobby they have. After you interview him/her, write down all your information into his/her life story. Congratulations! You are now a biographer! 

Chat with John Lennon

 
    John Lennon has been dead for 30 years, but now, thanks to the Internet, you can "chat" with him! It works like this: John Lennon said many things when he was alive. Someone put all of his words into the computer. When you chat with John Lennon, the computer chooses the best answer from all of his words. Just chat like you're talking to your friend on the Internet. You can ask questions or make comments. But, be careful. If your English is not correct, the answer might be strange. Give it a try, but be patient. It will take some time to load. 

Fantasy Dinner Party

 
    Pretend you are rich! You are going to have a dinner party in your big mansion. You can invite 10 people to your party. You can invite anybody. Living or dead. Real people or fictional people. Write the names of the people on this page. Then check to see who other people would invite to their fantasy dinner party.

     
    Your Turn:
    After you decide who you want to invite, make a list of questions that you would like to ask these people. Or write a complete dinner party conversation among all the guests. You could even write about the food that was served or the clothes that people wore to the party. 

Who2 Loops

 
    Who2 is a very interesting "people encyclopedia." You can find lots of interesting and unusual information about famous people. On this page, you'll find "Who2 Loops." These are groups of people who all have something in common. For example, "Serial Spouses" is a group of famous people who have been married 7 times or more! "Death by Car" is a group of famous people who have died in a car accident. Click on any name to read the complete biography. You can also search for a name in the search box at the top of the page, or browse by clicking on the first letter of the person's last name.

     
    Your Turn:
    Can you make your own loop? Try to think of an interesting category, and then use the Internet to research and find 4-6 people who can belong to the loop. This would be a good group activity! 
Burrito Poetry

 
    Burritos are my favorite food! This delicious Mexican food has beef, beans, cheese, and more, wrapped in a flour tortilla...yum!! Some people love burritos so much that they've written some poems about them. For example:
        Oh burrito, you are supreme 
        with chicken, beans, and sour cream. 
        Taco Bell has the best deals, 
        but FreeBirds lasts me for two meals. 
        Breakfast, dinner, or even for lunch, 
        I love burritos a whole, whole bunch. 

     
    Your Turn:
    After you read these burrito poems, think about your favorite food. Think about how it tastes and how it makes you feel. Now write your own poem about it. It can be a haiku, a limerick, or any other kind of poem! 

Casey at the Bat

 
    Do you like baseball? This is the story of the Mighty Casey, a great baseball player for the Mudville baseball team. This famous poem was written in 1888. It was first published in the San Francisco Examiner newspaper.

     
    Your Turn:
    You are a sports reporter for the Mudville News. Read the story of Casey at the Bat. Were you surprised by the ending of the story? Why? Take some notes about what happens in the story. Then write a headline and a short story about what happened. Remember that a good newspaper story answers the "WH" questions: Who, what, when, where, and why! 

The Complete Works of Pooh Bear

 
    Here's a chance to read some poems, songs, and "hums" by one of the greatest writers of the 20th Century, Winnie-the-Pooh. Pooh Bear has put pen to paw to create these whimsical writings. Just click on the one you want to read, or scroll down. When you find one that you really like, practice reading it out loud. Then, with some of your classmates, read a few of them in front of the class. These writings come from the original Winnie-the-Pooh books, by A.A. Milne, written in the 1920's. 

Giggle Poetry

 
    Poetry can be a fun way to play with words and improve your English! At this site, you can read lots of fun poems and learn how to write your own poems. Click on "Favorite Poems" to read the poems. Click on "Poetry Class" to learn how to write different kinds of poems. (Teachers: Click on "Poetry Teachers" for some great classroom activities!)

     
    Your Turn:
    After reading some of these poems, try to write your own poem. You can try a limerick, haiku, or just free verse! Read your poem to your classmates. Collect all the students' poems and make your own book of poetry! 

Fridge Magnet Poetry

 
    Writing poetry can be fun because you can write something interesting without worrying about all the "rules" of English. At this site, you'll find a lot of words. You can drag them around with your mouse. You'll find some words hidden underneath other words. Click on ENTER THE FRIDGE to start.

     
    Your Turn:
    Drag a few words around until they give you some kind of idea. Then use that idea to add more words. Put all the words together, and you've got a poem! Poems can be about anything. They can rhyme, but they don't have to. They can be serious, or they can be funny. They can be short, or they can be long. But the most important thing to remember when you're writing a poem is to relax and have fun! 

Poetry Pool

 
    Here is a very interesting collection of poems from people around the world. You can even send your own poem to them, and if it's good enough, they'll put it on the web site. Poetry is a very different kind of English. It's about using English to create a mood or a feeling in people. Poetry doesn't have to always follow the rules. It can rhyme or not rhyme. It can use words, phrases, or sentences. You can use any style you want, and you can choose any subject.

     
    Your Turn:
    Read a few of these poems. Find one that you really like. Why do you like it? What feeling do you get when you read it? Now try to write your own poem. Don't think about it too much. Just write whatever you are thinking. Then look at what you wrote, and change some parts to make it better. When you're happy with your poem, show it to a friend. Can they understand what you were trying to communicate? 

 All Things Considered

 
    Here's a great LISTENING site for ADVANCED students. "All Things Considered" is an American news program that looks at the news in much greater detail than most news programs. At this site, you can listen to one of the Special Features on the main page, or you can click on LATEST SHOW to hear the most recent program. You can listen to the complete program, or an individual story. To listen to previous programs, or to do a search of news topics, click on ARCHIVES.

     
    Your Turn:
    Try to take some notes when you listen to one of these programs. What is the main idea or theme of the report? Do you think it is a fair and balanced report? Many news reports talk about a problem. What is the problem? What would you do about the problem if you could? 

Ananova: Virtual Newscaster

 
    Ananova is the world's first virtual newscaster. She's not a real person, but a computer creation. She has been programmed to read real news in a realistic way. To watch the newscast, just click on her picture. You'll need to have Real Player 8 Basic to watch Ananova. It's free. Just click on "Need help playing video?" under her picture to download the player. What do you think about Ananova? Does she seem like a real newscaster? Check out the links on the site for more information about Ananova.

     
    Your Turn:
    Why don't you try to do your own newscast? Just find some news stories on the Internet or the newspaper. Make them shorter by editing any information you don't need. Then sit behind a desk and read it to your class. (If you have a video camera, you can even tape it!) 

Animal News Center

 
    Are you an animal lover? At this site, you can read about bullfights, pit bulls, and cloned sheep. In fact, you'll find lots of short news stories about animals. There are stories about pets, wildlife animals, farm animals, and lab animals. The stories have links where you can find more information about the subject.

     
    Your Turn:
    Make your own animal news notebook. Look at newspapers and magazines and try to find articles about animals. Put the most interesting ones into a notebook. Add new stories whenever you find them. Be sure to check any vocabulary you're not sure about. 

Attack on the U.S.

 
    People around the world were shocked when America was attacked by terrorists on September 11, 2001. Airplanes crashed into the World Trade Center in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. Many people were killed and injured. At this site, you can read newspaper headlines from around the world. You will also find more photo essays and stories from TIME magazine.

     
    Your Turn:
    1) What was your first feeling when you heard about the attack?
    2) What do you think America should do if they find out who was responsible for the attack?
    3) What can America do to prevent future attacks? 

Brain Bowl

 
    Do you keep up with current events? Do you read newspapers, watch TV news, or read the news on the Internet? At this site, you'll find 6 questions that will test your current events knowledge. You can play by yourself or against a friend. The quiz changes weekly.

     
    Your Turn:
    After you take this quiz, write your own current events quiz for your class- mates. Check the Internet or a newspaper for some ideas, and make sure you know the correct answers. Don't make the questions too hard, but don't make them too easy, either. 

CNN Learning Resources

 
    This is a great place to practice your reading and improve your vocabulary. First choose a news story from the Story Archives. Then choose a story level. Now you can read the story, listen to an audio, or watch a video. When you're finished, try one (or more) of the activities. You'll also find some related web sites. 

Easy English News Stories

 
    Reading a newspaper is a great way to improve your English. At this site, you'll find lots of interesting news stories written in EASY English. First, click on a story that you want to read. Then you can read the story or an outline of the story. Click on HEAR to listen to the story.

     
    Your Turn:
    After you finish reading and listening, check your understanding by doing the lessons (quizzes). There are 6 different kinds of quizzes. Just click on MENU to start. 

News Directory

 
    At NewsDirectory.com, you can quickly find more than 7,900 online English-language newspapers and magazines from all over the world! To find a newspaper, just choose a country. To find a magazine, choose a subject that you think is interesting. (You can also search by title.) 

PencilNews

 
    There's a lot of very important news happening these days, but sometimes it's hard to read the news in English. At Pencil News (from MSNBC), you can read the top news and sports stories written in EASY English.

     
    Your Turn:
    Use these stories to increase your vocabulary. Every time you find a word that you're not sure about, add it to your vocabulary notebook. Try to figure out the meaning from the context of the story before you use your dictionary. 

Words in the News

 
    Here's a great site from the BBC where you can keep up on the news and increase your vocabulary. First, choose a story from the archive. Then you can read and/or listen to the story. Each story has a vocabulary guide to help you understand the story. Archives are available for the last 3 years. 

  A. Pintura: Art Detective

 
    Do you like mysteries? What do you know about art? At this fun site, you can solve a mystery, and learn a lot about art, too. In "The Case of Grandpa's Painting," a mysterious woman walks into A. Pintura's office with a painting. Read the story and look at the mystery painting. Then compare that painting with other paintings from six famous artists. Can you help the art detective find out who painted the mystery painting? And who is the mysterious woman, Miss Fiona Featherduster?

     
    Your Turn:
    After you look at all the paintings, decide which one you like best. Write a short paragraph about the painting. Why do like it? What did you learn about the artist? 

Mystery! A Gorey Murder

 
    Poor Isabella von Recklinghause has been murdered! It's your job to find her killer! It's easy to play. Your mouse will be a spotlight. Just move the spotlight around and look for clues you can click on. Check everything in the picture. When you find a clue, use it to help you continue. You'll need Shockwave to play.

     
    Your Turn:
    After you find the killer, go back and play the game again. Now write the story. What happened in the beginning, the middle, and the end? Who was the killer? 

See-n-Solve Mystery

 
    Do you like murder mysteries? Here are some fun short mysteries for you to solve. You can help Detective Harry Silver and his daughter Amy try to find the killer. First, read the short mystery. After you read the mystery, click on the small picture. Now you can see a large picture of the murder scene. There are some clues in this picture. You can read them by clicking on the picture. Click on AMY'S LOGIC if want some hints. After you read the clues, try to guess who the murderer is. Why do you think he is the murderer? Now vote for your choice and find out if you were right. New stories are added often, so come back! 

Stickman Murder Mystery Games

 
    Do you like murder mysteries? This is a fun website where you can be a detective! First, choose a mystery to solve. Then read and follow the instructions carefully. To play the game, you have to find clues and evidence. Go to the Chief's office to find out about the case. Then get into your police car and investigate the case. When you think that you know who the killer is, go back to the Chief's office to find out if you're right! 

Takako's Great Adventure

 
    This is an exciting story about Takako, a Japanese girl who travels to Canada to visit her pen pal, Christine. She is met at the airport by a man who says he is Christine's uncle. But there is something strange about this man. Something doesn't seem right.... This mystery has ten episodes. You can listen to each episode and then do some interesting activities. You can also read the tapescript for each episode. The tapescript has a very useful feature that lets you find the definition for new vocabulary by clicking on the word. This is an excellent site. You can practice your listening AND enjoy a really exciting story!

    You'll need Shockwave to play.

Twist Mini-mystery

 
    Did you know that now you can watch movies right on your computer? If you like mysteries, you'll enjoy these short mystery stories. You can read a new Twist every week, or you can read previous stories by clicking on TWIST ARCHIVE.

     
    Your Turn:
    As you are reading a story, try to guess how the story will end. After you finish the story, answer the poll on the last page: WHAT DID YOU THINK WOULD HAPPEN? Were you right or wrong? Then check to see what other people thought would happen. What ending would YOU write for the story? 