This book is a yearend review where I will take
articles that are funny, important, or history makers and
bring the whole article full circle. So I will write about how
the story started, what happened and how it ended. I think
this way you leave knowing more about the subject than
just reminding you of what has been going on over this
past year. Remember my goals is simply to empower you
the reader to have information you can use to hold a
conversation with or simply impress your friends.
I can honestly say it has been a fun ride this past
year making my site. Taking an inspired idea from a
dream, to making it come alive is one of the most
challenging, exciting, daunting yet rewarding work anyone
can ever commit themselves towards. If you have a dream,
go ahead and bring it to life. You won’t feel at peace with
yourself until you do anyway. Trust me, it’s worth it.
So I just want to give a brief history lesson if you
like to blog or looking to start, I suggest you pay close
attention. But if you don’t blog, and not interested in our
early beginning, that’s ok. Skip on to Chapter 1 to begin
your reading pleasure.
MyMorningJoe.com was birthed because of what
happened to me. Due to cooperate downsizing I lost my
job. As a way to help save money around the house I
disconnected my cable TV so the only form of
entertainment I had was the internet and books. So while
[8]
being unemployed in my home forced to be without cable
tv, I would apply for jobs and read to keep my mind off of
things. I would read anything, my bible, old textbooks,
other blogs, anything interesting on the internet. What I
eventually found myself doing was, reading about one
subject then drilling down looking up more information
about the subject until I felt I could hold a conversation
about the topic. In doing this my friends started to take
notice by asking me things like “Where do you get the best
deals on airline tickets?”, or “What’s the best way to roll my
401k once I leave my old company”. It got so bad people
gave me the nickname ‘Wiki’ because they said talking to
me was like logging on to Wikipedia.
Well after several months of being unemployed I
finally landed a job, but I was not happy. I felt like there
was something I could do using my time and talents to
ensure future employment so I would not have to rely on a
9 to 5. Then I heard someone say while I was in the break
room “I can’t start my day without my morning joe”. I asked
them why they would say that and they replied to me
“without their morning coffee they cannot operate”. And
that my friend is where I got the idea for the site
MyMorningJoe.com the site would have been called
MyMorningCupOfJoe.com but I felt that was way too long.
[9]
What I envisioned for the site was that it would be
so good people could not start their day without logging on
to get their MMJ fix. The only problem was I had a name
but no theme for the site. Then it came to me, the site
needed to be truly informative, a site that offered news,
and deals, with content and stories people really could use.
I felt this was the best direction for the site because I
already did this for my friends, so it made sense to simply
blog about those things I would find so that I could help out
more than just the people I know. Now I would like to
pause the story right here and let you know that I know
this sounds like me just going on about me but there is a
point to all this. It’s this, when you’re making a site, blog, or
even a small business do what you enjoy the most and
then sit back and watch it grow.
I was able to open the doors to
MyMorningJoe.com back in September 1, 2009 with only
2 fans, myself and my then girlfriend now wife (I am a
fortunate man). But I did not know anything about
marketing the site, how to run a blog, or where to get the
information needed to grow my site. So I started with
emailing 15 of my closest friends to check out the site to
tell me what they thought. They would check the site from
[10]
day to day to see what I posted, many offering support and
suggestions many of which I used to grow the site to what
you have become used to today. Then after 1 month of just
testing this idea with my friends, I tried to give my idea life
by releasing it to the world. Now I have had other websites
in the past which were very successful in their own right,
but they have been decommissioned years ago, and web
development has changed a lot since then.
So with only an idea and a mission to keep people
informed I set off to find content that could not only help
people out but also give them something to talk about later
on in the day. My goal was to have all posts stop after
noon eastern standard time. I did this because I noticed
how news networks normally slow down after this point so I
figured I should do the same. Which is another point, you
must know your limitations. Initially I only did 3 posts a day.
Then as I got better at finding quality information, I moved
to 4, then to 5 and to now to 8 posts a day. Now I know for
a lot of people 8 posts a day is hard but I suggest starting
off slow and work your way up.
Moving on to what the site was going to talk about. I
wanted it to appeal to people who enjoyed being
[11]
entertained, loved to learn, and try something different.
That’s why I try to find information most of us can use; like
where to find cheap ink for your printer or what is the best
way to invest your money. Information like this we all need
from time to time. As I started to post the site grew and so
did my fan base. I started off with only 35 hits a day where
now I am pushing well over 10,000 hits a day. It’s nothing
too complicated on how we started to get noticed it’s just
the more you post, the sites like Google will add you to
their site. Now I know I am nowhere near as popular as
sites like Digg, or Stumble Upon, but I have learned to be
happy with what hits come my way. Now because this EBook
is free I cannot tell you a lot of the trade secrets I
used to gain my popularity but I will share with you this.
Never under estimate the power of faith, friendship,
and social networking. I believe that without sites like
Twitter, and Facebook my site would never have taken off.
What sites like these provide readers is a place to connect
to each other and share their thoughts and ideas with you
and with fellow followers. Then with friends and family
members they can help support you and even give you
great ideas. Finally I credit my faith in God. I know many
people would to want to shut me down because of my
beliefs but that’s the only thing I can attribute to what has
been going on with my site. I know what I am going to say
[12]
sounds very odd but to tell the truth it has been a year
since my site has opened its doors and I have only spent 5
dollars on marketing the blog and I get close to half a
million hits per month. Trust me I know I could not have
done this all on my own.
I know I have talked about where I came from, how
the site came to be, and how well it’s doing but I am sure
the next question you have is how much money do you
make off of this site. Well I can say it’s not enough to quit
my day job but I tell you this. Like anything in life you have
to keep at it and you will make a profit. I read somewhere
that it takes most small business owners 5 years before
they start to make a profit and I think it’s the same with
websites and blogs. Sites that slowly build their
customer/fan base and add value to their lives are the
ones that stay.
Well I hope you are ready because it’s time to get to
all these stories that took place since the launch of
MyMorningJoe.com. Happy reading and get ready to
leave some comments because the stories you may have
read about in the past year may not have been all they
seemed to be when they initially broke. I know you will be
moved to speak your mind so feel free to share your
thoughts with the community!!
[13]
My Morning Joe Site:
http://www.mymorningjoe.com
My Morning Joe Fan Page:
http://www.facebook.com/pages/My-Morning-
Joe/142225333958
My Morning Joe Twitter Page:
http://twitter.com/MyMorningJoe
Frank Martin Twitter Page:
http://twitter.com/frankmartin80
[14]
FOREWORD
HOW TO READ THIS BOOK
[15]
The Intellectual Bean is the simply me giving you the
reader the full story on those articles I have posted on my
blog over the past year.
I decided on key information that I think was worth telling
and letting you the reader be complexly informed. If you
will it’s what I love doing, making sure I know the full story
about a topic.
With that, I can say there are stories where I don’t hold
back. What do I mean? I mean I feel it is important to
discuss the issues as is. If people, organizations,
companies or groups did an awesome thing then I boldly
praise them and provide great feedback for their
contributions. However, if the opposite is true I will bring to
light those actions.
I am not paid by anyone to make any statements in this
book. I am simply providing my opinion of stories that took
place over the last 12 months.
[16]
In this case you will find I can be an Equal Opportunity
Offender as well as an Equal Opportunity Praiser. I believe
in giving credit where it is due, and likewise over turning
the under belly of stories that may not have gotten a good
examination upon first reporting.
So now you have been warned. Do you dare to undertake
reading the full story on news you may have heard but
never really knew all the details? Join me as I journey
through the last twelve months of news, entertainment and
more.
Next Stop Chapter 1--- Oktoberfest.
[17]
CHAPTER 1
OKTOBERFEST
[18]
MyMorningJoe.com opened as a beta back in
September but I decided to skip that month because the
site was on limited release. So blogging for the month of
October was hard, since I did not know what to really write
about, so for those who were with me from the beginning
thanks for sticking with me through the those October fluff
pieces. You know what I am talking even multimillion dollar
media houses use it. But for me the fluff was content, of
things that I thought were interesting but it did not feel like
content people really needed to know. I felt like I was still
trying to discover what MyMorningJoe.com was going to
be about, but eventually you to take some risks and get out
there. So I got over the hump and got rolling.
So one of the first stories I posted about in October,
which came as a complete and utter shock to me, was the
Internet giant GeoCities closed its doors. Well as the story
goes, Yahoo bought Geocities back in 1999 for over 3
billion dollars1 which I think is proof that the .com
movement was crazy and why the bubble busted like it did.
Never the less, after GeoCites was bought out, other
companies sprung up in hopes to get the same pay day.
Do you remember Fortune City, Tripod, or how about
Angelfire? But before the pop-up of the “mee-too’s”,
Geocities was truly the hip and trendy site to visit for your
own personal homepage on the web. I remember friends of
[19]
mine laughing at others because they didn’t host their site
on Geocities. Now fast forward almost a full 10 years later
and sadly they are no longer. RIP GeoCites.
Well stories like this always intrigue me as I try to
work out “The Math”. Let’s take a look, because I think
there is an interesting nugget here.
If you took the 120 months that GeoCites was open
after it was purchased, then divide that by 3 billion, it
equals approximately 25 million dollars per month that
Yahoo lost on this purchase. This is like losing an entire
budget for James Carmon’s Titanic every year! The idea
that Yahoo just decided that they had enough of this crying
game and decided to pull the plug on the whole thing just
seemed so cold. It’s like if you bought a house lived in it
for 10 years then suddenly decided to burned it to the
ground. I remember a while back I had applied for a job at
Yahoo to find that they did not give me a call back. Looking
back I now know why, maybe because they had a 25
million dollar a month hole in the budget they couldn’t
afford to add me to the mix. I am kidding of course, but it
does seem like a lot of money that went down the drain.
I know, I know, you’re wondering how is this news?
Well, in my opinion I believe Yahoo could
[20]
have revamped and made GeoSites successful instead of
just killing it. One idea I had was Yahoo could have
removed everyone’s site on Geocities then create a
Facebook like site. People would sign up for the account
for the city they lived in which would give you the ability to
better connect with people that lived in those same cities.
Now this is of course my idea and not something that
Yahoo was trying. All I am saying is if you spend that much
on a company you would think you would at least try to use
it and not kill it. Anyway in the end the site was taken down
and added to the pile of other Yahoo failures like the
Yahoo Browser, and Yahoo Auctions. Remember those?
The next biggest shocker that came out in the month
of October was the article I found titled “Latest bank fee is
for paying off credit card on time every month”. Yes
folks you read that right! I had to do a double take myself
when I first came across this story. Strangely enough I
found this article while doing a search for tips to pay off
debt. From what I can gather because of the social and
economic climate in America, many people are in debt up
to their eyeballs and while some people have all of their
credit cards maxed out, there are those other people that
might only owe on 2 or 3 cards but have several with a
zero balances. Well here is where the problem comes in.
When we hit the credit crunch of 2009 one of the first thing
banks did was hike up the interest rates and lowered the
[21]
amount of available credit of their card holders. Then they
tacked on fees if you were over your available credit limit.
They were simply making a killing off of the people who
were in debt but they couldn’t leave those zero balance
customers alone. No they just couldn't. So what did they
do?
Well the people that might have up to $5,000 or more
of credit but were not using it or they were paying off their
balance, the banks targeted them and found a way to
make money off of them as well. That’s where this new fee
came in. This fee could be as high as $100 dollars if the
card was not used. Speaking as a person that had credit
cards that carried a zero balance I thought this was
absolutely crazy. It was like being punished for being
responsible with my money. Well the reason for me putting
this in my book is, I found it very odd as I am writing this
book that I did a search on Google for this “fee for zero
balance on credit card” which logically should pull up
documents or images on banks issuing fee’s for carrying a
zero balance but instead I was shocked to find this came
up.
[22]
As you can see from this screenshot not a single
search result showed you anything about this fee. The
closest thing we had was from WikiAnswers and it was
asking if a 0 balance credit card looks good on your credit
report. I guess all I can say about this is there is nothing
[23]
stronger than the all-mighty-dollar because you don’t have
to pay the bank interest for spending cash.
The last post I wrote that really should be given a
second if not a third or fourth look daily was a post I found
on a blog called “10 Reasons Why You’re Rich”. After
reading this article, it really made you second guess
yourself especially when you think it’s time for a new car,
iPod, or flat screen TV. What this article did was to take a
snapshot of the world and strip down all of the extras in life
to show you what really makes you rich. In the end it was
10 of the best reasons to feel better about where you are in
life. I know it sounds bad when you say “O man I am glad
that I am not people in that country, they don’t even have
bathrooms or running water” but the truth is at the core of
every person we are glad we are not somebody else. If you
have ever made such a comment, and trust most of us
have, use to that feeling to help people out. For example
they talked about one of the reasons that you are rich is if
you did not go to bed hungry. This does not mean that you
are on a diet and you are starving yourself. No. It means
that you have no food in your home and probably have
very little means of getting any. This is a sad fact, but in
some countries they will eat clumps of mud just to keep
from having hunger pains. I do not want to talk about this to
depress anyone but my goal is to help you move into
[24]
feeling and having compassion for the poor. I am not
saying clean out your bank account convert all the money
you have into spare change then at the first sight of a
homeless person chuck the coins at them like some game
of slots in Vegas. No. What I do mean is that we all should
give of our time, money, or even food yearly, if not monthly
to help the homeless here and around the world. Think of
it, if one day you suddenly have no means to find a way to
eat, no job, and seemingly no family to help to come to
your rescue I am sure you would want someone to care
enough to help you.
On that note stay tuned for Chapter Two----A
November to Remember.
[25]
CHAPTER 2
A NOVEMBER TO REMEMBER
[26]
I really liked how the month started off with some very
good news on Ford Motor Company profit of almost 1
billion dollars as found in a article on CNN titled “Ford
reports a nearly $1 billion profit”. The reason why I
found this to be great news is, unlike other American car
companies when offered bailout money Ford declined2 they
said that if they got themselves into trouble then they can
get themselves out. This too is how big companies should
operate. They should not be given hand outs in hopes they
will improve but they should be able to see what’s wrong
and fix it.
Ford was doing so well in the previous quarter unlike
other companies like GM who in the same month reported
a $1.3 billion dollar loss3 which is horrible at best! To think
they were given 50 billion4 with a ‘B’ not with an ‘M’ dollars
to fix their company and the best they could show was a
loss of $1.3 billion dollars. Now I would think that if
someone was to give $50 billion dollars to help rebuild their
company they should be able to show some kind of
progress, not come back almost a full year later and say -in
my own words-”Yea about that money you let me borrow,
instead of changing anything I decided to keep things the
same and it didn’t work! Sorry.” Then to make matters
worse GM started to shrink as a company as they lost the
Pontiac, Saturn, Suzuki, Hummer, and Saab brands to
[27]
either downsizing, killing off the line or selling the brand to
another company. Yet they still showed a loss of over a
billion dollars. It really makes you think “what did my hard
earned money given in bailouts really do for stimulating the
economy?”
To add insult to injury in April of 2010 they said they
will start to repay the money back early5 even though they
showed a loss again of $3.5 billion. I am starting to think
they need to hire new people at GM or they should at least
talk to Ford and ask them what they are doing right. Think
about it. Ford who took no money from the government
was able to fix their problems and show a profit while GM
looks like a sinking boat in a ocean of failure. I will say this
much they did end up with a new electric concept car
called “Volt” that’s suppose to take the hybrid world by
storm. But when is the last time you heard a concept car
that wasn’t going to take the world by storm, oh and if you
want to see what a “take the world by storm” car looks like
from GM do yourself a favor and look up on YouTube or
Wikipedia the car called “Pontiac Stinger”. This Day-Glo
Green car was going to be hailed as the beach car of the
future too bad it looks about as functional as a college
student after a 5 hour beer bender.
Next story, with new credit laws coming the banks all
scrambled for new ideas to help boost their bottom line as I
[28]
wrote in the previous month, they made new rules to
charge you for having a card and not using it. Well in
November I found an article called “5 evil things credit
card companies can (still) do”. This was just as crazy as
the last post I made, even though now there are new credit
laws in place to help people from being nickel and dime to
death, the banks still could find ways to get your money.
One thing of interest is the banks undertook was increasing
the minimum monthly payments and raise interest rates. I
read cases where people had 3.5% interest rate and it
jumped to close to 15% and this is without missing a
payment or going over their limit.
I also found out they were lowering and in some
cases removing rewards and reward points. I have seen
cases where people lost all of their sky miles they were
saving up, simply because they were late on one card
payment. I feel like these are signs of what is to come. In
times gone by it use to be a good thing to keep a credit
card on the side in case of an emergency, which was ok for
most since they offered rewards like cash back, and sky
miles. Next thing you know people are using credit cards
for everything just to rack up the points. Then out of
nowhere the loyal credit card customers get fee’s, rate
hikes, and increased monthly payments when they were
making their payments on time. I think now more than ever
the consumer needs to show the banking system that they
[29]
are not going to take it anymore and switch back to using
cash. Doing that will hurt the industry and show them they
should not punish the good and the bad just because they
have fallen on hard times. The entire industry just seems
ripe for an overhaul of where good values and behavior
needs to be rewarded. But alas where there is money to be
made you can rest assured these practices will only get
more prevalent.
The next story was a very odd one to me it followed
Aerosmith the rock super band whose hits include Walk
This Way, Sweet Emotion, and Back in the Saddle. Well
their front man Steven ‘look how wide I can open my
mouth’ Tyler decided to quit the band back on November
9th. Then the very next day he showed up to Joe Perry’s
band which is called The Joe Perry Project which I have to
say it’s a very unimaginative name to say the least
anything less than the afore mentioned name would be if
the band was called Joe Perry Presents: Me Joe Perry.
Anyway I digressed. So Mr. Tyler shows up on stage and
claims they are still together as a band. Later it came out
that, it was just a lie and that he was really out of the band
from November, then on January 21st Aerosmith says they
are now taking auditions6 to replace Steven Tyler. Then
right before the “Cocked, Locked, and Ready to Rock Tour”
was about to begin Steven joins back with the boys. I do
[30]
not know about you but this guy needs help. How can you
quit the band then come back only to leave again. I know
what I am about to say might ruffle a few feathers of some
Rock and Roll purists but I think bands like Aerosmith need
to step down if you have been playing rock and roll longer
than 20 years and you haven’t had a major hit in 5 years.
It’s time to take a break.
Oh well life goes on and so with November over it’s
time to move on to December but I just can’t shake the
feeling like I forgot something. Let’s see, we talked about
the American car companies, credit cards and the many
down falls, and Steven Tyler trying to be a 60 year old diva.
I just can shake that this feeling that I missed some body
oh yes I remember now. The royal screw up of the year Mr.
Tiger Woods!
I cannot end the month of November without giving
you a complete report on what happened to this story. So
before that faithful day in November Mr. Woods was worth
over 1 billion dollars with more endorsements than you can
shake a five iron at. Then out of nowhere the car crash
heard around the world when he crashed his car into a tree
while his wife was chasing after him with a golf club back
on November 30th. At the time he claimed he lost control
of his car and his wife ran out to save him. Then later on
December 8th Tiger’s mother-in- law was rushed to the
[31]
hospital. At this time you could not turn on the TV without
seeing him. It got even worst when they found out he
cheated on his wife with 11 women, then later on could
only confirm it was only three, of which by any standard is
still three too many. Next thing we knew January he
checked himself into a sex rehab clinic. I am not sure what
they do in this clinic but it’s supposed to cure you of your
sex addiction. I think my barber put it best “The best way to
cure sex addiction is to take your wife up stairs”. I am sure
Mr. Woods would have loved to take that advice because
to put a cherry on top of this crap sundae, his wife Elin
divorced him for $750 million dollars. I mean really I do not
think anyone has taken so much for infidelity ever. With the
loss of many of his endorsements, being in the middle of
scandal for months, then in the end having one of the
biggest divorce payouts in history, this was one of those
whirlwind stories. In closing Tiger who talked about taking
a break from golf but now he has gotten back into the
swing of things to help clean up his image, and recoup his
losses. I only hope for him all the best because Lord knows
if any one of us lost $750 million dollars in a divorce we
would have gone mentally insane. Also as a word to the
wise for Tiger next time you need to remember the words
the great 1970’s soul singer Johnnie Taylor when he said
“It’s Cheaper to Keep Her!”.
[32]
Well stay tuned for Chapter Three----December Never
Looked So Bland.
[33]
CHAPTER 3
DECEMBER NEVER LOOKED SO BLAND
[34]
I know this title sounds harsh but in reality outside of
the Tiger Woods story of last month nothing really too big
happened. I am sure that this is a very debatable point but
this is from my perspective and if we have learned anything
so far, people’s perspectives are all relative. Meaning what
is import to me or the fans of MyMorningJoe.com might
not be to others. I can go even further to say that just
because this was big news in the United States does not
mean it does not show up on the radars of African tribes in
the Congo or Monks in Tibet. I know that was a long way to
prove a point but I really do not want to get flooded with
emails of people trying to prove me wrong.
With that said here are some things that were
important this month and yes most where media fluff
pieces. I am not sure if your are aware of what a fluff piece
is but it’s a piece of non news that the media makes news
to fill up time. As entertaining as they may be, these pieces
almost never show up anywhere in any history book, or
any book for that matter unless the author is trying to fill up
some pages with black text over white paper.
Now our first article was titled “Top searches of
2009”. Coming in at number one was Michael Jackson and
his death that was as sudden as that tug you get on your
gut after eating bad Mexican food. Even though several
[35]
other people died in 2009 (in fact I am willing to say
millions of others died that year) his was the most
important because everyone thought him to be a great
artist, phenomenal signer, a little odd with his personal
appearance, a freak of nature, and many other titles, it
really doesn’t matter what you thought but we were all
shocked to see the way in which he died. In fact after his
death people started saying now all the crazy stories are
about to come out about Michael like he was gay or that he
molested someone. But the truth in fact was the direct
opposite happened and people came to his defense saying
how great of a man he was. We also later learned that he
gave millions to help people all over the world but he did it
in secret. Say what you will about the Michael, nut case or
not he did leave his mark on the world.
The next big search came from Twitter or as I call it
“Simple Facebook” that allowed people to send quick
messages about anything the users wanted to send. Too
bad many users tweet about things like when they are
leaving town or their exact location, which is the reason
why sites like “Please Rob Me” was started. I know what
you’re thinking a site called Please Rob Me this must be
the authors attempt at another joke. Sorry it’s real it
monitors Twitter and Facebook and looks for people that
say they are out of town. It then publishes that you are not
[36]
at home. The point of the site is to scare people into not
giving away this type of information over the internet.
Moving on to the last and most popular search was
Swine Flu. This was a big scare that started in the Spring.
When this happened everyone everywhere was being
screened and if you just came from Mexico you were lucky
to get into the country if you dared to cough even once on
the plane. One person I knew said when they went through
the screening they had a slight sneeze and had to hold it in
fear of officials who they saw dragging people out of the
plane that even looked like they might have any flu like
symptoms. I know if I were on the plane I would freak out
that some person was pulled off of a plane but I would
think it was for other reasons. I mean in the day we live in
today I would think more so that it was a terrorist being
pulled off the plane than to think they had the flu. I know
that might sound wrong to some but if you think about it
what’s the first thing that comes to your mind when you see
someone dragged off an airplane? Times up and now you
hate to admit it to yourself but you thought terrorist.
Next was the news item or rather pillowy
fluff piece was the “Oldest and Most Amusing Headlines of
2009”. I choose this article only because it was too funny to
[37]
see what weird things people had to write about from day
to day. One that had me laughing so hard I almost fell out
of my chair was “Courtroom feces-thrower gets 31 years in
prison”. Apparently this man smuggled in a bag of his own
feces into a courtroom. I truly don’t get it. In prison you
have no rights so how did he get a bag in which to poo into
which leads me to the second question who did the search
on him and are they still working.
Anyway poo story aside, another side
splitting article was one called “Granny fights off bear with
pillow”. I do not know if granny put rocks in her pillow or
she caught the bear on his off day but what happened was
she left her back door opened (please no laughter I am
being serious) when the bear walked into the home it
walked to her room where she awoke to beat this bear with
the pillow. I want to say this was a million and one shot the
fact that the bear just didn’t decided he had enough of this
pillow fight and maul her is a miracle and the fact that she
got out without any issues so a even bigger miracle.
The last one I wanted to talk about was last
years Winner of the ‘I might be a touch crazy’ goes to
Miyuki Hatoyama. I know that name may mean nothing to
you but she is the first lady in Japan and this lady has
fallen off the deep end. She has gone on record to say
Tom Cruise was Japanese in a past life, that she has rode
a spaceship (in spite of the fact that she is not a member of
the JAXA), then finally she claimed she can eat the sun
and this is how she gets her energy. I am sorry but that
was the plot of Superman IV: The Quest for Peace which
[38]
must mean she was Nuclear Man in a past life.
The last article I thought was worth a read
was “Giant iceberg heading for Western Australia”. I
saw mention of this on CNN’s website as they hailed it as a
sign that 2012 is real and that we are all going to die. No
they didn’t say that exactly, it just seemed like they were
trying to perpetuate this fear that 2012 is going to be the
year the world ends, I can say this much that only time will
tell. Funny enough time did tell and the “angle” being
perpetuated of this being a sign of the times couldn’t have
been farther from the truth. In the article I read how this
iceberg was heading straight for Australia and would hit so
hard it would rock the country to its knees. Now this article
had me very interested but when I read another article that
came from Australia I found that it was not as bad as
people in the USA claimed. The Australian article even
reported one man saying this phenomenon happens once
every 30 years7 and that the ocean currents normally push
the iceberg back the way it came and it melts on its return.
I am not one to think the sky is falling or think that there is
an inconvenient truth out there but if this happens every 30
years then I put the media to blame for trying to make this
sound worse than it really was. This is something that
makes me mad because what good does it do to the world
to have the people that live there be scared to live. I mean
that is what they (meaning the media) are trying to do.
They know that this normally happens, but they also know
that 2012 is right around the corner, so instead of telling
the truth they blow it up to look like we are all going to die
(or at least the Australians). I mean imagine a world where
[39]
people fall for all the scare tactics the media uses every
day. You would have panic in the streets (which would then
be written about poorly that would thus create more panic
in the streets) people yelling at the top of their lungs “Oh
no, what will I do? My artificial sweetener might cause
cancer!” or “Because the rise of the Japanese Yen this
year’s shipment of Pokémon is going to cost my family a
small fortune this Christmas season”. I think the media
when they write things like this create a Frankenstein’s
Monster. Sure they meant well trying to bring some article
to life but then what happens when it gets out of control? I
have one thing to say about that and that is “Barack
Obama Kenyan Birth Certificate”. This piece of work came
from the media hype machine that somehow took a life of
its own, where even now (2+ years later) there are still
websites out there asking for proof. I have even seen
Republicans, Democrats, and the Hawaiian government
confirm where he was born but we are still debating this
fact to this day. I guess with that piece of news the media
hype machine can say “Mission Accomplished”.
Well stay tuned for Chapter Four----A New Year that Starts
off With a Bang!
[40]
CHAPTER 4
A NEW YEAR THAT STARTS OFF WITH A
BANG!
[41]
2010 did not start off like most, with people just rolling
back into the office talking about how they are about to quit
smoking or eating fatty foods. It started off with a bang
when the New Orleans Saints a team that people did not
think had a chance against the Colts were able to take the
game (Yes I know that the Super Bowl was in February but
the playoffs were in January).
This was something to celebrate but at the same time
tragedy striked when a 6.1 earthquake hit the country of
Haiti. This impoverished nation would never even make it
to the daily news when people were out in the streets
begging for food. Haiti which has been called one of the
poorest countries in the world was rocked by not one but
two earthquakes. One in January and another one which
the media is calling an aftershock (despite the fact it was
two weeks later). This has put this once poor country in the
lime light where huge out-pouring of support from almost
every nation has flooded in to aid this fallen country. From
blood drives, to churches doing out reaches, to whole
governments giving all they can, this was in fact a really big
deal. The sad thing is thanks to the media more things
went wrong that should have never been brought to light,
such as the ‘fighting’ in the streets that they showed in
almost every video after the earthquake. This made Haiti
look like a savage land but the truth of the matter was that
[42]
not everywhere was crazy. In fact my church sent people
out to help the people of Haiti and in the video there was
order not chaos but as we all know chaos sells
newspapers (or gets you hits on the internet) I mean
seriously when was the last time you saw an article that
said how nice Tom Hanks really is sell? But I bet you all
the money in my bank account that if he went on a drinking
bender and sucker punched a bouncer it would set the
internet world on fire. With that being said because of the
negative light the media put on this event the giving started
to slow down and so did the aid.
Now I am not going to make this 100% the media’s
fault I feel that the government of Haiti and all the other
countries that gave should have handled this better. I mean
there were cases where people were stealing food that
was given for free to the people then selling it to them for
big profits8 and course you cannot blame the media for
that. That blame rests on the shoulders of the irresponsible
people in charge that are trying to make a quick buck off of
the bleeding hearts out there who love to give. However I
still would encourage any of you out there that’s reading
this, make sure you give to people in need I mean just
because we do not live in a perfect society does not mean
you don’t have to give. Anyway now that you have had
[43]
your emotional passport stamped from that guilt trip I just
gave you I want to move on to our next story.
This story was truly a showing of how quickly your
employers can turn on you. I reference the snow job that
NBC gave Conan O’ Brian. I can honestly say I have been
a fan of his for years and I always wanted to see him in
New York. Then when he got the Tonight Show gig I
thought “wow he finally did it people finally find him funny
enough for the big time”. Too bad the talentless big
chinned wonder wanted his old job back. I mean let’s not
think of it as a late night thing but think of it as a job thing.
You work at your lower paying job for years only to find out
the big time gig finally has opened. Then no sooner did
they put your name on your parking space you find that the
old guy has returned to take his spot back. I am sorry but in
the real world that would never have happened. The
company would have told the old guy “Hey we are still
trying this new guy out and besides we gave you another
job and you failed at that!”. Well long story short Leno got
his old job back, Conan and his staff split 40 million and left
NBC but Conan was far from out for the count after
recovering from this very public firing. He did something
really smart and took his comedy show on the road (which
thanks to my wife I was able to see).He sold out every
show and I have to say from personal experience it was
[44]
awesome. Conan then landed a deal with TBS to have his
show at 11pm and the show Lopez Tonight to be moved to
Midnight. The funniest thing of all about this whole debacle
is during the tour and the TBS deal NBC pulled the ratings
on Leno to see that his ratings were even lower than
Conan’s9. I guess the public has spoken and we will see
who will win the late night wars come November 2010.
Can’t wait!!
The last thing that happened this month was Apple
talking about the release of the iPad. Now I do not own an
iPad, nor do I own a Mac I will admit I do own an iPod but I
haven’t logged into iTunes to load music on it in over a
year so I don’t think you can consider me a diehard iPod
user either but Mr. Steve Jobs found an idea that was
going to make pay dirt. While netbooks were all the craze
the previous year, he wanted to release a geeky toy that
was portable and expensive all at the same time. That’s
where the iPad came in. This device is very costly to say
the least running about $499 for the cheapest one. Now I
can say that this will go down in the history books as
something major. Why you ask? Well for years Tablet PC’s
have been around but never got their just due. Then just
two years ago they created what is now known as a eBook
Reader which did not gain the traction that they were
hoping for. All of this came out before the iPad but once
Apple made their release it was a real game changer. It
[45]
allowed people to play games, surf the web (well kinda)
and allowed people to read books all from a Tablet PC.
Then as soon as it launched with its huge price tag of
$400+ you saw a huge jump in eBook readers and
companies like Sony started to create cheaper alternatives.
I also think one of the most potent facts of this market trend
is the sales of eBooks now outsells the traditional
hardcover books on Amazon’s website over and over
again10. It really does show there truly was a demand and
money to be made in creating a great eBook reader. This
to me was real a genius on Apple’s part and I would like to
give them kudos for making something even more ‘cool’
than an iPhone. This proves that lighting can strike the
same place more than once (yes I know this is the third
time they made a trendy gadget but they don’t have a
saying for that).
Chapter five is coming up are you ready for----They Love
me they love me not!
[46]
CHAPTER 5
THEY LOVE ME THEY LOVE ME NOT
[47]
Ahh February home of such great things as Black
History Month, Valentine’s Day, and Presidents Day Sales
but I was able to find some other things that happened to
be ground breaking this month.
Some of the big things that happened was our
first post in February “Beyonce And Taylor Swift Make
Grammy History”. Now how is this news you might
wonder? Well, Beyonce not only grabbed 6 awards she
also went into the history books by being the only solo
female artist to achieve this feat. The next deal was Taylor
Swift who just a little while back had her glory taken from
her by Kanye West at the MTV movie awards11 when he
got on stage and told her that she did not deserve the
award of Artist of the year. Well many people say that if it
wasn’t for Kanye’s outbursts she would have never won
both Grammys but the truth is it doesn’t matter how you
win a Grammy, a win is a win. Although if we revisit a few
years back of course the exception to the rule which was
everyone’s favorite lip syncing duo of Milli Vanilli. Don’t
recall you say? Well they were ousted live on stage when
their record started to skip endlessly during one of their
performances. Of course they had to give back their
awards because well they never sang a note of any of their
hit songs. I am still left wondering if they didn’t sing those
hit songs like “blame it on the rain” and “girl don’t you know
[48]
it’s true” then who did and why aren’t they popular? I will
tell you why because they probably didn’t look good on
camera (in your free time do a search for Brad Howell and
John Davis or The Real Mili Vanilli) which proves the
Buggles where right when they said “Video Killed the Radio
Star”. But I am not writing about them I am talking about
Taylor Swift and Beyonce and
I have to say that it’s good to see that women are finally
getting what they deserve in the music field and not just
seen as backup singers!
The next item up is “January Unemployment Rate
Drops to 9.7 Percent” I know that this is from the month of
January but normally unemployment percentages do not
come out until after the month has closed. I felt that this
was a great start to the year. It was a minor drop from
where it was at the start of the year but it was going down
just the same. Now even though since then the percentage
has raised to approximately 12% since January, as of the
time I am writing this book it has dropped to 9.6%. So
because of this I have to look at this in a positive light. Now
before we get up and click our heals that unemployment is
down we must first look at what is unemployment. Well its
quite simply the number of people that are currently
unemployed right? Wrong!! Lets first look at what’s not
captured in this unemployment rate. One thing it does not
[49]
capture is the people who took less paying jobs just to get
by. So for example if you were making $65,000 and you
were let go from your company, remained unemployed but
then found and took a new position elsewhere that now
paid you $32,000 (just to keep the creditors off of your
back) you are now seen as employed. Well even though
you’re employed that does not mean that you’re happy or
that you’re going to stay at this job especially since you’re
use to making more money. You will more than likely leave
to find another place to work as soon as the market gets
better and so you would impact the unemployment
number. This is because you are now applying for a job
even though you have one currently. In doing this you’re
now taking that position away from the current market that
is looking for employment. Now what you have done
leaving from one company for another is actually take
away a potential career from the job market that could
have went to someone that is unemployed. I know what
you’re thinking “but my old job will become opened and it
will be filled later so what’s the big deal?”. Well the truth is
some companies in order to save money will allow you to
leave and never reopen your position but then make the
rest of the team pick up the slack. Please note that I am
not blaming anyone for trying to find a better job I am just
letting you know how the system works. Also the
unemployment rate is a average of all people across the
United States, so if you lived in Texas and their
[50]
unemployment rate was 6.5% then you’re not so bad but if
you were in let’s say the city of Detroit (where the auto
industry is trying to make a comeback after years of record
setting losses) it could be as high as 15%. So you see just
because it’s at 9.7% or even 9.6% it does not mean that
jobs are falling out of the trees. Other factors that come
into play are natural disasters they can throw the number
off. Let’s look at the BP oil spill (and yes I will be talking
about this in greater detail later on) because of major event
thousands have lost their jobs. The up side is that it has
also created temporary jobs once the spill is cleaned up
these people will be just as unemployed as the ones
waiting for the oceans to be clear again to return to their
way of life.
I choose not to look at the unemployment rate as a
focus point of the job market. I say you look at it like this, if
you have a job then good your part of the majority. If you
do not have a job well that is of course not good and you
will have to find one (and yes I have been unemployed
before so please do not take this as me making fun of the
unemployed). Now when I say find one I do not mean open
up your local paper and try to find a job I mean take what
you’re good at and if you can start your own company. If
you cannot then look everywhere and I mean everywhere
for a job I know I have talked to many people who have
[51]
been unemployed for a while and it was because they have
a skill but they don’t want to leave where they live or take
less pay. I can say this much from personal experience, in
theses tough times we have to do what we need (short of
breaking the law) to make it. I myself was willing to relocate
to the other side of the country just to stay afloat but in the
end all I am saying is do yourself a favor and know that
numbers lie. They can make numbers say and do whatever
they want them to. If they wanted to they could make it look
like unemployment is at 5% by cutting unemployment
benefits after six months. Now we all know that it takes
more than six months to find a job but if the government
uses unemployment benefits as a way to measure who is
employed and who is not then to make the unemployment
number look smaller they can just simply cut jobless
benefits at 6 months. If they want it to look bigger they
could extend it to 5 years. Unemployment rates in the end
can be thought of as a condensed soup (please let me
explain before you think I mad). If my can of vegetable
soup says add one can of soup to one can of water then
that is the most accurate way to make this soup, but if I
was selfish and did not want to make enough for everyone
I would just make a half can of water, and conversely I
could add 2 cans of water to 1 can of soup if I wanted
more. In the end I gave you the right way and two wrong
ways to make the soup and just like unemployment there
should only be one way to look at it, but if you try to look at
[52]
it from so many different angles then you’re bound to get it
wrong.
The last one out the gate is the story of Shani Davis.
He was the first person in the history of the Winter
Olympics to win back to back in the 1,000 meters speed
skating race. This was huge since no other individual has
ever done it before and I would like to think this record will
be on the books for many years to come. Unlike some
records that seem to be beaten every time you turn
around. For example in the world of sprinting at Summer
Olympic games the 100m World Record12 has been
changed almost every 2 years which on the one hand
makes it harder and harder to beat but then on the other
hand shows how possible it is to beat. Let me clarify what I
mean if you look at Shani Davis’ record which has never
happened in the history of the sport that started back in
1992, you can say that it’s been almost 20 years the sport
has been around and no one has been able to achieve
what he has done. Now you cannot say the same for
people who do the 100m run since 1992 as the fastest time
has been beaten 12 times. No offence to any track runners
out there, (my wife and I are big fans) but according to
history if you’re the fastest ever one year you might not be
the fastest the next year or even the next time the
Olympics is around which is why I have to tip my hat to
[53]
Shani Davis. The fact that you where able to keep up with
every one for two Olympics in a row is quite a feat to
achieve indeed. Congratulations.
Well stay tuned for Chapter Six----March really isn’t as mad
as people think it is.
[54]
CHAPTER 6
MARCH REALLY ISN’T AS MAD AS PEOPLE
THINK IT IS
[55]
Now I know so far I have written about things that
will make it into the history books or at least in some kind
of pointless trivia game but I would like to take this time out
to talk about scams!
I am sure when you saw this eBook was for free on
MyMoringJoe.com you thought it was a scam (if you
bought this book then thank you for supporting the Polaris
Project). You probably thought who would write a whole
book for free or whoever would put that much work into a
free ebook must be crazy (well I am not crazy I am
eccentric there is a difference).
Well I read an article called “Internet's most
successful scams” and it made me think, first thing I
thought was in today’s society we should have built up
some sort of immunity to scams. I mean with the internet
age we are just a point click away from finding the truth or
at least someone’s opinion on the sketchy email, instant
message, or voicemail we have received. I know if I ever
get a phone call from a strange number that I do not know
who it is, I look it up on a phone number finder then find out
who or what was trying to reach me. So you can only
believe the level of shock I had when I found that Internet
Scams have made of $560 million dollars13 and it’s on the
rise. There is a scam for everything now. It’s no longer just
the ‘Nigerian’ scam from the 1990’s where people promise
[56]
to mail you tons of money but all they need is a small
amount of earnest money to “free up” the money they want
to send you. Back when Obama was giving all sorts of
bailouts there was a scam sweeping the nation that Obama
was giving money for people to go back to college. People
would only have to provide their checking account
information so that the ‘direct deposits’ could be made, but
then as soon as they give up the information their account
would be tapped dry! Now think about all the friends that
you have. Now do you any of them have a boyfriend or
girlfriend that is living in another state or even another
country? Then there is a chance that they are being
scammed. I know sounds odd right but there have been
cases where people were dating for a couple of months but
then they claim “I wish we could see each other face to
face but I am too poor to make the trip”. So people will give
them money for plane tickets, bus pass, even spending
cash only to find that the person never came. In fact they
find that the person isn’t even real the pictures all came
from someone else’s Facebook or Myspace account.
I use to be a fan of a YouTube blog where this guy
would rant about all things political. Well one day he
noticed a lot of French people started becoming fans of his
page. They then started to send him messages in French
(which he could not read) he then asked anyone on his
YouTube followers that could translate the messages for
[57]
him. Well when they did he found that somebody
downloaded all of his photos from his Myspace account
and was posing as a French man conning French women
out of money, and the letters he was getting were from
those same women who saw him on the most popular
section of YouTube and figured they would give him a
piece of their mind. It’s sad but true I am not writing this to
scare you or to frown on online dating all I am saying is if
someone wants your money, credit card number, or
checking account information do some research before
giving it to them because chances are you will be the one
stuck with the bill.
Another good article was “PepsiCo cuts more
schools' drinks”. This change can be seen a positive
because it stops soda companies from selling their high in
sugar drinks to kids. I know that this is on the table as one
of the reasons for childhood obesity which I think is a joke
in and of itself and I will explain to you why. When you look
at the new ruling it states that they can only sell Water,
Milk, and Juice to students. Now with more parents telling
kids they need to drink their juice I am sure the sales of
Pepsi products were down. So I am sure you’re wondering
why I think it’s a joke, after-all they did take the Pepsi
products out right? Well in truth they didn’t they only
removed the sodas and I know when you hear PepsiCo
you think Mountain Dew right well PepsiCo also owns
[58]
another company that you might have heard of called
Tropicana and they only sell juice so let’s look at some
nutrition facts shall we. Tropicana Twister only contains
10% Juice and if you bought a 20 fl oz bottle of the stuff it
would be about 270 Calories, and 63g of Sugar the only
real nutrition you get from this juice is Vitamin C. Now let’s
look at Pepsi for a 20 fl oz bottle it has 250 Calories, and
69g of sugar with no nutritional value. Does it really seem
like your making a difference? As long as children are not
drinking 100% (or a number much closer to 100 than to 0)
fruit juice then we are simply trading vices.
The other thing is the states are not the parents, the
parents are and we should be teaching our children what to
eat and what not to eat. If not, well as you can see doing
something as simple as changing from soda’s to a 10%
fruit juice is only going to help line the pockets of Pepsi and
not teach the children anything. Now why is it a smart
move for Pepsi to push Tropicana over their Soda brand?
Well I know it’s easy to drink about one bottle of 20 fl oz
soda maybe two but by the 3rd one you may feel sick
because the acids found in soda and carbonation in fact
most find it hard to drink so many sodas in one sitting. This
goes the same for kids but I know many people that can
drink 3 or 4 bottles of fruit juice and think nothing of it
because we have been conditioned to think Juice =
Healthy and Soda = Unhealthy. In the end because they
[59]
are making us think we are getting a healthier choice we
would tend to allow ourselves to drink more which means
they would make more profit changing over to the
Tropicana brand than sticking with the Soda brand.
Donovan McNabb shook up the month with the trade
rumors that he was leaving the Eagles to go to another
team. Well after days of people asking he confirmed he
was going nowhere on March 29th, then April 5th we found
out all of that was a lie and he moved on to the Washington
Redskins. Now I have a problem with this and here is why.
McNabb told the people of Philadelphia he wasn’t going
anywhere and that he loves the city and its people and
would never leave the team. Then out of nowhere
blindsides them with leaving the team. Here is my issue,
there was little to no backlash when this happened it’s
almost like people understood his need to leave, however
fast forward a couple of months when Lebron James left
the Cleveland Cavaliers and people went after him with full
force. I saw whole websites go up on the internet saying he
was a sell out and should never play the game again. They
also went as far as to get Basketball stars like Jordan, and
Barkley to say they would have never made the same
moves that he has made. It’s sad because in doing this the
once great basketball player Lebron James who use to be
known as “The Next Jordan” has now been told by Jordan
that he would have never been like him. I mean ‘geez’ it’s
[60]
like your hero punching you in the gut. Its things like this
that confuses me to death (not all the way to death but
pretty close to it). How can one person do one thing and
nobody care but another person does the same move and
it’s almost like the whole world turns against them.
Well stay tuned for Chapter Seven---- Sorry but April
prefers baths to showers now-a-days
[61]
CHAPTER 7
SORRY BUT APRIL PREFERS SHOWERS TO
BATHS NOW-A-DAYS
[62]
April now that was a crazy month full of
mergers, exploding volcano’s and toys being band. I know I
was taken back by most of these stories because I could
not believe how so much happened in such a short amount
of time.
For example HP has merged with yet another
company. This company does not believe in moving into
new markets they just buy the guy that’s already in the
market then do cut backs then go on with their day. Think I
am making this up well here is a list of some companies
they have merged with Compaq, Mercury Interactive Corp,
3com, Voodoo PC, EDS, and the list goes on and on and
on. If there was a world record for the most mergers in a
single company they should win (or at least be in a close
second). Now I know what you’re thinking all of this
merging must mean the company is growing. Not really
since 2003 (and not 1993) the company has cut more than
25,000 employees14 worldwide (but mostly in the US). That
is more employees than most companies have. So why the
cut backs if they are merging? Shouldn’t the other merging
company be able to keep their employees? The answer is
no. The reason is HP has several areas where they want to
grow but they cannot do it organically so instead of trying
to grow by hiring people they just merge with another
company that is already established. Then once they are
merged they examine the company and say there are too
[63]
many people here doing the same job and they start doing
cuts. It’s like if your body merged with someone’s body that
looks better than yours well there are some features of
yours you like and some of theirs you like but everything
else has got to go. Now I could take this analogy even
further but I think you get the point.
So why all this HP merger talk well that is because
HP has merged with Palm the 4th place phone OS
company. Which is sad because if any of you remember
Palm was the first company to take the electronic organizer
and make it cool (sorry Apple but you gave up on the
Newton too soon for people to even remember why I am
mentioning you right now). Now even though HP has
acquired Palm they are showing some promise to use their
phone operating system to build a tablet PC to challenge
the iPad. They are also looking to build a wider range of
phones that will work for both the business use and casual
use. I think it’s good for them for trying to save this
company from failure but all I can say to Palm is do not get
too comfortable. Many of companies that have been
absorbed by the HP blob have suffered major losses in the
not too distant future.
One really big deal happened when Eyjafjallajokull
exploded. What is Eyjafjallajokull you might be asking
(other than a word that 90% of all reporters outside of
[64]
Iceland could not pronounce). It was the active volcano
that blew its top stopping all commerce for weeks. When
talking to some people that visit my site here in America
they could not understand how a volcano could stop planes
from flying well let me explain. When you go to a barbeque
and the person happens to use charcoal what is left behind
when you’re done cooking is small amounts of ash. Now
imagine you’re in a football stadium and from goal line to
goal line was covered in hot ash 5 feet thick. With you on
one end in a high powered truck and me on the other end
with a hundred dollar bill, even if you floored the truck you
would never make it to the other side of the field without
major challenges like the thickness of the ash which would
cause the tires to slip. Then let’s not forget this is hot ash
from the earth’s core so there is a good chance it would be
so hot it will start to melt the truck’s tires and frame. Then
lastly, the dust part of the ash would clog up every opening
it can be found. That would leave you stuck on the 50 yard
line and me walking away with the hundred dollar bill. Now
that we have a better understanding of what ash can do to
a car lets now think about an airplane cursing at 32000 ft. If
this were to happen, it would not simply get stuck in the air.
It would fall out of the sky. Which is why everything
stopped and people were too afraid to take that chance,
now after the ash cloud was gone life was able to return
back to normal. I still wonder how long it took to get all of
those backlogged passengers out but I think some
[65]
questions just go unanswered.
The last one comes from the west coast in Santa
Clara California where they are the first county in America
to ban toys in meals that have over 200 calories. I saw a
video about this on YouTube. I think it is a great idea that
the toy that comes with a children’s meal should be able to
be purchased without buying a meal. This gives a parent
the ability to buy the toy for their child and not have to buy
them a ‘Happy Meal’. I think this is great and parents no
longer have to force their children to eat a ‘Happy Meal’ for
a toy they can just buy, go home and have a sensible
meal. Wait what am I saying? I think this is just more proof
that we as parents need to have better control over our
kids. We need to understand that we have more control
over what our children eat then they do. We work to get the
money to feed them and because of that fact alone we tell
them what they can and cannot eat. I mean think about it
just because our kids want to eat something fatty does not
mean we have to give it to them. Look at it like this when
your child grows up to be a teenager you want them to
date a nice boy/girl. You wouldn’t want them just going out
with any person they see. Well think of healthy food as that
person you always wanted your child to marry. They are
kind, polite, and will take care of your teenage
son/daughter for years to come. Then here comes fast
food it’s slow, lazy, and will just ruin your teenagers figure.
[66]
Now if you’re standing at the cross roads of life and your
child had to choose one or the other you would hope they
would choose the person that is good for them and not the
one that will more than likely destroy any chance of your
teens happiness for years to come and that is how we as
parents have to look at fast food. Yes it’s great in a pinch to
have something for the family but in the end any doctor you
talk to will tell you it’s best to leave foods like that alone. So
in the end remember parents we don't want our kids to
grow up to be unhappy so it’s up to us to show them the
way!
Well stay tuned for Chapter Eight--- Maybe Yes? Maybe
No?
[67]
Chapter 8
Maybe Yes! Maybe No?
[68]
May was a big month of ‘maybe’s’ all thanks to people
like LeBron James, Nolan Ryan, and BP. They all had
people in America at the edge of their seats when it came
to making earth shattering decisions.
With LeBron James his contract was up with the
Cleveland Cavilers this season and he had to make a
decision on staying with the team that picked him up
straight out of high school or go with another team. Well he
kept his cards close to his chest. People were thinking he
was going to the Knicks, or the Rockets some even
thought the Bulls but days turned to months when he finally
was ready to give the official word. He said he wanted a
press conference with the people at ESPN. When he did
this it was the interview heard around the world. He
ultimately choose to go with the Heat this angered the
entire state of Ohio. So much so the owner of the
Cavaliers had some disparaging remakes for LeBron and
his choice to leave the team these same remakes gave
him a pretty hefty fine by the NBA.
Then in August LeBron was blamed for a rash of
unemployment in Miami when the owner of the Miami Heat
laid off the season ticket sales team when he found out
that season tickets were bought out for several years and
just incase some of these season ticket holders back out
they have a waiting list of over 6,000 people15. My take on
this, why hate LeBron he wanted to get a NBA
championship ring so he tried his best in Cleveland and
[69]
they couldn’t do it so he had to go to who would bring him
what he needed. I did not see any one complain in Phoenix
when Shaq left the Sun’s to help the Cavs try and get a
Championship. As a matter of fact, I did not see anyone
complain when Shaq left the Magic to go to the Lakers to
get his ring. Nor did you see it when he left the Lakers for
the Suns when he wanted to help them get a title. It just
seems like when your seen as the golden child everything
falls on you. O well we wish you all the best Mr. James with
the Heat!
Our next major issue was the BP Oil Leak. This
“leak” really was a gusher when it was later found that
millions of gallons of oil spewed out into the Gulf of Mexico.
This was the biggest man made disaster since the movie
Gigli or Glitter! I have to say that some of the funnier bits of
this disaster came when the oil rig blew up(no I am not
insensitive, read on to see why). Like any normal company
responding to such disaster, the first thing BP did was to
take responsibility for their actions and begin to clean up
their mess.
O wait that’s not what happened that’s what a
responsible company would do. Instead what BP did was
play the blame game. A game where everyone doesn’t
want to play and everyone looses even the environment.
BP claimed that they did not know who was in charge and
it took them a good while to find who was really in charge
of the entire company so that they would have some one to
[70]
face the press. Once that mystery was figured out, then
they started on cleaning up the mess. No wait that didn’t
happen either! They held press conferences on how to
clean up the mess. I am sorry but if you’re doing off shore
drilling there should be a go to plan to fixing the issue of a
rig exploding. Then after all these meetings were done,
they started to hash up ideas on how to stop the oil
spill.Why I say ‘hash’ up, because they did not have a real
plan set in place for such a deep pipeline bursting. In fact
the auto shut off was in place did not work, which was the
only real plan they had in the end. Next thing you know the
people of YouTube started to chime in on how to fix this
issue. One person said that we should dump sand on oil
spill which is a great idea accept for one key point, the
entire ocean is lined with sand so one would guess if
dumping sand on it would fix the issue then the ocean
should be able to fix itself (in time). Another one from the
peanut gallery said to fill the hole with golf balls, hair, and
other items as a way of backing it up. Oh wait this idea
came from the people at BP! Well they can’t all be winners
this oil spill continued for over 90 days killing off sea life,
jobs, and vacation plans. All of which came at the expense
of BP who dished out a whooping $147 million of its own
money in the relief effort16. One thing that was really odd
was BP cited that while trying to save the earth they
created hundreds of jobs. I find this a hard one to get
happy about. I mean 11 people had to die plus thousands
had to loose jobs, and businesses to only have BP in the
end say they stimulate the job market. For me if this is
what it takes to end the recession then I would like to tell
BP they can keep their jobs.
[71]
Now thankfully before this book came to print I was
able to find some good news which was on August 15th the
shrimp fishery’s started to see business again as they
started to find shrimp in the Gulf Coast17. I do wonder if
they are safe to eat?
Follow that hard story is something pretty cool which
was when Nolan Ryan a name that was synonymous with
phrases like ‘World’s Greatest Pitcher” or “Fastest Pitcher
in the World” but that was back in the 1970’s and 1980’s.
Well now he has a new name which is Savior of the Texas
Rangers. For those of you who do not follow baseball the
Texas Rangers where in trouble.Lack of interest in the
team was killing their fan base and the team looked like
they might be either moving or just shut down because the
former owner declared bankruptcy. Well that’s when Nolan
Ryan and his partner Chuck Greenberg came in to save
the day by putting in the winning bid for the team of $593
million dollars. I think this is how business should be
conducted I think that teams should be given a chance to
die. If they can’t get the fan’s to show up or have a winning
team we should allow them to go away much like how the
Montréal Expos left to become the Washington Nationals.
Once a team can no longer make it in their city they should
be given a chance to either be saved or leave. I think this is
even better because Nolan Ryan finished his career in
Texas. That it was only fitting that he buy the team out, its
much like if Hank Aaron bought out the Atlanta Braves.
Anyway I am sure the people of Texas are happy that they
[72]
got to keep their team and lets just hope they support them
as they come under new management.
Well stay tuned for Chapter Nine---June came too soon
[73]
Chapter 9
June came to soon
[74]
It felt like time was just rushing by and it seems like
only yesterday that we opened our site to world. With this
year end review almost complete I wanted to focus on
some big stories that came to a close in the month of June.
One of which was Larry King talks of stepping down
this fall to me is big. I heard that he is in the Guinness book
of world records for being the longest running TV show at
the same time slot with the same host. So in knowing that
this was a big deal to have him step down, I also hope that
who ever replaces him can do a good job and really nail
people on the tuff questions. Another hope of mine is that
he does not pull a Leno on the new host and try to ask for
his job back after leaving. Now I can say this much about
his show and that is it takes a whole lot of guts to have so
many people come on your show and have them speak
their mind even if you think they are completely nuts. I
mean to think that people like Anna Nichole Smith was on
Larry King Live and he had to interview her as if he really
cares about what she had to say. I tip my hat to him (that is
if I still wore hats). If it were me, I would have given up half
way though the interview stand up and say “I am so sorry
but you are a complete waste of my time and having you
on the air a second longer could in fact make my head
explode”. I do enjoy the times when he has trendy people
on the show and try to act like he knows who they are but
that is the sign of a good interviewer that he can pretty
much handle any person. With the one exception Jerry
Seinfeld how he screwed up that one was a mystery18
to
me.
[75]
With people getting NBA fever when the Lakers were
playing the Celtics. I thought it was a good series with
plenty of ups and downs. I know when I logged into my
Facebook, and Twitter accounts that it was flooded with
people going back and forth talking about how their team is
going to win but in the end there can only be one winner
and that winner was the Lakers which for them was their
16th championship in the teams history. As you know, I
cannot write on something without giving you some
shocking fact afterwards so here we go. After the Lakers
won, the city celebrated by burning the city to the ground
that’s right the fans started to riot19 as soon as the game
was over. Setting fires in the street and breaking into
stores. This leaves me very and I mean very confused. I
never understood this phenomenon. Why is it in Hockey,
College sports, and Basketball if your team wins people
want to celebrate by raising the insurance rates of
everyone around the city.
Let’s say you own a shop in a college town
selling candles and lotions you make a modest profit pay
your rent and insurance on time. Then out of no where the
local team wins the championship. Now what should
happen is everyone is happy and they go downtown for a
drink at a bar to celebrate but not this time. This time they
wanted to really show how happy they were so they started
to burn and break everything in sight. Tipping over cars,
knocking over light posts and lucky you the happy mob
stopped by your shop and decides to light everyone of your
candles at the same time. Next thing you know, you’re
calling for the fire department to put the 5 alarm blaze out.
[76]
When the fire has been put out you, then get a call from
everyone’s favorite friend the insurance adjuster. They cut
you a check but no sooner did you cash it, you find your
monthly payments have shot up because you’re now listed
as a higher risk. This of course is a worst case scenario but
it can still happen and I do not think that people stop to
think when they are part of a drunken mob how many
problems they are causing with there ‘celebration’. At this
point your thinking well what if my team wins and I want to
show off and act a fool. Well I would suggest you not to do
it in your own town but go to the opposing teams home
town to have your riot. I mean jumping around and saying
we are number one where you live is fine but it is never as
good as visiting your neighbor and letting them know first
hand. So to fix this I suggest after the game the winning
team should get together and charter a plane to the
opposing teams home town. Once there they should then
party hard from the time the plane lands to the time they
are locked away in jail for a premeditated riot(ps this is only
a joke and please do not do this).