
2
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER
Barry Daniels
June 2002
Western Shore, Nova Scotia, Canada.
3
The creative dreaming techniques described in
"Beautiful Dreamer" are real, and are used
nightly by countless people around the world.
Many of these people keep dream diaries, and
often claim to find inspiration and guidance from
contemplation and analysis of their dreams.
Lucid Dreaming is also real, although its mastery
and use are normally only achieved by many
years of dedicated effort.
4
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER.
Prologue
Nineteen Sixty: Yorkshire, England.
His friends called him ‘Titch’, which was simply a Yorkshire
term for a person of small size. In fact Titch was not small; not
for his age; it was just that any ten-year old boy who chose to
run with a pack of twelve to fourteen year olds was doomed to be
thought of as ‘Titchy’. Yet he was not small where it mattered
most to the gang -- in his heart and in his spirit -- and he could
hold his own in most of their rough and tumble games. But this
one was different.
It was cold, that winter; cold enough that the ice on the canal
could support the weight of a pack of small boys, who skated
and skidded and chased and tumbled on the frozen surface.
They ‘skated’ on the soles of their leather shoes, or, for the luckier
ones, their winter boots, for ice skates were a rare commodity in
that place at that time. And then they decided to play ice hockey.
Since no-one knew much about this strange North American
pursuit it fell to Brian Lockwood to determine the rules of play.
Being the eldest and biggest of the boys it often fell to Brian to
make such determinations. They knew that hockey was basically
a ‘girl’s game’ played by their female associates during the summer
season while the boys played soccer. Yet they understood
5
that in North America Ice Hockey was a game for the toughest,
the fastest, the most skilful of men. Therefore the rules for ice
hockey and field hockey must be substantially different in some
important respects. Their ‘hockey sticks’ were whatever pieces of
wood fell to hand; about half of the group brought out their
cricket bats. The ‘puck’ was a well worn tennis ball. Each ‘net’
was represented by two piles of scarves and hats, similar to those
which at other times would serve as the ‘goalposts’ for impromptu
soccer matches.
The boys cleared a light snowfall from the surface of the canal
over a surface roughly sixty feet long by the width of the waterway
– about fourteen feet. The sides were selected by team
captains – Brian Lockwood and his twelve year old brother Neil –
into two teams. Titch was the last boy picked, and ended up on
Brian’s team. “What position should I play, Bri?” he asked the
bigger boy.
“You play ‘Outfielder’” Brian told him. “That’s like fullback
in soccer. Go and stand by the goal, and if the ball comes back to
you, bash it up to the Attackers. OK?”
“That’s like being Goalie!” Titch complained. “I don’t want to
play goalie!”
6
“They don’t have goalies in ice hockey,” Brian explained.
“That’s why ‘Outfielder’ is such an important position, OK?”
Mollified, Titch stood by the goalposts, watching the tangle
of arms, legs, bats and various wooden contraptions as the two
sides melded into a single brawling mass. He longed to get into
the fray, but knew even at ten years old that a good team player
holds his position, no matter what. In his frustration he struck
at the ice with his cricket bat – a device really suited to a much
larger boy. The bat skidded off the surface, cracking the ice, and
the momentum of its continued swing carried the small boy off
his feet. He jackknifed in the air and headed downwards, butt
first, towards the ice.
The front-line scrum continued to hack and swing, to punch
and wrestle, until someone, more by luck than by skill, connected
a solid whack against the dirty white ‘puck’. The ball shot out of
the melée, back towards the ‘Outfield’.
“Get it, Titch!” Brian Lockwood yelled. But Titch was not
there.
When he hit the ice it exploded beneath him, and Titch fell
into the frigid water, his rate of fall barely slowed by contact with
the thin sheet of ice. At this time of the year the water level in the
canal was less than four feet, but it might just as well have been
7
forty. The shock of contact with the bitterly cold water caused
the boy to inhale rapidly, reflexively, filling his small lungs.
He opened his eyes to see an angel. He recognised her from
the pictures and descriptions given to him at his Methodist Sunday
School lessons. She was enclosed in a sheath of golden light,
and a halo of the same light circled her head. Her hair, too, was
golden and cascaded about her shoulders in tight curls. She
floated in front of the young boy’s wide-eyed gaze, and smiled at
him with her mouth and her eyes and her face and with her entire
being. The love which she felt for him was tangible and
warm. There was no place here for ice or snow, or frigid waters.
There was no place here for coldness of any kind. She held out
her hand, and Titch took it.
Together they floated towards a beautiful city of light. The
many tall buildings seemed to be made of glass, glowing in all
imaginable colours. It reminded the boy of the ‘Illuminations’
which he had seen the previous winter at Blackpool, on a day-trip
by coach arranged by his Sunday school; but these colours were
far more beautiful.
The fact of his situation registered, finally, and his small
features creased into an expression of confusion and fear. “Am I
dead?” he asked his angel. “Are you taking me to Heaven?” The
angel made no reply, and the two continued their journey over the
8
gleaming rooftops. They crossed the city and left it behind them.
An unknown amount of time passed – minutes or hours, Titch
was quite uncertain – before they came at last over more familiar
territory, and the boy recognised the small coal-mining village on
the outskirts of Sheffield where he had lived for the ten long years
of his young life. Along the canal they drifted, to a spot where the
snow had been cleared, where a group of young boys were clustered
over something – someone?—lying, unmoving, on the snow
covered bank of the waterway.
“That’s me, isn’t it?” Titch asked. “That’s my dead body, I
know it. Why have you brought me back to my dead body?
When are you going to take me to Heaven to be with Jesus?”
“It is best that you should not ask these questions.” The
reply formed itself in the boy’s mind. His angel had not turned,
not moved her lips; but she had spoken to him. “Who are you?”
Titch asked. He sought frantically amongst the sketchy memories
of his Sunday School teachings. “You can’t be God because
you’re a girl! Who are you, then? Are you the Mother Mary? Are
you the Angel Gabriel?”
“It is best that you should not ask these questions,” the
spirit replied again. “What happened was not meant to happen,
and I have come to correct the situation. It is best that you
9
should not know of me, not yet, nor remember any part of what
happened here today. I will make it so.”
“Yes,” said Titch, not understanding, “But you should at
least tell me who you are. It’s only polite. What will happen now?
Will you leave me here? Will you leave me in my dead body?
What will happen to me?” The thought of being trapped in his
dead body was not a pleasant one, and the boy fought hard to
compose himself and not let his fear show through, as befitted a
tough son of Yorkshire. Yet his angel felt the fear threaten to
overpower the child, and turned to take him in her arms and
comfort him. Titch felt the warmth of her love soak into him and
through him, and a feeling of perfect bliss soothed his concerns
and drove out the fear.
“My sweet child, I will never leave you. I will be with you
always, throughout your long life and in the life to come. I will
never let you come to harm.”
A sudden inspiration occurred to the young boy, derived not
from his Sunday School teachings but from a more prosaic
source. “Are you my Fairy Godmother?” he asked. The angel
smiled, but said nothing. And then everything went black.
He opened his eyes to find himself face down in the snow,
coughing out great quantities of foul tasting canal water. Twist10
ing his head slightly he saw Brian Lockwood’s concerned face
hanging over him, while brother Neil pounded rhythmically on his
back. He had no knowledge of how he had come to this. His last
memory was of swinging his cricket bat at the canal’s icy surface
and losing his balance. He did not recall hitting the ice. His
memory from the fall to the opening of his eyes was a black void.
In the way of young boys, especially those concerned with
impressing their older, tougher friends, Titch did not at all appreciate
being the centre of attention and the focus of alarm. It was
unthinkable that his friends should be concerned for his welfare
merely because he had slipped on the ice and, apparently,
knocked himself unconscious for a short time. He had not yet
noticed that he was dripping wet and freezing cold. Titch leaped
to his feet and faced his fellows. When he strove to speak he noticed
that his teeth chattered, and the full nature of his situation
was finally brought home to him.
“Listen, Titch,” Brian told him earnestly, his face a study in
concern, “You must get warm as soon as you can. The best way
to do that is to run. Can you run?” What a stupid question; of
course he could run. What Yorkshire boy could not run! He began
to run. His muscles felt strange, and sharp pains lanced
through his legs. Ignoring these small inconveniences Titch ran
on, and the pains lessened as the muscles warmed. Brian and
most of the other boys ran alongside to ensure that their smaller
11
colleague came to no further harm. They covered the half mile to
Titch’s home in a little over five minutes, a very creditable time for
the snow covered terrain, particularly given the circumstances.
The group hung back at the gate to the small garden in front of
the semi-detached brick-built home where Titch lived. Alone he
unlatched the door and ran on into the small living room where a
welcome coal fire blazed. His mother looked up from the newspaper
she was reading and took in the scene in an instant. The
dripping, panting young boy was at a loss for words and so spat
out the obvious.
“I fell in the canal, Mom. I fell through the ice into the canal.”
His mother stared for long seconds, mixed emotions of anger,
relief and love moving over her face. “Harry Murphy, if you’ve
ruined those new leather shoes I’ll kill you!”
12
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER.
Nineteen Ninety Eight: Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Chapter 1
Early in January Harry Murphy decided to keep a Dream
Diary. That is, a daily (or nightly) record of his dreams. His wife,
Liz, thought it was silly idea, but then Liz was long used to putting
up with Harry's silly ideas and this one seemed to be much
more benign than many of his previous sillinesses. Less costly
too. The expensive Clarinet he had bought a year ago was now
gathering dust in a bedroom closet. Harry had seen people playing
the Clarinet on TV and thought it looked easy
Harry had been interested in dreams since he was a young
man and had read Freud. Unfortunately he was one of those
people who rarely dream, so his interest had stayed more clinical
than personal. He had always believed, however, that there was
something very powerful about dreams; something which, if
tapped, could be a very useful tool in everyday waking life. He
knew that much of mankind's inventiveness and creativity comes
13
up from the subconscious mind, by means of a mechanism which
is neither well understood nor particularly reliable. He imagined
that if he could tap directly into his subconscious by way of
dreams -- few and far between though they may be -- it could be
the shortcut to Fame and Riches for which he had been searching
through much of his life.
The decision to keep a dream diary started while waiting for
Liz at Halifax Airport one snowy January afternoon, when a small
display of books outside Cole's bookstore caught his attention.
Harry was attracted to this particular little book by its blue-onblue
cover, its title -- "My Dreambook" -- and the price; about
what he had expected to pay for a magazine to pass an hour or so
while he waited for Liz's flight. He thumbed open the book and
read a few lines from the flyleaf. "Although you may not be aware
of it, you do dream," the book told him. "You dream several complex,
vivid dreams a night. Every night. And with a little help
from this book, you will remember every detail of every dream."
"And that" said the book "Is just the start of where I will take
you!"
OK, thought Harry. Sold. He paid the sale price, explained
yet again that he didn't really buy enough books to merit getting
one of their discount cards, took his prize over to a red vinylcovered
chair and started to read. The next thing he knew Liz was
14
standing over him asking "Harry Murphy, are you going to get up
and drive me home or should I get a taxi?" On the way out of the
Airport he stepped back into Coles and collected a small spiralbound
notebook and a supply of looseleaf paper.
Harry stayed up past midnight reading his fascinating little
book, and learned much about the current state of knowledge
regarding dreams. The physical side of the business made for
pretty dull reading, with much about brainwaves, dream states
and rapid eye movement. It struck Harry that this branch of science
had not moved a lot over the last five decades and still
seemed to rely heavily on students dozing off in research labs
with electrodes glued to various parts of their bodies. About the
only progress since the nineteen fifties seemed to be the use of
computers. These greatly improved the speed with which scientists
could determine which sleep state the subject was in -- for
what that might be worth. He speed-read most of this and got
very little out of it.
The psychological side of dreaming was more interesting,
and seemed to have come a long way since Sigmund Freud had
determined that all dreams are about sex, even if you're not
dreaming about sex. A section on the interpretation of dreams
told him how biblical prophets had once made a good living by
telling kings and emperors what they had really been dreaming
about when they dreamed they were having sex. He learned that
15
dreaming of a cat could mean any of half a dozen different things,
none of which seemed to have anything to do with cats. He
flagged several pages for later study and moved on.
The spiritual aspects of dreaming were beyond Harry, especially
at two o'clock in the morning. There was mention of hypnosis
and the opening of one's spiritual channels; of states of
meditation and of spirit guides; of spiritual growth and progress
along The Golden Path Towards Enlightenment. It made his head
ache. He closed the book and went to bed.
* * *
Harry arrived at Burton's Press at 7:30 Monday morning
and Louise met him in the foyer. Harry had worked at Burton's
for close to twenty years, and had worked in virtually every area
of the company. For the last eight years he had served as Production
Manager for the firm. "It's a Code Two, I'm afraid, Mr.
Murphy" Louise told him without even a "Good Morning".
The "Code" business had started as a little joke between
Louise and Harry some months ago, but she seemed to have
taken it more seriously than Harry had intended. Although he
recognised her as a first class Administrative Assistant, he had to
admit that Louise was also a first class worrier. At least once a
week she would be waiting for him in the lobby with some new
16
piece of gloom and doom, and he had quickly noticed that her
dire warnings fell neatly into half a dozen categories. For example,
"The Crabtree-Vickers is down again" was a Code One. This
was not an uncommon occurrence, nor was it surprising that a
forty year old printing press should break down on a fairly regular
basis. Any serious production problem was a "Code One". "Code
Three" was used for Personnel crises or Union problems. "Code
Two" meant that his boss, Theo Burton, was having conniptions
again and needed Harry to go up to his office, hold his hand and
say "There, there, Theo, don't worry. Harry is here now and Harry
will fix it."
Theodore Francis Burton was the grandson of James Eliott
Burton, the man who started Burton's Press some eighty years
previously with an old Linotype machine and an antique Letterpress.
Theo was the last of the line; no more Burton's at Burton's
after Theo. Although the family no longer owned the company
Theo remained a significant shareholder in Burton's and served
as Chief Executive Officer. This entitled him to an executive office
on the eighth floor, an Executive Assistant, an executive salary,
an annual executive bonus and, perhaps the most valuable perk
of all, a seat on the governing board of AGI -- Amalgamated
Graphic Industries Corporation. AGI owned Burton's, five other
large printing institutions, eight smaller ones and twenty other
companies all more or less connected with the printing and publishing
business. Most of his employees considered Theo to be a
17
nice guy, but totally useless. He was the spoiled son of James
Francis, who was the spoiled son of James Eliott, but there was
nothing of the old man's steel left in Theo. His main function was
to attend the monthly AGI meeting in Toronto and bring back his
notes to Halifax. These he read to Harry and the rest of the Burton's
Management Team on the Monday mornings following the
Toronto trips. The meetings were invariably short since nobody
asked questions. Nobody asked questions because they all knew
perfectly well that Theo had no answers, and it would only cause
embarrassment all round the table to expect them from him.
Harry grabbed the coffee which Louise held ready and
headed for the eighth floor. Theo met him coming out of the elevator.
"Harry," he shouted loud enough to be heard from floor
three on up, "Harry, they want me to take early retirement. Early
retirement, Harry! How can I take early retirement? How am I
going to manage, Harry? They say I won't even have a pension!"
Doesn't anybody bother with "Good Morning" anymore,
Harry wondered?
He got Theo settled in his black leather recliner, asked June
to bring in some tea, and tried to calm him down. June Sawler
was Theo's Executive Assistant, this title being one step up from
'Administrative Assistant'.
18
"Theo, for starters, you're sixty three years old, and you
would have had to start thinking about retirement soon anyway,
so let's not lay too much emphasis on this "early" business, shall
we? Secondly none of us in the management group have company
pensions any more. Those generous annual bonuses we've
been getting are supposed to let us make our own financial arrangements
for our golden years. And thirdly, you still own
twenty percent of Burton's stock, which should pay you a yearly
dividend about the size of my present salary and bonuses combined.
Take a deep breath Theo, and just think about this."
"Seventeen," he said.
"What?"
"Seventeen percent. I own seventeen percent of Burton's,
and they want that from me, too. They want to give me a two
percent share in AGI in exchange for my Burton's shares, so I
won't even have that."
Harry did some quick mental arithmetic. "Theo, they are being
nice to you. They are offering you a good old "golden handshake"
to make the parting easier. In terms of how much it will
pay you, your Burton's shares are equivalent to about one, maybe
one and a quarter percent of AGI stock. If they are still offering
two percent this morning call them back and grab it."
19
"But what am I going to do, Harry?"
"Just what you've always done, Theo." That didn't come out
the way Harry intended but luckily it seemed to go straight over
Theo's head. "You can do anything you want, whenever you want.
You don't have to wait for weekends to go to your cottage. You
can spend the whole summer fly fishing if you want to. You can
take the trip to Europe you've been talking about for the last five
years. Go on a world cruise. Lie in bed late in the morning if you
want to. Every morning, Theo."
About half of this was getting through, but it seemed to be
enough.
"You think it's OK then, Harry? Really, I mean? Honestly?"
"Theo, I think it could turn out to be the best thing that's
happened to you in years."
"But what about Burton's, Harry? How are you all going to
get along if I'm not here?"
Bite your tongue, Harry. Not even a flicker of a smile. He's
one of the Good Guys, remember, and they don't exactly outnumber
the other kind around here.
20
"Well, Theo, we'll have to face that problem sooner or later.
And I'm sure that AGI will insist that your replacement is at least
as capable a manager as you have always been." Careful Harry,
the man isn't stupid.
Theo smiled. June came in with the tea.
So now we come to the big one, Harry thought. The $64,000
question. Don't let it sound like you really care that much, or as
though you've been waiting for this moment for the last five years.
Sip your coffee, Harry, and don't drool.
"By the way, Theo, did George say whether they have anyone
in mind to replace you?" George Thorpe was the President and
Chairman of the Board at Amalgamated Graphics. George wasn't
exactly a dictator, but the last person to stand up to him with any
amount of vigour had not been heard from for six months. Office
gossip said he was managing a Copy Centre somewhere near Yellowknife.
"What? Oh, no." Theo was elsewhere. "You know Harry, I
bet I would get rid of this awful indigestion I get every time I eat
anything. Get the old insides back into good working order,
what? Out from under all the stress, you know, sort out the old
tummy, don't you think?"
21
Stress? What stress? "I'm sure you're right, Theo. Did he,
did George, did he happen to mention.......?"
"Oh, yes, sorry. No. Not that I recall. He says he wants me
to go up to Toronto to discuss the changeover."
"Changeover? So he does have someone in mind for the
job?"
"Someone in mind? Oh, I see. I don't know, Harry. Yes,
come to think of it, I believe he may have. Probably some recent
MBA from some prestigious American Ivy League. Likely the
nephew of one of the boys on AGI's board of directors. Somebody
who can speak to computers in their own language but has the
interpersonal skills of Attila the Hun. Damn shame for Burton's.
What the old firm really needs is somebody like you, Harry.
Someone with a knack for getting along with people. If you weren't
too old, that is. If I thought there was a chance I'd suggest
you to Thorpe when I talk with him next. You know, I think I will,
dammit."
Now how's that for a backhanded compliment, Harry wondered.
I'm forty seven for God's sake, with twenty good years left
in me. I'm a perfect age for the job.
22
Theo was standing with his back to Harry, staring out of the
window, probably thinking about fly fishing. The Code Two was
obviously over. Harry excused himself to Theo's back and left.
Back in his office Louise had re-scheduled his morning
meetings, postponed those who couldn't make the new times, and
replaced his tepid cup of coffee with a fresh one from the machine
by her desk. The morning sped past and by the time he noticed
how quiet the third floor had become it was half past lunchtime.
Despite the gossip Harry continued to believe that the staff
cafeteria ('Staff-Caff' as it was unaffectionately known) was not
harmful to your health unless you actually used it. He therefore
tried to keep his visits down to emergency use only, which averaged
out to about three, maybe four times a month. Having an
important customer arriving in his office within the next hour
constituted such an emergency, so he grabbed cup, plate, plastic
utensils and tray and made the best of what was left in the
stainless steel bins. He saw Mick Shaw, Burton's Pressroom
Chief, sitting alone and went over to his table.
"G'day Scotty" Harry said, setting his tray down on the small
cafeteria table. Mick was as Irish as the Shamrock. He came to
Canada in the early seventies, and took a job in a Montreal Pressroom.
Mistaking his accent, the locals (with no malice intended)
called him "Scotty". It stuck, and moved to Nova Scotia with him
23
in the mid eighties, but he'd never grown to like it. He gave Harry
a look.
"Sorry, Mick."
"G'day, Murph" he said, relaxing the scowl. (Finally, half
way through the day, the elementary courtesies observed!) Harry
had always thought Burton's was lucky to have Mick Shaw as
Pressroom Boss. Back not too many years ago you could get by
in such a job with a good working knowledge of the printing process
and the personal toughness necessary to enforce your orders;
but in today's high tech world, with half the equipment using
built-in micro-computers the first step in trouble shooting a press
problem was often searching for bugs in a computer program.
Mick Shaw possessed a rare combination of computer savvy,
printing knowledge and ham-sized fists. In the pressroom, when
Mick said "jump" it was wise to be well up into the air before asking
him "how high?"; And the techies had told Harry, away from
Mick's hearing, that "Scotty" knew as much as the best of them,
and was immune to jargon. It was said that one smartass sales
rep had tried to snow Mick with hi-tech bafflegab once. Only
once.
He was puffing and chewing by turns on a long, fat cigar,
occasionally flicking ash onto the "Strictly No Smoking" sign
which he'd taken from a nearby table and bent into a rough ap24
proximation of an ashtray. He looked abstracted, his eyes semifocussed
across the large dining room. Harry followed his gaze in
time to see June leaving by the big swing doors that led to the
elevators.
"She's a cracking bit of stuff, that secretary of Theo's," he
observed. "Do you suppose he's getting any of it?"
"No" Harry told him. "And she'd cut your Irish heart out if
she heard you call her a secretary."
"Yeah, what is it? Personal Assistant, right? Well she can
assist me personally any time of the day or night!"
"Executive Assistant, Michael. And why do you suppose
she'd look twice at a thug like you when you're sitting next to a
stud like me, tell me that now, will you?"
"HHmmphhaa" Mick spluttered, spitting cigar smoke and
coffee. "Yeah, right, in your dreams, Boyo!!"
Harry looked at Mick. The Pressroom Boss had the face and
physique of a successful barroom brawler, and his lunchtime
conversations rarely deviated from sports, Clint Eastwood movies
(for which he shared a fondness with Harry) or the supposed sex25
ual appetites of assorted Burton Beauties. Harry decided to try
the question anyway.
"Do you dream, Mick?"
Shaw looked at Harry as though he'd been asked how he'd
enjoyed his summer holiday on Mars. He said "Do you mean, like
do I think I should have a crack at Theo's job when he leaves next
month? Like, do I have -- what is it they call them? Career Aspirations?"
Before Harry could register surprise that Theo's secret was
already doing the rounds he remembered how it had been yelled
out to him at the elevator that morning. Mick had probably
known even before that. "No" he said. "I mean regular dreams.
At night. When you're asleep. You know. Dreams."
"Odd sort of question, Murph."
"Well." Harry decided to come clean. "It's just that I'm reading
this book, and it says that everybody dreams, several dreams
every night. But, me, I dream once every two or three months, so
you see....."
Mick grinned. "I see. You think you're not getting your
share, that it? Relax, Murph. I don't buy it. I don't remember
26
the last time I dreamed about anything. It was probably that June
Sawler, personally assisting me, with them long legs wrapped
around........"
Harry choked on a piece of yellowish vegetable matter. "OK
Mick, not while I'm eating this .... whatever it is. I take your
point."
"You know what, Murph, you should talk to my nephew,
Virgil. He has this thing about dreams, too. What was it he was
telling me about? Something about 'Elusive Dreaming' which is
like some kind of magic trick. If you learn how to do this 'elusive
dreaming', you can make wonderful things happen." His watch
beeped, and Mick was gone without another word. Well, at least
Harry had had a "G'day" from him.
As he watched Shaw's retreating back Harry realised that
Mick was probably recalling something he'd heard in passing anything
up to four or five years ago, and stored away for possible
use somewhere, some time. Quite a man, that Scotty Shaw. Elusive
Dreaming, Harry thought, sounded like something worth
looking up.
Liz was playing bridge that evening, so after supper Harry
sprawled out on the living room couch with Bach playing quietly
on the surround sound system, and opened his Dream Book.
27
There was no index and no mention of Elusive Dreaming in the
contents pages, so he picked up where he'd left off, and started on
the instructions for the remembering of dreams.
It was worse than playing a Clarinet, Harry thought. If he'd
expected this to be easy, he'd picked up the wrong little dream
book, and his dream diary purchase had been a tad premature.
Step One .... (Step one? Just how many steps are involved here,
he wondered. He flicked briefly ahead and saw that there were
four) Step One involved convincing yourself that you would remember
your dreams.
To do this, he read, you need to create a little mantra; a little
chant, that you repeat to yourself, silently, while trying to fall
asleep. It was apparently important that this mantra have not
only words, but cadence. Rhythm. The kind of thing that little
girls used to skip to. (Do they still?, he wondered). It is no good
simply repeating "I am damned well going to remember my
dreams tomorrow morning." The example given was:
"I will remember my dreams tonight."
"I will remember my dreams tonight."
Di Dah Di Diddelly Dah Di Dah.
28
Over, and over and over. And over. And over.
Eventually, the book explained, even though your thoughts
may drift to other things, the mantra will be implanted in your
subconscious mind and will have its intended effect. If you listen
quietly to your own thoughts you might just hear a faint mental
echo from somewhere deep down.
Di Dah Di Diddelley Dah Di Dah.
"I will remember my dreams tonight."
"I will remember my dreams tonight."
"I will remember my dreams tonight."
Until you fall asleep.
Not being particularly good at this sort of thing Harry
thought he might as well simply use the example given.
When Liz got home at 11:45 p.m. Harry was fast asleep on
the couch, snoring away to the accompaniment of "Sheep may
safely graze" replaying itself for perhaps the fifth time. She shook
him awake. He didn't remember any dreams, nor did he when he
next woke up the following morning.
29
* * * * * * *
The week flew by. Harry saw Theo once, briefly, on Thursday
morning. He breezed by Harry's office, stuck his head
through the doorway and told him he'd been worrying needlessly
about this 'early retirement business' and everything was working
out just ducky, thank you. Theo had, eventually, also done the
math, and had called AGI to accept their offer. In addition there
was a handsome severance package, which ran well into six figures,
and he got to keep his company car. All in all Theo was to
be pretty much as comfortable financially as he had been as an
employed CEO, and could even look forward to the occasional
consultancy fee on occasions when AGI had need of his particular
executive talents. Harry though that it could be a while before
such an occasion arose, but he kept this to himself and simply
nodded and smiled. Of course, he could well be wrong. Theo was
considered to be a Good Guy by one and all, and had more than a
few friends in high places. Someone from the board could very
well toss a contract his way for old time's sake. Theo's report
would probably end up as expensive executive toilet paper, if it
didn't go directly to the shredder, but then such are the ways in
which business is done at the more exalted levels. He was whistling
softly as he walked away.
30
There was not a single whiff on the office grapevine concerning
Theo's replacement. Harry could understand how his own
vine might have failed to pick up early gossip, but there was no
way that Louise or Mick Shaw would miss it. Louise even happened
to bump into June Sawler in the Staff-Caff and in passing
the time of day learned that not even June was privy to upper
echelon corporate thinking this time.
Harry resolved to make his move early the following week.
He had a few good contacts in Toronto, and a number of markers
he could call in. He knew George Thorpe well enough to give him
a call. It would certainly not hurt his career prospects to let
George know he was interested in the top slot, and that he considered
himself competent for the post. In fact Harry knew very
well how it would reflect on his career prospects if Toronto got the
impression that he did not have ambitions in that direction. Still,
it would have to be a very well thought out and immaculately
timed call. Come to think of it, Harry had several perfectly valid
reasons to schedule a few days in The City and although George
would see straight through him if he "just dropped in" he would
not take it amiss. Must think on this, Harry told himself.
The weather forecast called for one of those beautiful balmy
Nova Scotia winter weekends that could pass for spring in many
parts of the country, and Harry took himself off to his "thinking
place". Twelve years ago Nova Scotian oceanside property had
31
still been affordable by other than millionaires, and Liz's parents
had bought a three acre parcel on St. Margaret's Bay, half an
hour's drive out of town. Their intention had been to build a year
round home and retire there one day, but they failed to take into
consideration the intervention of a drunk driver who put an end
to all of the couple's intentions, short and long term. Liz's Dad
never did see retirement and her Mum never planted the seaside
garden she'd dreamed of. The driver walked away with barely a
scratch and was found a mile or so down the road, lying on his
back on the soft shoulder admiring the stars. Just one more
sorry drunk driver story, Harry thought cynically.
The term "million dollar location" is grossly overworked by
Nova Scotian Real Estate Agents, but the term fell short of describing
this little chunk of paradise. Over the years Harry had
come to see the property as the place to go when he needed to
think. Two summers ago they'd had a pre-fabricated cottage set
up on a poured concrete slab, had drilled a well and had a septic
system installed. A woodstove in the kitchen and a log fire in the
living room kept away the worst of the winter chill, and an old
record player stood in for the expensive sound system of their
Halifax home.
Liz had other plans for the Saturday morning, and would
join him later in the day, so on Friday evening Harry drove down
and fired up the kitchen stove and living room fireplace, set some
32
Verdi spinning on the old turntable, poured a generous Jack
Daniels and settled down to do some serious thinking. He took
his sippin' whiskey over to the big picture-window set into the
north facing wall and looked out over the huge bay. The lights at
Peggy's Cove twinkled in the distance and the ocean was a vast
expanse of blue-black ink.
An hour later his mind was unfettered by solutions. The
problems, on the other hand, seemed to have multiplied. If he
called George Thorpe personally, would other members of the
Board -- some of whom he knew quite well -- feel snubbed. But if
he called Philip Sutherland -- a board member he counted as a
friend (they had got drunk together once) -- would George think
he was plotting behind his back? Did George and Phil get along?
Could he talk to one without alienating the other? Or did anybody
truly matter in this but George himself? Then again, should
he call anyone before an official announcement arrived? Was he
even supposed to know? But if he waited until the official memo
arrived would they see him as a fool not to know what the assistant
janitor on the evening shift had already known for weeks?
Why the devil don't they teach this stuff in school, Harry
wondered.
33
What he really needed was some help from his subconscious
mind, where all questions of this nature are settled in the first
place.
Of course.
He hadn't come down to the cottage to study his Dream
Book, but some hunch had made him throw it into his overnight
bag. He dug out the little book, threw another log on the fire,
poured a second generous glass of thought-lubricant and settled
down on the old, overstuffed sofa.
Step Two, he began.
You do not need to train yourself to awaken automatically at
the conclusion of a dream. Sometimes this will happen; other
times it won't. If needed, you will wake up. Why would you need
to wake up after every dream? Because it is important that you
make a few notes immediately on waking. The dream takes place
in the mind, while memories are stored in the physical brain.
(Let's not go there, at least not yet, he thought. Harry had always
thought of "brain" and "mind" as synonymous). In order to imprint
the dream onto the brain, you may need a memory jogger.
A word or two will do. A short sentence will cover the most complex
of dreams. You dreamed that you were Robin Hood? Spent
years as an outlaw in Sherwood forest? Were restored to your
34
lands by good King Richard, married Marion and lived to become
a grandfather? An eighty year dream, shall we say? Wake up and
jot down "Bows and Arrows."
You have a matter of minutes -- perhaps only seconds -- to
do this before the dream evaporates like steam from a kettle and
becomes as impossible to recapture; but the next morning, as
soon as you see the jottings on the little notepad on the bedside
table, the entire epic will be restored and permanently impressed
into the memory recording apparatus of the brain. Trust me on
this, said the book.
Step Three. Good morning. Wake up, recover jottings, remember
dream, record in complete, intricate detail in your dream
diary. Don't leave out a thing. Write down what you said, what
you did, who you met, how you felt. If you don't do this, then the
limitations of physical memory take over and when you re-read
your jottings a week later you may not have the slightest idea
what they were meant to signify.
Nice. Simple. Not nearly as bad as he had first thought.
Much less complex than, say, learning to play a musical instrument.
One more glass of liquid gold. He toasted Sigmund Freud,
filled his hot water bottle from the kettle on the kitchen stove, and
35
climbed under the duvet into the Murphy shaped indentation in
the soft mattress. The living room and kitchen fires would die
down overnight, but the cottage would retain enough heat to keep
him comfortable until he stoked the fires in the morning.
I will remember my dreams tonight.
I will remember my dreams tonight.
I will remember my dreams tonight.
After about a dozen "remembers" he didn't remember anything.
He slept long and soft. No alarm clocks awakened him; no
morning radio DJ cheeried himself into Harry's day. No city traffic
noise intruded into his sleep. He woke up, about nine o'clock
on a sparkling Saturday morning in the most beautiful part of the
most beautiful province of the finest country on God's Good
Green Earth. He felt full of joy.
He checked his mental registers. No dreams. Nothing.
Could it be that the "Dah diddely dah" business would only work
for people who had dreams to remember in the first place? He
would have to look in the book to see if there was a section on
"inducing dreams".
36
Other pressing matters came to his attention so he grabbed
his dressing own and headed at speed for the bathroom.
When the rekindled fires had lifted the internal temperature
back to a more civilised level he went into the bedroom to dress,
and found a little white rectangle of notepaper lying on the floor.
He picked it up and looked at it and to his utter amazement saw
writing there. At least, he saw tracks on it. Pencil scratches.
There were two words, but it took some effort to decipher them.
Was it in English? After a number of false starts Harry concluded
that at some time during the night he had reached for his notepaper,
taken up a pencil and jotted down this important note:
Memo to self:
"Gravey Shakes”
He noticed that he'd misspelled "Gravy" as "Gravey", but regardless
of spelling he had no idea what it meant. Was Grav(e)y
an adjective describing a type of Shake (e.g. Milkshake, but made
with gravy?) Or a noun, so that "shakes" was a verb defining
what gravy does? He supposed that if the gravy was suitably
congealed (Burton's staff-caff achieved this well and regularly)
then when ladled over the mashed potatoes the gravy would
"shake" like jelly, as opposed to flow like, well, like gravy. Had he
dreamed of the Staff Caff? Some nightmare involving congealed
37
gravy over soggy, yellowish vegetables? Nothing he tried made any
real sense. He was stumped.
Liz arrived shortly after noon. Harry and Liz had graduated
to Empty Nesters the previous year with the departure of their
youngest offspring to Ottawa, and Liz was now preparing to go
back to work. She had studied law for two years at University
and worked previously as a legal assistant. A "Paralegal", Harry
thought, was the correct term. Liz had told Harry that a Paralegal
is to a lawyer what a Paramedic is to a doctor. He had asked if
this meant that she delivered emergency legal advice to roadside
accident victims. He didn't get a laugh. Liz was taking steps to
come up to date in her specialty, and she would then actively look
for work. It seemed to Harry that most of what she needed to
learn fell into the Computer field rather than the legal. But Liz
knew the law. Harry asked her if she knew of any legal significance
to the term "Gravy Shakes". She gave me him one of her
looks.
"Say that again slowly" she told him.
"Gravy -- as in Roast Beef and Yorkshire pudding -- Shakes
-- as in Milk variety or post party physical recriminations."
38
"No." Harry had known for many years not to expect ambiguity
or waffle from Liz. He had serious concerns about how she
expected to make a successful living in the legal profession.
"Does the term mean anything to you at all."
"No. What is this, Harry? A cryptic crossword puzzle clue?"
Liz naturally knew of his predilection for the London Times puzzle
page.
"Yes" he lied. Harry knew very well that Liz could see
through him like glass, but he also knew that she would usually
overlook his more harmless lies for the sake of marital harmony
and a more serene lifestyle. "What connotations does it bring to
mind for you?"
"Some bizarre concoction dreamed up by misguided youth?
Maybe something to do with the drug scene? Like mixing drugs,
for example. Especially the 'shakes' part. You 'shake' the mixture
and then you 'shake' from ingesting it. Maybe 'gravy' means
money, profits. I think that 'gravy' is slang for money in some
parts of the world. Any of this help, Harry?"
"Yes" he lied again. "Thanks, Liz." She went to take a
shower. Harry looked again at the scrawl on the scrap of paper.
Had he dreamed of drugs? Did "Gravey Shakes" refer to drug
39
profits? Was there anything here that could help him with his
AGI dilemma? It seemed not. Some help, Subconscious Harry.
Thanks a bunch.
Half an hour later Liz came out of the bathroom in her robe
and with a towel around her head. "Harry," she said "about your
crossword clue, could your "gravy" be as in Grave-y. Remember
Scrooge to Marley's Ghost? 'There's more of gravy than grave
about you'." Yes, he thought. Indeed it could. Harry did not
normally misspell simple words. Graves, he thought. Death and
dying. Bones in the ground. Tombstones. Graveyards.
Graveyards. It came back to him like a stroke of thunder.
One second he would have taken an oath that he had not
dreamed at all the previous night, and a split second later it was
all there, in instant, incredible detail. It was neither Grave-y nor
gravy, it was Harry's midnight shorthand for 'Graveyard'. And it
wasn't 'shakes'. In the middle of the night Harry had taken a
pencil and paper and scratched on it: Memo to self:
Graveyard Snakes.
40
Harry Murphy's Dream Diary: Friday, January 16.
I walked along a small path, not much more than a rabbit track,
through a grassy field. I don't know how I came to be there, nor
how I knew where I was, but I knew that I was on the outskirts of
a very old village somewhere in the north of England. Immediately
to my right ran a large iron railing. At the top of the railing, above
my head, the black poles ended in sharp points. The fence enclosed
a small stone church; I could see the church tower in the
near distance. The fence also enclosed a graveyard, which I could
see to my immediate right. The church and graveyard were immensely
old.
The day was ugly. The skies were heavy and oppressive, seeming
to hang only a few feet overhead, and ready at any minute to release
vast quantities of a frigid, wind-driven rain. I was aware of a
biting cold, but it caused me neither pain nor concern, as though I
were insulated from it in some way. There was no colour anywhere
other than drab browns and greys. My mood, too, was
heavy and oppressive as though some mighty problem weighed
down on me -- though I was not aware of what that problem might
be. I felt deeply depressed and despondent. Whatever it was that
troubled me, I had no hope for a solution.
41
I continued walking along the path, looking through the bars at the
crumbled old stones. Some had canted against their neighbours;
others had fallen and lay flat on the earth like paving stones in an
improbable footpath.
My focus moved back from the gravestones to the ground by the
side of the path, between the black iron poles of the fence. On the
graveyard side of the fence I saw a small brown snake, about two
feet long and the thickness of my thumb at its thickest section. As
my eyes passed along the base of the fence I saw another snake,
bigger than the first but of the same variety. Then I saw more, and
realised that the whole graveyard was infested with the creatures,
some of them several feet long and as thick as my forearm.
I was concerned that the snakes might take notice of me and see
me as prey. I had no idea whether they were harmless or possessed
of deadly fangs. Then I realised that the snakes were unable
to cross the line of the fence, and were in fact confined to the
graveyard. With this realization came an enormous sense of relief.
END.
Sunday dawned clear and colder. Harry had not dreamed
the previous night, or at least if he had dreamed, there were no
little squares of notepaper lying around to give evidence of it. He
stared out over the waters of the bay and tried to come to terms
42
with what had happened. How could he have dreamed such a
complex, detailed scenario and not known of it until the cryptic
"memory jogger" brought the whole script crashing back? How
many of these powerful little dramas had he participated in, over
the half century of his life? And why had he never, up to this
moment, even been aware of them? Had it not been for his
scrawled "Gravey Shakes" this experience, too, would have passed
unremarked and unremembered.
What had really hit him the hardest was the intensity of the
experience. When he had spoken with Mick Shaw about his occasional
dreams he had been speaking of shallow, low-impact
imaginings of no import and no lasting impression. If pushed, he
might have said: "I once dreamed of riding a horse," or "I saw my
grandfather in a dream." But he would never have believed himself
capable of dreaming an entire world into being, replete with
weather, lifelike props, emotional overtones. My God, emotional
overtones, Harry thought. He had known his emotional state of
mind in this dream. He had known himself to be down, dejected,
depressed. No, more than that, he had been dejected and depressed.
How he had come to this state he had no idea. If he had
dreamed longer, would he have walked on along the path, to a
road, perhaps? To a house on that road? To a family in that
house? Would he have opened a door into a home filled with
sickness and despair? Was he in financial trouble? Family problems?
Where had he come from to be walking alone past a thou43
sand year old churchyard? Somewhere in England, certainly, but
nowhere that he recognised from his childhood there. Why could
he not cast his mind back five minutes, in that dream, and know
from where he had started his walk on that cold, overcast winter's
day?
The memory of the dream was now fresh in his mind, and as
real and solid as the memory of yesterday's supper and the drive
along the coast road past Head of St. Margaret's to the cottage.
He could feel the touch of the cold iron railings; He could see the
slate grey rainclouds churning in the angry sky. He had not
known at the time that it was a dream. In the dream he had accepted
it as reality, and even now, only knowing that it had been
a dream prevented him from filing it away under "real memories"
and integrating the experience into his life.
It was all too much.
Liz, always sensitive to his moods, asked what was wrong
and Harry told her of the disturbing dream, all of it. That she
should be knowledgeable in this area did not at all surprise him.
"These things you dreamed are symbols Harry. The subconscious
speaks to us in symbols. I think that you are beset by
problems, probably centering on whether or not you really want
to replace Theo as CEO at Burton's (Is she a witch, this woman,
44
Harry wondered, to know these things? While he was waiting for
the right time to tell her she probably already had the AGI list of
potential successors in her purse). Your mind throws these issues
into your dream as little brown snakes and spike-topped
metal railings. Something like that. The iron railings are probably
your mind's way of saying that there is a barrier between
where you are and where you want to be; but the snakes and
tombstones speak volumes about what you really think is on the
other side of that barrier. The problems associated with the CEO
job -- the snakes in your dream -- can't get at you, not where you
are at the moment, not yet. But if you try to climb that fence you
will have to deal with the nasty sharp points on the way over, and
then face the snakes when you jump down. It sounds to me,
Harry, as though your subconscious mind is asking you whether
this is what you really want, all this grief and worry."
Wow. But she wasn't done yet.
"You need to get a book on Dream Interpretation, something
modern. Freud would have nailed you in a minute with all this
sexual imagery; snakes and long black pointed iron poles. Even
by modern standards I think you might find that snakes signify
sexuality in some way. But you should also look up Churches,
Old Tombstones and probably Weather, or specifically "heavy grey
rainclouds". I would take bets that the clouds are another way of
saying that big problems are looming over you, or about to loom.
45
And that is almost certainly the CEO business, about to thunder
into your life, and pour cold water all over your dreams."
Harry staggered under the deluge. "But I don't see this
business with Theo as any kind of threat, Liz. Honestly. I mean,
I admit I'm having some doubts about the best way to play it, but
I see this as a bright new opportunity for positive progress. Why
am I not dreaming of sunny meadows, and little brown bunnies
instead of nasty brown snakes?"
"This is 'real-world Harry' talking to me now," Liz said.
"'Subconscious Harry' has already had his say. Very eloquently,
too. It seems to me that Subconscious Harry is trembling in his
boots."
Wow again.
Liz left to complete her morning toilette, and Harry walked
over to the window. Harry Murphy, he thought. Happy-go-lucky
Harry, always ready with a grin and a wisecrack. Harry Murphy,
who had never in his life taken anything seriously enough to get
depressed about it, stood at the window of his little cottage on St
Margaret's Bay and stared out over the whitecaps. And, from
somewhere deep within, another Harry, a morose and troubled
Harry, stared along with him.
46
Later in the day he took Liz's advice, which presented no
problems given that his Dream Book included a whole chapter on
the meaning and interpretation of dream symbols. He flipped
through the book, and it fell open where he'd last put it down.
Step Four. He'd forgotten that there was a step four.
Step four turned out to be "Analyze your dream". Read
through your transcript, the book told him. Ask yourself what
emotions are triggered by reliving the dream? How do the messages
fit into your waking life? What especially draws your attention
in this dream? Did you recognize people, things or places?
Were they recognisably life-like, or did you just "know" who, what
or where they were? Was the dream true to life? Were some elements
true to life? Which ones? Make notes to review later.
Liz was right again. Liz is always right, he thought - it could
get to be quite nauseating at times - but in this case she was
only partly right. The little book told him that current thinking
suggested that there were no fixed interpretations for specific
dream symbols. Sorry, Sigmund, Harry thought, but the science
has apparently moved on since your time.
The prime --the only -- meaning behind any dream symbol is
what it signifies to the dreamer. A spider in a dream, for example,
might be a grade "A" nightmare to little Miss Muffet, who is
scared witless by the things, but a Walt Disney Special to a young
47
boy who loves insects and keeps a four-inch high tarantula
named 'Sweetie' as a pet. The only way to interpret such a dream
is how did you feel when the giant spider put his arms around
you?
REALITY CHECK.
Not necessary. I took my hands from the wheel. The car corrected
its aberrant path and came back into the slow lane on total cruise
control.
The bikers had caught up to me. Two flanked me while the third
took up station in front, and I saw his tail light brighten as he
touched the brakes. They were trying to slow me down, to stop my
car on this desolate, deserted stretch of highway on the outskirts of
an unidentified Canadian city in the middle of the night in the
middle of my dream.
I didn't wait for them. At a hundred and twenty kilometres per
hour I opened the door and stepped out into the road. I stood in the
middle of the highway and stared at the two bikers, who had also
come instantly to a stop and regarded me from fifty yards away.
There was no sign of the third. I walked towards them.
"Listen up, you sons of bitches," I yelled at them "I probably have
about ten seconds before I wake up, and you two bastards are
going to do ten seconds worth of talking if I have to squeeze it out
of you like toothpaste from a tube. So who wants to go first? Now
who the Hell are you and what...."
316
The two turned towards one another. One of them said something
like "Is he supposed to be able to do that?" ..... and they both vanished.
I stood in the road, my temper cooling. My car had vanished with
the bikers, but I didn't care. At the side of the road the trees were
shining with a pale blue light. The sky now had a glow of its own,
and I saw that my hands and feet had become luminous, a pale
turquoise energy streaming from my fingertips.
I walked along the road, waiting for the inevitable; but it did not
come. Tiring of my slow progress I decided to fly home. I leaped
into the sky, a capeless Superman -- and fell onto the hard shoulder.
It hurt!! I looked at my scraped hands, which seemed to be
leaking translucent turquoise blood.
"OK," I said to the air "I'm ready to wake up now." But I did not
wake up. "I know I'm at home, lying next to Liz, probably snoring.
And Liz is hogging the blankets. So I think I'll wake up now." But
still I dreamed on. From one extreme to the other, I thought. Couldn't
fall asleep; now I can't wake up.
But I felt calm and unconcerned, and I had no objection to staying
within the dream for a while, although I would have been glad of a
change of scenery.
317
"Hello, Margaret!" I called to the sky. "I made it! I'm here. Got your
message; read chapter twenty one and now I'm here. Come on
down and we'll have a chat. Come show me how to do your travelling
trick, and we'll go for a hike in the mountains instead of along
this bleak highway to nowhere."
No response. Wispy blue clouds crossed in front of an azure moon.
Blue on blue, the colours from the cover of my Dreambook.
I walked I past small farm by the side of the road. A long driveway
of crusher-rock passed a rickety barn and a small enclosed
paddock to the house, a half kilometer back from the highway. I
stood for a while, knowing that I had the choice of exploring the
farmhouse or continuing along the highway. I was Dreaming Lucidly,
and waiting for wonderful things to happen. Where were my
magic abilities? Where were my super powers? I couldn't even
fly!!
I walked through the farmyard towards the house. To my left --
presumably the east -- the sky was beginning to lighten. I expected
at any minute to hear a cock crow. I thought I could detect faint
farm smells; silage; pig manure.
As I approached the house I saw a faint light coming from one of
the upper windows. A nightlight, perhaps, in the room of a child.
318
Or the bedside candle of a farmer, rising to meet the dawn, ready
for his demanding day.
The front door was small and simple, but as I approached I saw
that it was bordered by a slim line of flickering flame. By the time I
was close enough to touch the door the flames had grown higher
and brighter, casting dancing shadows on the path behind me. I
touched the flames and they jumped to my fingers, burning not like
fire but like ice.
I knew what the door was. I lifted the latch and pushed it open.
With a last look at the peaceful farmyard and the now distant highway,
I turned to the door of yellow flame and stepped through.
Thursday August 13: Notes
I awoke to Liz's concerned, caring face. I was in my recliner, with
my feet up and my head on a pillow she had placed there for me.
Despite the warmth of the summer evening she had wrapped a
blanket around me; for comfort, not for warmth. She said "It's ten
o'clock, Harry my love. You've slept for almost twelve hours.
Would you like something to eat? Or have you still more sleeping to
do?"
I stretched and threw off the blanket. I got up from the chair and
held my beloved Liz close to me. Though I could not see them I
knew that streamers of beautiful turquoise energy were flowing
319
from me to her, and from her to me, and were surrounding us and
strengthening us and protecting us from anything evil.
I felt hungry, and said so. I had done enough dreaming for one
night. I knew that my sleep patterns were out of sequence, but I
would correct that soon enough.
I knew that I had mastered Lucid Dreaming. Oh, I knew that I had
much to learn before I was ready for my Superhero Cape, but I was
ready to learn, and eager to learn. There was no hurry. I could go
back any time I wanted to. I had learned how to find the doorway.
* * * * * * * *
320
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER
Chapter 6:
Harry's sleep patterns rapidly returned to normal but
Harry did not. Following his bout of insomnia he seemed to
have undergone a change of personality. At first the differences
were subtle. The old happy-go-lucky Harry had been
replaced by a more sober, more morose individual. Burton's
employees attributed this to the unsettling experience of the
strike, with its terrible finale, and/or to the added responsibilities
of his new position. In fact it owed its origin to neither
of those factors. Harry was wrestling with strange,
unsettling concepts which had sprung directly from his new
found dreaming capability and from his recent research.
Harry had taken to the Word Wide Web like the proverbial
duck to water, and now roamed the internet until the early hours
of most mornings in pursuit of new data. His readings in Near
Death Experiences had done no more than whet his appetite for
more information on the life of the (alleged) spirit, but he had
found that instead of answers his search led only to more questions,
and always of increasing complexity. An NDE site which
included an oblique reference to past-life regression opened an
entire Pandora's Box of vexing questions. Harry read about hypnosis
and suggestibility. He found sites which instructed in hyp321
notic technique. He learned that hypnotised subjects could easily
be persuaded to speak of long past events as though they were
currently living them; he read of how subjects could be regressed
back beyond early birthdays and spoke of passing through a
strange period of disassociation into previous lives -- lives which
could later be historically verified. He located the story of his
namesake, Bridey Murphy, a young American woman who, regressed
to a previous life, had given extensive, often intimate detail
of the life of an Irish woman dead many years. He read how a
trip to Ireland had unearthed old parish records which verified
the facts given by the hypnotised subject -- facts which the young
American could not possibly have known. And he read how the
whole thing had been discredited as a fraud, and how the discreditors
had themselves eventually been discredited, and how
the whole issue was now more of a mystery than it had ever been.
He read how a young child had, without benefit of hypnosis,
given to her parents specific detail of a previous life in a different
age and a different country; and how the intrigued parents had,
at considerable expense, verified the child's tales. How a woman
in the south of England had drawn to scale a map of a remote
Spanish village, which compared closely to maps held in a Madrid
museum of that same village -- in the sixteenth century.
From reincarnation he moved on to ghost sightings and
hauntings. His first search alone furnished several hundred first
322
hand accounts. Thence to poltergeists; to mediums and séances;
to bizarre messages furnished by Ouija boards; to tales of table
tipping and levitation. There appeared to be no end.
Even Harry himself could not understand the desperation
with which he pursued his search for answers and explanations.
Questions which had previously been of little or no importance to
him suddenly required answers as a matter of dire urgency.
He turned at last to religion, which he had rejected out of
hand many years before, but in re-reading the Bible he found
only those same shallow stories for children which he had
shunned previously; or perhaps, he conceded, stories told in
terms best suited to the unsophisticated minds of the inhabitants
of a land distant both in time and place. He recalled how, in a
less distant time and place, he had once passed a rainy afternoon
with his science master - a confirmed, card-carrying atheist. Together
they had calculated what proportion of the earth's surface
would become submerged if every molecule of water on the
planet's surface were to be converted from vapour or ice into liquid.
By condensing several million tons of cloud and melting several
billion tons of polar ice, the two had concluded that the
overall sea level would rise some thirty feet. Given that even the
local hills were several hundred feet high, there would still be a
large sufficiency of solid earth to allow the inhabitants of the
planet to continue their surface existence quite comfortably. So
323
much for Noah, his Ark and the great Flood. On subsequent afternoons
the two of them had demolished, with much glee, tales
of talking serpents (no larynx), Adam and Eve versus Charles
Darwin (no fossils), the thousand year lifespans of certain biblical
notables (biologically unlikely), the parting of the Red Sea (hydrologically
improbable), and the likelihood of virgin birth (the
pros and cons of which severely confused the twelve year old
Harry for some time afterwards). He recalled sharing the tale of
these theosophical assassinations with a school chum who had
turned out to be a devout Roman Catholic. The boy had patiently
explained that God, being God, could do whatever he wanted to
without the necessity of explaining himself to puny Science Masters.
He had then driven home his point by giving Harry a bloody
nose for his temerity.
Books from various websites now arrived daily, and Harry
immersed himself in a study of comparative religion. He had of
course known that there were alternatives to Christianity, each
with its own theories of the origin and ultimate destination of
mankind. He had heard of Buddhism and Islam, knew that Native
Americans held to their own home-grown theosophies, and
considered that there may well be a half dozen other possibilities
worthy of at least a passing glance. He wasn't prepared for what
he actually found.
324
A web search for "Religions" identified sixty four mainstream
earthly religions and their major offshoots. He learned that, despite
the efforts of Christianity to suppress them, the Druidic and
Wiccan religions still flourished in some parts of the world. He
read outlines of Confucianism and Taoism, and learned that, far
from being a fabrication of horror fiction writers, Voodoo was a
legitimate religion with a sizable following. While many of these
offered interesting alternatives to Christian theology (he developed
a special affinity for Buddhism) none of them spoke to Harry's
burning basic concerns. If he were to concede that he possessed
an immortal soul, Harry believed, then there were four simple
questions he needed to have answered with some degree of urgency:
-- Why was he so totally unaware of it?
-- Where had it come from?
-- Where was it all leading?
-- Why was it now imprisoned in this physical body?
No single website, book or theology answered these basic
concerns to anything
remotely resembling Harry's satisfaction. In the end, disenchanted,
he gave up. He knew that, with or without the virtually
limitless amount of information now available to him at the touch
of a button, he would still have to find his own answers.
325
At work he became distracted and disinterested. This was
clearly demonstrated at the Plant's monthly meeting when the
subject of Ed Knowles' Engineering Department was tabled for
discussion. Engineering had long been given credit for the very
survival of Burton's Press. It was due solely to the inventive constructions
of the Plant's Engineers that the old equipment had
been cajoled into continued daily production. The need to manufacture
parts not available elsewhere had produced, over the
years, a very large, very well staffed and expensively equipped
unit. Given that Burton's hardware was now brand new and
state-of-the-art, the need for a large, costly Engineering Department
had become moot. In the middle of a spirited, sometimes
acrimonious boardroom debate on the future of the department
Harry had remained strangely silent. When an agitated Ed
Knowles asked Harry whether he intended to say anything on the
subject, Harry had replied that it was all the same to him. Specifically
he had said: "What the hell does it matter? Do whatever
you want." Whereupon he left. When he eventually returned to
his office Louise asked where he had been for the last three
hours. Harry, with apparent surprise, said "Sorry, didn't I say?
I've been down at the Public Gardens, feeding the ducks."
Harry Murphy's Dream Diary: Thursday August 20
I stepped into the dream and entered a dimensionless sphere of
silence and darkness. I floated there enjoying the tranquillity of
not being. Here, time and space held little meaning. I knew that I
326
could float here for an eternity and awaken an eyeblink after I had
fallen asleep, or stay only for a second and awaken after eight
hours. The darkness and silence were comforting, and I drew the
stillness into myself. When I was ready I imagined the door and it
was there. I moved towards it and opened it. I felt the cool fire of
the flames as I stepped through.
I saw that the sun was now high in the sky, and I felt the warmth
of its rays on my face. I walked through the small farmstead to the
highway. I had hoped to find my dream-car here (the Rolls Royce
lived up to that definition in every sense of the word) but the highway
was deserted. No matter. Today I intended to start the exploration
of my new universe, and I could do this as well along this
highway as elsewhere. Primarily I hoped to find inhabitants. Even
the unpleasant
youths from my previous highway encounter would do. I walked
along the highway and called out to whoever might be within range
of my voice. "Hello, Margaret. Harry calling Fairy Godmother.
Come in, Godmother." When this solicited no reply I tried a new
tack. "Breaker, Breaker. Come on back, Good Buddy. Breaker on
Channel Nine, this is a Mayday. Come on back, anybody." When
this, too, failed I gave up and simply walked.
I knew that it was unimportant how far or how long I walked.
Whatever time and distance might be involved I would still awaken
in about eight hours in bed, next to Liz, and without the blisters or
aching muscles which a lengthy walk would have normally pro327
duced. So I walked; and observed; and allowed my thoughts to
drift.
I noticed that the indigo glow of the surrounding scenery seemed to
have lessened since my last visit to the highway, and that my own
energy streamers seemed likewise subdued. I attributed this to the
fact that I was now walking along the highway in daytime, rather
than night, and dim lights always seem brighter when the sun
goes down. I had been correct in assuming that all of my senses
were functioning at a heightened level, especially my eyesight. I
could identify individual hairs in the mane of a horse grazing in a
distant field. I could also hear distant sounds with particular clarity,
and I thought I could still detect the aroma of the farmstead,
now far behind me.
Apart from a few animals, all distant, there were few signs of life.
No cars passed me. No farmers walked their fields. No aircraft left
condensation trails in the high atmosphere. No distant radios sent
snatches of song over the highway. No dogs barked at departing
masters. On a whim I knelt in the grass by the side of the highway
and peered at the ground from a distance of about three inches. No
bugs. Very realistic grass, a perfectly passable dandelion,
scratchy grit. No grasshoppers. No ants.
I began to grow bored, and my thoughts started to wander. Where
was my elusive "Angel" now that I needed her? Where was Marga328
ret, who had hit me on the head in order to have me open Chapter
Twenty One and learn the Art of Lucid Dreaming? Here I was, as
ordered, and she had stood me up! I tried to remember her warnings
from the Viking dream: Be very careful, she had warned me.
Trust no-one; even your own instincts could be dangerously misleading.
But where was the danger in this tranquil setting? Not even a biting
insect to spoil the serenity. No little brown snakes to frighten
and confuse me. I could remember my first dream as though I had
just now awakened from it. With hindsight I wondered how I could
have possibly missed the visual symbolism of the dream with its
snakes and sharp iron rods -- and all of it merely to tell me that
Theo's job was not right for me. Yet now that I had the job, it all
seemed so meaningless, so trivial. What did it matter, in the final
analysis, whether I served out my days as Production Manager or
Company President? Or a doctor, as my mother had wanted. Or
fisherman, or farmer? Or garbage collector? After all of his days of
close involvement with his Grandfather's company, what did Theo
have to show for it in the end? A comfortable retirement, perhaps;
but would he not be equally as comfortable in a small cottage as
he was in his multi-room lakeside mansion? I knew without doubt
or question that I would choose a one room shack with Liz in it over
Theo's palatial estate without her. Poor lonely Theo. Poor little rich
boy. I wondered where he was now.
329
Fifty paces ahead, in the centre of the hard shoulder, I saw the
doorway. I did not know whether it had been there all along without
my having noticed it, or had just sprung into being. It stood
seven feet high, four feet wide and was outlined by a pale yellow
flame which was hard to see under the bright sunlight. Without
hurry, I walked up to it.
I looked behind the doorway and saw -- the back of a doorway. I
examined it from the side, and saw a vertical line of yellow fire. It
didn't seem dangerous in any way, but I recalled that my instincts
were supposedly fallible and dangerously misleading. What the
Hell, I thought, Nothing Ventured, nothing gained. And Fools rush
in. I stepped through the door.
I found myself on hard packed grit. In front of me and to both
sides the Alberta Badlands stretched to the horizon -- behind me,
too, for the doorway was gone. Large stone pillars surrounded me,
abstract sculptures of hard rock left standing when wind, weather
and time had eroded the sand and softer rock from their outer
edges. There were no evident pathways; no roads; no trails.
Theo was here. Somehow I knew that the doorway had appeared
in response to my thoughts, which had been turned towards my
old boss -- my old friend. I could feel that Theo was close, and I
knew I had no need to seek him out. All I had to do was walk. My
instincts would guide me, I knew. Maybe into danger. Maybe not.
Fools rush in.
330
I climbed from the sea of sand onto an island of rock and started
along a spiralling ledge which took me around and up. Well before
I saw it I knew that in the wall of rock to my right, about fifty feet
further along the ledge, was the opening to a cave. I walked the
fifty feet, and stood by the entrance.
I stepped into the cave and paused there, letting my eyes accustom
themselves to the dim light after the scorching blaze of the desert
sun. At the back of the cave I saw movement, and heard sounds.
The sounds were the unmistakeable slurpings and slaverings of a
pack of scavengers enjoying a feeding frenzy. Dogs of some kind;
Hyenas, possibly. But what had this to do with Theo? I could still
feel his presence, somewhere nearby. I felt no warning tingles of
fear; the hairs on the back of my neck did not rise; a cold sweat
did not break out on my forehead. Yet should I turn and leave
now, I wondered, before these beasts became aware of my presence.
I remembered well Margaret's warning that my instincts
could be dangerously misleading. If these beasts turned on me
and attacked, would I suffer real-life physical damage as a result
of their bites?
As I moved closer to the beasts the first of them sensed my presence
and turned. It was not a hyena, nor any member of the canine
fraternity that I recognised. It was a tall, slim beast with
matted fur, a long pointed snout and a mouthful of huge, white
331
teeth. The animal dropped the hunk of meat it held in its jaws and
snarled at me. The remainder of the pack rapidly followed suit.
The largest of the animals began to move towards me.
As the beasts parted I got a glimpse of their prey, a huddled lump
lying against the far wall of the cave, the remnants of some largish
animal, possibly a deer. To my amazement the lump seemed to be
moving, trying to turn. It was still alive. The lump rolled onto its
side, propped itself onto an elbow and raised its head.
"Hello, Harry," Theo said. "What the devil are you doing here?"
I saw a nightmare version of Theo. Not the plump, jovial friend of
my working days but an emaciated shell. Here and there great
bites of flesh had been ripped from the living body, which oozed a
dark purplish fluid onto the cave floor. As I watched, one of the
beasts, having dismissed any threat that I may have presented,
returned to the frail body and set its teeth into Theo's arm, high, by
the shoulder. Twisting its powerful neck the animal ripped a chunk
of living flesh from the arm. The jagged wound began to drip dark
blood. Theo glanced casually at the terrible injury.
"Won't be long now, Harry. They've been eating me for years, you
know. All those years I thought it was indigestion, but it was these
boys here, eating my innards. Not much left for them to eat, now
though. Won't be long."
332
I screamed, and screaming ran out of the cave to fall from the narrow
ledge down to the sand, a long way below. Down and down.
Thursday August 20: Notes
I was screaming when I awoke. I pretended that the effects of the
nightmare were fleeting, so that Liz could be calmed and return
quickly to sleep. When I was certain that she slept I got quietly out
of bed and went downstairs. I turned on every light in the living
room and poured a large glass of Jack Daniels. On second
thoughts I drained the glass and took the bottle. There would be
no more sleep for me that night.
By the last week in August Harry had achieved a record of
sorts. He had taken more time off in the previous three months
than in his entire working career prior to that period. While he
could still count on the loyalty and support of the majority of Burton's
employees, some relationships were beginning to show signs
of strain. The old, warm and witty Production Manager had
turned into a sombre, snappy short-tempered Chief Executive
and, for the first time in his life, people were going out of their
way to avoid him. He could on occasion be mean and hurtful
even to those who had previously been as close as family. When
he saw Louise collecting donations in a large brown envelope he
snapped "Not another Burton's charity case! What am I expected
333
to support this time? Another new baby? Somebody's wedding?
Or have they finally started begging for help with their kids' education?"
Close to tears Louise explained "It's just the weekly kitty for
Theo's flowers, Mr. Murphy. I don't ask you because you've told
me before not to bother you with it, but some of us just like to
make sure that Mr. Burton has fresh flowers in his room every
week, since he has no family do this for him. The doctors say it's
only a matter of a few weeks now, maybe even days, and
we.........."
"Theo's room? Doctors? What are you talking about,
Louise?"
"Why, Mr. Burton's cancer. They were talking about more
surgery, but now they say....."
"Theo has cancer?"
"Oh, Mr. Murphy, I knew you hadn't heard me. They said
you didn't care, but I knew it was just that....."
"Yes, never mind that! About the cancer?"
334
"I swear I've tried at least six times to tell you!! Theo had to
cut short his cruise and come home when he got these terrible
pains, and the doctors found advanced colon cancer. They operated
at once and started radiation and chemo, but it was too late,
it had spread everywhere. Oh, Mr. Murphy, it's eating him alive!
He isn't the Theo we knew any more. You really should see him, I
know that he would love to see you before....... before...... and
there's so little time now. He's stopped all treatment, not that it
was doing any good, and....."
"Where is he?"
"He's in the cancer ward at the Queen Elizabeth Health Sciences
Centre. I have the room number in my purse, I'll get it....."
Harry was already on his way.
The visit was too little, too late. The man in the hospital bed
was not Theo. He had lost at least half of his body weight, and
his colour was not that of any living being Harry had ever seen.
The doctor spoke quietly with Harry, but it was doubtful that
Theo could have been disturbed if they had shouted to each other
across his bed. "We're keeping him free from pain, Mr. Murphy,
and that's about all we can do now. Despite what you see, your
friend is a very tough man. He's still fighting. But he can't win,
not now. He should have come to us a year ago, when the first
335
symptoms started to show. But then that's the trouble with so
many forms of cancer, the early symptoms are often petty and get
ignored. By the time they're a real discomfort it's too late. Anyway,
there's no profit in diagnosis by hindsight. I'll leave you to
visit with your friend."
There was nothing Harry could do; nothing he could think of
to say. He sat by the bed, held Theo's limp, grey hand, and wept
for his friend.
Harry Murphy's Dream Diary: Tuesday August 25
There were two gates in the dark sphere. One, I knew, led to the
small farmstead by the empty highway, and the other led into the
Alberta Badlands and Theo's cave. I had to return to the cave and
fight the beasts which were killing Theo, but I did not know how. I
believed that I could find the courage if only I could think of some
way to fight them. Going unarmed into that cave would not be the
act of a brave man, but that of a suicidal fool. How could I fight an
entire pack of wolf-sized beasts, equipped with razor sharp claws
and inch long canine teeth? I remembered very well Margaret's
warning to me that injury here could result in real, physical
wounds, and I had tasted a small sample. My fingers had taken
close to a week to regain their normal flexibility and the thumb still
gave me some problems. If I died in the cave, defending Theo, how
336
would it help him? And what would happen to my sleeping body
in the process.
I needed to find a weapon of some kind. If I could only find my
way back to the mansion which my parents had owned in a dream
from a few weeks ago, there was a store in the middle of a small
shopping mall which had exactly what I needed. But how to go
there? Was it even possible? Did the mall continue to exist after
my dream ended?
I knew too little, and needed to know so much.
Shunning the door to the wild lands I plunged through the farmstead
and ran to the highway. I stood in the centre of the road and
howled. My emotions were as real as the pain and guilt I had felt
at Theo's bedside, and I could not see how any creature within
hearing range of my cries could ignore them. But no-one came.
Tears ran down my cheeks and fell to the asphalt. Even in my
grief I marvelled at the realism of the Lucid Dream experience. I
knew very well that my eyes were closed in sleep, and probably
dry, but when I wiped a knuckle over my eye it came away wet. I
licked the back of my hand and tasted salt. I felt the sun, hot on
my face, and a small breeze which cooled my tear-streaked
cheeks. I had no need to perform a reality check, for none was
needed now. I was able to move from awake to dreaming and
337
back again without a break in my stream of consciousness or a
blank spot in my memory. I knew exactly where I was.
It was becoming obvious that I could expect no help in my attempt
to save Theo's life. I had no
idea whether this was even possible, but I was committed to try. I
deeply regretted that I had not noticed Theo's situation in time to
visit while he was still conscious. I wondered whether he had
known I was there; whether he had heard me weeping over his
wasted body. When I had last visited my mother I had sat by her
still, unresponsive form and talked to her for almost an hour. The
nurses had assured me that she could hear me, but due to her illness
she was not able to respond. In my mother's case, too, I had
left things too late. I had let her slip into a coma -- her final coma,
by the doctor's testimony -- before I could find the time for a trip to
England, and, like Theo, I had let her slip beyond my reach.
I almost stumbled through the doorway before I noticed it, and I
leaped back on contact with the cold flames. I was not quite ready
to go to Theo's aid, but I knew that I could not put it off much
longer. And aid him I would, even if I had to fight off the beasts by
hand. I looked around for something to take with me for use as a
weapon; a tree limb; a fencepost; a rock of any size. But there was
nothing. I clenched my fists. I had those, and my teeth, and my
feet. I was not unarmed. I leaped through the doorway..........
338
......and stood on a stretch of wet sand by the Atlantic ocean.
This was a seaside resort at the peak of the summer season. It
was night, probably sometime in the small hours of an August
morning. The holiday makers were asleep in the hotels and Bedand-
Breakfast establishments fronting the promenade. A lone policeman
patrolled the boardwalk, but when I tried to speak with
him he could neither see nor hear me. A dog trotted past and
looked up as I whistled to him. The moon was so bright that it cast
sharp-edged shadows onto the pavement.
This was Skegness, a seaside resort on the east coast of England.
It was the location of the "Full-Care Retirement Home” where we
had sent my mother to die. We had chosen it because a room was
available overlooking the ocean (at a staggering cost!) and I did not
regret that choice even though there was no evidence that my
mother had ever enjoyed the view. I could see the house now,
about a half kilometre away.
It had not been my thoughts of Theo which had opened the door for
me this time, but thoughts of my mother. That was a valuable
lesson, and I would think about it -- later. I walked towards the
house, a converted Victorian Mansion, in which the many rooms
had become as many expensive wards, patrolled day and night by
competent medical staff, who, despite their skills, could do little for
most of their patients save keep them clean and pain free while
they waited to die.
339
The main door was closed and locked against the night, but
opened easily when I turned the knob. As I stepped in I saw that
there were two doors, the one which I had opened and the more
solid door which I had stepped through as if it were made of mist.
Another lesson to be dissected at leisure, later. I climbed the
stairs.
There were sounds from various rooms, not surprising since I suspected
that the conventional view of day and night had little meaning
to most of the residents. I found my mother's room, and went in
without bothering to open the frail door from the upstairs hall.
I stopped in sudden shock. My mother was alert and awake. She
was struggling on her bed against the combined efforts of three
white coated assailants. Two large men held her by the upper
arms, their strong fingers fully circling her thin biceps. A third man
struggled to find a suitable injection point for the huge hypodermic,
filled with an oily red fluid, which he held in his right hand. As I
watched, he stuck the needle deeply into her upper thigh, injecting
the fluid rapidly and forcibly, while my mother shrieked in pain.
Dropping the empty hypodermic he reached into a pocket and
withdrew a second. But he was not going to have any opportunity
to use it.
340
Hurling myself at the doctor -- as I supposed he was -- I grabbed
the needle from his hand and threw it to the floor. Pulling back my
fist I prepared to flatten his nose and hopefully break it, but with
amazing agility he wriggled free of my grasp and joined his colleagues
who were half way through the now open door. I let them
all go. My mother was unconscious, and I lowered her to the bed.
Once I had assured myself that she was comfortable I left quietly
and went in search of the "medical professionals" who had just
eluded me. We had business that was far from finished. My
mother would be out of that "Full Care" home before forty-eight
hours had passed, but that was not even the half of what I intended
to visit on this establishment. How many others had committed
their loved ones to the "care" of these insane "professionals"
I wondered? How would they feel when I told them how their
loved ones were treated after the visitors had left and the window
shades were drawn?
I raged through the building, but found no-one awake. I was not
surprised that those I had encountered were not to be found; in
hiding somewhere, probably. Wisely. I was in a way relieved,
since I could not have promised that self control would overrule my
urge to punish these men severely. But there was no-one there; not
in the surgeries, not in the administrative offices; not in the rooms
of their patients.
341
I had done as much as I could for the present. I would return at a
more appropriate time, and in a more appropriate manner.
I looked for and found the doorway. I ran into it.
Tuesday August 25: Notes
I awoke so angry that I disturbed Liz. "What's wrong, Harry?" she
asked, but I could only answer "I must go to England." She said
"Then so must I," and got up to pack with me.
This will be my last entry into my Dream Diary, as I no longer believe
that recording my dreams in this manner serves any purpose.
I'm not sure that it ever did.
END
Liz and Harry left for England at ten twenty that evening,
having paid a minor king's ransom for the privilege of a last minute
booking. Air Canada had explained that they could offer a
"compassionate rate" if Harry were to be travelling on urgent personal
business such as, say, to attend a funeral, but Harry had
only barked that he was travelling in an attempt to avoid one.
The flight touched down at Heathrow at ten o'clock the following
morning. Liz had slept little; Harry not at all. They followed a
342
familiar route through the airport to connect with the Avis courtesy
bus, and thirty minutes later they drove their rented Vauxhall
Vectra onto the M45. At midday they pulled off the
motorway to lunch at a small pub. Tired from the long flight,
Harry would not take the chance of washing down his steak and
kidney pudding with a pint of British bitter. A split second of indecision
could see him aiming the Vectra down the wrong side of
the motorway, with who knows what results.
They arrived in Skegness just before three o'clock, and drove
directly to the Retirement Home. Harry had told Liz the detail of
the dream but she had said only that he must, of course, reassure
himself that his mother was as well as could be expected in
the circumstances. Privately Liz was very concerned about
Harry's mental stability, and had agreed to travel with him not
because she shared his concern but because she was afraid to let
him travel alone.
They entered the home without knocking and went straight
to the administrative office where Matron Agnes Campbell looked
up in surprise from her desk.
"Mr. and Mrs. Murphy! What a lovely surprise! I had no
idea you were in England! Now you'll be wanting to visit with
your Mum, I presume."
343
"Before we go anywhere, Ms. Campbell, I'll be wanting to
discuss the way you treat defenceless elderly patients in the middle
of the night when you think yourself safe from watching eyes!"
Over the next ten minutes Harry learned much and spoke
little. He was informed that:
-- No treatments whatsoever were given after 'lights out' (ten
p.m.) except in an extreme emergency:
-- No such emergencies had occurred at the home in at
least the last two years.
-- To ensure a good night's sleep by all, any unstable patients
(who might disturb others) were housed in a separate wing
and were usually given a sedative (subject to a doctor's concurrence)
with their evening cup of tea or cocoa. For a further guarantee
of nocturnal peace and quiet, a night nurse was always on
duty in this wing.
-- There were no live-in male medical staff. Only three of
the nurses lived at the home, and these were all female. At the
present time there was one male nurse on staff. He normally left
by six thirty, and was in any case on vacation in Ireland where he
had been for the previous two weeks.
344
-- The home used the services of a local doctor who called at
two p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays for routine medical needs,
such as prescription refills, and was on call at other times if
needed. The last time the doctor had visited after midnight was
four months previously, when he had been summoned to the
bedside of a terminally ill, ninety eight year old patient who had
passed away peacefully.
-- Neither the Matron nor any of her staff would under any
circumstances tolerate the holding down of a distressed patient
for injection of medication. In rare cases where patients became
agitated before receiving injected medication they were given a
mild sedative (or a cup of tea, which the Matron believed to be
much the same thing) and calmed by quiet conversation. Never,
under any circumstances, were they held down by force. Furthermore,
this was irrelevant to present circumstances, since all
current patients were so accustomed to hypodermic injections
that they barely noticed receiving them.
-- Mrs. Murphy Senior had required no such treatment.
While remaining comatose, she gave no evidence of being in pain
or otherwise distressed, and her current therapy consisted mainly
of ensuring that she was kept clean and comfortable, free from
bedsores, bloodclots, and the several other complications which
could plague patients confined to bed for extended periods.
345
In conclusion, Ms. Campbell asked -- demanded -- that
Harry give her the name of whoever had put such evil ideas into
his head. Whoever it was would most certainly be meeting the
home's lawyer, and the meeting would not be a pleasant one.
Agnes calmed down enough to tell Harry and Liz how fortunate it
was that Susan -- Mrs. Murphy Senior's primary caregiver -- was
absent from the home at the moment. Susan would be absolutely
heartbroken to think that anyone could believe for one minute
that she might allow such things to happen to a helpless old lady
entrusted to her care. And Matron would be extremely unhappy,
Aggie Campbell advised, looking sternly at Harry, if such accusations
should somehow find their way to Susan, or to any other of
the home's devoted and dedicated caregivers.
Harry's mother was clean, comfortable and totally comatose.
She showed no reaction at all to Harry's presence, but, on the
assurance that she could hear him Harry talked with her and
sang to her (songs from his early childhood) for an hour before
leaving. The two then checked into a local hotel, taking a room
next to the elevator shaft since it was the last available, and
caught up on lost sleep. Despite the continuous rumbling of the
old elevator just feet from their heads, both travellers slept well
and deeply. Harry did not allow himself to dream.
They had intended to spend four days in England, this being
Harry's estimate of the time it would take to place his mother in a
346
new location. A phone call to Air Canada quickly revealed that,
being high season, it would not be possible to travel before this
date unless they wanted to hang around the Airport on the slim
chance of obtaining a standby seat. Liz suggested that Harry
should use the four days as a short -- but much needed -- vacation.
While she would accompany Harry on whatever he decided
to do, Liz had some urgent business to attend to first. After a
short conversation with hotel management she was able to plug
her laptop into the room's phone line and was soon receiving and
sending mail as readily as though she were at the Halifax office.
Left to his own devices Harry drove the small Vauxhall along
the seafront and headed out of the town to the northwest. The
reflexes needed to drive on the "wrong" side of the road soon returned,
and he handled the car with ease, changing gears without
thought and hurtling around the narrow, winding backroads as
though he had never left them. He stopped for a pint and a pie at
a small village pub and afterwards decided to explore for a while
before getting back into the car. Harry's father had always described
an English village as five houses, a church and two pubs;
if it had three pubs it was classed as a small town. Harry quickly
found the second pub, and on continuing his tour he noticed the
small greystone tower of the village church. Not being particularly
interested in church architecture he turned back to the carpark
and his rented Vauxhall, but turned again as the church
bell began to strike the hour. Something about the small stone
347
tower attracted his attention, but he could not immediately say
what. As he walked closer he saw that to get to the church he
would have to cross an open meadow through which a small footpath
straggled. Climbing a stile into the field he crossed the
meadow and came parallel to a small, enclosed cemetery, separated
from the field by a low concrete wall. By now he had realised
that the church and its enclosure had reminded him of his
first recorded dream, which seemed so long ago. The resemblances
were, he saw, quite superficial. While the tower was similar
the graveyard was much smaller and much better maintained.
Although the stones seemed well worn and obviously old, they
were for the most part upright and placed in neat rows. Looking
closely at the low wall he saw the stubs of metal railings which
had been cut down and removed many years ago. But the overall
scene was very evocative, and Harry remembered the mood of the
dream -- not substantially different from the way he felt today.
He stood on the path for a while, taking in the scene. In
contrast to the threatening skies of the dream, a hot sun shone,
with passing clouds providing an occasional welcome patch of
shade. As Harry turned to retrace his path he saw movement in
the grass at the base of the stone wall. Disturbed from its afternoon
nap, a small green and yellow snake wriggled across the
path and vanished into the longer grass of the meadow. A harmless
English Grass snake, Harry knew. No deadly fangs; no symbolic
messages. He walked on to retrieve his car.
348
Back home in Canada Harry brooded. While he went daily
to his office he handled the work there without spirit and with the
minimum required effort. He answered phone calls listlessly,
and two out of three callers asked whether Harry was "alright".
The same question was being asked of Louise at least a dozen
times each day. Where decisions were required Harry was arbitrary
and uncaring. When colleagues called to question them he
was abrupt to the point of rudeness. Ed Knowles called by his
office to discuss the Board's recent decision to cut Engineering's
budget for the next quarter by sixty percent, and Harry told him
brusquely that the cut was not open to discussion or debate, and
that in future he should not call on the Chief Executive Officer
without first making an appointment. When he gave essentially
the same response to Mick Shaw the Pressroom boss countered
with "I thought we'd gotten rid of the Dictator of Burton's, but I
see that we just replaced him with on older version.” Harry did
not look up from his desk. Mick's barb had little impact, if Harry
even heard it at all.
* * * * * * * *
Harry had discontinued entries in his dream diary, which
now lay alongside a large collection of tiny slips of notepaper in
349
the bottom drawer of his bedside table. He made no more efforts
to implant subconscious instructions regarding the memory of
dreams, nor did he make any preparations to ensure lucidity.
Such planning was no longer needed any more that he needed to
prepare mentally to start his car or drive to work. All of this was
now habitual and automatic.
He lay on his back in bed and focussed on his breathing. He
felt the air move in and out of his lungs, and he relaxed his muscles.
Within three breaths he felt the dark sphere form around
him and the focus of his mind shifted from waking consciousness
to dream. He floated in the emptiness and stilled his mind.
When he was completely relaxed and calm he called for the doorways.
Selecting one at random he floated through into the
dreamworld.
He was on a wide dirt-road which passed through a lightly
wooded area. He had selected this place at random, having no
intention of staying here long. He had thought long and hard on
the lessons learned in the last few lucid dreams, and was now
ready to put some of his new knowledge to the test. He had located
Theo and his mother not by visualising their location -- in
Theo's case he could never even have guessed at the strange destination.
His thoughts had been focussed on the person, and
some strange dream mechanism had taken him to them. Harry
saw nothing odd in this. Awake, many aspects of technology were
350
total mysteries to him. He had only the vaguest idea of how a
television or cellphone worked, and yet he used them every day.
He had no idea how gravity held him to the surface of the earth,
and yet he spent no time at all worrying about the possibility of
falling off it.
He focussed on Margaret, on the appearance which she had
always chosen to present to him so that he might be comfortable.
He closed his eyes and pictured her face. He expanded the vision
to that of a young girl in a white dress holding a small black
prayer book. He held the vision, focussed on it to the exclusion of
all else.
"Hello, Harry," she said.
He opened his eyes to find himself still on the dirt road
through the small copse. Margaret stood in front of him, exactly
as envisaged.
"We have to talk," he said.
"Yes. Let's walk along a way. There is a small lake a little
further where we can sit for a while."
"Why walk. Take us there."
351
They sat by the side of a small lake. Behind them a heavily
laden haywagon trundled along the road. Across the lake a
young doe stretched her graceful neck to the water to drink.
"Very nice," Harry said. "Did you make this?"
"No, I didn't make it. This place was made a long time ago,
and its maker is not known. As long as people visit and take
pleasure from this place it will endure. The energy of their love
sustains it. You want to know why I did not come to help you
when you called for me."
"Yes. I know that you heard me."
"I did hear you. And I wanted to come; but I was forbidden."
"What? Forbidden? Who could forbid you to come to me?"
"I have my superiors, too, Harry. There are many powers
above me, and I must often accept their better judgement. As I
am sent to guide you, there is someone who guides me, and he
told me that it was best not to interfere. Not yet."
"Who told you that? God?"
352
"No, not God. Would it help you if I put a name to him? He
has used many names. Would it comfort you if I gave him a title?
If I said "My Boss" ordered me not to help you?"
"Is he an Angel, your Boss?"
"That is a strange question from someone who calls Christian
lore "a load of crap written for children and people of small
mental capacity". But if you like, you can consider my Spirit
Guardian to be an Angel. Would you like me to list some of the
names he uses for you to choose one?"
"No. No matter. Why did he forbid you to come to help me?"
"Very simply, because you were doing so remarkably well on
your own. We have been trying to identify a number of evil spirits
who have formed an attachment to you and are using you for
their own purposes."
"You warned me about these 'beings' before. Just who are
they?"
Margaret did not answer immediately. She seemed to be
considering how best to answer this question. “They were human
once,” she said at last. “And may become so again, although it
will be a long and difficult path for them.”
353
Harry waited, saying nothing, until Margaret continued.
“Christians assume that our world – ‘Heaven’ if you like -- is
a place of perfection; that there is no pain there, no suffering.
But they are very wrong. There are men and women on earth
who are so perverted in their tastes and habits that when they
cross over to this world their souls are damaged beyond our ability
to help them. The worst of these are people who have exercised
great power for their own ends; dictators, tyrants,
murderers, torturers; men who have caused unspeakable suffering.
They are addicted to their ways of oppression and cruelty
and try to continue them here. But that is not possible – they
have no physical power over their victims here, and any authority
they wielded on earth is lost at their physical deaths. So they
seek out the weak spirits of earth. They prey on the sick and the
frail, spirits crippled by earthly suffering, deriving satisfaction
from their ability to cause pain and anguish. Several of these
beings have been plaguing your dreams, and we were very worried
for you, as I told you when we last met. Three such creatures
have been tormenting your mother. We were called to help
her a few days ago but by the time we arrived we found that you
were already dealing with the problem. Before we could interfere,
you scared them away. We were overjoyed to find that you were
able to do this. Think of it like this: A small boy is being badly
bullied every day at school. His parents, or maybe his elder
354
brother, start to hang around the schoolyard to protect him, and
every time the bullies show up they jump out and frighten them
away. But how long can they keep this up? They have jobs to go
to; the brother has his own school to attend. Then one day the
bullies strike, but before anyone can leap out of hiding the small
boy turns on the bullies and puts them to flight! Imagine the joy
of the parents!"
"So I've scared away the bullies! Happy ending!"
"I'm afraid not. They ran from you because your actions
were so unexpected. They thought that the small boy must have
a weapon in his pocket, or a previously unknown martial arts
skill; and like all bullies, they are cowards at heart. So they ran.
But they will be back. They'll be back mad. And you don't have a
secret weapon, Harry. The unfortunate truth is that on this level
of existence they are very much stronger than you. You've frightened
them off several times now. When they come back next time
they will be much better prepared."
Harry gaped, sat silently for a while. Margaret said nothing.
"When these beings were tormenting my mother, it wasn’t
real, was it?" Harry asked at length.
355
"Oh yes, it was 'real'. Very painful for her. But not in the
waking world. In your 'real' world your mother slept peacefully.
After you had chased them away I had permission to come to you
and explain what had happened, but before I could move you had
called for a doorway and left. Then there was no chance to get to
you before you were on a flight to England."
"Why don't you have somebody with my mother all the
time?"
"Your mother has a Guardian Spirit who is with her always.
It was she who called us. She cannot fight these creatures without
help, and by the time help arrives ....."
"So they can't be stopped? Found and stopped? My mother
must suffer this every night?"
"Not every night, and not for long. She is only vulnerable
because she is still tied to her body. It is a very frail thread and
will break soon. Your mother can then pass on to a place where
these creatures cannot reach her. Until then, we will do what we
can."
"So where does that leave me?"
356
"Where you were before. Your progress has been amazing,
and your strength in this place grows daily. But I warn you
again, be careful. Try to avoid serious injury here. Use caution.
I will help you when I can."
"You're saying that my mother will die soon! If you can't
protect her until then, I shall go to her every night, ..."
"I know. Please remember my cautions."
Harry called for a doorway and it formed in front of them.
As he stepped towards it Margaret spoke to him.
"You don't need those Harry. It is a convenient way to visualize
going from one place to another, but all you really need to do
is hold the place or the person in your mind and you will go
there."
"Thanks, Margaret, but I like my doorways. I'll keep them, if
its all the same to you."
He stepped through.........
............and was in his mother's room.
357
The room was quiet and peaceful. His mother seemed to be
sleeping, although Harry could see no movement of her chest beneath
the thin cotton sheet, and could hear no evidence of her
breath even when he placed his ear directly over her lips. He realised
that what he was seeing and hearing was not his mother's
physical body, but the reflection of it in .....wherever he was now.
In his dream? No, more than that, although he was not ready,
intellectually or emotionally, to put a name to this place. It would
mean admitting that......what? That he was sentient in a place
where he could see without eyes and hear without ears? Was
this, then, an acceptance of a spiritual existence? And what was
he guarding? He knew that, despite the screams and contortions
at his previous visit, his mother's body had not moved, nor expressed
in any way that she was experiencing the least discomfort.
Harry knew that he must address this issue soon, possibly
with Margaret's help. But not here; not now.
He was here to protect his mother from torment and torture
by these... creatures. Not human. Beings which had no counterpart
in the physical, but which were a real and deadly presence in
this other place. Philosophy and Theosophy must wait. The
question right now was how could he fight these creatures?
Again Harry looked around for a weapon. Something sharp.
Something heavy. Yet again the question arose, what merit would
such a weapon have against something as insubstantial as a
358
wraith? Harry recollected from something he had long ago seen
in some B-grade horror movie for the nineteen sixties that wraiths
were insubstantial vapour-like beings, somehow associated with
misty graveyards at the darkest hours of night. How had they
been fought? He strove to remember. Certainly not with a knife
or any other cutting weapon. How do you attack a vapour? In
his dream of Viking pirates he had effectively cut at shadows,
figments of his dream, hacked them to pieces with his great
sword ‘Invictus’. Perhaps that was the answer. An imaginary
sword to slash unreal beings. Moot, in any case, he thought,
since his great sword had probably vanished with the dream. Or
had it? He had remained; the huts and belongings of the fisherfolk
had remained. His armour had not vanished.
Even as the thought formed, so did the doorway. On the far
wall of his mother's room the outline appeared in the now familiar
yellow flames. The doorway, to be sure, to the small fishing village
on the north-east coast...... Wait. Doorways led both in and
out. Perhaps this particular doorway was a way into the room,
not out of it. Harry held his (unnecessary?) breath and waited.
Nothing/Nobody entered the room. If he could only welcome
them with a sword, Harry thought, it was worth risking exposing
his mother to a few moments torment. She had experienced
worse. He ran through the doorway.........
359
......... and appeared a small open space amongst the gigantic
trees of the coastal rain forest of British Columbia. Monstrous
redwoods towered over him, blocking the dim twilight. He could
see a few stars high above the clearing, and suspected that nightfall
could not be more than minutes away. The air was moist and
pungent. The quiet of the place was almost tangible.
"I think this is what you are looking for."
Harry turned. A small, slim brown-skinned man was standing
in the centre of the clearing. He wore a magnificent headdress
of many-coloured feathers, and was dressed in a buckskin robe,
beautifully decorated with beads. Over his shoulder he had
draped the ornamented scabbard, and across his extended palms
he held the weapon which Harry had come to find. Harry took
Invictus from the man, who then held out the scabbard.
“Is that my sword?”
“Yes. I took it up from where you left it in a recent visit.
You left rapidly along with your Spirit Guardian. She is very
strong, that one. I thought that you may have need of the
weapon at a later time, and I have kept it safe for you.”
"I don’t know what to say. I have nothing with which to repay
you," Harry said.
360
"Who has asked for payment? If you feel that you are in
debt to me, we can discuss this later” the small man replied.
"But I think that you have more urgent matters commanding your
attention right now. If I may point the way?"
Harry turned in the direction of the man's outstretched arm
and saw the doorway. Without question or concern he stepped
through it..............
.......into his mother's room. He entered behind the three
beings, who stood side by side at the foot of his mother's bed.
She was staring at the three with an expression of fear and loathing,
and in anticipation of the activity to come her face was already
wet with tears. Through blurred vision she saw a fourth
tormenter step through the doorway. Taller that the rest and
armed with a formidable looking sword which he now raised over
his right shoulder. The sword was so huge that it's tip carved a
deep gouge into the white plaster ceiling. Yet something about
this arrival was strangely familiar.
"Harry? Is it you........ but how?"
"Hello, Mother," Harry said as he swung Invictus in a horizontal
arc, neatly slicing through the neck of the nearest creature.
"Nice to see you sitting up and taking notice."
361
The passage of the sword through the creature's neck did
not sever the head, and did not seem to incapacitate the creature
greatly. But it certainly did hurt. The being hopped and howled,
moving as far away from the swinging blade as it was possible to
get within the small room. The other two gaped in obvious surprise
as Harry prepared his second swing.
"What is it?" one asked. "It cannot be human. What is that
instrument which it holds, and how is it able to harm us?"
Harry's second swing passed through the torso of the questioner,
who leaped further and higher than the first, making similar
sounds of discomfort.
And then they were gone. Where and how, Harry neither
knew nor cared. He knew that he had hurt them, and he suspected
it had a lot to do with the fact that the weapon he used
was a creation of this place, and had been made by these creatures
– although they had never intended that it should be turned
against them. He placed the sword in its scabbard and set it
down on his mother's bed. He went to sit with her and hold her
hand.
362
"Harry, my sweetheart, how is this possible? How did you
get into my dream, and where did you get that incredibly big carving
knife?"
"I can't tell you because I don't understand it myself. The
only thing that matters is that you're alright. And you are alright,
aren't you? You know who I am. You haven't known that in over
a year, Mom."
"Oh, Sweetheart, I always knew who you were, I just couldn't
get my mouth to say the words that were in my brain. I think
that my internal phone lines were down or something. Some of
my wires were shorted out. You were here last week, weren't
you? You sat at my bed and talked to me, and you sang "You are
my Sunshine", and "Daisy, Daisy" to me. I've heard every word,
my darling boy, and it tore at my heart that I couldn't even say
Thank You. So I'm saying it now. Thank you for not giving up on
me, and I'm so sorry for all the heartache I've given to you and
Liz. Is Liz here, too, Harry? Oh that would just make it all perfect."
"No, Mom, it's just me. Liz is safe at home, sleeping."
"Oh, Harry, I'm so tired. So worn out. Sing to me now,
Sweetheart, and sit by my bed, and keep those awful bogeymen
away so that I can have a good sleep. Would you do that for me?"
363
"That's why I'm here, Mom."
Harry sat by his mother's bed and sang softly to her until
she fell asleep, and when she finally slept peacefully he sat with
his sword across his knees, daring evil of any kind to come within
reach of his blade. The window shades eventually turned to a
light grey, and sounds began to come from the floor below as the
home prepared for another day. Harry stepped through the
doorway leaving his mother smiling in her sleep.
When the telephone rang at breakfast he was expecting the
call. Liz answered the phone and when she replaced the receiver
she came around the table to take Harry's hand.
"It's alright, Liz," he said. "I know. It's mother, isn't it?"
"Yes Harry. In her sleep last night. Very peacefully, Aggie
Campbell believes. She says your Mom was smiling when Susan
went to check on her this morning."
"That's right. She was."
* * * * * * * *
364
When Liz left for work Harry called Louise to say that he
would be in late, and went back to bed. He took off his shoes and
lay down on the bed in suit and tie, ready for the office. What he
had to do would not take long.
His breathing slowed automatically as he prepared his mind
for the dream state. Although he wasn't aware of it his pulse
slowed to half normal and his temperature dropped by one half of
a degree. Harry entered a state of consciousness closer to a hypnotic
trance than to a dream, but such niceties were of little importance
to him. He entered the darkened sphere, now softly
illuminated by a growing number of doorways set in the inner
surface. At the centre of the sphere Invictus hung waiting, a soft
blue light outlining the great blade. Harry took the sword and
strapped on the scabbard. Without conscious effort he drifted to
the doorway he needed......
..........and stepped directly into the cave.
He stood by the cave entrance and roared. The snarling
pack turned as one, but did not immediately attack. Harry remained
in the cave entrance, presenting a backlit target which
the hounds could not ignore. He did not want to move further
into the cave, where the walls diverged, as that would give the
creatures a greater chance to slip past him and escape. He did
365
not plan to leave any beast in a condition to return after he left
the cave.
He stared at the red eyes of the huge animals, wondering
which would attack first. They all did. The pack came at him as
one, a single-minded, merciless killing machine. But then, so
was Harry. He met the pack in a blur of motion, his blade sweeping
through a broad horizontal arc which slashed through the
beasts at the head of the pack. Using the momentum of the
swing to help him, Harry leaped to his left and crouched, bringing
the sword up in front and uptilted at a shallow angle. The first
animal to change course and leap at the crouching figure found
itself impaled.
Harry had theorised that these beasts must be close cousins
to the beings he had so recently met in battle, and therefore subject
to damage from the sword, but he had underestimated his
weapon's power. Severed limbs remained severed. The great
wounds he had inflicted at his first pass spurted a thick, dark
fluid. Three of the first four attackers already lay on the cave
floor, two of them unmoving while the third dragged its badly
crippled body towards the cave entrance.
Two of the uninjured dogs turned on one which had lost a
forelimb to Harry's sword, and while the three were preoccupied
with one another he despatched them all. Twenty seconds after
the fight had started Harry found himself the undisputed victor.
366
He walked around the arena using his sword to ensure that all of
the beasts were totally, irrefutably and irreversibly dead. Only
when he was sure of this did he walk slowly to the back of the
cave where the bundle of rags and greying flesh showed no more
sign of animation than the dismembered corpses. Gently, he
lifted Theo and turned the dying man towards him. Theo's eyes
were closed, and his body was completely limp. Harry had come
to late.
Not too late, but barely in time. Theo opened his eyes and,
with much difficulty, focussed on his rescuer. "Good God in
Heaven, Harry!" he said, quite distinctly and with more than a
trace of annoyance, "Now you've done it! Oh, now you've put the
cat amongst the pigeons! What on Earth did you think you were
playing at, Harry? Just who gave you permission to interfere in
my dying?"
"They're dead, Theo!" Harry said, stunned by his friend's reaction.
"They're all dead! You can get well now. I killed them
all."
"You certainly did!" Theo said indignantly. "Oh, yes, you did
that alright. But look what you've done to me! I was nearly dead!
Nicely done for! All the suffering behind me. Just a couple more
hours and I'd have crossed over and been with Dad. I've been
talking to him, you know. He's been a great source of encour367
agement and comfort while I was being eaten! And now I'll have to
do it all over again. My God, this could add months to my suffering.
I don't suppose you left any of them alive, by any chance?
No, I didn't think so, the way you were swinging that great
cleaver! I suppose I'll just have to wait here until they can send
some more hounds in to finish the job. Oh, get out of here,
Harry. Just go! Now, don't start sulking, I know you meant well,
and I know that it was a very brave thing that you thought you
were doing. But just go now. Shouldn't you be doing something
at Burton's? I hear you got my job there. And you'd better get
that bite treated, that one there on your left leg. Looks like one of
the hounds got in a lick of its own. Go on, Harry, there's nothing
you can do here; you've done quite enough, I think. Thanks for
the thought, I suppose I should say. Off you go now."
At a loss for word or action Harry backed out of the cave and
fell through his doorway directly into his bed. He looked at the
clock. If he hurried, and didn't hit heavy traffic he could still
make the nine o'clock board meeting. When he got out of bed and
tried to stand his left calf was so sore that he walked with a pronounced
limp.
At three o'clock that same afternoon Louise burst into
Harry's office without knocking, grinning broadly. "Oh, Mr. Murphy,
it's a miracle. They're even saying at the hospital, it's nothing
short of a miracle."
368
"Theo, I presume?"
"Oh, yes. Did you hear already?"
"No, Louise. Carry on, please."
"Yes, it's Theo. They expected him to, you know, pass away
last night, but this morning he's sitting up and talking to people.
He's very weak, but, I mean, considering everything, well, they
don't know what to make of it. His doctors can't say now, for
sure, whether the prognosis is still terminal or what. It's a miracle,
Mr. Murphy!"
"Yes, Louise, that's marvellous news! I couldn't be more
pleased. Are you still sending flowers? Would you take this
twenty from me? Thank you for coming straight in to tell me."
Louise left. "Poor old Theo," Harry thought. "Now he's got to
go through it all over again."
* * * * * * * *
369
He was at a crossroads, he knew. It was strange to think
that just a few short months ago his world was organised, stable
and well understood. The object of his life was clear; to make
enough money so that he and his family could live comfortably,
free from worry, and enjoy the finer things in life. He had
achieved financial security, prestige within the community and
the self assurance which followed from his private and professional
successes. If anyone had asked the Harry Murphy of previous
times “Who are you, really?” he would have fallen over
laughing. The concept of ‘finding himself’ would never have occurred
to him, while the question “What is life all about?” would
have been too ludicrous to merit an answer. Harry remembered a
bumper sticker he had received as a gag-gift on his fortieth birthday
which read “He who dies with the most toys, wins.” Harry
had attached the sticker to the rear bumper of his new Thunderbird
(his fortieth birthday present to himself) and adopted it as
his mid-life philosophy. Even six months ago he might have
claimed the axiom to be as good a viewpoint of life as any other.
Yet now he wrestled with questions and concepts which made his
previous attitude to life seem juvenile and frivolous.
These all centred around a single fundamental question:
Where did he go in his dreams?
How could he see when his eyes were closed? How could he
hear voices which made no sound anywhere close to his ears?
370
How could he move from place to place when his feet did not
move from their position at the end of his bed? Who were the
characters he encountered in his dreams? Had he really met with
his mother? Had he really spoken with Theo? And who was Margaret,
his Guardian Angel and Fairy Godmother? Was she a real
being, or a creation of his own subconscious mind?
The simple answer – that all of the above were mere figments
of his imagination – no longer held water. Harry recalled the
comments of Maurice Lalonde regarding his Near Death Experience
on the Toronto Freeway: "How can I be sure that I wasn’t
dreaming, Harry? I've dreamed all my life. I don't claim your expertise
in that area, but I've dreamed enough to know the difference.
I'm not dreaming now, and I wasn't dreaming then." Harry
had taken the comment with a pinch of salt at the time, and had
let it pass for the sake of courtesy and respect. But he now saw it
as much more than empty words. His dreams were at least as
real as waking life. If anything, his dreams were now the more
real of the two; his senses were sharper and the dream experiences
were altogether more solid. His dreams had become the
real life, and his waking life had become the dream.
This change in attitude could not fail to produce a change in
the way he viewed his waking reality. Things he had considered
important were now trivial. The Chevy Blazer and late model
Cadillac in his garage had been symbols of his success in the
371
world, but were now only a means of conveyance. If anything, he
felt embarrassed to be seen in the huge Caddy, which now
seemed to him nothing more than a symbol of opulence and arrogance.
His expensive suits and custom tailored shirts were frequently
left hanging in his closet while Harry went to work in
sweatshirts and old jeans. Behind his back the titters turned to
sarcasm and scorn, and finally to sorrow and concern, for Harry
was quite obviously losing his mind.
Previously important matters of his office became increasingly
trivial, and beneath his notice. Ren Barbour, Burton’s Finance
Chief, brought to Harry’s attention the fact that a large
customer was showing increasing reluctance to pay an account
which was several months overdue. The same customer had now
placed another very large and profitable order. Ren’s investigations
had suggested that the customer might be in serious financial
trouble, and could be facing bankruptcy. Under these
circumstances, he asked, should Burton’s take the risk of accepting
further business from this book publisher? Harry, who
would not long ago have solved such a problem with ease, told
Ren not to bother him with such trivial matters. When Ren very
politely and patiently pointed out that he was under standing instructions
to bring such matters to the CEO’s attention, and that
these instructions had come from Harry in the first place, Harry
exploded. He leaped out from behind his desk and began a tirade
against the people who were in league against him. While
372
berating Ren for trying to trap him with a puzzle which had no
solution he began to punctuate his comments with a jabbing finger.
The unfortunate Finance Chief now wanted nothing more
than to escape from Harry’s office. Waiting outside for his turn to
meet with the CEO, Mick Shaw saw what was happening, stepped
into the office and placed himself between the two men. Ren
thankfully withdrew. Still jabbing, Harry barely noticed that his
target had changed and continued his tirade. Gently, but with an
iron grip, Mick caught hold of the jabbing finger and as Harry
looked up in surprise Mick held him with a steely expression.
“This has gone too far, Murph,” he said. “I don’t know
what’s wrong with you or what’s to be done about it, but you can’t
go on like this. You need help, Sunshine! You need serious
help.”
Harry exploded afresh. Snatching away his entrapped hand
he began to swing both fists against this new, larger threat to his
safety, now yelling loudly about what he would do when he returned
later with his great sword. Mick parried the blows with
ease, his expression one of increasing concern for his disturbed
friend. Behind Harry the door opened once more. This was more
than he could take. He turned snarling to face his new attacker,
but found himself caught from behind in a grip which left him
barely room to breathe. He looked up to face the new intruder
and saw George Thorpe, his face a mix of alarm and concern.
373
“I didn’t know you were in Halifax,” Harry said meekly to his
boss.
“It’s right here in your diary, Harry,” said George, lifting the
leather bound book from Harry’s desk.
Mick released Harry from his stranglehold and turned to the
Chairman. “Mr. Murphy was just demonstrating how he defended
me against the hooligans at the battle of Burton’s…..” he
began.
“I guessed that’s what it was probably all about,” George
lied, “But if you would excuse us, Mr. Shaw, I’d like a few minutes
alone with Mr. Murphy.”
Mick left. Louise closed the door. Harry sat opposite George
and felt tears begin to run down both cheeks.
“I can’t explain, Mr. Thorpe. Mick Shaw is my friend, and
like many of my friends he is a very poor liar. And so am I. I was
attacking him, trying to hurt him, and I don’t know why. I don’t
know much of anything right now. I think I may be mentally ill.”
“Is this to do with your dreaming experiments, Harry?
Could they have unbalanced you in some way?”
374
“I don’t know. I honestly don’t know. Possibly. But I know
that I haven’t been pulling my weight around here for some time
now, and I think that the only honourable thing left for me to do
is to give you my resignation. I’m sorry to land you in such a
situation, Mr. Thorpe, when you’ve been so very good to me, but I
think it’s for the best.”
“Well I don’t’” George said. Harry looked up in surprise.
“And you needn’t bother with the resignation, since I will not accept
it. I don’t know what’s wrong with you, Harry, but I agree
with the comment I heard on the way in here. You need professional
help. Your illness may be related to your dream experiments,
or it may be that I placed you into a situation for which
you had neither the proper training nor adequate experience.
Then I dropped Simon on you and left you to fend for yourself.
And when the whole thing went sour I supported young Jensen
and blamed you. It was completely down to me that you ended
up in that battle zone where you so distinguished yourself. Then
in some bizarre show of ‘gratitude’, I stuck you with the job and
took off for Toronto. Well, Harry, I’ve let you down four times in a
row, but I’m going to do the right thing by you this time. You
need professional help and I intend to see that you get it. I will be
behind you all the way, and so will AGI. As of today you are on
indefinite sick leave, and will remain there until I receive a doctor’s
statement of your complete return to health. Now, just so
375
that people don’t think I’ve gone completely soft I’m setting you
back to your previous status as Production Manager while you’re
on leave. You will receive full pay and benefits at that level for
however long your period of absence may last, and all medical
and professional services will be paid for by AGI. Phil Sutherland
has been itching for some hands-on production experience, and I
intend to give it to him. Phil will move in as Halifax CEO and he’ll
stay here until you’re ready to resume the position. Does that
sound fair to you, Harry?”
“No, George. Not a bit. I think it’s grossly unfair….. to AGI!
Fair would be to have security throw me out onto Gottingen
Street. More than fair would be to give me a month’s pay in lieu
of notice. Your offer is…….. I don’t know what it is, but ‘fair’ just
doesn’t cut it.”
“Yes, but will you shake my hand on it?”
“Gladly George, and I consider myself indebted to you.”
Harry stood and came around his desk. The two men shook
hands. George left.
Harry made his goodbyes to Louise and Mick Shaw, who had
waited outside the office for the outcome, and departed Burton’s
without fanfare. As he drove from the lot he looked back at the
376
plant through the rearview mirror and wondered whether he
would ever return.
* * * * * * * *
Elias Sylliboy sat in his sweat lodge and waited for his spirit
guide. The ‘lodge’ was actually a modern sauna in the basement
of the Sylliboy split level ranch house by the Gold River in the
county of Lunenburg, Nova Scotia. Elias no longer used – no
longer needed to use – natural or synthetic stimulants to help
him communicate with his spirit guide; hadn’t needed them for
many years. He still found the sweat lodge useful; at the very
least it relaxed him and allowed him to let go of the day to day
tribulations which could otherwise get in the way. And there
were the physical benefits, too. A body couldn’t live in today’s
world without taking in toxins through virtually every orifice, including
the several million pores which the skin exposed to the
elements. The sweat lodge helped to expel the toxins back out
through the same holes that let them in. Elias had no such problems
with his Spirit body; not due to lack of contaminants, for
there were almost as many as there were toxic substances in the
physical world. But Elias knew how to protect his spirit from invasion
by the such poisons, and he never let down his guard.
Physical poisons could make his body sick, but spiritual con377
tamination could do infinitely more harm. He prepared himself
now. It helped to pass the time while waiting.
Elias relaxed his muscles, one by one, starting with his toes
and gradually moving upwards. This step alone had taken almost
an hour when he had first learned the art, many years ago. Now
it took him less than a minute. He slowed his breathing, lowered
his pulse rate and blood pressure. He focussed attention on the
heated air as it moved into and out of his lungs, carrying pure
energy in with the steamy air and carrying unwanted spiritual
and physical substances out into the tent. When he was ready he
formed the egg. In his mind’s eye he saw the bright, shining shell
form around him, encapsulating all of his bodies within it. He
filled the egg with the blazing white fire of the love of God for His
earthly children, and felt the wonderful relaxation of tension
which it carried to him. The fierce white light burned away all
evil, all cruelty, all negativity and left Elias floating in a sea of
bliss. Thus cleansed and protected, he opened his eyes. Seated
across from him, at the other side of the glowing coals at the centre
of the ‘tent’ sat a small brown-skinned man dressed in the
magnificent regalia of a Mi’kmag War Chief.
“Where the hell have you been, Running Elk?” Elias asked.
“You know I’ve been sitting here over an hour waiting for you?”
378
“Keep your bonnet on, Sylliboy,” said the apparition. “You
think you’re my only customer? You think I have to come running
every time you snap your finger?”
“Listen, wise guy, You called Me. And what on earth are you
doing in that Big Chief getup? You were never a Mi’kmaq Chief,
Running Elk! Not even close. You were …….”
“I know what I was! But you’re right, I did call you. And
that was in a dream nearly two weeks ago, so don’t give me that
crap about waiting an hour for me! How come it took you nearly
two weeks to get the fire lit? An electric fire at that!”
“Oh, I had a spot of family trouble. Patty ran into complications
with the new baby. Had to go in to Halifax for a few days.
You know, they took the baby out and fixed it up and put it back
inside her! Amazing what they can do….”
“I know about your granddaughter’s baby. Don’t worry she’s
going to be fine. And the baby is a boy.”
“I know that! We’re not living in the stone age, you know.
You never hear of Ultrasound?”
“I forget sometimes, Elias. The baby will be a healthy boy
and he will be called Thomas, and he will grow up to become……”
379
“Don’t spoil the story, Elk! I don’t want to know how it
comes out. Anyway, what do you want from me, now that we’ve
finally got together?”
“The Spirit Council ask a favour of you, my son. Not far
from here a good man has missed his footing on the path and
needs your help to find his way back. He wanders in dangerous
lands and he is neither knowledgeable nor able to defend himself.
It is a miracle that he has not already been badly harmed. Not
even the Council understands how he is able to continue, and yet
he presses deeper and deeper into danger.”
“How did he get there? Is this yet another man dabbling
with forbidden magics? If so I want no part……”
“No, Elias. This man is innocent, and of good spirit. His
soul was well along the path to rejoin with his Gods, but something
has happened; something has gone very wrong.”
“What do you mean, ‘gone wrong’. Things don’t just ‘go
wrong’. What was he dabbling with?”
“He did nothing other than examine his dreams. Nothing
that any child in our culture couldn’t handle with ease. But he
380
met up with Dream Riders and they have enticed him into their
world.”
“So the Riders threaten him?”
“Yes, but so far, in several encounters, he has bested them!
This is a very strange thing, but we cannot count on it to continue.
Elias, the man’s very soul is at stake. Will you help him?”
“No, Running Elk, I will not. I am nearly eighty years old,
and my body is tired. My bones ache in the mornings, even before
the cold weather is upon us. I think that soon I will rid myself
of this old bag of bones, and come to join you where I, too,
may dress as a Mi’kmaq Chief and keep old men waiting on my
pleasure. I’m too old and too feeble for this. Get one of the
younger men to do this thing for the Council.”
“None of the younger men can do this, Elias. Your body is
old and frail, truly, but in the land of dreams you are more powerful
than any. Only you can help this wandering soul. Say that
you will reconsider.”
“No, Running Elk, I will not reconsider. I am neither able
nor willing to help this wandering white man. Find another to
help him.”
381
“White man? Who said he was a white man? Would you
help him, then, if his skin were another colour?”
“Don’t think to trap me with words, Running Elk. Find
someone else.”
* * * * * * * *
382
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER
Chapter 7:
He hadn’t retired but it certainly felt that way. For the first
time Harry understood why so many men refused to accept that,
for them, that day would ever come. He faced the question which
had always struck fear into the hearts of the bravest of men:
“What am I going to do with all of this time?”
He wandered through the gardens, at home in Halifax and at
the cottage, where the fierce midsummer heat was starting to
wane now, and occasional mornings carried a hint of the turning
of the earth towards fall. He marvelled at the beauty of the morning
mists, flowing in from the ocean and giving to Liz’s seaside
garden a hint of surrealism until the sun rose high enough to
burn them away. The stillness of the cottage, which he had once
found peaceful and energising, had begun to feel stifling and oppressive.
In a sealed cardboard box on a garage shelf he found a
hoard of old paperbacks, musty treasures from his children’s
early readings. He dug through the damp books and found a
copy of “Treasure Island”, a favourite of his own youth. Rereading
the little book was like being reunited with a long lost childhood
friend. Back in the box he found works by Dickens and Trollop,
383
by Hemmingway and Shaw. At the very bottom of the box he
found a dog-eared copy of “Reach for the Sky”, Paul Brickhill’s
biography of Douglas Bader, the legless World War Two fighter
ace and one of Harry’s childhood heroes. His problem of what to
do with his time was solved. For a while.
He returned to his computer, and renewed his recent acquaintance
with the Web. He revisited old sites and found new
ones. He became fascinated for a short time with UFO phenomena,
which he often found associated with his early searchings
amongst the occult and the arcane. But the endless discussions
of “Are we alone in the Universe?” could not sustain his interest
for long. In any case, he had begun to suspect that if mankind
was truly destined to explore the universe it might best be done
by leaving his physical bodies in safe storage somewhere back on
Earth.
He stumbled by accident on a website which fascinated and
repelled him in equal measure, and for the next two days Harry
moved through the netherworld of Internet Pornography. He witnessed
sights and concepts previously unseen and unsuspected
throughout his forty seven years on the planet. An accidental
click on one such website took Harry into a subculture which
involved very young children in these activities, and which so
sickened him that he turned off his computer in abject disgust
and pulled out the wallplug for good measure.
384
He turned once more to the world of his dreams – although
strictly speaking he no longer needed to sleep in order to enter
the dreamstate. Given reasonably peaceful surroundings and a
comfortable place to relax Harry could enter the dreamstate
within a few minutes. The question of whether he was ‘asleep’,
‘self-hypnotised’ or merely ‘refocusing his awareness’ never entered
his head.
In dream after dream he found himself wandering through
unknown surroundings, always pulled towards a horizon which
never came closer. He could be striding down a lonely highway or
along the crowded sidewalks of some strange city. One dream
seated him in a dugout canoe behind the broad shoulders of a
dark skinned man who refused to turn or speak throughout the
long, fruitless journey. Another set him once again on the seat of
a drop-handled sports bicycle, pedalling furiously along a winding
country road towards a destination never known, never seen and
never reached. The common factor was the pull. He was desperately
eager to go somewhere, but had no idea where.
After his first two weeks of enforced idleness Liz quietly and
gently reminded Harry that a condition of his sick leave was that
he should seek and receive professional help.
385
“I don’t think that’s going to work for me, Liz,” Harry told
her. “I have this overwhelming feeling that there’s somewhere I
should be going and something I should be doing. When I get
there and do whatever it is that I have to do, all this weight will be
lifted from me. Everything will be fine, just as soon as I work out
where the hell I’m supposed to go.”
“Harry, Darling, that’s just part of the sickness. Whatever it
is that’s wrong with you, Depression is almost certainly a part of
it; and one symptom of depression is this urge you feel to get up
and go somewhere. Anywhere. Just somewhere other than where
you are. A friend of mine in college was depressive and it was
nothing unusual for her to get up in the middle of the night and
drive for three, four hundred kilometers just for the relief she felt
by the act of ‘going somewhere’. She told me the destination was
totally unimportant just so long as she kept moving.”
“Oh, I don’t think I’m depressed, Liz. It’s not so much that
I’m sad, more like that I’m driven; unsatisfied. It’s like I’ve something
very important to do but I can’t remember what it is, and
it’s driving me crazy – no pun intended!”
“Well I’m glad your sense of humour is still alive in there
somewhere, Harry. But ‘depression’ isn’t just about being sad.
There are all sorts of emotions involved, and not the least of them
are fear and anger. Why don’t you use your new computer to do
386
some research into it. One thing you’ll find right away is that
Depression very often has a bio-chemical cause. It’s as simple as
a short-circuit in an electrical gadget; the brain is just not making
the connections it should, and a simple pill can often supply
these chemicals and put the whole thing right for you.”
“I don’t know, Liz. I don’t think so.”
“Harry, I think your biggest problem could be you’re just not
ready to admit that you might have a mental illness of some kind.
That’s not surprising and not unusual. People still think in terms
of padded cells and barred windows when they think of mental
illness. There’s an awful stigma attached to it. But you owe it to
yourself at least to find out. Not to mention that you owe it to
AGI, and to George. And to me. Let me make an appointment for
you. George Thorpe’s office gave me a contact who they say is
one of the best men in Canada. You don’t have to admit to anything,
just go along and talk to this man. How on earth can it
hurt you just to talk?”
“Alright, you win, you silver tongued little devil. You’ve
talked me into it. But if they put me away I want you to promise
that you’ll come and visit me. Every day.”
“Harry, I swear that if they put you away they’ll have to put
me away right along side of you, alright.”
387
“Deal.”
* * * * * * * *
Norman James Arrenberg polished his gold-rimmed spectacles
and opened the leather bound portfolio which his secretary/
receptionist had placed on his desk. The portfolio looked as
though it contained nothing more than a small sheaf of notepaper,
but Arrenberg knew better. The folder contained gold. A
Corporate referral. Before he even saw the file on his new patient
Doctor Arrenberg had opened a large loose-leaf binder which he
kept in the bookcase behind his desk for easy reference. His secretary
received regular updates to the binder from the service to
which her boss subscribed by means of a monthly fee. The file
was therefore up-to-date and accurate, and contained vital financial
information not on the good doctor’s patients, but on their
employers and insurance companies – that is, on those who paid
the bills. Within a few seconds Arrenberg found the data he
sought and replaced the binder. This Mr. Murphy was apparently
a senior and much valued executive of a stunningly wealthy corporation
with plants in every major Canadian city. And the man
himself seemed to be seriously disturbed. The confidential background
information on his new patient suggested that he had
been overheard talking to himself on several occasions, had ex388
perienced lapses of memory during which he failed to recognise
colleagues of many years acquaintance, suffered from fugues and
anxiety attacks and even had a recent history of violent physical
outbursts. Pure Gold. Arrenberg recalled cases, some recent,
where his accumulated fees had eventually exceeded the limits
which the insurance companies were prepared to pay on behalf of
his patients. He had then been forced to terminate these cases by
referral to a public mental health practitioner. But the top page
on his current file made it quite clear that this ‘AGI’ organisation
clearly understood that he accepted only private patients, that he
gave no time guarantees on patient recovery (in fact he gave no
guarantees at all), that his fees were $300 per one hour session
with additional charges for special services. And in the little box
marked “Cost of treatment not to exceed……..” someone had
written “No limit established.”
“No Limit.” Pure gold. He hoped that this Mr. Murphy was
as sick as his notes suggested. He would be careful not to suggest
chemical therapy until he had established a close rapport
with his new client. It would be a real tragedy if the man were to
stumble onto one of the new psychotropic drugs and be cured by
a simple pill. First let’s establish some trust with Mr. Murphy, he
thought, and then very gently let’s lead him to the conclusion that
pills are rarely the answer. It can be very dangerous to put these
powerful mood-changing drugs into one’s system and you never
can tell what side effects may crop up. Done carefully, he would
389
be able to write in his file “Patient refuses to consider drug therapy.”
It looked so much better coming from the patient. Pure
Gold.
He pressed a small button on the multi-purpose telephone/
intercom device which graced his heavy oak desktop, and
five seconds later his receptionist was showing the new patient
into his office.
Arrenberg saw a man of medium height, fairly trim with just
the beginnings of a middle-aged spread showing beneath his old,
paint-stained sweater. He had obviously not bothered to shave
for this appointment, and it was clearly some days since he had
paid any attention to his hair. He wore old running shoes, no
socks, and an old pair of blue jeans which had once been quite
expensive. If the doctor had passed this man on Spring Garden
Road he might have offered him the price of a cup of coffee.
Probably not. And yet this person was apparently a Senior Executive
of a multi-billion dollar conglomerate which wanted him
back so badly that they considered the cost of his rehabilitation to
be of no importance. Arrenberg smiled, partly in welcome and
partly in avarice.
Harry saw an expensively dressed man in his early middle
age who was not more than five pounds short of being classed as
obese. He wore small, metal rimmed glasses and a small, well
390
trimmed Vandyke beard with exactly the right amount of grey in
it. Everything about the man and his office screamed to Harry
“Look How Important and Successful I Am.” Harry had been
sceptical and nervous while sitting in the opulent waiting room,
but now became guarded and angry without knowing exactly why
this should be. With some effort the Doctor heaved himself out of
the large chair and came around his desk to meet Harry. He extended
his hand, which Harry shook. The hand was flabby and
moist, but the grip was firm. “I’m so pleased to meet you, Harry.
Please come in and make yourself at home.”
Without thinking, Harry retaliated. “It’s Mr. Murphy, Doctor.
Possibly we shall come to know each other well enough, in
time, to move to first name familiarity; but we are not there yet.”
Arrenberg showed no sign of being insulted, offended or even
surprised by Harry’s attack. “My apologies, Mr. Murphy. It shall
be as you wish, of course. Would you like to take a seat in the
armchair by the fire?”
Harry looked in the direction indicated and saw two large
armchairs facing each other in front of a large fireplace in which
wooden logs burned. He knew that the thing had to be artificial,
since there were no smoke exits in the office and the entire block
was air conditioned anyway. This was confirmed when he moved
over to the fire, as the great crackling log gave out no heat. The
391
whole effect was brilliantly done, and included sound effects,
simulated smoke and a perfect illusion of leaping flames. Despite
himself, Harry was impressed. He sat. With some effort Arrenberg
eased himself down into the opposite chair.
“Well, Mr. Murphy, perhaps we could start off by finding out
a little about each other. I will be glad to answer any of your
questions, but perhaps I could go first?” Receiving neither a
negative nor a positive response from Harry the Doctor continued.
“Harry replaced the rope with a respectable leather
leash, and also fitted Mutt with a bright red nylon collar, replete
429
with engraved dog tags carrying Harry’s phone numbers for the
Halifax residence and seaside cottage. They walked along the
highway by a sign noting the way to Nova Scotia’s Shelter for
Homeless Animals in Distress, but by that stage there was no
chance that the little dog would be needing any help from the
good folks at SHAID. Not then; not ever. Returning to the trail
Harry slipped the leash from Mutt’s new collar and the little dog
trotted off to explore yet another stretch of new sights and sounds
and, especially, new smells.
The two hikers settled into a daily routine which seemed to
have been ticking along for years. Rising shortly after dawn they
would leave the tent for the privacy of surrounding brush to attend
to various personal functions, and would then meet back at
the small propane stove, or sometimes at a tiny campfire, for
breakfast consisting of some combination of fried eggs, bacon,
sausage, toast with jam or marmalade, coffee and ginger cookies.
Sometimes all of these. Harry had included a small bag of dog
food and a pack of dog biscuits amongst his provisions, but as
often as not Mutt shared whatever emerged from the cooking
pots. Harry, in return, tried one of Mutt’s dog treats but found
that he preferred his own English Ginger Snaps. After breakfast
Harry would pack his belongings, do his very best to leave no sign
that there had ever been a camp on this site, and step back onto
the trail. Their pace varied according to the weather, the terrain
and their respective moods, but Harry had found that, fully laden,
430
he could comfortably manage a twelve to fifteen kilometer hike
with minimum aches, pains or uncomfortable after-effects, and
he saw no reason to push for greater daily distance.
Late in the afternoon of their seventh day they came to the
bridge. They had passed through the small coastal village of
Chester Basin, where Harry had once again replenished their
stocks of consumables, and had been back on the trail for perhaps
two kilometers. Across a small road the trail curved to the
south-west and came immediately to a broad, turbulent river.
From his map Harry learned that this was the Gold River, and
that at this point it was very close to where it joined the Atlantic
Ocean. The bridge was, in life, exactly as he had found it in his
dream, and there was no longer any question about the message
of the dream. Somebody wanted him to follow the directions he
had been given.
Crossing over the broad span he came to the western edge of
the bridge and climbed the guardrail to the narrow path which led
downwards. Unlike the dream, he was unable to hold his footing
on the steep descent and slid down the last twenty feet of the
path on his back. Mutt immediately ran over and licked Harry’s
face by way of commiseration.
Dusting himself off, Harry followed the trail along the river’s
edge to the point at which he knew he must leave the path and
431
force his way through undergrowth to the small clearing, where
he knew he must camp that night. Right on schedule, the clearing
opened in front of him. The light was fading rapidly by this
time, and the two campers were comfortably tucked up inside
their tent by nine fifteen, where both were sound asleep before
nine twenty five. Harry did not dream.
He was awakened to the scarlet light which signified a
sunny morning, and to the sound of a hard rain falling on the
trees around the tent. Still fuzzy from sleep Harry could not at
first reconcile this apparent contradiction. As he sat up he noticed
that Mutt was no longer in the tent, and wondered whether
his friend had decided to continue his wanderings alone. More
probably he just gone out to answer some call of nature. The fact
that the dog would have needed to – and would have been able to
-- unzip the doorflap did not surprise Harry at all. Strange, he
thought, how the sound of rain hissing into the brush sounded
exactly like bacon frying. Stranger yet was how it could smell
exactly like bacon frying. Probably, Harry thought, because it
was bacon frying! Now, if Mutt had found the supplies, rekindled
the campfire and got breakfast underway, that certainly would
surprise Harry. He lifted the flap and looked out.
A small, shrivelled brown skinned man squatted over the
campfire, on which, supported by four small rocks, sat Harry’s
432
lightweight teflon coated aluminum frying pan. Next to the small
man sat Mutt, licking his lips in anticipation.
“Some guard dog you turned out to be!” Harry said to the
dog. Hearing the voice, the old man looked over to the tent. “Oh,
he challenged me, Harry, and he needed a heap of reassurances
before he let me take any liberties in your camp. I brought my
own bacon, by the way.”
“Oh, there’s plenty for three in my backpack,” Harry said.
“But before we get down to the social pleasantries, would you
mind just telling me who the hell you are!”
“Sure. I am Sky Reader. I am so called because even as a
small child I could foretell the weather for weeks in advance. My
English name is Elias Sylliboy. And I’ve heard every possible joke
about that, so I’d be much obliged if we don’t bother with any of it
this morning.”
“You’re an Indian.”
“Sheesh, barely introduced and already we’re into the ethnic
stuff! You, I suppose would be a square-headed Mick with some
Canuck.”
“No offence intended,” Harry said. “I just meant…….”
433
“Never mind. We don’t have time for it. Hurry up and do
whatever it is you have to do before breakfast and I’ll make you a
bacon sandwich and a strong cup of tea. Brought my own tea,
too, as well as a fresh baked loaf. We’ve a lot to do, and I’ve already
wasted five days waiting for you to come to me, since I’m
past the point where I’d gladly walk fifty miles to meet you. Come
on then, lots to do today.”
Harry emerged, stretched, scratched. “What exactly are we
about to do?”
“Your Spirit Guide sent me. She claims that you have wandered
seriously from your planned life-path, and I’m to see if I can
help you get back onto it.
“Margaret? You mean Margaret? I thought keeping me on
the right path was her job!”
“Your ‘Margaret’ is a very powerful, very busy person. She
serves the Spirit Council which oversees much of what happens
on this part of Earth.”
“You must be confusing her with someone else. My Margaret
is just a girl.”
434
“To you she appears as a girl, probably to make you feel at
ease in her company. To me she is a great and powerful leader,
and when I am summoned before her she appears as a mighty
warrior queen. She has lived on earth many times, and if I told
you some of the names she was known by you would find it hard
to believe. In her home land she was long ago known as
Boudi’chea. She was a great warrior and the Queen of her tribe.
When she lived amongst the Mi’kmaq she was a medicine man
revered by our people throughout the northern lands for her
knowledge of healing, and for her wisdom.”
“You mean medicine ‘woman’.”
“When she chose rebirth amongst us she lived as a man.
Several times she has chosen to be male when circumstances
required it, although her preference is to be female. During her
time with us, alas, the voices of women were not always respected
by our warriors.”
“Why would she send you to help me? I’m not Mi’kmaq. I’m
not even Native Canadian.”
“Harry, I can assure you that the only reason I’m here is
that your skin is white. If you had been of my blood and my tribe
I would not have stepped across my threshold to help you. Now
435
get into the brush and do what you have to do before the bacon
gets cold. Like I said, we’ve a lot to do and little time to do it in.”
Harry scratched again, walked around the tent and moved
off amongst the trees. Elias Sylliboy and Mutt the mutt looked at
each other and shrugged.
* * * * * * *
436
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER
Chapter 8:
“Tell me again, Sky Reader, about this ‘life-path’ I’m supposed
to have wandered away from.”
“Harry, I know now that you’re not a bigot. I know that you
measure a man by his deeds and by his heart, and that you care
little for what labels he carries. But when you use my Mi’kmaq
name I’m never sure that you’re not being just a tad sarcastic. I’d
be much obliged if you’d call me Elias, or ‘Eli’ if you prefer, which
is what my friends call me. You do want to be my friend, don’t
you, Harry?”
“‘Eli’ suits me fine. And yes, you seem like a decent sort of
chap and I’d like to be your friend. But about this ‘life-path’ business?”
“If you haven’t realised it yet, you will soon learn that the
purpose of earth-life is to learn and to grow spiritually. Earth is a
school. You come here to learn specific lessons, which have been
constructed with your input and approval. The way…….”
“Whoa, there, Eli. I’m still coming to grips with whether I
have an immortal soul or not. Now you expect me to buy into this
437
‘school’ business? And are you saying that my life was all
planned out before I was even born? What proof do you offer
me?”
“Proof? You want proof? None, Harry; I offer none whatsoever.”
Elias’s words flew like bullets and his eyes turned angry.
“I’m well aware that you’ve stumbled through your life wearing
blinkers, and you haven’t a clue about what’s really going on!
But it’s not my job to open your eyes or to make you see what’s
hanging under your nose. I’m told you’re a competent Dream
Walker – Lucid Dreamer, I think is your term – but as I see it you
go around every night seeing, yet denying that you have eyes;
conversing with folk yet refusing to accept that you have ears and
a mouth; walking…..”
“Eli, I know I that have eyes, but they are closed in sleep.
My dreams are nothing more than imaginings, taking place only
within my brain. I don’t really……..”
“Harry, it’s like I said, we do not have time for this. You’re
just going to have to accept the evidence of your senses – your
spiritual senses, and move on. This should have been settled long
ago. It’s as though a small child should say to its mother ‘Prove
to me that the thing I see over there is a real thing’; or ‘When I
stroke the cat, how can I be sure that it is a real cat?’ Why can’t
438
you can trust me? Take my word for it? Can you do that, do you
think? Or am I, too, just a figment of your imagination?”
“Are we to sit here and play word games all day, then? Is
that how I’m going to be put back on the right path?”
Elias seemed to shrink back inside himself. “No, Harry. I
apologise. I’m a tired old man, and I got up very early to drag this
weary, worn out body down along the banks of the Gold River,
and to be honest I didn’t really want to come. So please forgive
me if I’m a little grumpy. I shouldn’t have tried to get smart with
you and I shouldn’t have got snappy with you. But to tell the
truth it just burns me up that you refuse to accept something
that’s always been a part of my daily life; something that I consider
to be so obvious that it goes without saying; something that
every child in my culture knows as well as his name. Try to see it
from my point of view. Suppose you had been asked to convince
me that a simple inoculation can prevent certain serious diseases,
and I’m sitting here telling you that the very idea is preposterous.
Little animals too small to see, crawling about in my bloodstream?
What nonsense! You grew up knowing this to be a fact,
but what could you do to convince me? What proof could you
offer? Look, I’m just getting all steamed again. This is no good.
Under the circumstances I think that perhaps the best thing for
us to do is meet up in the dream world. At least while we’re there
439
I can point to the realities of the place by way of demonstration.
Will you do that for me?”
“Do you want to start right away?”
“Yes, if you’re ready.”
Harry dragged his sleeping bag out of the tent and spread it
on a bed of the pine needles which covered the small clearing. He
rolled a spare shirt into a makeshift pillow and made himself
comfortable. He looked at Elias, who had settled against the
trunk of a large spruce, and at Mutt who lay at his feet. Elias
nodded.
Harry relaxed his body and focussed on his breathing. He
moved rapidly into and through his sphere of darkness and stood
beside his tent. Elias came to his feet in some surprise, and the
huge German Shepherd loped over to Harry, wagging his tail in
obvious delight.
“I am most impressed,” Elias said. “Especially for a white
man! Damn! I always forget I’m not supposed to say that stuff
any more! Sorry if I caused offence. I was told that you were good
at crossing, but that was as well done as I can do it.”
440
Harry, too, had been taken by surprise. The man by the tree
was in his prime, somewhere in his early thirties. His eyes were
bright, and twinkled with mirth. He wore only a small loincloth
and heavy muscles rippled as he moved. His jet black hair hung
almost to his waist.
“What?” Elias asked, seeing Harry’s expression. “Oh, yeah.
The body! Welcome to one of the many benefits of dreamlife!
Back in your waking reality you have to live with what you have,
more or less. Plastic Surgery can only do so much. Time and
Gravity always win in the end. But here, my friend, you can be
whatever you want to be. Did you not notice your scruffy little
four-legged buddy there? Well whatever he can do, you can do.
Usually better.”
“I don’t even know what I look like, Eli! I tried looking in a
mirror but I had no reflection. I know what my physical body
looks like, but…….”
“Harry, I am so glad to hear you say that. ‘My Physical
Body’. That tells me that you are closer than you care to admit to
believing that some part of you exists outside the physical. If you
can accept that, my work is half done.”
“Eli, you just can’t know how much I’ve wrestled with that!
But I guess I gave up on religion a long time ago. An invisible
441
soul, floating up to heaven to sit on a throne and listen to a
bunch of angels playing on their harps! For ever and ever! Eternal
boredom, I’d call it! But honestly, what garbage it all is! I
saw through it when I was twelve years old, and it makes even
less sense now than it did then!”
“You ever hear about throwing the baby out with the bathwater?
You’re talking about Christianity, of course, but if you’d
been a child raised in my religion you’d probably have come to the
same conclusion. Our stories differ from yours; no wise men, no
guiding star, no manger. No Messiah! But you’d have gagged on
the story of how the sun and moon were made, and our creation
story is no less far fetched than ‘Adam and Eve’. But these were
tales for a less sophisticated time, Harry. All religions are pretty
much the same. You wouldn’t have fared much better under
Buddhism, or Islam, and you’d have made a lousy Druid.”
“Well then, what’s the point?”
“The point? Maybe just ‘Don’t confuse Spirituality with Religion;
they’re two very different things!’ Maybe I have no point at
all. I’m an old man and my mind tends to wander. But we were
talking about the reality of this place. Do you see me now?”
442
“I see an image; but I know it’s not you. I know that in reality
you’re an old man, sleeping against a tree, just as I know that
the big dog with you is…..”
“Nonsense! Utter nonsense! Where the hell do you think
you are now, exactly?”
“I’m dreaming.”
“Then who or what is that, lying over there on top of the
sleeping bag?”
“That’s my sleeping body. I’m dreaming an image of my
sleeping body.”
“Then look at my body. Walk over to it. Look closely above
my right eye. What do you see?”
Harry looked. “You have a scar there. Faint. Looks very
old. It runs right up into your hairline.”
“I do have such a scar. I got it when I fell from a horse as a
young man. But I didn’t tell you about it, or show it to you. So
how do you know it is there?”
“I see it.”
443
“What with? Your eyes are in your body, over there by the
tent, and they are closed, Harry.”
“I see it with…….with…..”
“With your eyes, Harry. With your spirit eyes. We are
standing here talking to each other, looking at each other. You
see me; you hear me. Do you want to touch or taste me? Come
closer and smell me!”
“Don’t be revolting!”
“Let me try it this way: What would it take to convince you
that you are alive, alert, and fully functioning quite apart from the
physical body which lies out there beside the tent.” Elias drew
from his belt a wicked, long bladed knife which gleamed under
the bright sun. He moved over to Harry’s sleeping body.
“What if I killed this body, Harry, and yet you continued to
live? Would that convince you?”
Elias put the edge of the blade to the throat of the sleeper,
and Harry reflexively leaped forward. Elias raised his hand and
Harry ran into a solid wall of air which held him as though he
444
were bound by ropes. Elias sheathed his blade and stood. A
wave of his hand released Harry’s bonds.
“Please know that I would never harm you; not here, and
not in the waking world. My temper does not improve with age.
But believe me, Harry, if someone came into the clearing while
you slept and cut your head clear from your body, you would continue
to exist exactly as you are now. I’m at a loss as to what will
convince you. Can we just leave that issue, for a while, and move
on to the Life-Path?”
“Eli, I don’t mean to be hard on you, it’s just that I see no
point in agreeing with you for a quiet life when in my heart I can’t
accept what you say. But yes, let’s move on then.”
“Do me a favour, just listen to me for a minute. I swear to
you that everything I say will be the absolute truth. If you still
need proof, we’ll come back to that later.”
“OK.”
“Your spirit came into existence many thousands of years
ago and has been evolving ever since. It has grown and developed
by several means, but by far the best and most effective of these
is earthly incarnation. You have lived on earth several times.
You have been a great leader, a powerful warrior, a renowned
445
teacher and a man of science. You have always chosen to be
male. You have learned much, but have missed one very important
lesson. Before you were born to your present life your
Guardian Spirit met with the Great Council on your behalf to
determine the course of your time on earth. She had already discussed
with you the kind of life you wished to live, and meeting
with the Council was, in your case, pretty much a formality. It
was agreed that the most useful life you could live this time would
be as husband and father. You had no further need to study the
use of power or the leadership of men. Yet despite all of your experience
you had missed out on the most valuable of all life’s lessons;
you did not know how to love, or how to be loved. So a life
was devised for you which would give you the chance to learn.
Love for your parents, your children, your friends – even your
pets. Love for all of humanity -- though few can succeed at that!
But above all, love for your wife, Liz. You had known Liz in previous
lives, but not as a lover or a wife. It was decided also that
your career would be less than successful in order that you may
learn something of humility – a quality which you do not possess
in quantity, Harry! That was to be the pattern of your life.”
“But …… sorry, Eli, I know I said I would not interrupt, but
where is the learning in this, if I do no more than follow a script?
As a character in a play, where is my free will?”
446
“Free will is everywhere! The outline of your life was
planned in order that you could encounter situations you needed
to face in order to grow; but how you deal with those situations
is entirely up to you. You could have treated your friends badly –
as indeed you have in recent weeks. You have caused your
friends much pain lately, Harry. You could have said ‘goodbye’ to
Liz on the night you met, never to see her again. Or you could
have known her as a lover for a short time and moved on to other
women. You could have married her, and then fought and feuded
for sixty years. You could have abused your children, or neglected
them. You could by now be estranged from your entire
family.
“And if I had made such choices?”
“Then you would have needed to repeat the lesson. Until
you got it right.”
“And I failed?”
“Do you love Liz?”
“With all my heart, and without qualification.”
“And do you allow her to love you?”
447
“Allow it? Her love is the most precious thing in the world to
me.”
“Then how can you have failed, Harry?”
“But you say that I have left my path?”
“That is not to say that you have failed! But yes, you have
wandered from your path; from your life-script. It was written
that you would succeed to the position of Chief of your organisation.
Many trials were planned for you there. You would have
been required to bring hardship to your friends for the sake of
company profits. Your career and personal life would have come
into great conflict, and ultimately you would have had to choose
between your career and your wife.”
“No contest.”
“Not now! And that is the root of the problem. Somehow
you have seen through to the shallowness of many of your earthly
pursuits. You now count your career as of little value. How can
you be placed in a learning situation by being forced to choose,
when one of the two choices has become valueless to you?”
“But how did this happen, Eli? I don’t understand it myself!
Less than a year ago I would have killed for the CEO job. Right
448
up to the time I got it, I thought it was the most important thing
in my world. What happened to me to make me see it, now, as
such a trivial thing.”
“We don’t know Harry. Honest to God, we just don’t know.
And the question we move to from there is, under the circumstances,
is there any point in your continued earthly existence?”
“What do you mean? That I could….. I could die?”
“Physically, yes. Exactly that. Why plod through another
thirty years of a life which has lost it’s meaning? Drifting from
day to day like a sea anemone, with no purpose except to exist?
What is the point of such a life? You will face no hardships; you
will not be tested; you will not learn or grow in what is left of your
earth-life. It would be the easiest thing to arrange for your body
to die, here and now. A sudden, unexpected heart attack. A
passing hiker would find your body a couple of days from now.
Or that same hiker could kill you in your sleep, for the credit
cards in your wallet and the few possessions in your back-pack.”
“But Liz…….”
“Would be heartbroken, yes. And facing that would be, for
her, a valuable lesson in itself. Just as your children would have
to face losing you. Your friends, too. For all of them, their life
449
patterns would be disrupted, but much could be salvaged. All of
this could be arranged, but we come back to the central question:
What is the best option for Harry Murphy?”
“Are you asking me? Are you asking me what I want?”
“In a way, yes. Your wants and needs are more important
than you can know. Where do you want to go from here, Harry?”
“I don’t know. You’ve shown me one possibility; what other
choices do I have?”
“You could forget everything. We could erase every memory
of every dream. Better yet, we could leave sketchy memories of
shallow experiences, so that you would think your experiments in
dreaming had come to nothing, and would experiment no more.
We could re-script the remainder of your life. At least that way
you will grow old with the woman you love; you will have the
chance to support each other through age and illness. There are
still some lessons to be learned by such a choice.”
“Then if you can do that…….”
“But we cannot undo the events that have already taken
place, and we cannot - we will not - tamper with your essential
soul. We will not change what you have now become. You would
450
go back with a clean bill of health to your AGI, cured of your
‘mental illness’; but would you still want the job? I think not,
now. Then what would you do? You have an expression which
I’m not sure I understand – a ‘loose cannon’. That is what you
would be, I think. A loose cannon. Free to make choices. And
depending on your choices, the paths of many people close to you
would hang in the balance. Would you become a Christian Missionary
to some remote location? Doubtful, I suppose. Would
you go back to University, study medicine and find the cure for
some dreadful disease? Or make some important scientific discovery?
Or turn to a life of crime? All of these are possibilities,
and all are unknowns. Then, to fit in with the changes to your
life-script, we would need to change the scripts of many of the
people close to you, affecting the lessons which they went to
Earth to learn. We could never be sure that it would be to their
advantage, to make such changes.”
“Or?”
“Or you could start over. We could erase all memory of this
life and send you for rebirth to live essentially as you lived before.
As always at re-birth your memories would be washed clean, but
your character would remain exactly as you stand before me now.
”
“And Liz?”
451
“If you wish to relive your life together, we must wait for Liz
to complete her time and ask her whether she wishes to live again
as your wife. The wait would be small on this side of the veil, and
from what we know of the two of you I feel certain that……”
“Would we go back to the same time period? Or be born into
the twenty first century?”
“We can’t move your time backwards but we could recreate
the circumstances quite precisely. You could both be born to the
same parents and live under similar circumstances as before.
The things that truly matter would be the same.”
“I don’t know, Eli. I need more time to think.”
“Take all the time you need, Harry. We can make this day
last for a hundred years if you need so long. Let’s walk a little,
shall we?”
Elias turned and walked along a small path into the woods.
Harry followed with Mutt at his heels, and found himself in a primeval
forest of huge sequoias, twenty feet thick at the base and
towering so high that their tops were lost in cloud.
452
“I was here before,” Harry said. “I received my sword here.
That was you, wasn’t it? You brought my sword to me.”
“No, not me. A good friend of mine. His name is Running
Elk, and he is my Spirit Guardian. He thought that you might
have some use for it against the Dream Riders who were tormenting
your mother.”
“It was indeed most useful. Thank your friend from me
when you see him.”
“He hears your thanks. He has watched you closely these
last few weeks.”
They walked on along the path, which wound around the
huge trees and through marshy ground. Foot long, bright yellow
slugs crawled slowly along the side of the path.
“I know this place.” Harry said. “This is the rain forest of
the Pacific Rim. Liz and I visited it when we were in British Columbia.
Those creatures are called Banana slugs.”
“There are such places along the coast of Vancouver Island”
Elias said “But this particular stretch does not exist any longer;
except in our dreamworld. In your real world men have cut down
453
these trees for lumber. But in this world they it will live forever.
Listen to the silence.”
The two men walked and listened, while Mutt raced back
and forth in ecstasy, surrounded by a canine paradise of new
sights, sounds and smells. Harry thought he could hear the
sounds of the ocean, very faintly, in the far distance. His mind
raced as he tried to come to grips with the facts which Elias had
offered to him. What should he choose? If he ignored the whole
situation, would Elias and his ‘Council’ choose for him? Would
he awaken in his ‘real’ world to some situation not of his choosing
and far from his liking? Or would he simply awaken, returned
from a complex dream to the world much as he had left it? In the
end, he could not choose.
“Elias, I could walk in these woods for a hundred years, and
still not come to any conclusion. I need more help. I need to understand
and come to terms with what has happened to me. I
accept now that what you have told me is true. I accept the reality
of my immortal soul, and I accept the transitory nature of life
on earth. But I still have a thousand questions, and I still need
time to let this new awareness sink in. It’s still all too new to me,
and too strange. I want to know more. I want……… I want to
know…..I want to know everything!”
454
* * * * * * * *
In a place which was not a place a thousand beings who had
once been human met to discuss the future of one small, undistinguished
man. Their discussion made no sounds which could
have been heard by human ears, if there had been such ears present,
and took place at the speed of thought. On the fringes of
this meeting a being who was still human observed the proceedings.
Sky Reader had made his report to the council and had
been granted permission to remain. In this place of eternal peace
and contentment, Elias was ill at ease and definitely not happy.
He had known Harry Murphy for only a short time as earth hours
are measured, but had come to like and admire the man. Harry
had a good heart and a strong spirit. By rights, his present
earth-life should have been penultimate. One more lifetime on
earth should have given him the spiritual strength necessary to
progress beyond the need for earthly incarnation. His present life
had been intended to teach him how to love and be loved, and in
this he had made excellent progress. Apart from a few relatively
minor trials related to earthly employment, Harry had been considered
home and dry. It had been intended that in his final days
Harry would be required to nurse his beloved wife through a hard
battle with cancer, a fight which she would ultimately lose. A
tough test, but one taken by many loving couples at the end of
long lives spent together. Harry was expected to face his ordeal
with courage and compassion, and in so doing he would have
455
developed considerable emotional strength and spiritual power.
All in all, a very profitable life-script for the Murphys, and one
which should have produced a highly satisfactory outcome for
both of them.
And now where were they?
Sky Reader had reported to the Council, through his Guardian
Running Elk, that his efforts had failed. He was unable to
offer a solution which Harry could accept, and reluctant to force a
solution onto the man.
The Council had accepted his report without comment and
in doing so had taken to themselves the responsibility for resolving
the problem. Questions and comments filled the ether. One
question, if it had been expressed in earthly terms and in a human
language was “Does anybody yet have an answer to how this
situation came about? Why did this man’s character suddenly
take such a radical about-face?”
“His studies of dreams surely caused this,” came an instantaneous
response. “He achieved a high degree of knowledge and
competence in an incredibly short time. We could not have
known that he had such aptitude.”
456
“No,” another ‘voice’ cut in. “The dream studies were incidental
to the attitudinal changes. The fact that they occurred at
the same time is coincidental. We should be asking ourselves,
rather, what caused the deviation from the scripted life-path?
The man did not choose to make such deviation, it was thrust
upon him. His newly acquired ability to re-focus awareness was
the mechanism of the deviation, not the cause of it.”
A new ‘voice’. “I am his Spirit Guardian. Let me speak to
this.”
The new speaker had no image in this place, but her personality
was very clear to all participants. The strength and love
flowing from the being was almost overpowering to Elias, who
remained on the boundary of the proceedings. He knew that, in
past meetings with Harry’s Guardian, she had appeared to him as
a woman in her fifties, handsome rather than beautiful, knowledgeable
and wise in the ways of the human race. He doubted
that Harry would have recognised his Margaret from the description,
though they were one and the same. Her thoughts came
clearly to Elias, as to all participants at the meeting.
“I have lately come to believe that the deviation may be
linked to an intervention which I made when the man Murphy
was very young. A minor variance occurred which resulted in
death by drowning of the young boy, and it was necessary for me
457
to correct this imbalance. For reasons still unknown to me the
boy died instantly upon immersion. He should have survived
without difficulty for long enough to be rescued by his friends,
who were nearby. But his spirit drifted. I had to pursue and capture
him, and then re-infuse his life-essence into the body. While
separated from his body Harry achieved awareness. This, too,
was unexpected and should not have happened. In order to prevent
a life-path deviation at that point I suppressed memory of
the experience. It was far too early in his life for him to become
aware of his spiritual qualities. I now believe that this suppression
caused a severe inner conflict which smouldered for almost
forty earth years: What he knew to be true, subconsciously, he
believed, consciously, to be impossible. This inner conflict finally
exploded into Harry’s conscious awareness in his late forties
when he attained the ability to examine his subconscious mind
by way of his dreams. He very rapidly obtained a waking knowledge
of his spiritual existence which was incompatible with his
planned life-script. The situation was then further complicated
when he insisted on suppressing his new knowledge by conscious
reasoning. What he knew to true be just couldn’t be true. And
this drove him mad.”
“Yes,” from many ‘voices’. “This could be. But it does not
help us towards a solution.”
458
“No, it does not. But I think, perhaps, that our council is
missing the key ingredient necessary to determining the best solution.”
“What ingredient?”
“The mind of Harry Murphy.”
“He is unready. He does not have the intellect needed to
function at council, and will not possess this for at least one more
incarnation. How could he be brought to us to participate except
through your representation?”
“I will prepare him. He has told Sky Reader that he has
many questions, and that if answers are supplied he, himself, will
make the decision regarding the remainder of his planned earthlife.”
“What does he want to know?”
“He wants to know “everything”. And I intend to teach him.”
* * * * * * * *
459
Harry awoke as from a dreamless sleep, and for the first few
seconds was dazed and disoriented. As the world came into focus
he realised that Elias Sylliboy was leaning over him while Mutt
licked furiously at his whisker-covered cheek.
“Come on back, Harry,” the old man said. “Wake up now!”
Harry sat up. “What happened?”
“Oh, not much” Elias told him. “You slept for a while, is all.
Six hours, actually. I expect you’re pretty hungry by now. I’ve a
stew in the pot over there, but I’ll be leaving you and your pal
here to enjoy it alone, if it’s all the same to you. Now your dog
has been showing remarkable self restraint, but if you don’t get
up pretty soon I think he’ll reach the end of his control and just
tuck into that stew all by himself.”
“You’re leaving, Eli?”
“Yes, Harry. I’ve done what I can, though it was little
enough I could manage for you. Your future is in other hands
now. Capable hands, and loving hands. I’m sure that it will all
turn out well. But I must be away now. I’m an old man, and
there’s not much juice left in me. I’d as soon be back to my bed
now as spend another night on pine needles. But let me say this
to you. You are a man of great heart. A good man. I admit freely
460
that I didn’t want to come to help you, but as it turned out it has
been a rare privilege for me to share your path for a few steps.
We will meet again, Harry Murphy, but not in this world. Goodbye
now.”
Harry sat up, intending to thank the old Mi’kmaq for his
help, or at least for his good intentions, but the man had gone.
“Goodbye, Sky Reader” Harry called to the trees. “I will remember
you as I last saw you, with hair to your waist and the muscled
body of a young warrior. Goodbye my friend.”
He did not sleep that night, but sat outside the tent with
Mutt curled at his feet, listening to the night sounds from the
woods at his back and the eternal roaring of the Gold River on its
wild journey to the sea.
* * * * * * * *
By sunrise of the following morning Harry and Mutt were
once again on the trail and heading west. They had retraced their
steps along the banks of Gold River and climbed back up to the
trail. At Western Shore, a coastal village a few kilometers further
west, they left the trail to replenish their food supplies. At a local
hardware store Harry picked up a new propane cylinder to fuel
the small camp stove which he carried in the backpack. The pack
now seemed a fraction of its original weight, and the abrasion at
461
the shoulder straps had become no more than a minor annoyance.
The trail wound south-west, passing through a series of
small settlements, and away from any sight or sound of the
ocean.
As Harry walked on the days and nights fused together into
a seamless continuum in which time had no meaning. He slept
little, and dreamed not at all. As often as not he made camp simply
by dropping the backpack onto a convenient patch of ground
and covering himself with the unzipped sleeping bag. By fortune,
the nights remained cool but not cold, and little rain fell. His dog
would station himself between Harry and the passing trail, standing
guard until his master roused himself to resume their quest.
When Harry called Liz to give his nightly report she asked him
why he seemed so sad. This surprised Harry, who was not at all
sad. When he thought about it, he was not especially anything.
He walked through an emotionless void, an empty vessel ready to
accept whatever emotion were to be poured into him.
On the morning of the thirteenth day of his journey Harry
rose with the sun, strapped on his backpack, threw a handful of
energy bars to Mutt, and walked to the trail. As far as he could
calculate he was half way between the picturesque town of Mahone
Bay and the ancient settlement of Lunenburg. He had visited
the latter several times, and liked the feel of the old town,
which was preserved pretty much unchanged from the time of its
462
inception as a sailing and shipbuilding centre some two hundred
years ago. With a little imagination Harry could walk the streets
of Lunenburg and persuade himself that he was a mariner of the
last century, about to take ship and embark on a voyage to unknown
parts of the unexplored globe. He strode out briskly,
turned a sharp corner and almost walked into a young girl in a
white dress who stood, smiling, at the centre of the trail.
“Hello Harry. I am very pleased to meet with you.”
“Hello, Margaret. Am I dreaming, then? I could have sworn
I was awake.”
“You are asleep and awake. Neither and both. The distinction
was always a matter of mental focus; do you look at the
window or through the window? You learned how to focus your
awareness, to do either, and now you are able to do both. You
can see the glass and you can see through the glass.”
“Those odd children at the beach said much the same thing.
Abram and another boy, and the girl Juleen. They told me that
there was only one world, and that what we saw in it depended
only on our mental focus.”
“So Juleen is back with her brothers now. She was male
when I last saw her. I hope that she remembers well what I told
her I will do to her when we next meet. But in this, at least, they
did not lie to you. I see that you have bested them again, and
463
probably for good. After your last meeting I doubt that they will
come to you again. They seek weaker prey; more pliable minds.”
“Elias said that you appear to him as an older woman. Why
do you come to me always as a child?”
“When we first met you were very young, and I took from
your mind an image which you found unthreatening. I have kept
it, but we can change my image at any time.”
“Young? It was earlier this year when we first met. But
then, I am told that you are older than the hills, so I suppose that
forty seven is…….”
“No, that’s not it. But let that pass for a while. Would you
prefer me to appear as I do to the Sky Reader and his Guide?”
As Harry watched Margaret transformed into a woman of
Harry’s age, perhaps a few years older. Her expression was kind,
but Harry thought it might be a very bad idea to cause that expression
to turn to one of anger.
“No, Margaret. I find the situation confusing enough. Leave
me what little stability I can find in it.”
The young girl was back. “As you wish, my sweet Harry.
Come on, then. Come with me. Put your pack by the side of the
464
road. I will place wards at this spot and nobody will disturb your
dreaming body. Your new friend will stand guard against the
chance that my wards should fail.”
“Harry did as instructed. He made himself comfortable at
the side of the trail and stepped out of his body to stand with
Margaret on the path. To anyone passing, an elderly tramp was
taking a nap at the side of the trail, with his mongrel dog standing
guard as he slept.
“Come with you where, Margaret? Where are we going, you
and I?”
“Where you asked to go, Harry. I’m taking you to school.”
* * * * * * * *
465
BEAUTIFUL DREAMER
Chapter 9:
“Take my hand, Harry.”
The land fell away rapidly, and Harry found himself soaring
through the air, hand-in-hand with his Guardian Spirit. Far below,
the coastline of Nova Scotia shimmered with haze and
blurred with distance. Thin cloud gradually obscured the view,
and, without a point of reference by which to judge, the sense of
movement ceased.
Very soon they began to descend, and Harry saw the outline
of a great city far below. A warm, golden glow seemed to cover the
entire city, and as they came lower he could see that each building
contributed its own inner light. Flying over the rooftops Harry
felt a strange stirring within him, as though some memory of this
unearthly place were trying to surface to conscious awareness.
“I think I have been here before, Margaret.”
“Everyone passes twice through this place Harry, or one very
much like it; once on the way to rebirth and again on the return
trip. It is a way-station of sorts, but for you it will serve as a
school, at least for a time.
466
“Is this an earth place? An earth city?”
“It has an earthly counterpart, but if you visited it you would
see only a few scattered villages and a large monastery. An unimpressive
place, and one which draws few tourists.”
“Where is it located on Earth?”
“See, we have arrived at our destination, and here is your
teacher to welcome you.”
“Why did we not travel here directly? Why was it necessary
to fly through the sky to get here?”
“Too much traffic. See, your instructor awaits.”
They stood on the flat roof of a tall building which stood
amongst many even taller structures. Like all of the surroundings,
this construction gave off a light of its own. Walking towards
them was a man of medium height and build, dressed in a
one-piece loose fitting robe. He greeted the new arrivals warmly.
“I know you, don’t I?” Harry asked. “You’re my science
teacher from my third year at Grammar School!”
467
“Does this appearance suit you?” the man asked, looking
concerned and a little agitated. “We thought that the image of a
respected teacher from your earthly schooldays would be appropriate.
If it does not suit you I would be pleased to change it. I
have little experience of the assignment I have been asked to undertake.
Would some other image be more appropriate?”
The last question was directed to Margaret, who smiled at
the man and reached out to touch his shoulder. “Harry is much
concerned with appearances, Malek. He makes many associations
between appearance, ability and intention -- most of which
are wrong. Your choice of image will suffice well.”
Margaret turned to Harry. “This man will instruct you in the
functioning of the afterlife. You may call him Malek, which is the
name by which he was known during his last earthly incarnation.
While he instructs you in each aspect of the life of the spirit he
will also answer any questions which may occur to you.”
“But I thought that you……”
“Malek has much experience as a teacher of men. In earlier
lives he was known by other names, some of which would be well
known to you. If my presence is required at any time I will come
to you. I will be watching your lessons constantly, and much interested
in your progress.”
468
“Malek began to walk to a door at the edge of the roof, and
Harry followed. Turning to say goodbye to Margaret he saw that
she had already departed. He followed Malek down a flight of
stairs into a small classroom. A single desk sat in the centre of
the room, facing a wall completely given over to blackboard.
“This is not at all what I expected of the afterlife,” Harry said
to his teacher.
“Oh, this is not the afterlife, Harry. You would be most uncomfortable
in that place while still attached to a living physical
body. We may visit there for short periods, but I will shield you at
those times to prevent damage or discomfort to you.”
“Yes, but a classroom? A blackboard? A school desk? Not
even a computer? This looks like a setting from the early nineteen
hundreds.”
“I am sorry if I have disappointed you, Harry. I conferred
with many colleagues about a setting in which you could feel at
home, but none of us has ever been asked to do this before. To
instruct a living human! It is unheard of. Perhaps if you could
give me some idea of a setting in which you might feel more at
ease…..?”
469
“I’m sorry, Malek. This is all new to me, too, and I didn’t
know what to expect. Perhaps one thing only? Might I ask for a
more comfortable chair?”
The teacher smiled with obvious relief and gestured towards
the desk. As Harry turned he saw that it had already been replaced
by the black leather recliner from Theo’s office. Shrugging
his shoulders, he sat. Malek moved to the blackboard, and
picked up a piece of chalk.
“Your first lesson,” he said, writing on the board “Will concern
the structure and composition of the astral plane.”
On the board Harry saw that he had written: Lesson 1:
Physics.
Harry’s First Lesson: Physics:
Malek turned from the board and Harry saw that he was
holding a rectangular shaped bar of some light coloured, shiny
material. He passed the bar to Harry, who examined it briefly.
The bar was hard and heavy.
“That is a bar of steel. It is an exact replication of its earthly
counterpart. It has the same physical properties and chemical
structure. You will say that it is quite solid.”
470
Harry grinned. “Extremely solid, I should say.”
“Most men of earth would agree with you. But of course you
are wrong. The material is quite insubstantial.”
Harry raised an eyebrow and looked at his teacher for some
sign that he was making a joke, but his face was composed and
unsmiling.
“Let us examine this material together. You may find this
experience a little disorienting, so please advise me at once if you
are subjected to any discomfort.”
The steel bar floated out of Harry’s hand and sat, suspended,
a few feet in front of his eyes. Harry felt an instant of
dizziness and all the lights went out. He found himself staring at
the same steel bar, which hung exactly as it had moments before;
but his perspective had shifted substantially. Instead of being
perhaps fifteen centimeters long and five wide it now seemed like
some immense structure floating free in space; a massive station
of some sort, around which Harry and his instructor floated in
orbit. Turning his head, he found that he could see neither his
own body nor that of Malek, who spoke to him now as a detached
voice.
471
“I have made a few little changes to time and space in order
that we may examine this bar” he said. “Let us approach closer
now.”
Harry floated towards the bar, which grew until it completely
covered his field of vision, and continued to expand. As he came
closer to the surface of the metal he saw that it was far from
smooth. In fact the surface was extremely irregular. Closer yet
and he saw that, far from a homogeneous substance, it was assembled
from discrete chunks, not even visibly connected to one
another.
“At this level we begin to see the individual molecules from
which the steel is constructed. I wish you to note that the supposedly
‘solid’ substance, when examined in this way, consists of
a number of discrete masses, each more or less spherical. In
terms of the total volume of space which it occupies, as you see it
is mostly……”
“Empty air!” Harry interjected.
“Not air. And not empty. But let us examine one of the molecular
masses.”
Like a small spaceship approaching a large asteroid Harry
moved towards the nearer of the floating spheres. “I thought
472
molecules were like coloured beads connected together by sticks
and strings,” he said.
“Ah, yes, your science class representation,” Malek responded,
apparently amused by Harry’s observation. “Let us now
enter the molecule.”
They moved towards and then into the molecule, which now
seemed as insubstantial as a grey raincloud. Harry saw that,
once again, the substance comprised a number of vague, dark
grey shapes, floating, seemingly unconnected through – emptiness.
“And those darker spots which you see about you are the
atoms,” Malek told him. “We will now enter an atom of the element
‘iron’.”
Once more Harry drifted towards the grey shape in front of
him and passed inside. The scenery here was more familiar. He
was moving through a large dark solar system, in which orbital
planets circled a huge, central sun. But the sun gave off no light.
The space inside the atom seemed to glow with a faint blue radiance.
The effect was quite beautiful, and Harry was lost in wonder.
Malek, sensing this, remained silent for a few moments.
473
“A wondrous construction, is it not? But you will observe
again that in terms of the total volume of space occupied by the
atom, most of that space is filled with…..”
“Nothing!” Harry said.
“Look again.”
Harry studied the scene in front of him. Far away, the dark
nucleus of the atom seemed somehow in motion; somehow alive.
Above him a small planet passed in rapid orbit.
“I have, of course, modified the time scale. Your normal perceptions
would be ineffective at observing the passage of the orbital
electrons.”
“Of course!” Harry realised. He was looking at a classic portrayal
of the atom, pretty much as his science teacher had long
ago described it. But he could still see no evidence of ‘matter’ of
any form within the ‘solar system’ before his eyes.”
“There is nothing there, Malek, unless it is something which
I cannot detect.”
“You see nothing?”
474
“Only a blue light.”
“So there is nothing there; but it is a blue nothing.”
“Is it a gas, then?”
“Think, Harry. At this scale the atoms of any gas would look
much like the atoms of iron and carbon, differing only in the
composition of the nucleus and the number and placing of their
orbital electrons.”
“Then what is it?”
The lights came on and the bar of steel was gone. They were
back in the classroom. Harry sat in the recliner as his teacher
wrote on the desk and went over the points of his lesson.
“What it is, this blue light, is the basis of all life in this universe.
Let us see what we have learned. The ‘solid’ bar of steel is
made of mostly empty space, with a scattering of molecules,
bound together by energy. These molecules are themselves
mostly empty space, with a scattering of atoms, bound together
by energy. Each atom, in terms of the space it occupies, is also
mostly empty, the components held together again by an unseen
energy. So the whole bar of steel is mostly emptiness. But we
have seen that it is not ‘emptiness’. The massive vacancies are all
475
filled with a nothingness which is blue. And here we are at the
heart of the lesson.
“The blue glow is energy. It is not light, although it acts
much like light in some ways, and it is able to interact with the
visible spectrum. It is not electromagnetic energy at all, not as
men understand the term. It is an energy which men on earth
have at present no way to detect. Not by their senses and not by
their equipment. Oh, Kirlean Photography came close at the
middle of the present century; and one day, not too far away, a
man and a woman will devise a way to detect and use it. Their
names will then stand amongst the giants of science. And the
world will change, that day, more than ever before. But for the
moment the blue energy is undetectable.”
“What is it.”
“It is the energy from which everything here is made. It fills
the entire universe, physical and spiritual, and permeates everything
within. It is the energy which, when coupled with a suitable
physical material, vivifies that material and sparks life.
“I say that it cannot be detected on the physical level; nevertheless
it is well known. Men have known of the existence of a
vivifying energy for many centuries. It is called by many names;
prana, chi, elemental essence, astral matter, holy spirit, Life
476
Force, God's Love. This energy is the source of your spiritual
existence -- your spirit is made of it. It is the spiritual equivalent
of the atoms and molecules which form physical objects, and it is
no less 'real'. For the sake of consistency and simplicity I suggest
that we choose one name and stick to that name. For myself, I
prefer the use of ‘astral energy’, and will use that title if you find it
satisfactory.”
“Fine by me,” Harry said. “You say that my spirit is made
from this blue energy? This ‘astral energy’. How can that be? It
is not solid; it has no substance. How can my body – even a spirit
body – be made of something which lacks substance?”
“Ah,” said Malek, smiling broadly. “Did not Mr. Einstein
demonstrate to you that matter is merely a special form of energy?
A ‘condensation’, could I say? There is a very famous
equation which explains this relationship. But I see that you are
an apt and eager pupil. You are ready at once to move forward to
your second lesson! Very well, let us do so.”
Malek picked up the chalk and moved again to the board
where he wrote:
Lesson 2: Biology
Harry’s Second Lesson: Biology:
477
“Physical Matter attracts Astral Matter to it. It does this by
a force very similar to gravity. Because of this the Astral form
follows the outline of the physical body, overlapping it by a small
amount. This overlap is seen by psychics – human beings who
are able to perceive astral matter – as the ‘Aura’. The aura can
reveal much about the human being which it envelops by its colour,
its consistency and by certain other characteristics.
“At the death of the physical body the Astral body retains its
shape for a period of time which varies greatly from one individual
to another. But this shape is not the true Astral body of the individual.
Over time, the surplus astral material dissipates, leaving
the basic structure. This, as we shall see, is essentially a slightly
asymmetrical ovoid. An egg, if you like. However, many people,
especially at the level on which we now find ourselves, choose to
‘clothe’ this by attracting to it astral matter to form the shape of
their choice. This is frequently the shape of the physical body
they have recently left, but with any imperfections and infirmities
corrected.
“Thus I have taken this particular shape in order to help you
learn in a familiar non-threatening environment. My true astral
form would appear like this.”
478
As Harry watched, Malek’s body began to turn translucent,
and then transparent. Inside the body he could see the outline of
a large, shining egg. Finally the body had completely disappeared,
leaving the egg floating at the front of the classroom.
Malek’s voice continued, although in his present state Harry
could see no mouth nor any organ approximating one. In fact he
could see no organs at all.
“Once ‘stripped’ to my basics, I am at liberty to re-attract
astral matter, and shape it into any other form I desire. Thus I
might wish to appear in the guise of someone personally familiar
to you. This is often a useful mechanism for establishing trust.”
The ‘air’ around the egg became misty. The mist thickened
and swirled; colours and shapes formed, and Harry’s mother
stood at the front of the class.
“No!” before the image could speak Harry leaped from the
chair and shouted at the shape in front of him. “You will not take
on that appearance in front of me.”
Malek stood before him in his original guise. “My sincere
apologies, Mr. Murphy. It was not my intention to upset or offend
you. I plead again my ignorance in this, and my lack of experience.
Please forgive me.”
479
Harry resettled himself. “I over-reacted, Mr. Malek. Please
continue.”
“Thank you. We will move on, then. In order to understand
the ‘biology’ of the astral body, I must first ensure that you have a
knowledge of closed, self sustaining energy vortices. I will illustrate
this.”
The blackboard dissolved, to be replaced by a black-andwhite
image which flickered and jerked. It looked like an image
from a very old movie – and it was! Harry recognised a scene
from the “Wizard of Oz”.
“This,” said Malek, “Is a Tornado.”
Harry felt himself drawn into the screen to become part of
the movie. Malek’s voice came to him once more from a disembodied
source. All around him debris spun and twisted madly.
He expected at any moment to see a young girl with a small dog
whirl up from the ground to join him.
“What you are experiencing is a duplication of an actual
storm,” Malek said. “The actual event on which our simulation is
based took place in the southern USA some years ago.”
“I already figured out that we were in Kansas.” Harry said.
480
“Kansas?” Malek was obviously puzzled by the reference.
“Oh, no, Mr. Murphy., I assure you that we are not in Kansas.
Our actual location – I should say, the earthly counterpart of our
present location, is somewhere in Tibet, I understand.”
Ah, Harry thought. I’ll just tuck that little bit of data away
in case I should need it some day. He decided to press for more
information. “Tibet you say, Mr. Malek. Strange that I saw few
mountains on the way here.”
Malek roared with laughter. “Mountains! Oh, Mr. Murphy!
You have such a splendid sense of humour!”
As Harry tried to make sense of the odd response he found
himself drawn downwards towards the mouth of the great funnel,
which was sucking up anything in its path. An outbuilding of a
nearby farm disappeared into the mouth of the tornado and was
instantly torn into a thousand pieces of shredded timber. Seemingly
unimpressed, Malek continued his dissertation:
“So long as the vortex receives energy, the storm will continue.
If it can obtain sufficient energy it will grow. These
storms, as you probably know, are spawned over warm oceans,
but rapidly lose their vitality when they make a landfall. If the
tornado were a sentient being, and able to seek out energy
481
sources, it would become self sustaining and could theoretically
exist for all time. Fortunately for mankind, they cannot.”
The scenery changed, and Harry was looking down at a huge
whirlpool in the middle of a vast expanse of open ocean.
“The maelstrom is another type of vortex,” Malek’s voice
came from everywhere. “The principle is much the same. And
this is yet another vortex.”
They were back in the classroom, Harry in his comfortable
chair while Malek stood before him at the blackboard. In his
hand he held what seemed to be a shiny spinning top.
“This particular vortex is one which I have just now constructed.
It is built from that same astral energy which we have
seen elsewhere. I have caused the vortex to spin, and have made
certain modifications to the mouth of the funnel so that it is able
to draw energy from its surroundings. If I were now to release
the vortex into the room it would exist here forever. It is self sustaining
as long as it can find energy to draw into itself, and the
energy which it requires is infinite and everywhere.”
Harry watched the spinning top float up from Malek’s hand
and hover in front of his eyes. It seemed to glow from within, and
482
Harry could now see colours beginning to form until, with a sharp
‘pop’ the vortex vanished.
“You must know that it is against our laws to create such
vortices and allow them to become sentient,” Malek said. “You
may begin to understand why this should be when I explain to
you that the self sustaining vortex is the basis for the spirit body.
Let me show you my bones!”
Chuckling, Malek’s form wavered and vanished, leaving the
glowing ‘egg’ which Harry had seen previously. His voice continued
to come from some source which Harry could not pin-point.
“You now see the outer form of my astral body, but this is
mostly random astral matter which has been attracted to the essential
structure. I will take away this extraneous material.”
In the centre of the egg Harry saw an outline begin to take
shape. As the outer layers dispersed the outline became, as
Malek had indicated, an assembly of vortices. A slim central column
floated approximately where Malek’s spine would have been
in a human being. At the top and bottom of the column were two
funnel-shaped constructions, joined to the column by the mouths
of the funnels. Along the length of the column were five more
pairs of vortices, once again connected at their pointed ends to
the column itself.
483
“You are looking at my bare bones, Harry. My bones and my
bodily organs. Each of these paired vortices fills a particular
function, much like the organs of your physical body. Focus your
attention on the lower organs until you begin to see a predominant
colour.”
Harry did as instructed and the lower paired ‘organs’ took
on a rusty brown tinge.
“They seem to be vaguely orange,” he said.
“Yes. Each of the pairs operates at a frequency which
causes a sympathetic vibration in the visual spectrum. The lower
organs can sometimes be seen as orange. The higher ones are
seen at the blue-violet end of the spectrum.
Harry gaped. Was he truly looking at a human soul,
stripped to its basic components? He could find nothing to say.
“I must tell you that this is less newsworthy that you seem
to think, Harry! Men have been aware of this construction for
many years, although the knowledge is less widely spread
through the western world. Men call these organs ‘Chakras’,
which is an old term for a spinning wheel; you will notice that
from certain vantage points that is exactly how they appear.”
484
Malek turned to face Harry, who saw that from this viewpoint
the astral organs did indeed resemble rapidly spinning
wheels.
Without further discussion the egg reformed rapidly, as astral
matter was pulled to the structure from its surroundings, and
within a few heartbeats Malek stood once more at the front of the
classroom.
“This, then, is the basic construction of the astral body.”
“So this is what my immortal soul looks like!”
“No. Pay attention, please! Your soul – which, by the way,
is not immortal, not eternal – comprises several bodies, including
the astral. You may learn of the other bodies in time. I think
that we should now move along to the next lesson.”
“But I have more questions: How do these chakra work?
How do I see with them? How are we able to communicate.”
“You are a strange man, Harry Murphy. You have lived forty
seven years on earth without knowing or caring how your physical
eyes work; why should the machinery of astral sight suddenly
be of interest to you?”
485
“But I do know how my eyes work. It’s like a camera, with a
lens and an aperture and ……”
“The basics, yes. The very basic basics. But how do the
photoreceptors of the retina convert electromagnetic signals into
nerve impulses? And how does the brain then process the mad
jumble of signals into a form which it may recognise? Or perhaps
you could explain to me how visual purple is secreted to enhance
night vision? Tell me……”
“Ok, I get your point.”
“Shall we move on to discuss the workings of the ear? Or
perhaps you could explain to me the mysteries of taste and
smell.”
“No, Malek, let’s not. Let’s go on to the next lesson.”
“Harry, on earth much is known of the functioning of the
chakras. Look it up on the web if you return home. Speak with
those knowledgeable in ……”
“What do you mean, if I return home?”
486
“I was advised that you have not yet determined what course
of action you intend to take. Am I wrong in this?”
“No. Let’s move on. What comes next?”
“Ah, you know now of the astral body; how it is constructed;
how it feeds. You must learn now how it grows. We could call
this lesson ‘the meaning of life’.”
Malek went once again to the board and wrote: ‘Education
and Spiritual Growth.’
Harry’s Third Lesson: Education and Spiritual Growth:
“This is an immature astral body,” Malek said. “I should
probably rotate the diagram, since it is the spirit body of an animal.”
Harry had been looking at a diagram on the blackboard
which seemed to be nothing more than a slim vertical tube with a
funnel at the bottom and a number of bumps along its length. As
he watched, the chalk drawing rotated though ninety degrees and
became a horizontal tube, the funnel protruding from the extreme
right. Malek sketched the outline of some animal around the
tube.
487
“What is that supposed to be?” Harry asked.
“Let’s say it is a horse,” Malek replied, and the sketch
changed slightly to correspond more to a known animal. “You
will note that the lower chakra, now placed by the animal’s tail, is
the only developed organ. The others are no more than stubby
growths at the place where the chakras will eventually form. The
only structure less developed than this would be that of a plant.”
“Plants have souls?”
“That question demeans your intellect, Harry. Plants, like
all living organisms, are infused with astral energy. In plants and
lower animals, the energy is not structured, and dissipates on the
death of the host creature. In higher animals the energy is tightly
structured in interconnected vortices, as we have seen. If the
structure is sufficiently well developed it can remain intact on the
death of the physical body, and the being may then reincarnate
and begin to develop. In the case of this horse, there is very little
chance that the spirit has the necessary cohesion, and it will not
survive the death of the body.
“Here is another animal,” Malek said, and the chalk lines
changed to represent some smaller animal. “This one is female.
She mates for life, and protects her young until they are capable
488
of taking care of themselves. She forms associations with others
of her kind and will fight to defend the common good. You will
note that several of the chakras are quite prominent when compared
to the previous example.”
Harry studied the diagram. The vortex at the tail of the
animal was quite large and well defined. The other chakras,
though less well defined and smaller, were still easily seen.
“The spirit of this female animal has a chance, albeit a slim
one, of surviving physical death. Now this one……” Once again
the chalk outline re-modelled itself on the board. “…..is a dog; a
family pet; well loved and cared for, and in return loving and devoted
to his master. You will see that the chakras are strong
here; large and well developed. The spirit will remain intact; the
individuality of this animal will survive. This spirit will reincarnate
once more in animal form, perhaps twice, and should then
be strong enough to animate a human body. Now what this
………..”
Harry was stunned by what he had just heard. “Wait a minute,
Malek! Just let me digest this. You are telling me that human
beings developed from animals?”
“Harry, your Mr. Charles Darwin already proved that many
of your years ago.”
489
“But you are saying that the human spirit also evolved in
this way!”
“Of course. Where did you think that human spirit came
from? Did you think that it sprung instantly from nothingness in
one inspired burst of creativity? Are you about to preach the
‘Adam and Eve’ story to me? Would you tell me of your ‘Garden
of Eden’?”
“No. No. I suppose that it’s logical, when I stop to think
about it. It just came as a bit of a shock. You mean that I….
that my spirit…. that I was once an animal?”
“Yes. Shall we move along, then? Very well. Let us now
consider what is needed in order that an astral body may grow
and develop. Now, obviously a source of energy is a requirement,
but not a key one. As we have seen, an infinite supply of suitable
energy is everywhere available. But something else is needed.
“The strength of the spirit is determined by the power of the
Chakras to use astral energy. The illustration which I first gave
you showed an immature spirit, with barely developed chakras,
which could do nothing with energy except absorb it, and even
this it could not do particularly well. The later version, the family
pet, showed some well developed chakras. It was able to under490
stand basic emotions, to communicate quite effectively, to develop
lasting relationships and, most importantly, to give and receive
love. Incidentally, that was a diagram of your canine friend, the
one who somehow followed you here.”
“Mutt? Mutt is here?”
“Yes. We’re not sure how he got here, but his bond with you
was so strong that he was able to ‘follow the scent’ and find you.
He is being cared for, and has been made to understand that his
presence would detract from your studies. You will be reunited
with him soon enough.
“So we come to the question: ‘how can the chakras best be
developed?’ And the answer? Much as you would strengthen and
develop your physical body during your earth life by exercise and
a good diet. We will discuss the ‘diet’ in a later lesson. By using
the chakras you strengthen them. By testing them past their limits
you cause them to grow stronger. What is it that your athletes
say of their training? ‘No pain, no gain’ I think is the expression.
So it is with the spirit. If you wish to develop the intellect, use it!
Tackle problems which you may think beyond you. Stretch yourself!
And your emotions, too. Learn to express your love; to control
your hate; to express your grief; to stifle feelings of jealousy
and lust. And how can this best be done? Many ways have been
491
tried, but the only one which has worked consistently well
is………”
“Earth life.”
“Well done, Harry! Yes, indeed, earth life! Physical incarnation
is a hard teacher. It is so frighteningly harsh that there are
many here who have never dared to experience it. But as a route
to growth of the spirit, nothing else even comes close.
“On earth, people think of the afterlife as perfect. Do you
still call it ‘Heaven’ in your culture, or is it ‘Nirvana’. I forget
these things which I once knew so well.”
“Christians speak of Heaven.”
“Yes, ‘Heaven’, then. Well, Heaven is not perfect by quite a
wide margin. There is still contention and disagreement; there
are accidents and ailments. But on the whole it can still be considered
a very tranquil and peaceful place. Now consider this: to
develop physical muscles you need an appropriate environment.
A hard physical occupation, for example, or a well equipped gymnasium.
Similarly, to strengthen spiritual ability you also need
an appropriate environment, and Heaven does not provide one.
Therefore some other environment is needed. In order to learn
how to control hatred, you must experience hatred. Similarly for
492
greed, lust, jealousy; the whole spectrum. Earth provides such
an environment – how do you say this? In Spades!”
Malek laughed at his own humour and Harry joined in with
him. “Ah, Mr. Murphy,” Malek said, grinning widely “What an
entertaining assignment this is turning out to be! I am sure that
my colleagues will now compete against each other if there should
ever be another such requirement.”
“And so you are sent to Earth, and placed in a controlled
situation in which you come face to face with the emotions which
you wish to experience. How well you fare in this, of course, depends
completely on you.”
“Who determines whether I am successful or not?”
“Ah, have patience. We will come to that.”
“Is God my judge then, or Saint Peter?”
“I see that patience is not your ‘strong suit’. Oh, isn’t this
use of language such good fun. I had forgotten about ‘fun’.”
“Tell me this at least, is the judge hard on those who fail?”
493
“Hard? Oh, gracious yes. You will never again encounter
such a harsh, critical person as the one who judges your degree
of success. He will pick apart minor faults which you never even
noticed that you had; and he will give little credit for deeds which
you considered to have demonstrated your great virtues. Things
you thought important will turn out to be trivial, and minor acts
of kindness will prove to be your salvation! Oh, what a shock you
are in for, yes indeed.”
“Then I will be sent to Hell!”
Faced with Harry’s downcast expression Malek once more
broke into laughter, but rapidly recovered in the face of such obvious
distress. “Oh, be of cheer, Mr. Murphy! I assure you that
there is no ‘Hell’. The concept exists only on earth, and only in
the religion of Christianity! I give you my solemn promise that
you will not be ‘sent to Hell’!”
“But…..”
“No, ‘but’ me no more. We must now address the question
of how you are able to meet the situations needed for your personal
growth. After all, there would be little point in having you
drift through life like a sea anemone through warm waters, encountering
no challenges.”
494
“My friend Elias said exactly the same thing to me.”
“Ah, yes. The Sky Reader is a man of great strength and
wisdom. But this is not a problem. It cannot happen. We can be
very sure that you will encounter the situations you require during
your earth life. Because we write the scripts!”
Harry’s Fourth Lesson: Art and Literature:
“First, you must know this. Earth is a school. That is its
only function and its only purpose. Everything in life is either a
lesson or a test; everything! And a test is merely a special type of
lesson; one in which you learn how much you do not know!
“Under the circumstances it would be foolish to leave the
learning experience to chance. It would be like a school with no
classes, no teachers, no examinations. How much would you
have learned if your earthly schools had been run along such
lines? Very little, I think. But your earth life is well organised
before you are even born. Depending on the lessons which you
wish to study you may be born into the family of a powerful King,
a wealthy industrialist or a poor carpenter. There is nothing
haphazard or random about this choice, for it determines much of
what follows.
495
“The single most important aspect of this form of training is
that you must continually push yourself. You must face adversity.
For this reason, many choose to be born into poverty and
hardship and then ascend to fame and riches by their own strivings.
There is much to be learned from such a life, and people
find it very satisfying. Most men would choose such a life over
one in which power and riches are bestowed on them due to no
effort or achievement of their own. But at the base of all this is
the fact that no burden will be set unless the student should
agree to it. No challenge must be faced in life that the student
has not requested be placed there.”
“Pause a while, Malek. I have questions!” Harry had hesitated
to interrupt the flow of words as his tutor warmed to the
subject. “What if a man should take on a life of hardship and
then find it to be more than he can bear? Or let us say that a
man is facing the end of his life, suffering from an illness that can
never be cured, and is looking forward only to more months of
pain and………..
“You are going to ask me, Harry, why it should be considered
wrong for such a man to end his life prematurely by his own
hand.”
“Yes.”
496
“You were thinking of your friend Theodore?”
“Yes, in part. But I was thinking more of another, a friend of
my youth, who killed himself on his twenty-first birthday at the
home of his parents.”
“Why do you say that such an act would be considered
‘wrong’? Who do you think would consider it so?”
“You, Malek, would you not?”
“No, I would not. I realise that some earthly religions teach
this, but it is not my personal view. I would consider it not to be
wrong so much as weak and foolish! Less so, of course, in the
case of Theodore, who was in any event close to the end of his life
and would cause few problems by leaving a little prematurely.
But for the young man, this is a different case. That person undertook
earthly life in order to face certain challenges necessary
to his development. That he was unable to face them tells much
about the man’s character. It is much akin to dropping out of
school, Harry. He will leave in the middle of his grade, his education
incomplete. He will be unable to progress, and, in the end,
he will be sent back to face again that same set of circumstances
from which he fled. Time and time again, if need be. Yet there is
another side: The tangled mess of lives which he leaves behind
by his premature exit will need much work to straighten. Many
497
scripts will need to be rewritten, and some will have been damaged
past the point of restoration. Your friend’s parents, for example,
had not built such a challenge into their scripts yet now
must face this situation. Be sure that these effects will sit hard
on the shoulders of the suicide when he faces the seat of judgement,
and it is unlikely that he will be shown lenience. On the
whole, it is not a course of action which I would recommend, nor
one, I think, that your friend’s Spirit Guide will soon forgive. Perhaps,
on reflection, ‘wrong’ might not be too strong a term. Have
I spoken to your concern? Shall we return to the lesson? Yes?
Very well.
“At this time of planning you will also be allowed a say in the
length of your life. On earth a long, healthy life is much prized,
and those who achieve a very old age are often held in high esteem.
But remember, you would be planning this from your
‘heaven’, from a place of great contentment and freedom from
hardship. You would be asked, essentially, ‘how long do you wish
to stay in that place of pain and suffering? Of accident and illness?
Of disappointment and regret? How long do you wish to
endure cold and heat, to be blown about by winter winds and
burned by summer sun? To be involved in wars and plagues and
famines, and live in almost constant conflict with your fellow
man? Some would say that a person requesting a long life under
these circumstances is a great fool!
498
“Yet it stands to reason that, if the course is set hard
enough, more can be learned in a long life than in a short one; in
the end, the majority of people settle for something close to the
average span of years, and for a moderate degree of hardship and
suffering.”
“ I have another question,” Harry interrupted once more.
Malek showed not the slightest sign of irritation and waited patiently
for Harry to continue. “Tell me why some should choose to
live only a few days, or weeks? Why should they choose a life of
sickness, pain and early death?”
“The short lives of children are often lived more for the sake
of the parents than for the child. Watching a child suffer and
eventually die is perhaps the hardest test set for men and women
on earth, and not many would face this willingly. Yet for those
who are able to bear it, the potential for growth of the spirit is
very high. And, of course, some are required to live such a life
due to Karmic obligation.”
“To what?”
“Karma. We will discuss this in your lesson on Justice and
the Law. But if I may continue, we will now observe the process,
you and I. We will listen in on part of a planning session for a
man who is shortly to return to earth. He will neither see nor
499
hear us, so you may feel free to ask any questions which occur to
you.”
“Malek, I don’t much like eavesdropping, spying. I would
feel happier if we were doing this with the consent of the man
who’s life is being planned here.”
“This attitude does you much credit, but your concerns have
been addressed. The man in question does not mind that you
should observe the process.”
“I guess I’ll have to take your word for that. Let’s go, then.”
Harry followed Malek through the classroom’s rear wall.
Moving through solid objects no longer posed a problem to Harry,
but it reminded him that he was still dreaming. He found himself
in a similar room to the one he had left. Seated across from each
other at a small table were a middle aged woman and a plump,
jovial looking man in his early twenties.
“But you have already lived twice as a warrior, Phillipe,” the
woman was saying. “You have proved your courage and your valour
many times, but you have ignored other aspects of your personality.
And you would have lived again as a warrior in your
recent life if I had not prodded you towards a career in science!
Even then, you insisted that you would begin your scientific stud500
ies only after your return from fighting with Napoleon! You place
far too much emphasis on this outdoor activity; this riding and
hunting, and carving up your fellow men in battle. It is time to
change your focus. You come to love war too much!”
“Oh, my dear Angelica, you know that is not true! I take no
pleasure from the pain I must inflict on my fellow man, but from
the ……….”
“Yes, I know. Planning the campaign! Outwitting the enemy!
Winning, always winning!”
“Oh, but you have had me loose, too. In my last life you
took away my left arm! And at eighteen years of age!”
“Phillipe, it was the only way to stop you fighting! And you
succeeded well enough. But let us not dwell on the past. You
know too much of war and killing, and far too little about love.
You have never married. Never raised a family. And you have
enjoyed far too much success. You must learn how to handle
defeat.”
“I accept your better judgement as I have always accepted it.
You are truly my Guiding Spirit, Angelica, and I would be a fool
not to accept the course which you chart for me. Tell me again
501
then about my planned life as a factory manager, then; tell me
how I will grow weak and pale for lack of sunlight.”
“The career is secondary. You will earn your daily bread in
such a way, but the focus of your life will be family and friendship.
You recall Lillianne, your aunt in your last life?”
“Aunt Lillith, yes, of course! My mother’s sister. I loved
aunt Lillith very much when I was a boy. Throughout my life she
was very dear to me.”
“Yes, and she felt much love for you. She will have the part
of your wife in the next incarnation. She will bear you two children.
You have the potential to learn much about love in this life,
and your spiritual progress will benefit greatly.”
“Very well, then. Let’s go over the script again. Tell me
about my factory.”
“You will manage a Printing Factory in Canada, and you will
succeed to high office. But you will find problems there, and conflict
with the family values we wish you to study. Let us start,
then. You will be born shortly after the end of the second world
war in the north of England. Your parents, the Murphys, will be
middle income, and your father……”
502
Harry stood, open mouthed. “That’s me. You fooled me,
Malek. That is my life they are planning. Is this a recording or
something? Or are those two acting the scene for us?”
“You could call this a recording. And the ……”
“Where is Margaret? Shouldn’t she have been with me to do
this ‘script writing’?”
“That is the being known to you as Margaret. At the time of
this discussion she had not yet taken on the form in which she
now appears to you. That was done when you were very young.”
“They spoke of other lives, previous lives. I was a soldier? A
warrior? Malek, I simply cannot absorb this. There is just too
much. Let’s move on to my next lesson, and I will try to make
sense of what I have seen later.”
“A sensible course of action. We will move on then. You
have asked me before about the process of judging a life -- how it
is determined whether you have succeeded or failed. I told you
that the judge in such cases is extremely strict and almost impossible
to please. I have arranged for you to see him in action.”
“I am going to see a case being tried?”
503
“No. You are going to be judged.”
Harry’s Fifth Lesson: Law and Justice:
They stood on the sidewalk of a broad street somewhere
close to the heart of the city. There was no vehicular traffic on
the wide street, but many people walked swiftly here and there
around them. The building was magnificent. Even here, where
immense skyscrapers were commonplace, the Judicial Building
dwarfed its surroundings. A flight of polished stone steps led
upwards to massive doors, flanked by carved columns which rose
so high that their tops were barely visible. Half way up the flight
of steps a large sculpture on a huge plinth represented a set of
scales. Harry thought that a medium sized ocean-going liner
could fit on one side of the balance, while one of the space shuttles
– complete with blast rockets -- might fit comfortably into the
other.
“I see that here, too, the balance is the symbol for justice,”
Harry commented. “Here the balance represents Karma,” Malek
replied. “Come. Our time approaches, and here is your defence
counsel, ready to plead for mercy on your behalf!”
As the two men climbed the steps Harry saw Margaret waiting
for them by an open door at the top of the flight. He was concerned
that she had chosen to arrive in her ‘Girl-in-White’ guise,
504
as he did not know what weight this would carry with the dread
judge who he was shortly to face.
“I will wish you good luck, and leave you to your judgement,
Harry. We will meet again shortly.”
“Yes, if I’m not consigned to Purgatory!” Harry said glumly.
Malek left, laughing again.
Deep in his personal thoughts Harry said little to Margaret
as they moved into the hall. Although crowded with people, who
seemed to be rushing about in all possible directions, the silence
in the huge building was tangible. Harry found himself talking in
whispers.
“Margaret, I don’t want to hurt your feelings or insult you,
but do you think that your present appearance is the best choice
for the work we have in front of us today? What will this judge
think if I am represented by a young girl?”
“I know this judge well, Harry. Believe me, this is the best of
all possible images to present to him.”
“Well, I guess I’m going to have to trust you. Malek says he
is a cruel and heartless judge, the one who will hear my case today.”
505
“Not at all, Harry. He is the kindest of men. Malek probably
meant to say that he would judge you harshly, and condemn
every little failing without mercy; that he would overlook the
kindest of deeds, but condemn even the smallest act of oversight
or thoughtlessness.”
“Is that true, then?”
“Oh, yes. All of that and much more.”
From high above them Harry heard his name called, and
turned to Margaret, his face a mask of fear. “Where do we go?
What should I do?”
“Have courage, Harry. See that little door over there? Go
through it. Inside you will find a chair. Sit in it. Then wait.”
“Are you not coming with me?”
“I shall enter by another door and see you inside.”
Knees knocking as he walked, Harry approached the small
door, opened it, and stepped through. Inside, the room was dim,
but he could just see the outline of a large chair. He sat in the
chair, and waited. After a while his eyes adjusted to the dim light
506
and he could see that he was in a medium sized court chamber.
There were two chairs; the one in which he sat and a second,
smaller chair by the side of a small door to his right. As he
watched, Margaret entered the room and sat in the smaller chair.
“Are you ready to begin, Harry?” she asked him.
“Margaret,” Harry hissed, “The judge is not yet here!”
“He is here, Harry. He entered when you did, and he is sitting
in your chair!”
Harry leaped to his feet and looked around, but there was
nobody else in the room. Margaret was laughing.
“Please forgive us, Harry. Malek was playing a joke on you,
and he asked me to go along with it. Malek has not shown a
sense of fun in over two thousand years! You have really had an
amazing effect on him in your short time here.”
“What joke? Is the judge coming late? Is there to be no trial
today?”
“There is but one person fit to judge your life Harry. No-one
else is competent or qualified to make such a judgement. The
judge is you.”
507
Harry sat, stunned. After long seconds he managed to gasp
out “Me?”
“Of course you! Your life was planned for your benefit. Your
life was lived for your benefit. Who is to say whether you received
that benefit but yourself? But I warned you that the judge will
show you no mercy, and I did not lie. Are you ready to begin?”
“Yes. I think so. No. I’m not…..Yes.”
“Then we will begin at the beginning.”
In the centre of the room a baby was crying. Harry saw his
mother, a young woman, come to the baby and pick it up. She
rocked the child and sang softly to it. Harry realised that he was
one with the scene. He was part of the scene and at the same
time a distant observer. As he sat in the high chair he also lay in
his mother’s arms. He could feel his mother’s love for the new
infant; her hopes for the child. He knew that she would give her
life without question or hesitation if it should ever be needed to
save this little baby. The scene flowed, and sped up. Images
flashed past like landscapes glimpsed through the windows of an
express train, but Harry identified with every flickering image. He
felt his mother’s anguish when he was an hour late for their evening
meal. He knew she cared little for the wasted food – al508
though that was how she berated him. And for every tear she
shed, then and later, he felt the sting of the lash on his own back.
He was a cruel and unmerciful judge. He forgave himself nothing.
After seconds or hours of this he met Liz, and felt with her
the dizzying heights and terrible lows to which a woman in love is
always subjected. He felt each tear she shed, each time she was
stung by some thoughtless act on Harry’s part. But now, with
each tear, Harry brought the whip down on himself. Without
mercy.
He saw his generous gifts to charity in their true light –
money he could easily afford, given, in part to prove his goodness
to himself and to others. He saw a coin thrown carelessly to a
panhandler on the Spring Garden Road. He felt the gnawing of
hunger in the young boy’s stomach as he sat down to his own
meal. Again and again the lash fell.
But there were highs to cancel out some of the lows. He saw
his love for Liz shining through the tarnish of his life. He loved
her truly, not for any personal gain, not for any reason of social
need; he loved her because it was the right and natural thing to
do. And by her returned love he knew himself to be the most fortunate
of men.
509
For hours or seconds or perhaps days the scenes came and
passed and changed and Harry felt all of it. He felt the pain he
had caused to loved ones, to innocent bystanders, to people he
never knew that he had harmed. And he felt the love, the gratitude,
the warmth of feeling for acts of kindness. At the end he
knew that he had made no great sacrifices for others, had been
less than generous in showing tolerance or understanding where
it was needed. He saw his career successes to be as valueless as
throws of the dice in some game of chance. His promotions, his
high salary, his expensive possessions – worthless now, in this
place, and never really worth what he had thought at the time.
The only lasting thing of value from his working life was the fact
that he had used his power well; not for personal gain or self interest.
He had been fair in his decisions and had treated his employees
well. In the end he saw that he had not succeeded, but
neither had he failed in any great way. A mediocre result. A mediocre
life. He gave himself a passing grade; barely.
But the show was not quite over. He saw himself walking
along a disused railway track, a large backpack sitting uncomfortably
on his shoulders. On a collision course came a small,
scruffy, hungry animal which had lost its way. Bought as a
Christmas puppy for a child who had no true interest in such a
pet, this animal had lived on the end of a rope for most of its
short life. Fed occasionally; petted on Christmas Day and rarely
thereafter. On a recent summer morning the little dog had caught
510
his rope collar on a jagged splinter of the shabby doghouse in
which he spent his days and, except for the very worst of the winter,
his nights. In trying to pull himself free, he had broken the
collar. Knowing nothing other than a life in captivity, he had decided
to see what life was like on the other side of the fence. By
the time he met up with Harry the dog had eaten nothing in three
days. His owner, noting the dog had escaped, did nothing. The
dog had approached children and been driven away by thrown
rocks. He had barely escaped traffic on the coastal highway, but
quickly learned how to evade the clumsy cars. He approached
Harry, his tiny stomach cramping with hunger and fear. The big
two-footed creature was eating. It had food. The dog expected at
best a kick, which he was now almost too weak to evade. He
hoped there would be no more thrown stones, one of which had
hurt him badly.
But two-foot had fed him! And had not harmed him! And
fed him again! And rubbed his head, and stroked his belly!
Within minutes the little dog was ready to lay down his life for his
new friend. He did not know what he could give to two-foot in
exchange for all of the wonderful gifts he had been given, but
whatever it was he wanted in return, Mutt would give it readily.
Willingly. Eagerly.
The movie ended. The curtain fell and the lights came up.
511
“Well, Harry,” Margaret said. “Are you ready to give your
verdict?”
But Harry sat with his head lowered, his body wracked with
sobs. He had already rendered the verdict, and it was every bit as
harsh as Margaret and Malek had promised it would be.
* * * * * * * *
“Are you ready to resume your lessons, Harry,” Malek
asked. “There is still much to learn of law.”
They were back in the classroom. Neither Margaret nor
Malek had asked Harry to discuss his experience at the judgement
seat, and he was unready to volunteer any information.
“Yes,” he said. “Let’s move on. What am I to learn about
today?”
“Karma. Do you know this term?”
“Yes, I have read something of this. It is ‘fate’ is it not, or
‘destiny’?”
512
“It has such connotations, but what I want to discuss with
you is more in the context of Karma as ‘balance’. A simple explanation
would be ‘good begets good; bad begets bad’. If you live a
life of goodness and concern for others, then good acts and
thoughts will be attracted to you and happiness will follow. If you
live a life of evil, then the evil you do will rebound to you, possibly,
manyfold, and you will be unhappy. This is a considerable
oversimplification, but would put you on the right track.
“Now, the whole thing seems too simplistic to be true. It is
much like the mother telling the small child “Eat your greens and
you will grow strong and healthy.” Another oversimplification, of
course – but with an important kernel of truth.
“That same mother may say to the same child “Be good, and
good things will happen to you.” This is patently untrue, and I
am sure that you can cite many examples of good people who
have been beaten down by bad. But on the spiritual level, things
are a little different. Here, it is not an altruism. It is not a moral
rule. It is not the law as given to us by some great and powerful
figure. It is a law of nature! It is the way things work here.