
China
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
	This article contains Chinese text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Chinese characters.
This article is about the modern state in East Asia. For the Republic of China, commonly known as Taiwan, see Republic of China. For other uses, see China (disambiguation).
"PRC" redirec
(CE; CE-1949)
Drives on the	right, except for Hong Kong & Macau
ISO 3166 code	CN
Internet TLD	.cn[c] .??[9] .??
Calling code	+86[c]
a. ^ Simple characterizations of the political structure since the 1980s are no longer possible.[10]
b. ^ 9,598,086 km2 (3,705,842 sq mi) excludes all disputed territories.
9,640,821 km2 (3,722,342 sq mi) Includes PRC-administered area (Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract, both territories claimed by India), Taiwan is not included.[11]
c. ^ Information for mainland China only. Hong Kong, Macau, and territories under the jurisdiction of the Republic of China (Taiwan) are excluded.
China
Chinese name
Simplified Chinese:	??
Traditional Chinese:	??
Literal meaning:	Middle Kingdom
Transliterations
Gan
- Romanization:	Tung-koe?t
Kejia
- Romanization:	Dung24 Gued2
Mandarin
- Hanyu Pinyin:	Zhongguó
Min
- Hokkien POJ:	Tiong-kok
- Min Dong BUC:	D?ˆng-guók
Wu
- Romanization:	Tson? koh?
Yue
- Jyutping:	Zung1 gwok3
- Yale Romanization:	Junggwok
People's Republic of China
Alternative Chinese name
Simplified Chinese:	???????
Traditional Chinese:	???????
Transliterations
Gan
- Romanization:	Chungfa Ninmin Khungfokoet
Hakka
- Romanization:	Dung24 fa11 ngin11 min11 kiung55 fo11 gued2
Mandarin
- Hanyu Pinyin:	Zhonghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó
Min
- Hokkien POJ:	Tiong-hôa jîn-bîn kiong-hô-kok
- Min Dong BUC:	D?ˆng-huà Ìng-mìng Gê??ng-huò-guók
Wu
- Romanization:	Tson? gho? zin? min? gon? ghu? koh?
Yue
- Jyutping:	Zung1 waa4 jan4 man4 gung6 wo4 gwok3
- Yale Romanization:	Jungwàh Yàhnmàhn Guhngwòhgwok
Mongolian name
Mongolian:	
Tibetan name
Tibetan:	??????????
??????????
????????????
Transliterations
- Wylie:	krung hwa mi dmangs spyi mthun rgyal khab
Uyghur name
Uyghur:	?????? ???? ?????????? ?
Zhuang name
Zhuang:	Cunghvaz Yinzminz Gunghozgoz
China i/'t?a?n?/ (Chinese: ??/??; pinyin: Zhongguó/Zhonghuá; see also Names of China), officially the People's Republic of China (PRC), is the most populous state in the world, with over 1.339 billion citizens. Located in East Asia, the country covers approximately 9.6 million square kilometres (3.7 million square miles). It is the world's second-largest country by land area,[12] and the third- or fourth-largest in total area, depending on the definition of total area.[13]
The People's Republic of China is a single-party state governed by the Communist Party of China (CPC).[14] The PRC exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four directly-controlled municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing), and two largely self-governing[15] former European colonies, Hong Kong and Macau, as special administrative regions (SARs). Its capital city is Beijing.[16] The PRC also claims as a 23rd province the island of Taiwan, which is governed by the Republic of China (ROC). This claim of Taiwan is controversial and related to the complex political status of Taiwan.
China’s landscape is vast and diverse, with forest steppes and the Gobi and Taklamakan deserts in the arid north and northwest near Mongolia and Central Asia, and subtropical forests in the wetter south near Southeast Asia. The terrain of western China is rugged and elevated, with the towering Himalaya, Karakorum, Pamir and Tian Shan mountain separating China from South and Central Asia. The world’s highest point, Mt. Everest (8,848 m) and the second-highest, K2 (8,611 m) lie on China's borders, respectively, with Nepal and Pakistan. The country’s lowest and the world’s third-lowest point, Lake Ayding (-154 m), is located in the Turpan Depression. The Yangtze and Yellow Rivers, the third- and sixth-longest in the world, flow from the desolate Tibetan Plateau to the densely-populated eastern seaboard. China’s coastline along the Pacific Ocean, 14,500-kilometre (9,000 mi) in length (the 11th-longest in the world), is bounded by the Bohai, Yellow, East and South China Seas.
The ancient Chinese civilization—one of the world's earliest—flourished in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain.[17] China's political system was based on hereditary monarchies, known as dynasties, beginning with the Xia (approx. 2,000 BC) and lasting almost 4,000 years, until the end of the Qing Dynasty in 1912. Since the Qin Dynasty first united China in 221 BC, the country has been divided and reunited numerous times in history. The Republic of China (ROC), founded in 1912 after the overthrow of the Qing, ruled the Chinese mainland until 1949. In the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949, the Chinese Communists defeated the Chinese Nationalists (Kuomintang) on the mainland and established the People's Republic of China in Beijing on October 1, 1949. The Kuomintang relocated the ROC government to the island of Taiwan with its capital in Taipei. The ROC's jurisdiction is now limited to Taiwan, Kinmen, Matsu and several outlying islands. Since then, the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) have remained in dispute over the sovereignty of China and the political status of Taiwan, mutually claiming each other's territory and competing for international diplomatic recognition. In 1971, the PRC gained admission to United Nations and took the Chinese seat as a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council. The PRC is also a member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations, including the WTO, APEC, BRIC, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and the G-20. As of September 2011, all but 23 nations have recognized the PRC as the sole legitimate government of China.
Since the introduction of market-based economic reforms in 1978, China has become the world's fastest-growing major economy,[18] and the world's largest exporter and second-largest importer of goods. As of 2011, it is the world's second-largest economy, after the United States, by both nominal GDP and purchasing power parity (PPP).[19] On per capita terms though, China ranked 91st by nominal GDP and 94th by GDP (PPP) in 2010 according to the IMF. China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world's largest standing army, with the second-largest defense budget. In 2003, China became the third nation in the world, after the Soviet Union and the United States, to independently launch a successful manned space mission. China has been characterized as a potential superpower by a number of academics,[20] military analysts,[21] and public policy and economics analysts.[22]
Contents
1 Etymology
1.1 English names
1.2 Chinese names
2 History
2.1 Prehistory
2.2 Early dynastic rule
2.3 Imperial China
2.4 Late dynastic rule
2.5 Republic of China (1912-1949)
2.6 1949 to present
3 Geography
3.1 Political geography
3.2 Landscape and climate
3.3 Biodiversity
3.4 Environment
4 Politics
4.1 Administrative divisions
4.2 Foreign relations
4.3 Military
4.4 Sociopolitical issues and reform
5 Economy
5.1 Science and technology
5.2 Communications
5.3 Transport
6 Demographics
6.1 Ethnic groups
6.2 Languages
6.3 Urbanization
6.4 Education
6.5 Health
6.6 Religion
7 Culture
7.1 Cuisine
7.2 Sports
8 See also
9 References
10 External links
Etymology

Main article: Names of China
English names
The word "China" is derived from Cin (???), a Persian name for China popularized in Europe by the 14th-century explorer Marco Polo.[23][24] The first recorded use in English dates from 1555.[25] The Persian word is, in turn, thought to be derived from the Sanskrit word Cina (???),[26] which was used as a name for China as early as AD 150.[27] The traditional theory, proposed in the 17th century by Martino Martini, is that this word is derived from Qin (Chinese: ?, Old Chinese: *dzin[28]), the westernmost of the Chinese kingdoms during the Zhou Dynasty, or from the succeeding Qin Dynasty (221 – 206 BC).[29]
Chinese names
In China, common names for the country include Zhongguo (Chinese: ??; literally "Middle Kingdom", Mandarin pronunciation: [t??´?kw?ˆ]) and Zhonghua (Chinese: ??). The official name of China changed with each dynasty or with each new government. The term Zhongguo first appears in the Classic of History (6th century BCE),[30] but only in the late nineteenth century did Zhongguo became the common name for the country. In earlier times the term was used in various senses. In pre-imperial times, it was often as a cultural concept to distinguish the Huaxia from the barbarians. Sometimes Zhongguo, which can be either singular or plural, referring to the group of states in the central plain. The Chinese were not unique in regarding their country as "central", since other civilizations had the same view.[31]
Zhongguo was used as a common name for the Republic of China (simplified Chinese: ????; traditional Chinese: ????; pinyin: Zhonghuá Mínguó) after its establishment in 1912. After the Communists took over control of mainland China in 1949, they established the People's Republic of China (simplified Chinese: ???????; traditional Chinese: ???????; pinyin: Zhonghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó). The PRC's official abbreviation is "??."[citation needed]
History

Main articles: History of China and Timeline of Chinese history

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2011)
Prehistory
Archaeological evidence suggests that the earliest hominids in China date from 250,000 to 2.24 million years ago.[32][33] A cave in Zhoukoudian (near present-day Beijing) has fossils dated at somewhere between 300,000 to 780,000 years.[34][35][36] The fossils are of Peking Man, an example of Homo erectus who used fire.
The earliest evidence of a fully modern human in China comes from Liujiang County, Guangxi, where a cranium has been found and dated at approximately 67,000 years old. Controversy persists over the dating of the Liujiang remains (a partial skeleton from Minatogawa in Okinawa).[37][38]
Early dynastic rule
See also: Dynasties in Chinese history


Jade deer ornament made during the first historical Chinese dynasty, the Shang, 17th to 11th Century BC.
Chinese tradition names the first dynasty Xia, but it was considered mythical until scientific excavations found early Bronze Age sites at Erlitou in Henan Province in 1959.[39] Archaeologists have since uncovered urban sites, bronze implements, and tombs in locations cited as Xia's in ancient historical texts, but it is impossible to verify that these remains are of the Xia without written records from the period.


Some of the thousands of life-size Terracotta Warriors of the Qin Dynasty, ca. 210 BC.
The first Chinese dynasty that left historical records, the loosely feudal Shang (Yin), settled along the Yellow River in eastern China from the 17th to the 11th century BC. The Oracle bone script of the Shang Dynasty represent the oldest forms of Chinese writing found and the direct ancestor of modern Chinese characters used throughout East Asia. The Shang were invaded from the west by the Zhou, who ruled from the 12th to the 5th century BC, until their centralized authority was slowly eroded by feudal warlords. Many independent states eventually emerged out of the weakened Zhou state, and continually waged war with each other in the Spring and Autumn Period, only occasionally deferring to the Zhou king. By the time of the Warring States Period, there were seven powerful sovereign states, each with its own king, ministry and army.
Imperial China
The first unified Chinese state was established by Qin Shi Huang of the Qin state in 221 BC, who proclaimed himself as the "First Emperor" and created many reforms in the Empire, notably the forced standardization of the Chinese language and measurements. The Qin Dynasty lasted only fifteen years, as its harsh legalist and authoritarian policies soon led to widespread rebellion.
The subsequent Han Dynasty ruled China between 206 BC and 220 AD, and created a lasting Han cultural identity among its populace that extends to the present day. The Han Dynasty expanded the empire's territory considerably with military campaigns reaching Korea, Vietnam, Mongolia and Central Asia, and also helped establish the Silk Road in Central Asia. China was for a large part of the last two millennia the world's largest economy.[40] However, in the later part of the Qing Dynasty, China's economic development began to slow and Europe's rapid development during and after the Industrial Revolution enabled it to surpass China.
After Han's collapse, another period of disunion followed, including the highly chivalric period of the Three Kingdoms. Independent Chinese states of this period such as Wu opened diplomatic relations with Japan, introducing the Chinese writing system there. In 580 AD, China was reunited under the Sui. However, the Sui Dynasty was short-lived after a failure in the Goguryeo-Sui Wars (598–614) weakened it.


10th–11th century Longquan celadon porcelain pieces from Zhejiang province, during the Song Dynasty
Under the succeeding Tang and Song dynasties, Chinese technology and culture reached its zenith. The Tang Empire was at its height of power until the middle of the 8th century, when the An Shi Rebellion destroyed the prosperity of the empire. The Song Dynasty was the first government in world history to issue paper money and the first Chinese polity to establish a permanent standing navy. Between the 10th and 11th centuries, the population of China doubled in size. This growth came about through expanded rice cultivation in central and southern China, and the production of abundant food surpluses.
Within its borders, the Northern Song Dynasty had a population of some 100 million people. The Song Dynasty was a culturally rich period for philosophy and the arts. Landscape art and portrait painting were brought to new levels of maturity and complexity after the Tang Dynasty, and social elites gathered to view art, share their own, and trade precious artworks. Philosophers such as Cheng Yi and Chu Hsi reinvigorated Confucianism with new commentary, infused Buddhist ideals, and emphasized a new organization of classic texts that brought about the core doctrine of Neo-Confucianism.


Along the River During the Qingming Festival; daily life of people from the Song period at the capital, Bianjing, today's Kaifeng.
In 1271, the Mongol leader and fifth Khagan of the Mongol Empire Kublai Khan established the Yuan Dynasty, with the last remnant of the Song Dynasty falling to the Yuan in 1279. Before the Mongol invasion, Chinese dynasties reportedly had approximately 120 million inhabitants; after the conquest was completed in 1279, the 1300 census reported roughly 60 million people.[41] A peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang overthrew the Mongols in 1368 and founded the Ming Dynasty.[42] Ming Dynasty thinkers such as Wang Yangming would further critique and expand Neo-Confucianism with ideas of individualism and innate morality that would have tremendous impact on later Japanese thought. Chosun Korea also became a nominal vassal state of Ming China and adopted much of its Neo-Confucian bureaucratic structure.
Under the Ming Dynasty, China had another golden age, with one of the strongest navies in the world, a rich and prosperous economy and a flourishing of the arts and culture. It was during this period that Zheng He led explorations throughout the world, possibly reaching America. During the early Ming Dynasty China's capital was moved from Nanjing to Beijing. In 1644 Beijing was sacked by a coalition of rebel forces led by Li Zicheng, a minor Ming official turned leader of the peasant revolt. The last Ming Chongzhen Emperor committed suicide when the city fell. The Manchu Qing Dynasty then allied with Ming Dynasty general Wu Sangui and overthrew Li's short-lived Shun Dynasty, and subsequently seized control of Beijing, which became the new capital of the Qing Dynasty.
Late dynastic rule
Main article: Qing Dynasty
The Qing Dynasty, which lasted until 1912, was the last dynasty in China. In the 19th century the Qing Dynasty adopted a defensive posture towards European imperialism, even though it engaged in imperialistic expansion into Central Asia. At this time China awoke to the significance of the rest of the world, the West in particular. As China opened up to foreign trade and missionary activity, opium produced by British India was forced onto Qing China. Two Opium Wars with Britain weakened the Emperor's control. European imperialism proved to be disastrous for China:
The Arrow War (1856–1860) [2nd Opium War] saw another disastrous defeat for China. The subsequent passing of the humiliating Treaty of Tianjin in 1856 and the Beijing Conventions of 1860 opened up more of the country to foreign penetrations and more ports for their vessels. Hong Kong was ceded over to the British. Thus, the "unequal treaties system" was established. Heavy indemnities had to be paid by China, and more territory and control were taken over by the foreigners.[43]
The weakening of the Qing regime, and the apparent humiliation of the unequal treaties in the eyes of the Chinese people had several consequences. One consequence was the Taiping Civil War, which lasted from 1851 to 1862. It was led by Hong Xiuquan, who was partly influenced by an idiosyncratic interpretation of Christianity. Hong believed himself to be the son of God and the younger brother of Jesus. Although the Qing forces were eventually victorious, the civil war was one of the bloodiest in human history, costing at least 20 million lives (more than the total number of fatalities in the World War I), with some estimates of up to two hundred million. Other costly rebellions followed the Taiping Rebellion, such as the Punti-Hakka Clan Wars (1855–67), Nien Rebellion (1851–1868), Miao Rebellion (1854–73), Panthay Rebellion (1856–1873) and the Dungan revolt (1862–1877).[44][45]


A corner tower of the Forbidden City at night; the palace was the residence for the imperial family from the reign of the Yongle Emperor of the Ming Dynasty in the 15th century until the fall of the Qing Dynasty in 1912.
These rebellions resulted in an estimated loss of several million lives each and led to disastrous results for the economy and the countryside.[46][47][48] The flow of British opium hastened the empire's decline. In the 19th century, the age of colonialism was at its height and the great Chinese Diaspora began. About 35 million overseas Chinese live in Southeast Asia today.[49] The famine in 1876–79 claimed between 9 and 13 million lives in northern China.[50] From 108 BC to 1911 AD, China experienced 1,828 famines,[51] or one per year, somewhere in the empire.[52]
While China was wracked by continuous war, Meiji Japan succeeded in rapidly modernizing its military and set its sights on Korea and Manchuria. At the request of the Korean emperor, the Chinese government sent troops to aid in suppressing the Tonghak Rebellion in 1894. However, Japan also sent troops to Korea, leading to the First Sino-Japanese War, which resulted in Qing China's loss of influence in the Korean Peninsula as well as the cession of Taiwan to Japan.
Following this series of defeats, a reform plan for the empire to become a modern Meiji-style constitutional monarchy was drafted by the Guangxu Emperor in 1898, but was opposed and stopped by the Empress Dowager Cixi, who placed Emperor Guangxu under house arrest in a coup d'état. Further destruction followed the ill-fated 1900 Boxer Rebellion against westerners in Beijing.
By the early 20th century, mass civil disorder had begun, and calls for reform and revolution were heard across the country. The 38-year-old Emperor Guangxu died under house arrest on 14 November 1908, suspiciously just a day before Cixi's own death. With the throne empty, he was succeeded by Cixi's handpicked heir, his two year old nephew Puyi, who became the Xuantong Emperor. Guangxu's consort became the Empress Dowager Longyu. In another coup de'tat, Yuan Shikai overthrew the last Qing emperor, and forced empress Dowager Longyu to sign the abdication decree as regent in 1912, ending two thousand years of imperial rule in China. She died, childless, in 1913.
Republic of China (1912-1949)
Main articles: Republic of China (1912-1949) and History of the Republic of China
On 1 January 1912, the Republic of China was established, heralding the end of the Qing Dynasty. Sun Yat-sen of the Kuomintang (the KMT or Nationalist Party) was proclaimed provisional president of the republic. However, the presidency was later given to Yuan Shikai, a former Qing general, who had ensured the defection of the entire Beiyang Army from the Qing Empire to the revolution. In 1915, Yuan proclaimed himself Emperor of China but was forced to abdicate and return the state to a republic when he realized it was an unpopular move, not only with the population but also with his own Beiyang Army and its commanders.
After Yuan Shikai's death in 1916, China was politically fragmented, with an internationally recognized but virtually powerless national government seated in Beijing. Warlords in various regions exercised actual control over their respective territories. In the late 1920s, the Kuomintang, under Chiang Kai-shek, was able to reunify the country under its own control, moving the nation's capital to Nanjing and implementing "political tutelage", an intermediate stage of political development outlined in Sun Yat-sen's program for transforming China into a modern, democratic state. Effectively, political tutelage meant one-party rule by the Kuomintang.
The Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) (part of World War II) forced an uneasy alliance between the Nationalists and the Communists as well as causing around 20 million Chinese civilian deaths.[53] The Japanese 'three-all policy' in north China — "kill all, burn all and destroy all", was one example of wartime atrocities committed on a civilian population.[54] With the surrender of Japan in 1945, China emerged victorious but financially drained. The continued distrust between the Nationalists and the Communists led to the resumption of the Chinese Civil War. In 1947, constitutional rule was established, but because of the ongoing Civil War many provisions of the ROC constitution were never implemented in mainland China.
1949 to present
Main article: History of the People's Republic of China
	This section requires expansion with:
1961-1966 history, regarding Deng Xiaoping and Liu Shaoqi.
Major combat in the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949 with the Communist Party of China in control of mainland China, and the Kuomintang (KMT) retreating to Taiwan, reducing the ROC territory to only Taiwan and surrounding islands. On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic of China.[55] "Communist China" and "Red China" were two common names for the PRC.[56]


Chairman Mao Zedong proclaiming the establishment of the People's Republic in 1949.
The economic and social plan known as the Great Leap Forward resulted in an estimated 45 million deaths.[57] In 1966, Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution, which would last until Mao's death a decade later. The Cultural Revolution, motivated by power struggles within the Party and a fear of the Soviet Union, led to a major upheaval in Chinese society. In 1972, at the peak of the Sino-Soviet split, Mao and Zhou Enlai met Richard Nixon in Beijing to establish relations with the United States. In the same year, the PRC was admitted to the United Nations in place of the Republic of China for China's membership of the United Nations, and permanent membership of the Security Council.
After Mao's death in 1976 and the arrest of the Gang of Four, blamed for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution, Deng Xiaoping quickly wrested power from Mao's anointed successor Hua Guofeng. Although he never became the head of the party or state himself, Deng was in fact the Paramount Leader of China at that time, his influence within the Party led the country to significant economic reforms. The Communist Party subsequently loosened governmental control over citizens' personal lives and the communes were disbanded with many peasants receiving multiple land leases, which greatly increased incentives and agricultural production. This turn of events marked China's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an increasingly open market environment, a system termed by some[58] "market socialism", and officially by the Communist Party of China "Socialism with Chinese characteristics". The PRC adopted its current constitution on 4 December 1982.
The death of pro-reform official Hu Yaobang helped to spark the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, during which students and others campaigned for several months, speaking out against corruption and in favour of greater political reform, including democratic rights and freedom of speech. However, they were eventually put down on 4 June when PLA troops and vehicles entered and forcibly cleared the square, resulting in numerous casualties. This event was widely reported and brought worldwide condemnation and sanctions against the government.[59][60] The "Tank Man" incident in particular became famous.
CPC General Secretary, President Jiang Zemin and Premier Zhu Rongji, both former mayors of Shanghai, led post-Tiananmen PRC in the 1990s. Under Jiang and Zhu's ten years of administration, the PRC's economic performance pulled an estimated 150 million peasants out of poverty and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11.2%.[61][62] The country formally joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.
Although the PRC needs economic growth to spur its development, the government has begun to worry that rapid economic growth has negatively impacted the country's resources and environment. Another concern is that certain sectors of society are not sufficiently benefiting from the PRC's economic development; one example of this is the wide gap between urban and rural areas. As a result, under current CPC General Secretary, President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao, the PRC has initiated policies to address these issues of equitable distribution of resources, but the outcome remains to be seen.[63] More than 40 million farmers have been displaced from their land,[64] usually for economic development, contributing to the 87,000 demonstrations and riots across China in 2005.[65] For much of the PRC's population, living standards have seen extremely large improvements, and freedom continues to expand, but political controls remain tight and rural areas poor.[66]
Geography

Main article: Geography of the People's Republic of China
See also: Geography of Taiwan

A map showing the topography of China.

Longsheng Rice Terrace in Guangxi.

The Li River in Guangxi.
Political geography
The People's Republic of China is the second-largest country in the world by land area after Russia,[12] and is either the third- or fourth-largest by total area, after Russia, Canada and, depending on the definition of total area, the United States.[67] China's total area is generally stated as approximately 9,600,000 km2 (3,710,000 sq mi).[68]. Specific area figures range from 9,572,900 km2 (3,696,100 sq mi) of Encyclopædia Britiannica[69], to 9,596,961 km2 (3,705,407 sq mi) of U.N. Demographic Yearbook[70], to 9,596,961 km2 (3,705,407 sq mi) of CIA World Factbook[71] and 9,640,011 km2 (3,722,029 sq mi) that includes Aksai Chin and the Trans-Karakoram Tract, which are controlled by China and claimed by India.[72] None of the aforementioned total area figures includes the 1,000 square kilometres (386.1 sq mi) of territory ceded to the PRC by the Tajikistan following the ratification of a Sino-Tajik border agreement by the Tajik Parliament on January 12, 2011.[73]
According to Encyclopædia Britannica, the total area of the United States, at 9,522,055 km2 (3,676,486 sq mi), is slightly smaller than China. In the CIA Factbook, until the coastal waters of the Great Lakes was added to the United States' total area in 1996, China's total area was also greater than that of the United States.[74]
China has the longest land borders in the world, measuring 22,117 km (13,743 mi) from the mouth of the Yalu River to the Gulf of Tonkin. China borders 14 nations, more than any other country except Russia, which also borders 14. China extends across much of the East Asian continent bordering Vietnam, Laos, and Burma in Southeast Asia; India, Bhutan, Nepal and Pakistan,[75] in South Asia; Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan in Central Asia; a small section of Russian Altai and Mongolia in Inner Asia; and the Russian Far East and North Korea in Northeast Asia.
Additionally, China shares maritime boundaries with South Korea, Japan, Vietnam and the Phillippines. The PRC and the Republic of China (Taiwan) make mutual claims over each other's territority and the frontier between areas under their respective control is closest near the islands of Kinmen and Matsu, off the Fujian coast, but otherwise run through the Taiwan Strait. The PRC and ROC assert identical claims over the entirety of the Spratly Island in the South China Sea, and the southern-most extent of these claims reach Zengmu Ansha (James Shoal), which would form a maritime frontier with Malaysia.
Landscape and climate

Mount Everest in Tibet.

The South China Sea coast at Hainan.
The territory of China lies between latitudes 18° and 54° N, and longitudes 73° and 135° E. The country's vast size gives it a wide variety of landscapes. In the east, along the shores of the Yellow Sea and the East China Sea, there are extensive and densely populated alluvial plains, while on the edges of the Inner Mongolian plateau in the north, broad grasslands are visible. Southern China is dominated by hill country and low mountain ranges, while the central-east hosts the deltas of China's two major rivers, the Yellow River and the Yangtze River. Other major rivers include the Xi, Mekong, Brahmaputra and Amur. To the west, major mountain ranges, most notably the Himalayas, and high plateaus feature among the more arid landscapes of the north, such as the Taklamakan and the Gobi Desert. China's highest point, Mt. Everest (8848m), lies on the Sino-Nepalese border. The country's lowest point is the dried lake bed of Ayding Lake (-154m) in the Turpan Depression.
A major environmental issue in China is the continued expansion of its deserts, particularly the Gobi Desert, which is currently the world's fifth-largest desert.[76][77] Although barrier tree lines planted since the 1970s have reduced the frequency of sandstorms, prolonged drought and poor agricultural practices have resulted in dust storms plaguing northern China each spring, which then spread to other parts of East Asia, including Korea and Japan. According to China's environmental watchdog, Sepa, China is losing a million acres (4,000 km²) per year to desertification.[78] Water quality, erosion, and pollution control have become important issues in China's relations with other countries. Melting glaciers in the Himalayas could potentially lead to water shortages for hundreds of millions of people.[79]
China's climate is mainly dominated by dry seasons and wet monsoons, which lead to a pronounced temperature differences between winter and summer. In the winter, northern winds coming from high-altitude areas are cold and dry; in summer, southern winds from coastal areas at lower altitudes are warm and moist. The climate in China differs from region to region because of the country's extensive and complex topography.
Biodiversity
Main article: Wildlife of China


A giant panda photographed in Sichuan.
One of 17 megadiverse countries,[80] China lies in two of the world's major ecozones, the Palearctic and the Indomalaya. In the Palearctic zone, mammals such as the horse, camel, tapir, and jerboa can be found. Among the species found in the Indomalaya region are the Leopard Cat, bamboo rat, treeshrew, and various monkey and ape species. Some overlap exists between the two regions due to natural dispersal and migration; deer, antelope, bears, wolves, pigs, and numerous rodent species can all be found in China's diverse climatic and geological environments. The famous giant panda is found only in a limited area along the Yangtze River. China suffers from a continuing problem with trade in endangered species, although there are now laws to prohibit such activities.
China also hosts a variety of forest types. Cold coniferous forests predominate in the north of the country, supporting animal species which include moose and the Asiatic black bear, along with over 120 bird species. Moist conifer forests can have thickets of bamboo as an understorey, replaced by rhododendrons in higher montane stands of juniper and yew. Subtropical forests, which dominate central and southern China, support as many as 146,000 species of flora. Tropical and seasonal rainforests, though confined to Yunnan and Hainan Island, actually contain a quarter of all the plant and animal species found in China.
Environment
Main article: Environment of the People's Republic of China
See also: Water resources of the People's Republic of China


Wind turbines in Xinjiang. The Dabancheng project is Asia's largest wind farm.
China suffers from severe environmental deterioration and pollution.[81] While regulations such as the 1979 Environmental Protection Law are fairly stringent, enforcement of them is poor, as they are frequently disregarded by local communities or governments in favour of rapid economic development.
Leading Chinese environmental campaigner Ma Jun has warned of the danger that water pollution poses to Chinese society. According to the Chinese Ministry of Water Resources, roughly 300 million Chinese are drinking unsafe water. This crisis is compounded by the perennial problem of water shortages, with 400 out of 600 cities reportedly short of drinking water.[82][83]
However, China is the world's leading investor in renewable energy technologies. with $34.6 billion invested in 2009 alone.[84][85] China produces more wind turbines and solar panels than any other country,[86] and renewable energy projects, such as solar water heating, are widely pursued at the local level.[87] By 2009, over 17% of China's energy was derived from renewable sources - most notably hydroelectric power plants, of which China has a total installed capacity of 197 GW.[88]
Politics

Main article: Politics of the People's Republic of China
See also: Politics of the Republic of China


The State organs of the People's Republic of China.
The PRC is regarded by several political scientists as one of the world's five last remaining Communist states (along with Vietnam, North Korea, Laos, and Cuba),[89][90][91] but simple characterizations of PRC's political structure since the 1980s are no longer possible.[10] The PRC government has been variously described as communist and socialist, but also as authoritarian, with heavy restrictions remaining in many areas, most notably on the Internet, the press, freedom of assembly, reproductive rights, and freedom of religion.[92] Its current political/economic system has been termed by its leaders as "Communism with Chinese characteristics".
Compared to its closed-door policies until the mid-1970s, the liberalization of the PRC has resulted in the administrative climate being less restrictive than before. The PRC is far different from liberal democracy or social democracy that exists in most of Europe or North America, and the National People's Congress (highest state body) has been described as a "rubber stamp" body.[93] The PRC's incumbent President is Hu Jintao who is also the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and his Premier is Wen Jiabao who is also a member of the CPC Politburo Standing Committee.


The Great Hall of the People in Beijing, where the National People's Congress convenes.
The country is ruled by the Communist Party of China (CPC), whose power is enshrined in China's constitution.[94] The political system is very decentralized[95] with limited democratic processes internal to the party and at local village levels, although these experiments have been marred by corruption. There are other political parties in the PRC, referred to in China as democratic parties, which participate in the National People's Congress (NPC) and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC).
There have been some moves toward political liberalization, in that open contested elections are now held at the village and town levels,[96][97] and that legislatures have shown some assertiveness from time to time. However, the Party retains effective control over government appointments: in the absence of meaningful opposition, the CPC wins by default most of the time. Political concerns in the PRC include lessening the growing gap between rich and poor and fighting corruption within the government leadership.[98]
The level of support to the government action and the management of the nation is among the highest in the world, with 86% of people who express satisfaction with the way things are going in their country and with their nation's economy according to a 2008 Pew Research Center survey.[99]
Administrative divisions
Main articles: Administrative divisions of the People's Republic of China, Districts of Hong Kong, and Municipalities of Macau
See also: Administrative divisions of the Republic of China
The People's Republic of China has administrative control over 22 provinces, and considers Taiwan to be its 23rd province, although Taiwan is currently administered by the Republic of China, which disputes the PRC's claim.[100] China also has five autonomous regions, each with a designated minority group; four municipalities; and two Special Administrative Regions, which enjoy a degree of political autonomy. These 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, and four municipalities can be collectively referred to as "mainland China", a term which usually excludes the Special Autonomous Regions of Hong Kong and Macau.
Political divisions of the PRC
Provinces (?)

For a larger map, see here.	
Anhui (??)
Fujian (??)
Gansu (??)
Guangdong (??)
Guizhou (??)
Hainan (??)
Hebei (??)
Heilongjiang (???)
Henan (??)
Hubei (??)
Hunan (??)
Jiangsu (??)
Jiangxi (??)
Jilin (??)
Liaoning (??)
Qinghai (??)
Shaanxi (??)
Shandong (??)
Shanxi (??)
Sichuan (??)
Taiwan (??)†
Yunnan (??)
Zhejiang (??)
†Taiwan is claimed by the PRC but administered by the Republic of China
Autonomous regions (???)
Municipalities (???)
Special Administrative
Regions (?????)
Guangxi (???????)
Inner Mongolia / Nei Mongol (??????)
Ningxia (???????)
Xinjiang (????????)
Tibet / Xizang (?????)
Beijing (???)
Chongqing (???)
Shanghai (???)
Tianjin (???)
Hong Kong / Xianggang (???????)
Macau / Aomen (???????)
 


Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of the People's Republic of China


Hu Jintao with former US President George W. Bush in 2006.
The PRC has diplomatic relations with 171 countries and maintains embassies in 162.[101] Its legitimacy is disputed by the Republic of China and a few other countries; it is thus the largest and wealthiest state with limited recognition. Sweden was the first western country to establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic on 9 May 1950.[102] In 1971, the PRC replaced the Republic of China as the sole representative of China in the United Nations and as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.[103] The PRC was also a former member and leader of the Non-Aligned Movement, and still considers itself an advocate for developing countries.[104]
Under its interpretation of the One-China policy, the PRC has made it a precondition to establishing diplomatic relations that the other country acknowledges its claim to Taiwan and severs official ties with the government of the Republic of China. PRC officials have protested on numerous occasions when foreign countries have made diplomatic overtures to Taiwan,[105] especially in the matter of armament sales.[106] Political meetings between foreign government officials and the 14th Dalai Lama are also opposed by the PRC, as it considers Tibet to be formally part of China.[107]
Much of China's current foreign policy is reportedly based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence of Zhou Enlai – non-interference in other states' affairs, non-aggression, peaceful coexistence, equality and mutual benefits. China's foreign policy is also driven by the concept of "harmony without uniformity", which encourages diplomatic relations between states despite ideological differences. This policy has led China to support states that are regarded as dangerous or repressive by Western nations, such as Zimbabwe, North Korea, and Iran.[108] Conflicts with foreign countries have occurred at times in China's recent history, particularly with the United States; for example, the US bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during the Kosovo conflict in May 1999 and the US-China spy plane incident in April 2001. The PRC's foreign relations with many Western nations suffered for a time following the military crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, although in recent years China has improved its diplomatic links with the West.[109][110]
Trade relations
In recent decades, the PRC has played an increasing role in calling for free trade areas and security pacts amongst its Asia-Pacific neighbors. In 2004, the PRC proposed an entirely new East Asia Summit (EAS) framework as a forum for regional security issues, pointedly excluding the United States.[111] The EAS, which includes ASEAN Plus Three, India, Australia and New Zealand, held its inaugural summit in 2005. The PRC is also a founding member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), along with Russia and the Central Asian republics.
In 2000, the U.S. Congress approved "permanent normal trade relations" (PNTR) with China, allowing Chinese exports in at the same low tariffs as goods from most other countries.[112] Both Bill Clinton and George W. Bush asserted that free trade would gradually open China to democratic reform.[113] Bush was furthermore an advocate of China's entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO).[114] China has a significant trade surplus with the United States, its most important export market.[115] In the early 2010s, U.S. politicians argued that the Chinese yuan was significantly undervalued, giving China an unfair trade advantage.[116]
Sinophobic attitudes often target Chinese minorities and nationals living outside of China. Sometimes, such anti-Chinese attitudes turn violent, as occured during the 13 May Incident in Malaysia in 1969 and the Jakarta riots of May 1998 in Indonesia, in which more than 2,000 people died.[117] In recent years, a number of anti-Chinese riots and incidents have also occurred in Africa and Oceania.[118][119] Anti-Chinese sentiment is often rooted in socio-economics.[120]
Sino-Japanese relations
Main article: Sino-Japanese relations
The relationship between China and Japan has been strained at times by Japan's perceived refusal to acknowledge its wartime past to the satisfaction of the PRC. Revisionist comments made by prominent Japanese officials and some Japanese history textbooks regarding the 1937 Rape of Nanking have been a focus of particular controversy. Sino-Japanese relations warmed considerably after Shinzo Abe became the Prime Minister of Japan in September 2006, and a joint historical study conducted by the PRC and Japan released a report in 2010 which pointed toward a new consensus on the issue of World War 2-era atrocities.[121] However, in the early 2010s, relations cooled once more, with Japan accusing China of withholding its reserves of valuable rare earth elements.[122]
Territorial disputes
China has been involved in a number of international territorial disputes, mostly resulting from the legacy of unequal treaties imposed on China during the historical period of New Imperialism. Since the 1990s, the PRC has been entering negotiations to resolve its disputed land borders, usually by offering concessions and accepting less than half of the disputed territory with each party. The PRC's only remaining land border disputes are a disputed border with India and an undefined border with Bhutan. China is additionally involved in more minor multilateral disputes over the ownership of several small islands in the East and South China Seas.[123]
China and the developing world
China is heavily engaged, both politically and economically, with numerous nations in the developing world. Most notably, the PRC has started a policy of wooing African nations for trade and bilateral co-operation.[124][125] Xinhua, China's official news agency, states that there are no less than 750,000 Chinese nationals working or living in Africa.[126] China has furthermore strengthened its ties with larger developing economies, becoming the largest trading partner of Brazil[127] and building strategic links with Argentina.[128]
Emerging superpower
China is regularly cited as a potential new superpower, with certain commentators pointing out that its rapid economic progress, military might, very large population, and increasing international influence could see it attain a prominent global role in the 21st century. Others, however, warn that economic bubbles and demographic imbalances could slow China's growth as the century progresses.[129][130][131][132][133]
Military
Main article: People's Liberation Army


A PLAAF Chengdu J-10 fighter aircraft.
With 2.3 million active troops, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) is the largest military in the world, commanded by the Central Military Commission (CMC).[134] The PLA consists of the People's Liberation Army Ground Force, the People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN), the People's Liberation Army Air Force, and a strategic nuclear force. The official announced budget of the PLA for 2009 was $70 billion. However, the United States government has claimed that China does not report its real level of military spending, which is allegedly much higher than the official budget. The Defense Intelligence Agency estimated that the real Chinese military budget for 2008 was between US$105 billion and US$150 billion.[135]
As a recognised nuclear weapons state, China is considered both a major regional military power and an emerging military superpower.[136] China is the only member of the UN Security Council to have limited power projection capabilities.[137] To offset this, it has begun developing power projection assets, such as aircraft carriers, and has established a network of foreign military relationships that has been compared to a string of pearls.
The PRC has made significant progress in modernizing its military since the early 2000s. It has purchased state-of-the-art Russian fighter jets, such as the Sukhoi Su-30s, and has also produced its own modern fighters, most notably the Chinese J-10s and the J-11s.[138] China is furthermore engaged in developing an indigenous stealth aircraft, the Chengdu J-20.[139][140]
China has also acquired and improved upon the Russian S-300 surface-to-air missile system, which is considered to be among the most effective aircraft-intercepting systems in the world.[141] Russia has since produced the next-generation S-400 Triumf system, with China reportedly having spent $500 million on a downgraded export version of it.[142] The PRC's armored and rapid-reaction forces have been updated with enhanced electronics and targeting capabilities. In recent years, much attention has been focused on building a navy with blue-water capabilities.[143] In August 2011, China's first aircraft carrier, the refurbished Soviet vessel Varyag, began sea trials.[144]
Little information is available regarding the motivations supporting China's military modernization. A 2007 report by the US Secretary of Defense notes that "China's actions in certain areas increasingly appear inconsistent with its declaratory policies".[145] For its part, China claims it maintains an army purely for defensive purposes.[146]
On 13 March 2011, the PLAN missile frigate Xuzhou was spotted off the coast of Libya, marking the first time in history a Chinese warship sailed into the Mediterranean. The entrance into the Mediterranean was part of a humanitarian mission to rescue PRC nationals from the 2011 Libyan civil war, though analysts such as Fareed Zakaria viewed the mission as an attempt to increase the PRC's global military presence.[147]
Sociopolitical issues and reform
See also: Human rights in the People's Republic of China, Hukou system, Social welfare in China, Elections in the People's Republic of China, and Feminism in the People's Republic of China
The Chinese democracy movement, social activists, and some members of the Communist Party of China have all identified the need for social and political reform. While economic and social controls have been greatly relaxed in China since the 1970s, political freedom is still tightly restricted. The Constitution of the People's Republic of China states that the "fundamental rights" of citizens include freedom of speech, freedom of the press, the right to a fair trial, freedom of religion, universal suffrage, and property rights. However, in practice, these provisions do not afford significant protection against criminal prosecution by the State.[148][149][150]
As the Chinese economy expanded following Deng Xiaoping's 1978 reforms, tens of millions of rural Chinese who have moved to the cities[151] find themselves treated as second-class citizens by China's hukou household registration system, which controls state benefits.[152] Property rights are often poorly protected, and eminent domain land seizures have had a disproportionate effect on poorer peasants.[151] In 2003, the average Chinese farmer paid three times more taxes than the average urban dweller, despite having one-sixth of the annual income.[152] However, a number of rural taxes have since been reduced or abolished, and additional social services provided to rural dwellers.[153][154][155]
Censorship of political speech and information, most notably on the Internet,[156] is openly and routinely used in China to silence criticism of the government and the ruling Communist Party.[157] [158] In 2005, Reporters Without Borders ranked the PRC 159th out of 167 states in its Annual World Press Freedom Index, indicating a very low level of perceived press freedom.[159] The government has suppressed demonstrations by organizations that it considers a potential threat to "social stability", as was the case with the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. The Communist Party has had mixed success in controlling information: a powerful and pervasive media control system faces equally strong market forces, an increasingly educated citizenry, and technological and cultural changes that are making China more open to the wider world, especially on environmental issues.[160][161] However, attempts are still made by the Chinese government to control public access to outside information, with online searches for politically sensitive material being blocked by the so-called Great Firewall.[162]
A number of foreign governments and NGOs routinely criticize the PRC's human rights record, alleging widespread civil rights violations, including systematic use of lengthy detention without trial, forced confessions, torture, mistreatment of prisoners, and restrictions of freedom of speech, assembly, association, religion, the press, and labor rights.[163] China executes more people than any other country, accounting for 72% of the world's total in 2009, though it is not the largest executioner per capita.[164]
The PRC government has responded to foreign criticism by arguing that the notion of human rights should take into account a country's present level of economic development, and focus more on the people's rights to subsistence and development in poorer countries.[165] The rise in the standard of living, literacy, and life expectancy for the average Chinese in the last three decades is seen by the government as tangible progress made in human rights.[166] Efforts in the past decade to combat deadly natural disasters, such as the perennial Yangtze River floods, and work-related accidents are also portrayed in China as progress in human rights for a still largely poor country.[165]
The PRC government remains divided over the issue of political reform. Some high-ranking politicians have spoken out in favor reforms, while others remain more conservative. In 2010, Premier Wen Jiabao stated that the PRC needs "to gradually improve the democratic election system so that state power will truly belong to the people and state power will be used to serve the people." Despite his status, Wen's comments were later censored by the government.[167]
As the social, cultural and political consequences of economic growth and reform become increasingly manifest, tensions between the conservatives and reformists in the Communist Party are sharpening. Zhou Tianyong, the vice director of research of the Central Party School, argues that gradual political reform as well as repression of those pushing for overly rapid change over the next thirty years will be essential if China is to avoid an overly turbulent transition to a democratic, middle-class-dominated polity.[168][169] Some Chinese look back to the upheavals of the Cultural Revolution, and fear chaos if the Communist Party should lose control of the domestic situation.
Economy

Main article: Economy of the People's Republic of China


The Shanghai Stock Exchange building in Shanghai's Lujiazui financial district.
From its founding in 1949 until late 1978, the People's Republic of China was a Soviet-style centrally planned economy, without private businesses or capitalism. To propel the country towards a modern, industrialized communist society, Mao Zedong instituted the Great Leap Forward in the early 1960s, although this had decidedly mixed economic results.[170] Following Mao's death in 1976 and the consequent end of the Cultural Revolution, Deng Xiaoping and the new Chinese leadership began to reform the economy and move towards a more market-oriented mixed economy under one-party rule. Collectivization of the agriculture was dismantled and farmlands were privatized to increase productivity. In 1978, China and Japan began normalized diplomatic relations, and China started borrowing money from Japan in soft loans. Since 1978, Japan has been China's most significant foreign donor. Modern-day China is mainly characterised as having a market economy based on private property ownership,[171][172] and is one of the leading examples of state capitalism.[173][174]
Under the post-Mao market reforms, a wide variety of small-scale private enterprises were encouraged, while the government relaxed price controls and promoted foreign investment. Foreign trade was focused upon as a major vehicle of growth, leading to the creation of Special Economic Zones (SEZs), first in Shenzhen and then in other Chinese cities. Inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs) were restructured by introducing western-style management systems, with unprofitable ones being closed outright, resulting in massive job losses. By the latter part of 2010, China was reversing some of its economic liberalization initiatives, with state-owned companies buying up independent businesses in the steel, auto and energy industries.[175]


In 1978, Deng Xiaoping initiated the PRC's market-oriented reforms.
Since economic liberalization began in 1978, the PRC's investment- and export-led[176] economy has grown 90 times bigger[177] and is the fastest growing major economy in the world.[178] According to IMF that PRC's annual average GDP growth for the period of 2001–2010 was 10.5 percent and predicted to grow with 9.5 percent for the period of 2011–2015. From 2007 to 2011, China's economic growth rate was equivalent to all of the G7 countries' growth combined.[179] According to the Global Growth Generators index announced by Citigroup in February 2011, China has a very high 3G growth rating.[180] As of September 2011, China has the world's second largest nominal GDP, at 39.8 trillion yuan (US$6.05 trillion),[181] although its GDP per capita of US$4,300 is still low, and puts the PRC behind roughly a hundred countries in global GDP per capita rankings.[6] China's primary, secondary, and tertiary industries contributed 10.6%, 46.8%, and 42.6% respectively to its total GDP in 2009. If PPP is taken into account, the PRC's economy is again second only to the US, at $10.085 trillion, corresponding to $7,518 per capita.[182]
The PRC is the fourth-most-visited country in the world, with 50.9 million inbound international visitors in 2009.[183] It is a member of the WTO and is the world's second largest trading power behind the US, with a total international trade value of US$2.21 trillion – US$1.20 trillion in exports (#1) and US$1.01 trillion in imports (#2). Its foreign exchange reserves have reached US$2.85 trillion at end of 2010, an increase of 18.7 percent over the previous year, making its reserves by far the world's largest.[184][185] The PRC owns an estimated $1.6 trillion of US securities.[186] The PRC, holding US$1.16 trillion in US Treasury bonds,[187] is the largest foreign holder of US public debt.[188][189] China is the world's third-largest recipient of inward FDI, attracting US$92.4 billion in 2008 alone,[190] and China increasingly invests abroad, with a total outward FDI of US$52.2 billion in 2008 making it the world's sixth-largest outward investor.[191] In 2010, China's inward FDI was $106 billion, marking a 16% increase over 2009.[192]

China is the world's second largest economy (IMF, 2010).
The PRC's success has been primarily due to manufacturing as a low-cost producer. This is attributed to a combination of cheap labor, good infrastructure, relatively high productivity, favorable government policy, and a possibly undervalued exchange rate. The latter has been sometimes blamed for the PRC's huge trade surplus (US$262.7 billion in 2007)[193] and has become a major source of dispute between the PRC and its major trading partners – the US, EU, and Japan – despite the yuan having been de-pegged and having risen in value by 20% against the US dollar since 2005.[194]


Foreign currency reserves and gold minus external debt, based on 2010 data from CIA Factbook.
The state still dominates in strategic "pillar" industries (such as energy and heavy industries), but private enterprise (composed of around 30 million private businesses)[195] has expanded enormously; in 2005, it accounted for anywhere between 33%[196] to 70%[197] of national GDP, while the OECD estimate for that year was over 50%[198] of China's national output, up from 1% in 1978.[199] Its stock market in Shanghai, the SSE, has raised record amounts of IPOs and its benchmark Shanghai Composite index has doubled since 2005. SSE's market capitalization reached US$3 trillion in 2007, making it the world's fifth largest exchange.


Nanjing Road in Shanghai is one of the world's busiest shopping streets.[200]
China now ranks 29th in the Global Competitiveness Index[201] and ranked 135th among the 179 countries measured in the Index of Economic Freedom.[202] 46 Chinese companies made the list in the 2010 Fortune Global 500 (Beijing alone with 30).[203] Measured using market capitalization, four of the world's top ten most valuable companies are Chinese. Some of these include first-ranked PetroChina, third-ranked Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (the world's most valuable bank), fifth-ranked China Mobile (the world's most valuable telecommunications company) and seventh-ranked China Construction Bank.[204]
Although a middle-income country by Western standards, the PRC's rapid growth has pulled hundreds of millions of its people out of poverty since 1978. Today, about 10% of the Chinese population live below the poverty line of US$1 per day (down from 64% in 1978), while life expectancy has increased to 73 years. More than 93% of the population is literate,[205] compared to only 20% in 1950.[206] Urban unemployment declined to 4 percent in China by the end of 2007, although true overall unemployment may be as high as 10%.[207]
China's middle-class population (defined as those with annual income of at least US$17,000) has reached more than 100 million as of 2011,[208] while the number of super-rich individuals worth more than 10 million yuan (US$1.5 million) is estimated to be 825,000, according to Hurun Report.[209] Based on the Hurun rich list, the number of US dollar billionaires in China doubled from 130 in 2009 to 271 in 2010, giving China the world's second-highest number of billionaires.[210] China's retail market was worth RMB 8.9 trillion (US$1.302 trillion) in 2007, and is growing at 16.8% annually.[211] China is also now the world's second-largest consumer of luxury goods behind Japan, with 27.5% of the global share.[212]
The PRC's growth has been uneven, with some geographic regions growing faster than others, and a pronounced urban-rural income gap contributing to a national Gini coefficient of 46.9%. Development has been mainly concentrated in the heavily urbanised eastern coastal regions, while the remainder of the country has lagged behind. To counter this, the government has promoted development in the western, northeastern, and central regions of China.
The Chinese economy is highly energy-intensive and inefficient – on average, industrial processes in China use 20%–100% more energy than similar ones in OECD countries.[213] China became the world's largest energy consumer in 2010,[214] but still relies on coal to supply about 70% of its energy needs.[215] Coupled with lax environmental regulations, this has led to massive water and air pollution, leaving China with 20 of the world's 30 most polluted cities.[213]
Consequently, the government has promised to use more renewable energy, planning to make renewables constitute 30% of China's total energy production by 2050.[216] In 2010, China became the largest wind energy provider in the world, with a total installed wind power capacity of 41.8 GW.[217] In January 2011, Russia began scheduled oil shipments to China, pumping 300,000 barrels of oil per day via the Eastern Siberia – Pacific Ocean oil pipeline.[218]
Science and technology
Main article: Science and technology in the People's Republic of China

History of science and
technology in China
Inventions
Discoveries
By era
Han Dynasty
Tang Dynasty
Song Dynasty
People's Republic of China
Present-day China
This box: view · talk · edit
Ancient Chinese inventors were responsible for pioneering a vast number of technologies. These included papermaking, woodblock printing and movable type printing, the early lodestone and needle compass, gunpowder, toilet paper, early seismological detectors, matches, pound locks, the double-action piston pump, blast furnace and cast iron, the iron plough, the multi-tube seed drill, the suspension bridge,[219] natural gas as fuel, the differential gear for the South Pointing Chariot, the hydraulic-powered armillary sphere, the hydraulic-powered trip hammer, the mechanical chain drive, the mechanical belt drive, the raised-relief map, the propeller, the crossbow, the cannon, the rocket, and the multistage rocket.
Chinese astronomers were among the first to record observations of a supernova. Chinese mathematics evolved independently of Greek mathematics and is therefore of great interest in the history of mathematics. Moreover, the Chinese were keen on documenting all of their technological achievements, such as in the Tiangong Kaiwu encyclopedia written by Song Yingxing (1587–1666).
Despite its earlier sophistication, China's grasp of science and technology had fallen behind that of Europe by the 17th century. Political, social and cultural reasons have been given for this, although recent historians focus more on economic causes, such as the high level equilibrium trap. Since the beginning of Deng Xiaoping's market reforms, China has grown increasingly connected to the global economy and information sphere, and the government has placed a heavy emphasis on the development of science and technology.
After the Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s and '70s, China started to develop its own nuclear weapons and delivery systems, successfully detonating its first surface nuclear test in 1964 at Lop Nur. A natural outgrowth of this was a satellite launching program, which culminated in 1970 with the launching of Dong Fang Hong I, the first Chinese satellite. This made the PRC the fifth nation to independently launch a satellite. China has the world's second largest research and development budget, and invested over $136 billion in science and technology in 2006, an increase of more than 20% over 2005.[220] Stem cell research and gene therapy, which some in the Western world see as controversial, face minimal regulation in China. China has an estimated 926,000 researchers, second only to the 1.3 million in the United States.[221]
In 1992, the Shenzhou manned spaceflight program was authorized.[222] After four unmanned tests, Shenzhou 5 was launched on 15 October 2003, using a Long March 2F launch vehicle and carrying Chinese astronaut Yang Liwei, making the PRC the third country to put a human being into space through its own endeavors.[223] In 2008, China successfully completed the Shenzhou 7 mission, making it the third country to have the capability to conduct a spacewalk. In 2007, the PRC successfully sent the Chang'e spacecraft, to orbit and explore the moon as part of their Chinese Lunar Exploration Program. China has plans to build a space station in the near future and to achieve a lunar landing by the 2020s. There are also plans for a manned mission to Mars.[224]
China is also actively developing its software, semiconductor and energy industries, including renewable energies such as hydroelectric, wind and solar power.[225] In an effort to reduce pollution from coal-burning power plants, China has been pioneering the deployment of pebble bed nuclear reactors, which run cooler and safer than conventional nuclear reactors, and have potential applications for the hydrogen economy.[226] In 2010, China developed Tianhe-IA, for a time the world's fastest supercomputer, at the National Supercomputing Center of Tianjin.[227] China also operates the Nebulae supercomputer, which was also among the world's top 10 supercomputers in 2010.[228]
Communications
Main article: Telecommunications in the People's Republic of China
China currently has the most cellphone users in the world, with over 800 million users as of July 2010.[229] It also has the world's largest number of internet and broadband users.[230] By December 2010, China had around 457 million internet users, an increase of 19% over the previous year, and by the end of March 2011 the number of internet users had reached 477 million.[231][232][233] According to China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC), China's average internet connection speed is 100.9 kbit/s, less than half of the global average of 212.5 kbit/s.[234]
China Telecom and China Unicom, the country's two largest broadband providers, accounted for 20% of global broadband subscribers, whereas the world's ten largest broadband service providers accounted for 39% of the world's broadband customers. China Telecom serves 55 million broadband subscribers, while China Unicom serves more than 40 million. The massive growth of internet use in China continues to fuel rapid broadband growth, whereas the world's other major broadband ISPs operate in the mature markets of the developed world, with high levels of broadband penetration and rapidly slowing subscriber growth.[235]
Transport
Main article: Transport in the People's Republic of China


G5 Expressway near exit 10, outside Beijing. There are 74,000 km (45,980 mi) of divided expressways in China, making the expressway network just 1,000 miles shorter than the US Interstate Highway System.


A high-speed maglev train leaving Pudong International Airport, Shanghai.
Transportation in mainland China has been prioritised by the government in recent decades, and has undergone intense state-led development since the late 1990s. The national road network has been massively expanded through the creation of a network of expressways, known as the National Trunk Highway System (NTHS). By 2011, China's expressways had reached a total length of 74,000 km (46,000 mi), second only to the road network of the United States.[236]
China possesses the world’s longest high-speed rail network, with over 4,618 mi (7,432 km) of service routes. Of these, 601 mi (967 km) serve trains with top speeds of 220 mph (350 km/h).[237]
Private car ownership is growing rapidly, with China surpassing the United States as the largest automobile market in the world in 2009, with total car sales of over 13.6 million.[238]
Domestic air travel has also increased significantly, but remains too expensive for most. Long-distance transportation is dominated by railways and charter bus systems. Railways are the vital carrier in China; they are monopolized by the state, divided into various railway bureaux in different regions. Due to huge demand, the system is regularly subject to overcrowding, particularly during holiday seasons, such as Chunyun during the Chinese New Year.
Rapid transit systems are also rapidly developing in China's major cities, in the form of networks of underground or light rail systems. Hong Kong has one of the most developed transport systems in the world, while Shanghai has a high-speed maglev rail line connecting the city to its main international airport, Pudong International Airport.
Demographics

Main article: Demographics of the People's Republic of China


A population density map of the People's Republic of China. The eastern, coastal provinces are much more densely populated than the western interior.
As of July 2010, the People's Republic of China has an estimated total population of 1,338,612,968. About 21% of the population (145,461,833 males; 128,445,739 females) are 14 years old or younger, 71% (482,439,115 males; 455,960,489 females) are between 15 and 64 years old, and 8% (48,562,635 males; 53,103,902 females) are over 65 years old. The population growth rate for 2006 was 0.6%.[239]
By end of 2010, the proportion of mainland Chinese people aged 14 or younger was 16.60%, while the number aged 60 or older grew to 13.26%, giving a total proportion of 29.86% dependents. The proportion of the population of workable age was thus around 70%.[240]
With a population of over 1.3 billion and dwindling natural resources, the PRC is very concerned about its population growth and has attempted, with mixed results,[241] to implement a strict family planning policy. The government's goal is one child per family, with exceptions for ethnic minorities and a degree of flexibility in rural areas. It is hoped that population growth in China will stabilize in the early decades of the 21st century, though some projections estimate a population of anywhere between 1.4 billion and 1.6 billion by 2025. China's family planning minister has indicated that the one-child policy will be maintained until at least 2020.[242]


Population of China from 1949 to 2008.
The one-child policy is resisted, particularly in rural areas, because of the need for agricultural labour and a traditional preference for boys (who can later serve as male heirs). Families who breach the policy often lie during the census.[243] Official government policy opposes forced sterilization or abortion, but allegations of coercion continue as local officials, who are faced with penalties for failing to curb population growth, may resort to forcible measures, or manipulation of census figures.[citation needed]
The decreasing reliability of PRC population statistics since family planning began in the late 1970s has made evaluating the effectiveness of the policy difficult.[243] Data from the 2010 census implies that the total fertility rate may now be around 1.4.[244] The government is particularly concerned with the large imbalance in the sex ratio at birth, apparently the result of a combination of traditional preference for boys and family planning pressure, which led to a ban on using ultrasound devices in an attempt to prevent sex-selective abortion.
According to the 2010 census, there were 118.06 boys born for every 100 girls, which is 0.53 points lower than the ratio obtained from a population sample survey carried out in 2005.[245] However, the gender ratio of 118.06 is still beyond the normal range of around 105 percent, and experts warn of increased social instability should this trend continue.[246] For the population born between the years 1900 and 2000, it is estimated that there could be 35.59 million fewer females than males.[247] Other demographers argue that perceived gender imbalances may arise from the underreporting of female births.[248][249][250][251] A recent study suggests that as many as three million Chinese babies are hidden by their parents every year.[251] According to the 2010 census, males accounted for 51.27 percent of the population, while females made up 48.73 percent of the total in 2010.[245]


An estimated 40 million people in northern China still live in cave homes known as yaodongs.
Ethnic groups
Main article: List of ethnic groups in China
Hundreds of ethnic groups have existed in China throughout its history. The largest ethnic group in China by far is the Han. This group, however, is internally diverse and can be further divided into smaller ethnic groups that share similar traits. Over the last three millennia, many previously distinct ethnic groups in China have been Sinicized into a Han identity, which over time dramatically expanded the size of the Han population. Because of this, many within the Han identity have maintained distinct linguistic and cultural traditions while still identifying as Han.
The PRC officially recognizes 56 distinct ethnic groups, the largest of which are the Han Chinese, who constitute about 91.9% of the total population.[252] Large ethnic minorities include the Zhuang (16 million), Manchu (10 million), Hui (9 million), Miao (8 million), Uyghur (7 million), Yi (7 million), Tujia (5.75 million), Mongols (5 million), Tibetans (5 million), Buyei (3 million), and Koreans (2 million).[253]
Languages
Main article: Languages of China
Most languages in China belong to the Sino-Tibetan language family, spoken by 29 ethnicities. There are also several major linguistic groups within the Chinese language itself. The most spoken varieties are Mandarin (spoken by over 70% of the population), Wu, Yue (Cantonese), Min, Xiang, Gan, and Hakka. Non-Sinitic languages spoken widely by ethnic minorities include Zhuang (Thai), Mongolian, Tibetan, Uyghur (Turkic), Hmong and Korean.[254]
Classical Chinese was the written standard in China for thousands of years, and allowed for written communication between speakers of various unintelligible languages and dialects in China. Written vernacular Chinese, or baihua, is the written standard based on the Mandarin dialect and first popularized in Ming Dynasty novels. It was adopted with significant modifications during the early 20th century as the national standard. Classical Chinese is still part of the high school curriculum and is thus intelligible to some degree to many Chinese.
Urbanization
See also: List of cities in the People's Republic of China, List of cities in the People's Republic of China by population, and Metropolitan regions of China
Since 2000, China's cities have expanded at an average rate of 10% annually. The country's urbanization rate increased from 17.4% to 46.8% between 1978 and 2009, a scale unprecedented in human history.[255] Between 150 and 200 million migrant workers work part-time in the major cities, returning home to the countryside periodically with their earnings.[256][257]
Today, the People's Republic of China has dozens of cities with one million or more long-term residents, including the three global cities of Beijing, Hong Kong, and Shanghai. The figures in the table below are from the 2008 census, and are only estimates of the urban populations within administrative city limits; a different ranking exists when considering the total municipal populations (which includes suburban and rural populations). The large "floating populations" of migrant workers make conducting censuses in urban areas difficult;[258] the figures below do not include the floating population, only long-term residents.
Leading Urban Centers of the People's Republic of China


Shanghai

Hong Kong

Guangzhou


Shenzhen
Rank	Core City	Division	Urban Population	Prefecture Population	Region	view · talk · edit

Beijing

Tianjin

Chongqing

Nanjing
1	Shanghai	Shanghai Municipality	9,495,701	18,542,200	East
2	Beijing	Beijing Municipality	7,296,962	17,430,000	North
3	Hong Kong	Hong Kong SAR	6,985,200	6,985,200	South
4	Tianjin	Tianjin Municipality	5,066,129	11,500,000	North
5	Wuhan	Hubei Province	6,660,000	9,100,000	South Central
6	Guangzhou	Guangdong Province	4,154,808	15,000,000	South
7	Shenzhen	Guangdong Province	4,000,000	8,615,500	South
8	Shenyang	Liaoning Province	3,981,023	7,500,000	Northeast
9	Chongqing	Chongqing Municipality	3,934,239	31,442,300	Southwest
10	Nanchang	Jiangxi Province	3,790,000	4,990,184	East
11	Nanjing	Jiangsu Province	2,822,117	8,004,000	East
12	Harbin	Heilongjiang Province	2,672,069	8,499,000	Northeast
13	Shijiazhuang	Hebei Province	2,620,357	9,630,000	North
14	Xi'an	Shaanxi Province	2,588,987	10,500,000	Northwest
15	Chengdu	Sichuan Province	2,341,203	11,300,000	Southwest
16	Changchun	Jilin Province	2,223,170	7,400,000	Northeast
17	Dalian	Liaoning Province	2,118,087	6,200,000	Northeast
18	Hangzhou	Zhejiang Province	1,932,612	7,000,000	East
19	Jinan	Shandong Province	1,917,204	6,300,000	East
20	Taiyuan	Shanxi Province	1,905,403	3,413,800	North
21	Qingdao	Shandong Province	1,867,365	8,000,000	East
2008 Estimated - suburban and rural area excluded on urban population


Education
Main article: Education in the People's Republic of China


Tsinghua University in Beijing.
In 1986, China set the long-term goal of providing compulsory nine-year basic education to every child. As of 2007, there were 396,567 primary schools, 94,116 secondary schools, and 2,236 higher education institutions in the PRC.[259] In February 2006, the government advanced its basic education goal by pledging to provide completely free nine-year education, including textbooks and fees.[260] Free compulsory education in China consists of elementary school and middle school, which lasts for 9 years (ages 6–15); almost all children in urban areas continue with three years of high school.
As of 2007, 93.3% of the population over age 15 are literate.[239] In 2000, China's literacy rate among 15-to-24-year-olds was 98.9% (99.2% for males and 98.5% for females).[261] In March 2007, the Chinese government declared education a national "strategic priority"; the central budget for national scholarships was tripled between 2007 and 2009, and 223.5 billion yuan (US$28.65 billion) of extra state funding was allocated between 2007 and 2012 to improve compulsory education in rural areas.[262]
In 2009, Chinese students from Shanghai achieved the world's best results in mathematics, science and literacy, as tested by the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), a worldwide evaluation of 15-year-old school pupils' scholastic performance.[263]
The quality of Chinese colleges and universities varies considerably across the country. The consistently top-ranked universities in mainland China are:[264][265]
Beijing: Peking University, Tsinghua University, Renmin University of China, Beijing Normal University
Shanghai: Fudan University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Tongji University, East China Normal University
Harbin: Harbin Institute of Technology
Tianjin: Nankai University, Tianjin University
Xi'an Jiaotong University (Xi'an)
Nanjing University (Nanjing)
University of Science and Technology of China (Hefei)
Zhejiang University (Hangzhou)
Wuhan University (Wuhan)
Guangzhou: Sun Yat-sen University (aka Zhongshan University)
Health
Main article: Public health in the People's Republic of China
The Ministry of Health, together with its counterparts in the provincial health bureaux, oversees the health needs of the Chinese population.[266] An emphasis on public health and preventive medicine has characterized health policy since the early 1950s. At that time, the Communist Party started the Patriotic Health Campaign, which was aimed at improving sanitation and hygiene, as well as attacking several diseases. Diseases such as cholera, typhoid and scarlet fever, which were previously rife in China, were nearly eradicated by the campaign.
After Deng Xiaoping began instituting economic reforms in 1978, the health of the Chinese public improved rapidly due to better nutrition, although many of the free public health services provided in the countryside disappeared along with the People's Communes. Healthcare in China became mostly privatised, and experienced a significant rise in quality. The national life expectancy at birth rose from about 35 years in 1949 to 73.18 years in 2008,[267][268] and infant mortality decreased from 300 per thousand in the 1950s to around 23 per thousand in 2006.[36][269] Malnutrition as of 2002 stood at 12% of the population, according to United Nations FAO sources.[270]
Despite significant improvements in health and the construction of advanced Western-style medical facilities, China has several emerging public health problems, such as respiratory illnesses caused by widespread air pollution[271] and hundreds of millions of cigarette smokers,[272][273] a possible future HIV/AIDS epidemic, and an increase in obesity among urban youths.[274][275] China's large population and densely-populated cities have led to serious disease outbreaks in recent years, such as the 2003 outbreak of SARS, although this has since been largely contained.[276]
Estimates of excess deaths in China from environmental pollution (apart from smoking) are placed at 760,000 people per annum from air and water pollution (including indoor air pollution).[277] In 2007, China overtook the United States as the world's biggest producer of carbon dioxide.[278] Some 90% of China's cities suffer from some degree of water pollution,[279] and nearly 500 million people lacked access to safe drinking water in 2005.[280] Reports by the World Bank and the New York Times have claimed industrial pollution, particularly of the air,[281] to be a significant health hazard in China.
Religion
Main article: Religion in China


"Three laughs at Tiger Brook", Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism are one, a litang style painting portraying three men laughing by a river stream, 12th century, Song Dynasty.


The Round Mound Altar, the altar proper at the Temple of Heaven in Beijing, where the Emperor communed with Heaven.
In mainland China, the government allows a degree of religious freedom to members of state-approved religious organizations. An accurate number of religious adherents is hard to obtain because of a lack of official data, but there is general consensus that religion has been enjoying a resurgence over the past 20 years.[282] A survey by Phil Zuckerman on Adherents.com found that in 1998, 59% (over 700 million)[283] of the population was irreligious. A later survey, conducted in 2007, found that there are 300 million believers in China, constituting 23% of the population, as distinct from an official figure of 100 million.[282]
Despite the surveys' varying results, most agree that China's traditional religions – Buddhism, Taoism, and Chinese folk religions – are the dominant faiths. According to a number of sources, Buddhism in China accounts for between 660 million (~50%) and over 1 billion (~80%)[284][285][286][287] while Taoists number 400 million (~30%).[288][289] However, because of the fact that one person may subscribe to two or more of these traditional beliefs simultaneously and the difficulty in clearly differentiating Buddhism, Taoism, and Chinese folk religions, the number of adherents to these religions can be overlaid. In addition, subscribing to Buddhism and Taoism is not necessarily considered religious by those who follow the philosophies in principle but stop short of believing in any kind of deity or divinity.[290][291][292]


Saint Sophia Cathedral in Harbin, northeast China. Harbin had a sizable Russian population, totalling around 100,000, by 1921, feeding the growth of Christianity in the city.[293]
Most Chinese Buddhists are merely nominal adherents, because only a small proportion of the population (around 8% or 100 million)[294][295] may have taken the formal step of going for refuge.[296][297] Even then, it is still difficult to estimate accurately the number of Buddhists because they do not have congregational memberships and often do not participate in public ceremonies.[298] Mahayana (??, Dacheng) and its subsets Pure Land (Amidism), Tiantai and Chán (better known in the west by its Japanese pronunciation Zen) are the most widely practiced denominations of Buddhism. Other forms, such as Theravada and Tibetan, are practiced largely by ethnic minorities along the geographic fringes of the Chinese mainland.[299]
Christianity was first introduced to China during the Tang Dynasty, with the arrival of Nestorian Christianity in 635 CE. This was followed by Franciscan missionaries in the 13th century, Jesuits in the 16th century, and finally Protestants in the 19th century. Of China's minority religions, Christianity is one of the fastest-growing. The total number of Christians is difficult to determine, as many belong to unauthorized house churches, but estimates of their number have ranged from 40 million (3% of the total population)[282][300] to 54 million (4%)[301] to as many as 130 million (10%).[302] Official government statistics put the number of Christians at 16 million, but these count only members of officially-sanctioned church bodies.[303] China is believed to now have the world's second-largest evangelical Christian population — behind only the United States — and if current growth rates continue, China will become a global center of evangelical Christianity in coming decades.[304]


The Masjid and Islamic Centre in Kowloon.
Islam in China dates to a mission in 651, only 18 years after Muhammad's death. Muslims came to China for trade, becoming prominent in the trading ports of the Song Dynasty.[305][306] They became influential in government circles, including Zheng He, Lan Yu and Yeheidie'erding. Nanjing became an important center of Islamic study.[307] Statistics are hard to find, and most estimates figures that there are 20 to 30 million Muslims (1.5% to 2% of the population).[308][309][310][311][312]
China also plays host to numerous minority religions, including Hinduism, Dongbaism, Bön, and a number of more modern religions and sects (particularly Xiantianism). In July 1999, the Falun Gong spiritual practice was officially banned by the authorities,[313] and many international organizations have criticized the government's treatment of Falun Gong that has occurred since then.[314] There are no reliable estimates of the number of Falun Gong practitioners in China.[315]
Culture

Main articles: Culture of the People's Republic of China and Culture of China

Beijing opera is a quintessential aspect of traditional Chinese culture and holds an important position in the world treasure of art.[316]

A north corner of Forbidden City, featuring classic construction style.
For centuries, opportunity for economic and social advancement in China could be provided by high performance on Imperial examinations. The literary emphasis of the exams affected the general perception of cultural refinement in China, such as the belief that calligraphy and literati painting were higher forms of art than dancing or drama. China's traditional values were derived from various versions of Confucianism and conservatism.
A number of more authoritarian and rational strains of thought have also been influential, such as Legalism. There was often conflict between the philosophies, such as the individualistic Song Dynasty neo-Confucians, who believed Legalism departed from the original spirit of Confucianism. Examinations and a culture of merit remain greatly valued in China today. In recent years, a number of New Confucians have advocated that democratic ideals and human rights are quite compatible with traditional Confucian "Asian values."[317]
The first leaders of the People's Republic of China were born in the old society but were influenced by the May Fourth Movement and reformist ideals. They sought to change some traditional aspects of Chinese culture, such as rural land tenure, sexism, and a Confucian education, while preserving others, such as the family structure and obedience to the state.
Many observers believe that the period following 1949 is a continuation of traditional Chinese dynastic history, while others say that the CPC's rule has damaged the foundations of Chinese culture, especially through political movements such as the Cultural Revolution, where many aspects of traditional culture were labeled 'regressive and harmful' or 'vestiges of feudalism' by the regime and thus, were destroyed. They further argue that many important aspects of traditional Chinese morals and culture, such as Confucianism, Chinese art, literature, and performing arts like Beijing opera, were altered to conform to government policies and propaganda at the time.
Today, the Chinese government has accepted a great deal of traditional Chinese culture as an integral part of Chinese society, lauding it as an important achievement of the Chinese civilization and emphasizing it as vital to a Chinese national identity. Since the Cultural Revolution ended, various forms of traditional Chinese art, literature, music, film, fashion and architecture have seen a vigorous revival,[318][319] and folk and variety art in particular have gained a new found respectability, and sparked interest nationally and even worldwide.[320]
Chinese culture and the West were linked by the Silk Road. Artifacts from the history of the silk route, as well as from the natural history of the Gobi desert, are displayed in the Silk Route Museum.[321][322][323]
Cuisine
Main article: Chinese cuisine


Traditional Chinese food in Tianjin.
Chinese cuisine is highly diverse, drawing on several millennia of culinary history. The dynastic emperors of ancient China were known to host banquets with over 100 dishes served at a time,[324] employing countless imperial kitchen staff and concubines to prepare the food.
Over time, many royal dishes became part of everday Chinese culture. Numerous foreign offshoots of Chinese food, such as Hong Kong cuisine and American Chinese food, have emerged in the various nations which play host to the Chinese diaspora.
Sports
Main article: Sport in the People's Republic of China


Dragon boat racing, a popular traditional Chinese sport.
China has one of the oldest sporting cultures in the world. There is evidence that a form of association football was played in China around 1000 AD.[325] Besides football,[326] some of the most popular sports in the country include martial arts, table tennis, badminton, swimming, basketball and snooker. Board games such as Go (Weiqi), Xiangqi, and more recently chess are also played at a professional level.[327]
Physical fitness is widely emphasized in Chinese culture. Morning exercises are a common activity, with elderly citizens encouraged to practice qigong and tai chi chuan. Young people in China are also keen on basketball, especially in urban centers with limited space and grass areas. The American National Basketball Association has a huge following among Chinese youths, with Chinese players such as Yao Ming being held in high esteem.[328]
Many more traditional sports are also played in China. Dragon boat racing occurs during the Dragon Boat Festival. In Inner Mongolia, sports such as Mongolian-style wrestling and horse racing are popular. In Tibet, archery and equestrianism are a part of traditional festivals.[329]
China has participated at the Olympic Games since 1932, although it has only participated as the PRC since 1952. China hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, and received the highest number of gold medals that year.[330]
See also

	Asia portal
	China portal
	Geography portal
	Hong Kong portal
	Macau portal
	People's Republic of China portal
	Shanghai portal
Additional, more specific, and related topics may be found at:
Outline of China
Index of China-related articles
List of China-related topics
International rankings of the People's Republic of China
References

^ Chan, Kam Wing (2007). "Misconceptions and Complexities in the Study of China’s Cities: Definitions, Statistics, and Implications". Eurasian Geography and Economics 48 (4): 383–412. Retrieved 2011-08-07. p. 395
^ "What are China's largest and richest cities?". University of Southern California.
^ a b "Law of the People's Republic of China on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese Language (Order of the President No.37)". Gov.cn. Retrieved 27 April 2010. "For purposes of this Law, the standard spoken and written Chinese language means Putonghua (a common speech with pronunciation based on the Beijing dialect) and the standardized Chinese characters."
^ a b Communiqué of the National Bureau of Statistics of People's Republic of China on Major Figures of the 2010 Population Census
^ "China". Encyclopaedia Britannica. Retrieved 2010-03-15. "Form of government: single-party people's republic with one legislative house".
^ a b c d e "People's Republic of China". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 2011-04-21.
^ CIA World Factbook [Gini rankings]
^ "Human Development Report 2010". United Nations. 2010. Retrieved 5 November 2010.
^ "ICANN Board Meeting Minutes". ICANN. Retrieved 25 June 2010.
^ a b Boum, Aomar (1999). Journal of Political Ecology: Case Studies in History and Society. Retrieved 5 May 2007.
^ "GDP expands 11.4 percent, fastest in 13 years". Chinadaily.net. 24 January 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ a b "Countries of the world ordered by land area". Listofcountriesoftheworld.com. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ The total area ranking relative to the United States depends on the measurement of the total areas of China and the United States. See List of countries and outlying territories by area for more information.
^ Walton, Greg; International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development (2001). "Executive Summary". China's golden shield: Corporations and the development of surveillance technology in the People's Republic of China. Rights & Democracy. p. 5. ISBN 9782922084429. Retrieved 29 August 2009.
^ "Sino-British Joint Declaration". Retrieved 8 September 2008.
^ "Constitution of the People's Republic of China". People's Daily Online. Retrieved 23 November 2009. "Article 138. The capital of the People's Republic of China is Beijing."
^ "Rivers and Lakes". China.org.cn. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "Country profile: China". BBC News. 1 July 2009. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Altucher, James (8 January 2010). "There's no stopping China". New York Post. Retrieved 2 August 2010.
^ Muldavin, Joshua (9 February 2006). "From Rural Transformation to Global Integration: The Environmental and Social Impacts of China's Rise to Superpower". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Retrieved 17 January 2010.
^ (Lt Colonel, USAF) Uckert, Merri B. (April 1995). China as an Economic and Military Superpower: A Dangerous Combination?. Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama: Air War College, Air University. p. 33.
^ Bergsten, C. Fred; Gill, Bates; Lardy, Nicholas R.; Mitchell, Derek (17 April 2006). China: The Balance Sheet: What the World Needs to Know about the Emerging Superpower (Illustrated Hardcover ed.). PublicAffairs. p. 224. ISBN 9781586484644.
^ "China", Online Etymology Dictionary
^ Wood, Francis, Did Marco Polo go to China (1995), p. 61.
^ Eden, Richard, Decades of the New World (1555) "The great China whose kyng is thought the greatest prince in the world."
^ "china", The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Boston and New York, Houghton-Mifflin, 2000.
^ Found in Book 2 of Kautilya's Arthashastra. (Denis Crispin Twitchett, Michael Loewe, John King Fairbank, The Ch'in and Han Empires 221 B.C.-A.D. 220, p. 20.)
^ Schuessler, Axel, (2009). Minimal Old Chinese and Later Han Chinese: a Companion to the Grammatica Seria Recensa. (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press), 322.
^ Martino, Martin, Novus Atlas Sinensis, Vienna 1655, Preface, p. 2.
^ ??•??»:????????????????Roughly translated as "The Heavens awarded the lands and peoples of Zhongguó to our ancestors".
^ Endymion Wilkinson, Chinese History: A Manual (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, Rev. and enl., 2000 ISBN 0674002474 ), 132.
^ "Early Homo erectus Tools in China" by Archaeological Institute of America
^ List of Chinese fossil hominids[dead link] at ChinesePrehistory.org
^ Ian Tattersall (1997). "Out of Africa again...and again?". Scientific American 276 (4): 60–68. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0497-60.
^ Shen, G; Gao, X; Gao, B; Granger, De (Mar 2009). "Age of Zhoukoudian Homo erectus determined with (26)Al/(10)Be burial dating". Nature 458 (7235): 198–200. Bibcode 2009Natur.458..198S. doi:10.1038/nature07741. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 19279636.
^ a b CIA World Factbook. 20 April 2006. URL accessed 3 May 2006.
^ "The Liujiang skeleton".
^ "Skull may complicate human-origins debate. (Chinese Roots). Skull may complicate human-origins debate". Thefreelibrary.com. 2002-12-21. Retrieved 2010-06-02.
^ "Bronze Age China" by National Gallery of Art
^ Dahlman, Carl J; Aubert, Jean-Eric. China and the Knowledge Economy: Seizing the 21st Century. WBI Development Studies. World Bank Publications. Accessed January 30, 2008.
^ Ping-ti Ho, "An Estimate of the Total Population of Sung-Chin China", in Études Song, Series 1, No 1, (1970) pp. 33–53.
^ "Ming Dynasty[dead link]". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2009. Archived 2009-10-31.
^ Busky, Donald F. (2002). "Communism in History and Theory. Greenwood Publishing Group, p.2.
^ Jenks, R.D. Insurgency and Social Disorder in Guizhou: The Miao ‘Rebellion’, 1854–1873. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 1994.
^ Cf. William J. Peterson, The Cambridge History of China Volume 9 (Cambridge University Press, 2002)
^ Damsan Harper, Steve Fallon, Katja Gaskell, Julie Grundvig, Carolyn Heller, Thomas Huhti, Bradley Maynew, Christopher Pitts. Lonely Planet China. 9. 2005. ISBN 1-74059-687-0
^ Gernet, Jacques. A History of Chinese Civilization. 2. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
^ Perry, Elizabeth. Rebels and Revolutionaries in Northern China, 1845–1945 (Stanford, CA: Stanford UP, 1980).
^ The world's successful diasporas. Management Today. April 3, 2007.
^ Dimensions of need – People and populations at risk. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
^ Ó Gráda, C.: Famine: A Short History. Princeton University Press.
^ China: Land of Famine. Journal of the Royal Institute of International Affairs.
^ "Nuclear Power: The End of the War Against Japan". BBC — History.
^ Himeta, Mitsuyoshi (????) (???????????·??????????) (Concerning the Three Alls Strategy/Three Alls Policy By the Japanese Forces), Iwanami Bukkuretto, 1996, Bix, Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan, 2000
^ The Chinese people have stood up. UCLA Center for East Asian Studies. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ Smith, Joseph; and Davis, Simon. [2005] (2005). The A to Z of the Cold War. Issue 28 of Historical dictionaries of war, revolution, and civil unrest. Volume 8 of A to Z guides. Scarecrow Press publisher. ISBN 0810853841, 9780810853843.
^ Akbar, Arifa (17 September 2010). "Mao's Great Leap Forward 'killed 45 million in four years'". London: The Independent. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
^ Hart-Landsberg, Martin; and Burkett, Paul. "China and Socialism. Market Reforms and Class Struggle". Retrieved 30 October 2008.
^ Youngs, R. The European Union and the Promotion of Democracy. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-19-924979-4.
^ Carroll, J. M. A Concise History of Hong Kong. Rowman & Littlefield, 2007. ISBN 978-0-7425-3422-3.
^ Nation bucks trend of global poverty (11 July 2003). China Daily
^ China's Average Economic Growth in 90s Ranked 1st in World (1 March 2000). People's Daily.
^ China worried over pace of growth. BBC. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ China: Migrants, Students, Taiwan. Migration News. January 2006.
^ In Face of Rural Unrest, China Rolls Out Reforms. The Washington Post. 28 January 2006.
^ "Frontline: The Tank Man transcript". Frontline. PBS. 11 April 2006. Retrieved 12 July 2008.
^ "The People's Republic of China" (7 September 2005). Foreign & Commonwealth Office
^ "Land area" GOV.cn, Chinese Government's Official Web Portal
^ "United States". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 25 March 2008.
^ "Demographic Yearbook—Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density" (pdf). United Nations Statistics Division. 2008. Retrieved 2011-09-24
^ [1]
^ Field Listing – Disputes – international, CIA World Factbook
^ China, Tajikistan sign border agreement
^ The CIA has updated the total area of United States a number of times since initial publication of the World Factbook. From 1989 through 1996, the total area of US was listed as 9,372,610 km2 (3,618,780 sq mi) (land are plus inland water only). The listed total area changed to 9,629,091 km2 (3,717,813 sq mi) in 1997 (With the Great Lakes areas and the coastal waters added), to 9,631,418 km2 (3,718,711 sq mi) in 2004, to 9,631,420 km2 (3,718,710 sq mi) in 2006, and to 9,826,630 km2 (3,794,080 sq mi) in 2007 (territorial waters added). Note: From 1989 to 1996, China was listed as the world's third-largest country by total area according to the CIA World Factbook. The United States replaced China in 1997 after additional water spaces were added.
^ China's border with Pakistan falls in the disputed Kashmir province. The area under Pakistani-administration is claimed by India.
^ "Gobi Desert Facts". Retrieved 2011-09-24.
^ "Beijing hit by eighth sandstorm". BBC news. Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ "The gathering sandstorm: Encroaching desert, missing water". The Independent. 9 November 2007.
^ "Himalaya glaciers melting much faster". MSNBC. 24 November 2008. Retrieved 21 September 2011.
^ "Biodiversity Theme Report". Environment.gov.au. 10 December 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Ma Xiaoying; Ortalano, Leonard (2002) [2000]. Environmental Regulation in China. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
^ Ma, Jun Li, Naomi (2006). "Tackling China's Water Crisis Online". www.chinadialogue.net. Retrieved 18 February 2007.
^ "300 million Chinese drinking unsafe water". People's Daily Online. 23 December 2004. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ Friedman, Lisa (25 March 2010). "China Leads Major Countries With $34.6 Billion Invested in Clean Technology". The New York Times. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Black, Richard (26 March 2010). "China steams ahead on clean energy". BBC News. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Bradsher, Keith. "China leads global race to make clean energy". New York Times.
^ http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=chinas-big-push-for-renewable-energy Scientific American. Retrieved 2011-09-24.
^ China tops the world in clean energy production. Ecosensorium. Retrieved 2011-09-24.
^ "Randall Hoven, 7 November 2007 American Thinker". Americanthinker.com. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Cienciala, Anna (1996). The Rise and Fall of Communist Nations 1917–1994. Retrieved 16 October 2008.
^ Espinosa, Juan Carlos; Civil Society in Cuba: The logic of emergence in comparative perspective[dead link]. Retrieved 16 October 2008.
^ "Freedom House: Freedom in the World 2011: China".
^ "BBC, Country Report: China". BBC News. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Constitution of the People's Republic of China". English.people.com.cn. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "CFR.org". CFR.org. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Unknown Author (2003). "Beijingers Get Greater Poll Choices". China Daily. Retrieved 18 February 2007.
^ Lohmar, Bryan; and Somwaru, Agapi; Does China’s Land-Tenure System Discourage Structural Adjustment?, 1 May 2006. USDA Economic Research Service. Accessed 3 May 2006.
^ China sounds alarm over fast-growing gap between rich and poor. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ 22 July 2008 (22 July 2008). "PEWresearch.org". PEWresearch.org. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Gwillim Law (2 April 2005). Provinces of China. Retrieved 15 April 2006.
^ "Background Note: China". Bureau of Public Affairs. U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 10 March 2011.
^ "China and Sweden". Chinaembassy.se. Retrieved 15 June 2009.[dead link]
^ Chang, Eddy (22 August 2004). Perseverance will pay off at the UN, The Taipei Times.
^ "China says communication with other developing countries at Copenhagen summit transparent". People's Daily. 21 December 2009. Retrieved 20 August 2010.
^ "Taiwan's Ma to stopover in US: report". AFP. 11 January 2010.
^ Macartney, Jane (1 February 2010). "China says US arms sales to Taiwan could threaten wider relations". The Times (London).
^ Moore, Malcolm (8 January 2010). "China cancels UK human rights summit after Akmal Shaikh execution". The Daily Telegraph (London).
^ Keith, Ronald C.. China from the inside out – fitting the People's republic into the world. PlutoPress.
^ "Ready to face the world?". The Economist. 6 March 1997. Retrieved 24 March 2011.
^ "China and Europe: A summit dominated by trade could get frosty". The Economist. 27 November 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2011.
^ Dillon, Dana; and Tkacik, John, Jr.; China’s Quest for Asia, Policy Review, December 2005 and January 2006, Issue No. 134. Retrieved 22 April 2006.
^ "Clinton signs China trade bill". CNN.com. 10 October 2000
^ "The China Trade Debate". Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). 18 May 2000.
^ "Bush woos China on trade", 30 May 2001, BBC News
^ "US trade gap widens on increased Chinese imports". BBC News. 14 October 2010
^ "Chinese President Hu Jintao resists Obama calls on yuan". BBC News. 13 April 2010.
^ Malaysia's race rules. The Economist Newspaper Limited (25 August 2005). Requires login.
^ Algeria: Xenophobia against Chinese on the rise in Africa. Afrik.com. 5 August 2009.
^ Looters shot dead amid chaos of Papua New Guinea's anti-Chinese riots. The Australian. 23 May 2009.
^ Overseas and under siege. The Economist. 11 August 2009.
^ Nanjing by the Numbers. Foreign Policy. 9 February 2010.
^ Backlash over the alleged China curb on metal exports, Daily Telegraph, London, 29 Aug 2010. Retrieved 2010-08-30.
^ Ramachandran, Sudha (2011-01-27). "China plays long game on border disputes". Asia Times. Retrieved 2011-02-11.
^ McLaughlin, Abraham; A rising China counters US clout in Africa, The Christian Science Monitor, 30 March 2005 edition.
^ Lyman, Princeton N.; China’s Rising Role in Africa, 21 July 2005 Council of Foreign Relations. Retrieved 26 June 2007.
^ Politzer, Malia; China and Africa: Stronger Economic Ties Mean More Migration. Migration Information Source. August 2008
^ http://www.forbes.com/sites/ricardogeromel/2011/08/24/is-brazil-a-derivative-of-china/ Forbes.com. Retrieved 2011-09-24.
^ http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-09/09/c_131129475.htm Xinhua.com. Retrieved 2011-09-24.
^ Khanna, Parag (27 January 2008). "Waving Goodbye to Hegemony". New York Times. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ "China as a global power". University of Southern California US-China Institute. 13 November 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ Broughton, Philip Delves (23 January 2004). "The Dragon’s catastrophic potential". The First Post. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ Sanders, Sol (29 June 2007). "China's utterly distorted economy is a train wreck waiting to happen". World Tribune. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ Williams, Ian (23 January 2004). "China-US: Double bubbles in danger of colliding". Asia Times. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ China Seeks to Allay US Fears as Summit Nears (2006). Retrieved 15 April 2006.
^ US Department of Defense
^ Nolt, James H. Analysis: The China-Taiwan military balance. Asia Times. Retrieved 15 April 2006.
^ Martin Andrew. "AsianResearch.org". AsianResearch.org. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "Sinodefence.com". Sinodefence.com. 28 March 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "Early Eclipse: F-35 JSF Prospects in the Age of Chinese Stealth." China-Defense. Retrieved: 23 January 2011.
^ "Chengdu J-20 – China’s 5th Generation Fighter." Defense Update. Retrieved: 23 January 2011.
^ SinoDefence: Surface-to-air Missile System (2006). Retrieved 7 July 2009.
^ "HQ-19 (S-400) (China) – Jane's Strategic Weapon Systems". Janes.com. 23 December 2008.
^ SinoDefence: Aircraft carrier programme (2006). Retrieved 15 April 2006.
^ "China's first aircraft carrier completes sea trial". Xinhua News Agency. 15 August 2011. Retrieved 2011-08-15.
^ "China Military Power Report.indd" (PDF). Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "China fury at US military report". BBC News. 26 March 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "GPS: China Flexes Military Muscle". CNN News. 13 March 2011. Retrieved 2011-03-11.
^ "Human Rights Watch, World Report 2009". Hrw.org. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Will the Boat Sink the Water?: The Life of China's Peasants / Chen Guidi and Wu Chuntao (2006) ISBN 1586483587
^ Empire of Lies: The Truth About China in the Twenty-First Century / Guy Sorman (2008) ISBN 1594032165
^ a b Wingfield, Rupert (7 March 2006). "China’s rural millions left behind". BBC News. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ a b Luard, Tim (10 November 2005). "China rethinks peasant apartheid". BBC News. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Ni, Ching-Ching (30 December 2005). "LAtimes.com". Articles.latimes.com. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Harvard.eu[dead link]
^ "China ends school fees for 150m". BBC News. 13 December 2006. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ Media Control in China[dead link] published 2004 by Human Rights in China, New York. Revised edition 2006 published by Liming Cultural Enterprises of Taiwan
^ "Freedom House: Freedom on the Net Report: China".
^ "Freedom House: Freedom of the Press Survey: China".
^ "Reporters sans frontières – Annual Worldwide Press Freedom Index – 2005". Rsf.org. 30 April 2009. Archived from the original on 2008-04-19. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ 1998 US Embassy Beijing report "The Fading of Environmental Secrecy".[dead link] Retrieved 4 February 2007.
^ 1997 US Embassy Beijing report "Environmental NGOs in China: Green is Good, But Don't Openly Oppose the Party".[dead link] Retrieved 4 February 2007.
^ Egypt not trending in China
^ "Freedom House: Freedom in the World 2011: China".
^ Yixiang, Lin (1 April 2009). "China Responsible for 72 Percent of Executions Worldwide". The Epoch Times. Retrieved 19 August 2010.
^ a b "China's Progress in Human Rights" July 2005, Accessed: 18 April 2008.
^ "China's reform and opening-up promotes human rights, says premier". 11 December 2003. Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the United States. Retrieved 28 April 2006.
^ Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao talks reform, but most countrymen never get to hear what he says. Washington Post
^ Part I of summary of Zhou Tianyong's 2004 book Reform of the Chinese Political System[dead link] Accessed 7 February 2007.
^ Part II of summary of Zhou Tianyong's 2004 book Reform of the Chinese Political System[dead link] Accessed 7 February 2007.
^ http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/great_leap_forward.htm History Learning Site. Retrieved 2011-09-23.
^ "Berkeley.edu" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-04-27.
^ "China is already a market economy – Long Yongtu, Secretary General of Boao Forum for Asia". English.eastday.com. Retrieved 2009-07-14.
^ Communism Is Dead, But State Capitalism Thrives, by Vahan Janjigian, forbes.com, Mar. 22 2010.
^ The Winners And Losers In Chinese Capitalism, by Gady Epstein, forbes.com, Aug. 31 2010.
^ "China's State-Planned Economy Is Doomed to Flop: David Pauly" Bloomberg. Accessed: 16 April 2011
^ "China must be cautious in raising consumption". China Daily. Retrieved 8 February 2009.
^ 16 August 2010, China Overtakes Japan as World's Second-Biggest Economy, Bloomberg
^ "China's gross domestic product (GDP) growth". Chinability. Retrieved 16 October 2008.
^ Will China's Economy Stumble?
^ 3G Countries
^ "China's economy surges 10.3% in 2010 (Xinhua)". China Daily. 19 January 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2011.
^ World Economic Outlook Database International Monetary Fund (October 2010). Retrieved on 7 October 2010.
^ "Microsoft Word - UNWTO Barom07 2 en.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 14 May 2010.
^ "China’s Foreign-Exchange Reserves Surge, Exceeding $2 Trillion". Bloomberg L.P.. 15 July 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ China's forex reserves reach USD 2.85 trillion
^ "China must keep buying US Treasuries for now-paper". Reuters. 20 August 2009. Retrieved 19 August 2009.
^ "China now owns $1.16 trillion of U.S. debt". CBS News. 28 February 2011
^ Washington learns to treat China with care. CNNMoney.com. 29 July 2009.
^ Hornby, Lucy (23 September 2009). "Factbox: US-China Interdependence Outweighs Trade Spat". Reuters. Retrieved 25 September 2009.
^ "China's FDI up 23.6% in 2008". China Daily. 15 January 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ "On China's rapid growth in outward FDI". China Daily. 3 August 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ China scores number one on FDI penetration, 16% rise in 2010
^ "2007 trade surplus hits new record – $262.2B". China Daily. 11 January 2008. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ "China widens yuan, non-dollar trading range to 3%". 23 September 2005. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ Putting Democracy in China on Hold John Lee, The Center for Independent Studies. Retrieved 26 July 2008.
^ english@peopledaily.com.cn (13 July 2005). "People.com". People.com. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "Businessweek.com". BusinessWeek. 22 August 2005. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "Microsoft Word - China2bandes.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 27 April 2010.
^ "China Is a Private-Sector Economy". BussinessWeek. 22 August 2005. Retrieved 27 March 2007.
^ "Nanjing Road Shopping Mall Shanghai". AsiaRooms – TUI Travel PLC.
^ The Global Competitiveness Report 2009-2010 World Economic Forum. Retrieved on 24 September 2009.
^ "2011 Index of Economic Freedom" The Heritage Foundation. Accessed 17 April 2011
^ Money.cnn.com Retrieved on 27 July 2010.
^ Global 500 2009, Financial Times, Retrieved on 12 August 2009.
^ "CIA – The World Fact Book". Cia.gov. Retrieved 14 May 2010.
^ Plafker, Ted, China's Long—but Uneven—March to Literacy[dead link] International Herald Tribune
^ Urban unemployment declines to 4% in China People's Daily Online (22 January 2008). Retrieved on 27 July 2008.
^ Abigmission.com China’s 100 million strong middle-class need to be reached. Retrieved on 30 August 2009.
^ One Person in Every 1700 in China has at least 10 Million Yuan[dead link] Hurun Report (14 April 2009). Retrieved on 4 March 2010.
^ "China's billionaires double in number". Retrieved 7 September 2011.
^ Total Retail Sales of Consumer Goods (2007.12) National Bureau of Statistics of China (13 March 2008). Retrieved on 21 November 2008.
^ Super Rich have Craze for luxury goods China Daily (3 March 2010). Retrieved on 4 March 2010.
^ a b "China Quick Facts". World Bank. Retrieved 26 July 2008.
^ Swartz, Spencer; Oster, Shai (19 July 2010). "China Becomes World's Biggest Energy Consumer". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ Feller, Gordon. "China’s Coal". ECOworld. Retrieved 19 July 2010.[dead link]
^ "China have set a Renewable Energy Target of 10% of Electric Power Capacity by 2010". Reuters. 11 March 2008. Retrieved 19 July 2010.
^ Wind power in the People's Republic of China
^ Reuters: Russia in milestone oil pipeline supply to China. Reuters. 1 January 2011
^ People have walked across the Anlan Bridge for 1,700 years.
^ "China overtakes Japan on R&D" Financial Times. Retrieved 3 December 2006.
^ OECD: China to spend $136 billion on R&D[dead link] BusinessWeek. Retrieved 3 December 2006.
^ China's First Man-made Satellite (2003). Ministry of Culture. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ Wade, Mark. Shenzhou (6 January 2006). Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ Wade, Mark. (30 March 2005) Project 921-2. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ "Blinding Science: China's Race to Innovate" Bruce Einhorn, Business Week, 31 March 2006, accessed: 16 April 2006.
^ Robert J. Saiget. "China leading world in next generation of nuclear plants" DAGA. 5 October 2004. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ "China Makes World's Fastest Supercomputer". International Business Times. 28 October 2010.
^ Worldtech24.com
^ "China August mobile phone users top 823 million". People's Daily. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
^ Barboza, David (26 July 2008). "China Surpasses US in Number of Internet Users". NY times. Retrieved 26 July 2008.
^ Theglobeandmail.com[dead link]
^ China's Internet population rises to 457 million http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20110119/ap_on_hi_te/as_china_internet_population
^ China's online population rises to 477mn – Yahoo! News
^ Shanghai: Home to the slowest internet in all of China – Shanghaiist
^ Broadband provider rankings: The Rise and Rise of China: CommsUpdate : TeleGeography Research
^ "China's total mileage of expressways open to traffic reached 65,000 kilometers". English.peopledaily.com.cn. 15 Jan 2010. Retrieved 14 July 2010.
^ Japan's bullet train will have a top speed of 310 mph
^ "China auto sales officially surpass US in 2009, 13.6 million vehicles sold". Industry News. 8 January 2010. Retrieved 14 May 2010.
^ a b HDRstats.undp.org (2009). UNHD.
^ China census shows population ageing and urban
^ "The New England Journal of Medicine, September 2005". Content.nejm.org. doi:10.1056/NEJMhpr051833. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "China to keep one-child policy". CNN. 10 March 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ a b USembassy-china.org.cn[dead link]
^ The most surprising demographic crisis
^ a b http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-04/28/c_13850191.htm
^ "Chinese facing shortage of wives". BBC News. 12 January 2007. Retrieved 23 March 2009.
^ Estimation of the Number of Missing Females in China: 1900–2000 page 20
^ M. G. Merli and A. E. Raftery. 1990. "Are births under-reported in rural China? Manipulation of statistical records in response to China's population policies", Demography 37 (February): 109–126.
^ Johansson, Sten; Nygren, Olga (1991). "The missing girls of China: a new demographic account". Population and Development Review 17 (1): 35–51. doi:10.2307/1972351.
^ Merli, M. Giovanna; Raftery, Adrian E. (2000). "Are births underreported in rural China?". Demography 37 (1): 109 126.
^ a b http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/china/7787661/Chinese-hiding-three-million-babies-a-year.html
^ CIA factbook (29 March 2006). Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ Stein, Justin J (Spring 2003). Taking the Deliberative in China. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ Languages. 2005. GOV.cn. URL accessed 3 May 2006.
^ Zhou Qun, Lin Yanhua. Nov. 2005/14441.html China's urbanization encounters "urban disease"[dead link], Chinanews.cn (?????), 11 November 2005. Retrieved 21 April 2005.
^ Harney, Alexandra (3 February 2008). "Migrants are China's 'factories without smoke'". CNN. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ Tschang, Chi-Chu (4 February 2009). "A Tough New Year for China's Migrant Workers". Business Week. Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ Francesco Sisci, "China's floating population a headache for census", The Straits Times, 22 September 2000.
^ Factbox: Education in China (2008). China-Arab Education Information Network
^ China pledges free 9-year education in rural west (21 February 2006). China Economic Net.
^ "Where And Who Are The World’s Illiterates: China". UNESCO. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Premier Wen announces hefty educational investment (2007). Retrieved 6 March 2007.
^ "China Beats Out Finland for Top Marks in Education". TIME.
^ 2005 Chinese University Ranking unveiled (21 February 2005). China Daily. Retrieved 16 April 2006.
^ All-around Ranking (2003). Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ China AIDS Survey at Yahoo. Retrieved 18 April 2006.
^ "Population Growth in China : The Basic Characteristics of China’s Demographic Transition" by Maristella Bergaglio.
^ "China". CIA World Factbook, 16 May 2008
^ China’s Infant Mortality Rate Down. 11 September 2001. CHINA.ORG.CN. URL accessed 3 May 2006.
^ "Nutrition country profiles: China summary". Archived from the original on 15 September 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2007.
^ McGregor, Richard (2 July 2007). "750,000 a year killed by Chinese pollution". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 July 2007.
^ "Smoking 'will kill one third of young Chinese men'". 16 August 2001. Honolulu Community College. Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ "China's Tobacco Industry Wields Huge Power" article by Didi Kirsten Tatlow in The New York Times 10 June 2010
^ "Serving the people?". 1999. Bruce Kennedy. CNN. Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ "Obesity Sickening China's Young Hearts" 4 August 2000. People's Daily. Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ "China’s latest SARS outbreak has been contained, but biosafety concerns remain". 18 May 2004. World Health Organization. Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ "China 'buried smog death finding'". BBC News. 3 July 2007.
^ "China overtakes US as world's biggest CO2 emitter". Guardian.co.uk. 19 June 2007.
^ "China says water pollution so severe that cities could lack safe supplies". China Daily 7 June 2005.
^ "As China Roars, Pollution Reaches Deadly Extremes". The New York Times. 26 August 2007.
^ "Air Pollution in Yixian". Air Polution in Yixian. 1900-1-0. Retrieved 25 May 2010.
^ a b c "Asia-Pacific | Survey finds 300 m (980 ft) China believers". BBC News. 7 February 2007. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "Nonreligious, continued...". Adherents.com<!. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ China Beliefs
^ Buddhism in China, Foreigners in China
^ China culture exploring assistant
^ "Buddhists in the world". Vipassanafoundation.com. Retrieved 15 June 2009.[dead link]
^ "How Now Tao?". Asia Sentinel. 27 April 2007. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "Alliance of Religions and Conservation (ARC)" (PDF). Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Religions and Beliefs in China". Travelchinaguide.com. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Society for Anglo Chinese Understanding". SACU. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Index-China Chinese Philosophies and religions". Index-china.com. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Memories of Dr. Wu Lien-teh, plague fighter". Yu-lin Wu (1995). World Scientific. p.68. ISBN 9810222874
^ "Buddhism". Adherents.com. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "International Religious Freedom Report 2007 – China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau)". State.gov. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Buddhism in China". AskAsia. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "TheAmericanForum For Global Education". Globaled.org. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "US Department of States – International Religious Freedom Report 2006: China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau)". State.gov. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Macintosh, R. Scott. China's prosperity inspires rising spirituality (9 March 2006). Retrieved 15 April 2006.
^ Watts, Jonathan (7 February 2007). "Christian population in China". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 27 August 2007.
^ "China Survey Reveals Fewer Christians than Some Evangelicals Want to Believe". Assistnews.net. 1 October 2007. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "Sons of heaven". The Economist. 2 October 2008.
^ "Chinese government official statistics on Christian population in China". hrwf.org. Archived from the original on 2007-08-08. Retrieved 27 August 2007.
^ God and Caesar in China: policy implications of church-state tensions
^ "BBC Islam in China (650–present)". BBC News. 2 October 2002. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Islamic culture in China".
^ "Looking East: The challenges and opportunities of Chinese Islam".[dead link]
^ Counting up the number of people of traditionally Muslim nationalities who were enumerated in the 1990 census gives a total of 17.6 million, 96% of whom belong to just three nationalities: Hui 8.6 million, Uyghurs 7.2 million, and Kazakhs 1.1 million. Other nationalities that are traditionally Muslim include Kyrghyz, Tajiks, Uzbeks, Tatars, Salar, Bonan, and Dongxiang. See Dru C. Gladney, "Islam in China: Accommodation or Separatism?", Paper presented at Symposium on Islam in Southeast Asia and China, Hong Kong, 2002. Available at islamsymposium.cityu.edu.hk. The 2000 census reported a total of 20.3 million members of Muslim nationalities, of which again 96% belonged to just three groups: Hui 9.8 million, Uyghurs 8.4 million, and Kazakhs 1.25 million.
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – China". Cia.gov. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "China (includes Hong Kong, Macau, and Tibet)". State.gov. Retrieved 15 June 2009.
^ "NW China region eyes global Muslim market". China Daily. 9 July 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Muslim Media Network". Muslim Media Network. 24 March 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ Xinhua, China Bans Falun Gong, People's Daily, 22 July 1999
^ Mary-Anne Toy, Underground existence for Falun Gong faithful, The Age, 26 July 2008.
"The US State Department, US Congress, the United Nations and human rights groups such as Amnesty say persecution of Falun Gong practitioners in China is a continuing abuse of human rights."
^ Xu Jiatun, Cultural Revolution revisited in crackdown, Taipai Times, 8 September 1999.
^ "Tour Guidebook: Beijing". China National Tourism Administration.
^ Bary, Theodore de. "Constructive Engagement with Asian Values".[dead link] Columbia University.
^ "China: Traditional arts". Library of Congress – Country Studies. Accessed: 26 December 2007.
^ "China: Cultural life: The arts". Encyclopædia Britannica Online Accessed: 26 December 2007.
^ "China: Folk and Variety Arts". Library of Congress – Country Studies. Accessed: 26 December 2007.
^ "Silk Route Museum". Silk Route Museum. Retrieved 14 July 2009.
^ "Tourism Guide 2009" (PDF). Retrieved 14 July 2009.[dead link]
^ "First Annual Silk Road Museum International Arts Competition 2009" (PDF)