
channel for the product. All of these choices affect your system architecture. 
Promotion (Advertising and Marketing Communication) 
Promotion refers to the full set of activities associated with increasing awareness of your product 
within your target market. It is often easiest to think of it as just advertising, because advertising is 
arguably the most exciting promotional activity. When you put aside sheer excitement, however, other 
promotional activities are often more important. 
Total Available Market, Total Addressable Market, and Market 
Segmentation 
The total available market is all of the customers who could possibly use your good or service. The 
total addressable market is the subset of the total available market that you can reach. An effective 
marketing program will further divide the total addressable market into well-defined market segments. 
A market segment is a group of customers who share specific characteristics, chief of which is that 
they must communicate with each other. A very effective marketing program may further divide 
market segments into niche markets, which allow for narrowly targeted promotion and sales activities. 
Here is an example of these concepts in action. Let's suppose you have created a Web-based self-
service benefits management system that allows employees to manage their 401K, health care, 
vacation, and other benefits. Your total available market is all of those companies that could possibly 
use this system (presumably, a large one). These companies will range from extremely large (Fortune 
500) to very small (less than $5M in revenue). 
The requirements associated with these companies are very different. As a result, you may choose to 
define one market segment as public companies with between $25M and $50M in annual revenue. This influences all aspects of the marketing mix, including pricing, promotion, distribution, product, 
and sales models. 
Unfortunately, this market segment is probably too large to service in the early releases of the product. 
Narrowing further, you might define one or more niches within it. One common approach is to divide 
based on vertical industries: pharmaceuticals, automotive, chemical, technology hardware, technology 
software, and so forth. Another is to divide based on the strengths of your product relative to your 
competitors'. Suppose you're creating a new e-mail client that has been extensively usability tested for 
novice users and that also has extensive anti-spam controls. Chances are good that your competitors 
are targeting this market and, by virtue of their longevity, claim that they are the most user friendly. 
By segmenting the market into people who care about spam, you can differentiate yourself from your 
competitors by promoting your anti-spam features, thereby creating and owning a market niche. Once 
you've achieved success in this niche, you can expand into others. 
The S-Shaped Curve of Adoption 
Countless studies have found that the adoption of new products, generally referred to as innovations, 
follows the S-shaped curve shown Figure 2-2. An innovation doesn't just mean a "new" product, but 
also includes new releases or new versions of existing products. Parts of this curve have been labeled 
to reflect common characteristics of adopter categories. Understanding these categories can help 
product management and associated marketing functions change the shape of the curve, which varies 
tremendously by innovation type. Simply put, some innovations are adopted much more rapidly than 
others. The differences between categories are not perfectly defined, but they do represent 
generalizations that accurately characterize the willingness of a given person to adopt an innovation. 
As will be addressed throughout this book, various adopter categories place quite different demands 
on your system and its architecture. Understanding adopter category differences will help you meet 
these demands and accelerate adoption of your solution. 
Figure 2-2. The S-shaped curve of adoption 
 
Innovators The very first individuals to adopt an innovation are known as innovators. These people are usually 
more technically curious and enjoy "pushing the boundary" with new products and services. They 
often have the necessary resources at their disposal to "make" an innovation work. Innovators are 
tolerant of poor installation and integration features and a lack of training, documentation, and help 
systems. Unfortunately, early wins with innovators may create a false sense of security that the 
product is "ready for prime time" when it really isn't. The early majority category is likely to demand 
that the same system accepted by the innovators have good installation procedures and some 
integration features and some training, documentation, and help. 
Early Adopters 
Following the innovators are the early adopters. While they also like pushing the envelope, they are 
more conservative. Because they are more conservative, they expect a more "complete" product, and 
are more demanding on every facet of the proposed solution. Meeting these increased demands is 
worth the effort, as early adopters are key predictors for overall success. If they can be convinced of 
the innovation's merits, chances are good you've got the foundation of a winning solution. If they 
can't, you probably don't. Closing the gap between innovators and early adopters is referred to as 
crossing the chasm, which is also the title of the influential marketing book written by Geoffrey 
Moore. 
Early Majority 
Close on the heels of the early adopters are the early majority. As you might expect, these individuals 
are considerably more conservative than the innovators and still more conservative that the early 
adopters. This is not necessarily bad, for this portion of the curve is often when the price/performance 
associated with the new product becomes most favorable. The earliest of the early majority often find 
the greatest competitive advantage: Most of the major kinks have been worked out, and they should be 
getting a fairly reliable product. From the perspective of product management, arguably the most 
important aspect of the early majority is that they will require references to key early adopters to be 
assured that the product works. This includes such things as customer success stories and ROI (return 
on investment) analyses. 
Late Majority 
The late majority are reluctant to adopt a new product, preferring tried and true mechanisms for 
dealing with problems. In fact, they may only adopt under significant economic pressure. 
Unfortunately, adopting this late in the process often results in the late majority receiving far fewer 
economic advantages than the early majority. 
Laggards 
Individuals who wait the longest to adopt an innovation are characterized as laggards. In general, they 
have the lowest social and economic status of all adopter categories. By adopting so late they derive 
little, if any, economic benefit from the innovation. 
These broad categories represent a relationship between an individual and a given innovation. They 
are not universal labels but convenient tools for understanding the behavior of key market segments. It 
is important to remember that innovations are adopted primarily because of their perceived effects on 
current problems. You might quickly adopt a new release of your favorite compiler in the middle of a 
project, especially if this compiler provides a much-needed bug fix or new feature. In marketing 
terms, you're an innovator. Alternatively, if the new release fails to address any specific problems, it is far safer and cheaper to stick with the current compiler, which categorizes you as a member of one of 
the other adopter categories. 
The categories define not only adopters but also the maturation process associated with entire markets. 
As of the writing of this book, the CDMA-based cell phone market is mature, while the 3G-based 
market is just emerging. Within these markets the adopter categories exist. In subsequent chapters I 
will refer to both markets and adopter categories in the context of creating and sustaining winning 
solutions. 
The Whole Product 
The concept of a "whole product" helps product managers create the full range of solutions required 
for success in the marketplace. Consider a common product, such as a cell phone. The generic product 
is the cell phone, a device that enables us to conveniently make phone calls. But, as anyone who has 
one knows, it must be augmented in a variety of ways before it becomes truly useful. For example, if 
you're unable to receive a call the cell phone service provider almost always provides you with voice 
mail. This is the expected product, which is commonly defined as the smallest configuration of 
products and services necessary to minimally meet customer expectations. 
Moving beyond these minimal expectations is where real value and customer loyalty can be created. 
An example is a cell phone that allows you to pay online with a credit card or one that has a visible 
indicator of how many minutes remain on your monthly plan. This is what's known as an augmented 
product, or one that has been designed with a variety of "extras" to provide the maximum value. 
These small ideas are just a few of the things I'd like in my cell phone plan. Surely you can think of 
others. If we enumerated these ideas, we'd have a definition of the true potential product that would 
exist for cell phone users: the full set of creative ideas that continues our product's growth and expands 
its market. 
The four product concepts collectively represent the "whole product." When applied to the world of 
technology, they reveal some surprising insights. While the generic product might be the application, 
we expect that it will be relatively easy to install, that it will operate in a manner that is consistent with 
other applications on our chosen platform, and that it will have basic online reference materials. 
Augmenting this product with an extensible API or including sophisticated operation and analysis 
capabilities may make us very happy. All of these capabilities are supported, directly or indirectly, 
through the choices made in the overall architecture of the system. 
Marketing types often use the term whole product when they should be using expected product or 
augmented product. Unfortunately, this can cause confusion, because the perception of the generic, 
expected, augmented, or potential product changes over time as technology and markets mature. To 
make the distinction clear, I use the term target product to define what is being created and offered to 
a given target market. In the early stages of the market, the target product may consist primarily of the 
generic product, but as the market matures the target product must evolve because the majority of 
customers are unwilling to accept anything less than the expected or augmented product. The target 
product is related to a specific release, but the terms are not synonymous. For example, it may include 
specific choices made regarding business models or support that do not directly relate to the system as 
it is delivered to your customer. 
Technical versus Market Superiority Product managers love the idea of superiority because they can exploit it to create unfair advantages 
in a given market and thereby dominate it. However, there are various kinds of superiority, not all of 
which translate into a winning solution. Technical superiority is often easily duplicated, unless 
protected by patents, trade secrets, or other forms of intellectual property protection. Market 
superiority can be stronger, consisting of everything from a brand name to a distribution channel. A 
well-known example of market superiority is Microsoft's OEM contracts, which have resulted in 
Microsoft operating systems being installed by default in the vast majority of personal computers. 
Position and Positioning 
Your position is a sober, objective, and accurate assessment of how your customers currently 
categorize or perceive your product. It is their point of view, not yours. It is objective, which means 
that, if your customers think your product is hard to use, it is. 
Positioning is a strategic, managed effort to create and defend a distinctive concept that your customer 
can care about and remember. Unlike position, which is about the present, positioning is about the 
future. 
Marketing people care about position versus positioning because the goal of positioning is to have 
potential customers naturally think of your product/service before all others. Consider 7-Up, a lemon-
lime soft drink. Common sense might have tried to position it as the freshest lemon-lime soft drink or 
the most sparkling or the first, the best, or the most lively or the lemon-lime drink for the young at 
heart. Uncommon sense decided to get 7-Up off that battlefield and to hitch its star to the thriving cola 
category: "We're not lemon-lime soda, we're the Uncola." 
In technical markets positioning can matter more than position, because purchasing decisions are not 
controlled by rational thought. Instead, most are driven first and foremost by emotions and only later 
backed up with objective "facts" that support the emotions. Consider your own behavior when making 
a purchase. Do you really go with Consumer Reports when it recommends a product or company 
you've never heard of? Or, like most of us, do you go with the product or company that has positioned 
itself as the leader? 
The Motivational Impact of Effective Positioning 
I've found a very strong correlation between a product development team in trouble and a 
product with ineffective or nonexistent positioning. Positioning isn't just about creating a 
future for your customers. To be effective, it must be about creating a compelling future for 
everyone, including the development team. 
Whenever I am asked to work with an engineering team I inevitably end up with the product 
management team (and vice versa!). My experience goes something like this. The 
development team can fairly quickly create a position, for they know the good and the bad 
of their product (although struggling teams spend a disproportionate amount of their time 
focusing on the bad). They can't tell me their positioning either because they don't have one 
or because it isn't compelling; so I work with product management and help them create a 
compelling vision of the future. 
Once we've done this I've found that it has a tremendous motivational impact on the 
development team. For perhaps the first time, they know they are going to be creating a 
future that their customers care about—a future they can live in for quite some time because it is strategic and defensible and not based on a fleeting set of easily duplicated features. 
It can be difficult to create a "motivational" positioning from scratch. If you find yourself 
stuck, try filling in the blanks in this "classic" positioning statement formula to get yourself 
started. 
For <target customer> 
Who <compelling reason to buy> 
Our product is <product category> 
That <key benefit> 
Unlike <main competitor> 
Our product <key differentiation> 
Applying this formula to the fictitious benefits management system described earlier, we 
might create something like the following: For hospitals with 250 to 1,000 employees who 
are finding benefits management costs to be increasing each year, our product is a self-
service, Web-based benefits management system, that, unlike traditional mainframe-based 
benefits systems, provides easy, low-cost, and universal access to all benefits management 
functions. 
It follows that positioning is rarely, if ever, feature based. It is far better to own a meaningful and 
relevant benefit in the customer's mind than to own a temporary advantage in features. Positioning is 
long term, strategic, defensible, and ownable. Features are short term and can be duplicated. This 
means that successful positioning can focus on only one concept one that is narrow enough to be 
compelling and broad enough to allow for the future. 
Once positioning has been set, you must continually create and recreate a position that moves you 
toward this goal. If not, your positioning quickly becomes meaningless and loses all value in the mind 
of the customer. 
Brand 
Your brand is the promise you make to a customer—it is why people care. Everything you and your 
company do is reflected in it. This includes partnerships, customer support, the nature and structure of 
the company's Web site, the quality of the goods and services it provides to customers, and the manner 
in which it manages profits. To illustrate the importance of brand, consider the differences that come 
to mind when I compare Mercedes and Hyundai, Coke and Pepsi, or Microsoft and Sun. This is one 
reason that brand management is a very important part of product and marketing managers' job 
functions. 
Brands are usually represented and communicated through a number of brand elements: terms, 
symbols, slogans, and names. Brand elements are often protected as intellectual property, notably by 
trademarks and copyrights. The impact of brand elements on creating a winning solution and their 
effects of software architecture are discussed in Chapter 9. 
The Main Message 
Your main message is a short (one- or two-phrase) statement that creatively captures the positioning. 
It should provide a continually useful bridge between your position and your positioning, reinforcing 
the positioning while making certain your customer "gets" what you're saying. The main message is important because it drives all creative marketing communication activities, from press releases to 
advertisements. 
The main message should be customer-centric. Unfortunately, the number of times this simple and 
pretty much obvious advice is not followed is surprising. Too often, messaging for technology 
products becomes shrouded in technical jargon, which often prevents the message from reaching its 
intended market. There are times when highly technical messaging does work, but like all good 
messaging it is what a customer "has ears to hear" that is the true foundation of a good message. Great 
messages express an important benefit, telling customers why they should care or how the product 
will solve their headaches. Finally, any specific message that is delivered to customers must be 
accurate and truly supported by the product. 
Chapter Summary 
•  Product management is the comprehensive set of activities required to create and sustain 
winning solutions. 
•  Creating the first version of a software product begins with a concept proposal that justifies 
the product and ends with a launch plan. These processes are larger and more comprehensive 
than similar software development processes. The processes for creating subsequent releases 
are lighter and build upon the materials created during the first release. 
•  Well-run product development processes are characterized by a stringent "go/kill" decision at 
every stage. They are augmented and improved by successive freezing, change management 
protocols, and an idea recycle bin. 
•  The business plan is the central document that justifies a product's ongoing development. 
•  The four Ps of marketing are: product (offering), price (and the business model), place 
(distribution), and promotion (advertising, marketing communications). 
•  The total available market is all of the customers who could possibly use your good or 
service. 
•  The total addressable market is the subset of the total available market that you can reach. 
•  A market segment is a group of customers who share specific characteristics, chief of which 
is that they must communicate with each other. 
•  The adoption of innovations, such as a new product or the new release of an existing product, 
follows an S-shaped curve. Key adopter categories within this curve are the innovators, the 
early adopters, the early majority, the late majority, and the laggards. 
•  The concept of the whole product comprises the generic product, the expected product, the 
augmented product, and the potential product. The target product is the specific product being 
offered to a specific market segment. 
•  Position is an objective and accurate assessment of how your customers currently categorize 
or perceive your product. Positioning is a strategic, managed effort to create and defend a 
distinctive concept that your customer can care about and remember. Your "main message" is 
a short (one- or two-phrase) statement that creatively captures positioning. 
•  Your brand is the promise you make to a customer—It is why people care. Everything you 
and your company do is reflected in its brand. 
Check This 
•  We have defined some mechanism for capturing requirements. 
•  Product management represents the "voice of the customer." 
•  There is a way to kill a project or product in our company. 
•  We understand what our competitors are doing. We know what we need to do to win. 
•  We understand for whom we are building our product and to whom we are selling. •  We have a useful change management protocol. 
Try This 
1.  Who is playing the role of product manager? When was the last time you ate lunch with this 
person? 
2.  Who is playing the role of program manager? When was the last time you ate lunch with this 
person? 
3.  It might seem convenient to think that a given person is always an innovator or a member of 
the early majority. Fortunately, this is not true. Each of us has a unique response to an 
innovation (some new product or service). Sometimes we're innovators, sometimes members 
of the late majority, and sometimes we don't adopt an innovation at all even if we're members 
of the target market. Name at least one innovation in which you were an innovator, an early 
adopter, a member of the early majority, a member of the late majority, or a laggard, and did 
not adopt at all. If you're having trouble with this question, ask yourself, Have I purchased a 
DVD player? If yes, when? Have I purchased a cell phone? If yes, when? When was the last 
time I downloaded a file from a peer-to-peer Web site? Have I purchased freeze-dried food in 
the last 12 months? 
4.  Get a copy of your current position, positioning, and messaging statements from product 
management. Critically examine each. Do you think your position statement describes your 
product with integrity and accuracy? Why or why not? Is your positioning statement credible, 
true, unique, ownable, simple, relevant, memorable, sustainable? Does it paint a future you'd 
like to create? Is your message short and direct? Does it creatively link your position and your 
positioning? 
5.  The essence of a brand is captured in one word or a short phrase: Mercedes means prestige 
while BMW means professional driving. What is your brand? How does it compare to what 
you think of your product? 
Chapter 3. The Difference between Marketecture and 
Tarchitecture 
Chapter 1 presented an overview of software architecture. Chapter 2 followed with a discussion of 
product management. This chapter returns to architecture and clarifies how the marketing and 
technical aspects of the system work together to achieve business objectives. 
Who Is Responsible for What? 
Software systems can be divided architecturally along two broad dimensions. The first is the 
marketecture, or the "marketing architecture." The second is the tarchitecture, or the "technical 
architecture." I refer to the traditional software architect or chief technologist as the tarchitect and the 
product marketing manager, business manager, or program manager responsible for the system as the 
marketect. 
The tarchitecture is the dominant frame of reference when developers think of a system's architecture. 
For software systems it encompasses subsystems, interfaces, distribution of processing responsibilities 
among processing elements, threading models, and so forth. As discussed in Chapter 1, in recent years 
several authors have documented distinct styles or patterns of tarchitecture. These include 
client/server, pipeline, embedded systems, and blackboards, to name a few. Some descriptions offer 
examples of where these systems are most appropriately applied. Marketecture is the business perspective of the system's architecture. It embodies the complete 
business model, including the licensing and selling models, value propositions, technical details 
relevant to the customer, data sheets, competitive differentiation, brand elements, the mental model 
marketing is attempting to create for the customer, and the system's specific business objectives. 
Marketecture includes—as a necessary component for shared collaboration between the marketects, 
tarchitects, and developers—descriptions of functionality that are commonly included in marketing 
requirements documents (MRDs), use cases, and so forth. Many times the term whole product is used 
to mean marketecture. 
The $50,000 Boolean Flag 
One "heavy client" client/server architecture I helped create had a marketing requirement 
for "modular" extension of system functionality. Its primary objective was that each module 
be separately priced and licensed to customers. The business model was that, for each 
desired option, customers purchase a module for the server that provided the necessary core 
functionality. Each client would then install a separately licensed plug-in to access this 
functionality. In this manner, "modules" resided at both the server and client level. One 
example was the "extended reporting module"—a set of reports, views, and related database 
extract code that a customer could license for an additional fee. In terms of our pricing 
schedule, modules were sold as separate line items. 
Instead of creating a true "module" on the server, we simply built all of the code into the 
server and enabled/disabled various "modules" with simple Boolean flags. Product 
management was happy because the group could "install" and "uninstall" the module in a 
manner consistent with their goals and objectives for the overall business model. 
Engineering was happy because building one product with Boolean flags is considerably 
simpler than building two products and dealing with the issues that would inevitably arise 
regarding the installation, operation, maintenance, and upgrade of multiple components. 
Internally, this approach became known as the "$50,000 Boolean flag." 
The inverse to this approach can also work quite nicely. In this same system, we sold a 
client-side COM API that was physically created as a separate DLL. This allowed us to 
create and distribute bug fixes, updates, and so forth, very easily; instead of upgrading a 
monolithic client (challenging in Microsoft-based architectures), we could simply distribute 
a new DLL. Marketing didn't sell the API as a separate component, but instead promoted it 
as an "integrated" part of the client. 
Moral? Maintaining a difference between marketecture and tarchitecture gives both teams 
the flexibility to choose what they think is the best approach to solving a variety of technical 
and business problems. 
Early Forces in Solution Development 
A variety of technical and market forces shape a winning solution. These range from the core 
technologies to the competitive landscape to the maturity target market. What makes these forces so 
interesting is that they are always changing: Technology changes, the competitive landscape changes, 
markets mature, and new markets emerge. 
Three particularly influential forces in the early stages of development are the ilities, the problem 
domain, and the technology base. As shown in Figure 3-1, driving, and being driven by, these forces 
are the target market, shown at the upper right, and the development organization, shown at the upper left. Product management is shown in the center to emphasize its collaborative, leadership role in 
resolving these forces. 
Figure 3-1. Forces shaping software architectures 
 
The strength of the affinity that the target market and developers have with various forces is 
represented by single or double arrows. The final solution, including the marketing and technical 
architectures, lives in the "space" defined by all of the forces that shape its creation. 
The problem domain is the central force in the development of a winning solution. Any given problem 
domain, such as credit card transaction processing, automotive power systems, or inventory 
management, immediately evokes a unique set of rules, nomenclature, procedures, workflows, and the 
like. Included in my definition of the problem domain is the ecosystem in which the solution exists, 
including customers, suppliers, competitors, and regulatory entities. Understanding the problem 
domain is a key prerequisite for both the marketect and the tarchitect if they wish build a winning 
solution. This is why most every development methodology places such a strong emphasis on 
gathering, validating, and understanding requirements as well as modeling the solution. This is also 
why effective product development places such an emphasis on the concept proposal and the business 
plan. 
The interplay between the marketect and the tarchitect in this process is quite interesting. Recall from 
Chapter 2 that the marketect's primary job is clarifying and prioritizing market needs; the tarchitect's 
primary job is to create a technical solution that will meet these needs. If the marketect is convinced 
that speed is paramount, as opposed to flexibility or usability, then the tarchitect will make certain 
choices that emphasize speed. Simply meeting the prioritized requirements, however, is insufficient to 
produce a successful tarchitecture. For this, the tarchitect must also bring his or her own domain 
experience to the tarchitectural design. 
The requirement of extensive domain knowledge for a tarchitect is so strong that few developers can 
be promoted to this position until they have considerable experience and skill building systems within the specified domain. My rule of thumb is that, before someone can be considered a tarchitect, he or 
she must have done one of the following: 
•  Been a key member of a team that has created, from scratch, at least one major system in the 
given domain and has experienced the effects of that system through at least two full releases 
after the initial release (three releases total). 
•  Been a key member of a team that has made major architectural changes to an existing system 
and experienced the effects of these changes through at least two full release cycles after the 
changes were introduced. 
You're not an architect in your very first job. You're not an architect after the first release. There is 
simply no substitute for sticking with a problem long enough to receive and process the feedback 
generated through customer use of your system. Do this long enough and you may gain sufficient 
experience to become an architect. 
Ilities are the various quality and product attributes ascribed to the architecture. As Bass [98] points 
out, they fall within two broad dimensions: those discerned by observing the system at runtime and 
those not observed by observing the system at runtime. The former, including such attributes as 
performance and usability, are directly influenced by the target customer. The latter, such as testability 
and modifiability, are secondary attributes that govern the future relationship with the target customer. 
Because these secondary attributes are often informally specified, if they are specified at all, the 
discipline in tarchitectural design and associated system construction is critically important. 
Care must be taken when the marketecture or marketect routinely accepts lesser ility attributes than 
those desired by the development team. When a developer wants to fix a bug or improve performance, 
but marketing thinks the product can be safely shipped without the fix or that the current performance 
is acceptable, tempers can flare, especially as you get closer to the projected release date. Keep things 
cool by creating forums that allow both development and marketing to express their points of view. 
For example, marketing needs to present arguments that a particular choice is "good enough" for the 
target customer. 
I've found it especially helpful to have customers participate in forums. I vividly remember one 
customer demanding that we allow her to ship a beta version of our software three months before the 
scheduled delivery date. Our software was a core component to her software. Any delays in shipping 
our software affected her customers. She readily acknowledged that the beta had many issues that 
needed to be resolved. However, its value was so compelling and her customer's need was so great 
that we eventually agreed to let her ship the beta subject to some strict terms and conditions regarding 
its use and a firm commitment to upgrade the released version when we thought it was ready. 
Sometimes "The Hard Way" Is the Only Way 
Most of the time the only way to learn a domain is through long-term relationships with 
customers. Among my responsibilities at a major digital content security provider was the 
creation of a backend server architecture that supported multitier distribution of software. 
As I learned the capabilities of the system, I also learned some of the lessons key members 
of the development team had learned over several years of working with major software 
publishers. 
One of the most interesting lesson lay in the management of serial numbers. As it turns out, 
almost every major software vendor has a unique approach to managing serial numbers 
through its sales channel. Some create them in real time. Others create serial number blocks that are distributed according to predetermined algorithms to key channel participants. In 
this approach, the numbers are used not only for identification of shipped software but also 
for backend reporting and analysis. Other vendors use variants of these approaches. 
Supporting every variant requires close interaction between marketects and tarchitects. In 
the case of this company, it was also vital to involve professional services, since they were 
the group that made everything "work" for a customer. It was clear to me that the only way 
the system could have evolved to support all of these demands was through the long-term 
relationships established with customers that enabled key team members to learn the 
problem domain. 
Engineering (and especially quality assurance) needs to make certain that the risks associated with 
good enough choices are clearly understood. In the example I just mentioned, engineering provided 
the customer with a very clear assessment of how the product would fail outright under certain usage 
scenarios. This didn't change her mind—the beta still shipped—but it did enable her to equip her 
customer support organization with answers should these problems arisen in the field. 
As described in Chapter 1, most development teams must make a variety of technical compromises in 
order to ship the product on time. Managing these compromises is difficult, as most compromises 
have their most pronounced negative effect in the release that follows the release in which they were 
introduced. This is another reason to demand that your tarchitect have the experience of two or more 
full release cycles. Only experience can help you gauge the potential severity of a technical 
compromise and only a long term commitment to the integrity of the product will make absolutely 
certain such compromises are removed. 
Bug Severities, Priorities, and Normalization 
One technique that I have found very effective in managing ilities is to classify bugs by 
severity and priority. Severity refers to the impact of the bug on the customer. Setting it to a 
value ranging from 1 to 5 works well, where 1 is a crash with no workaround and 5 is an 
enhancement request. Priority refers to the importance of fixing the problem. A five point 
priority scale also works well. A 1 is a bug that must be fixed as quickly as possible—such 
as one that breaks the build or that is required to satisfy an important customer. A 5 means 
"fix it when you can." 
It is relatively easy to create consistency within your QA organization for severities, 
because they can be objectively verified. Priorities, on the other hand, are subjective. A 
misspelling in the user interface may get a 4 for severity, but different cultures will ascribe 
different priorities to fixing it. Americans and Europeans are happy to give these kinds of 
bugs low priorities. Japanese customers tend not to be as tolerant and give user interface 
bugs high priorities. Because of their subjective nature, setting priorities consistently across 
various members of the team can be difficult. 
Fortunately, I learned how to improve prioritization consistency from one of the very best 
QA managers I know, James Bach. When a code freeze occurred, James would hold a bug 
review meeting that included all of the major stakeholders involved with the release. In this 
meeting he would review a sample of bugs (or all of them) to set initial priorities. Because 
all of the major stakeholders were represented, we could learn when and why support might 
prioritize a bug higher than product management would or why a senior developer would be 
so concerned if a certain kind of bug appeared. Although the meetings were rather long in 
the early part of the QA cycle, they had the advantage of "calibrating" the QA team so that they could more effectively prioritize bugs based on their collective perceptions. 
These meetings worked well for our organization because we could quickly come together, 
review the issues, and move on. They don't work for every team, and when they go poorly a 
lot of time can be wasted. If you try this approach and find it isn't working, consider an 
alternative approach that my colleague Elisabeth Hendrickson has used: preset quality 
criteria. 
Preset quality criteria act both as exit criteria and as a prioritization guide. Suppose you 
define them as MUST, SHOULD, and MAY. Any violation of a MUST is an automatic P1 
bug, SHOULD violations became P2s, and so forth. You then have to define the various 
criteria. You might define MUST as follows: 
•  The system MUST support 100 concurrent users. 
•  The system MUST retain all data created in a previous version throughout an 
upgrade. 
•  The system MUST present an error dialog only if the dialog contains directions on 
how the user can fix the problem. 
One advantage to this approach is that you get people thinking about priorities (both market 
and product) long before quality assurance is initiated. Bugs are also managed by exception, 
with the review committee meeting to handle those that for some reason don't seem to 
match the preset quality criteria. 
The technology base dimension includes the full suite of possible technologies available to the 
development team. These include the languages and compilers, databases, middleware, messaging, as 
well as any "uber-tarchitecture" associated with the system—a technical architecture that prescribes 
the basic structure of many classes of application and that is delivered with an extensive array of 
development tools to make it easy for developers to create applications within it. Examples of uber-
tarchitectures include J2EE, CORBA, Sun ONE and Microsoft .NET (all of which are also 
marketectures, depending on your point of view). 
Choices made within the technology base must support the tarchitecture as motivated by the problem 
domain. This can be challenging, as developers are people with their own hopes, desires, preferences, 
and ambitions. Unfortunately, "resumé-driven design," in which developers choose a technology 
because they think it's cool, is a common malady afflicting many would-be architects and a major 
contributor to inappropriate architectures. Marketects are also people, and "airplane magazine market 
research" becomes a poor substitute for the hard and often mundane but necessary market research and 
decision making that lead to winning solutions. 
I have intentionally simplified my discussion of the early forces that shape a winning solution. If you 
were to ask me about a discrete force not already discussed, such as competitive pressures or 
requirements imposed by a regulatory agency, I would lump its effect with one associated with the 
problem domain, the ilities, or the underlying technology. This process is not intended to diminish the 
effect of this force in your specific situation. To consciously do this would be dangerous and would 
certainly miss the point. It is imperative that you remain vigilant in identifying the most important 
forces affecting both your marketecture and your tarchitecture. 
 Creating Results in the Short Run while Working in the Long 
Run 
World-class marketects approach their task from a perspective of time that easily distinguishes them 
from those less skilled. Instead of listening to what customers want now (easy), they extrapolate 
multiple streams of data, including current requests, to envision what customers will want 18 to 24 
months in the future (hard). To them, the current release is ancient history, and they often use past 
tense to refer to the features for the next release that are supported in the current tarchitecture as these 
requirements stabilize—even though this next release may be ten or more months in the future. 
World-class marketects know that when a feature motivates a new capability or other fundamental 
change to the tarchitecture they must watch it carefully, for a mistake here may not only hurt their 
ability to secure future customers but also harm their ability to support existing customers. 
Envisioning the future on behalf of customers, even when they can't articulate what they want, is the 
world-class marketect's key distinguishing feature. 
Like their marketect counterparts, world-class tarchitects also extrapolate multiple streams of data and 
envision a technological future that provides superior value to their customers. One of the key reasons 
certain tarchitectures, such as the IP addressing scheme or the 5ESS phone switch, have provided 
enduring value is simply that the key tarchitects behind them envisioned a future and built for it. 
Projecting the Future 
If the marketect and the tarchitect pursue different visions of a future, the total system will fail. You 
can minimize this risk through a variety of simple diagrams that capture how you want to create your 
future. I will refer to these diagrams as "maps," even though they do not map what currently exists but 
what you want to create. These maps are reviewed briefly here and presented in greater detail as 
patterns in Appendix B. 
The first map is the market map. It shows the target markets you've identified and the order in which 
you will create offers for them. (An offering is a bundle of one or more products or services). To make 
certain you can properly compete for these markets it is helpful to create a feature/benefits map, which 
shows the key features required for each identified market segment and their associated benefits. 
Variants of these maps are common in product development organizations. A market events and 
rhythms map helps to ensure that the timing of your product releases matches the market timing. 
Maintained by the marketect, but open to sharing and upgrades by all, these maps are key 
communication vehicles for the marketecture. 
The tarchitecture map is the necessary equivalent of the market-related maps. It shows the natural 
evolution of the tarchitecture in service to the market segments, features, and benefits identified by the 
marketing team. Essential features that may not be supportable within the existing tarchitecture must 
be noted as discontinuities so that the changes needed to resolve them can be managed. Alternative, 
emerging technologies that hold promise for substantially improving the product and/or for opening a 
new market are shown so that marketects can prepare for these futures. 
Examples of discontinuities abound. Consider an application originally designed for a single language. 
If this language becomes successful, the marketect may include internationalization in her map, but 
the corresponding entry in the tarchitecture map is often a major discontinuity, especially if the team is 
not experienced in building such applications. Another example is new business models envisioned by 
the marketecture. It is doubtful that the original tarchitecture was planned with them in mind, so they 
should be noted as tarchitectural discontinuities. In a similar vein, known problems with the tarchitecture that grate against developer sensibilities should be identified so that they can be 
addressed in future revisions. 
Although teams can improve their performance by creating any of these maps, the best results are 
obtained when all are created so that they work together, as shown in Appendix B. 
Harnessing Feedback 
Marketects typically use the following formal and informal, external and internal feedback loops to 
ensure that they receive the data they need to make sound decisions: 
•  Organizing and/or attending user conferences (their own and competitors) 
•  Reviewing first- and second-line technical or product support logs 
•  Reviewing feature requests generated by customers 
•  Interviewing salespeople for features they believe would significantly improve the salability 
of the product (often referred to as a "win/loss analysis") 
•  Meeting with key customers or advisory groups 
•  Meeting with industry or market analysts 
Tarchitects employ similar feedback loops to stay abreast of technological trends. Conferences, 
magazines, mailing lists, home computers, and insatiable curiosity all provide them with data. 
Drawing from different data sources results in divergence between the tarchitecture and marketecture 
maps described in the previous section. 
Fortunately, the creation and ongoing maintenance (e.g., quarterly updates) of these maps are the best 
ways to prevent divergence and to share data. Other helpful techniques include making the raw data 
that informs these maps available to both marketects and tarchitects. For example, marketects usually 
obtain primary market data via user conferences or focus groups. Inviting marketects to these events is 
a great way of reaching consensus on key issues. Marketects, in turn, should be open to reading the 
key technical articles that are shaping their industry or tarchitecture, and the tarchitect is a key source 
for such articles. Note that my goal isn't to change the naturally different information-seeking and -
processing methods of marketects and tarchitects but to make certain that the subset of data used as a 
source for key decisions are available to everyone on the project. 
What if They Say Something They Shouldn't? 
One simple and effective strategy for leveraging primary feedback is to ask your developers 
to work directly with customers. Several of my clients have been Silicon Valley startups. 
One created a marketplace for intellectual property licensing and for several years ran a user 
conference to actively seek feedback from customers on current and proposed product 
offerings. What made this conference unique was that nearly the entire development staff 
was present to make presentations, conduct demos, and work with key customers. This 
direct involvement was a key element of the company's ability to build products that its 
customers truly wanted. 
Of course, you might be thinking, "I'm not going to let my developers talk with customers. 
What if they say something they shouldn't?" This fear may be real—sometimes developers 
do say things that they shouldn't—but in practice it isn't that big a risk. If you're really concerned, give your developers the following guidelines: 
•  Don't make any promises on priorities. 
•  Don't make any commitments. 
•  Don't talk negatively about our product or our competitors' products. 
•  Don't say, "That should be easy." It sets expectations too high and can kill any 
negotiation to have the customer pay for the modification. 
•  Don't say, "That's too hard." It can prematurely stop conversation about what the 
customer really wants and ways to achieve this. 
•  Listen nonjudgmentally. They are your customers, and they're not stupid. They 
might be ignorant, but they're not lazy. They might have priorities you don't know 
about. They're neither your fan nor your adversary. 
Generating Clarity 
A marketect has among his or her primary objectives and responsibilities the generation of a 
sufficiently precise understanding of what the development team is charged with building so that the 
team can actually build it. The specific approach for achieving this varies and is heavily influenced by 
the structures, processes, and outcomes the total development organization has chosen in building the 
system. 
There are a variety of source processes and materials to select from. Marketects can choose simple 
paper-and-pencil prototypes or more formally defined marketing requirements documents (MRDs). In 
response, development organizations can create models using UML, entity-relationship models, 
dataflow diagrams, and so forth. Communication between the teams can take place in regular 
meetings that formally review progress or in daily meetings that track incremental improvements. 
Chief among the variables that determine appropriate structures, processes, and outcomes are the size 
of the team and the number of external interactions it must support. (See [Hohmann 96] for an in-
depth description of these variables). Larger projects require a level of formality and detail that would 
suffocate smaller ones. Other variables, including team culture, are vitally important. 
The marketect has similar objectives and responsibilities but for a very different audience. He must 
make certain the prospective client is clear on how the system will impact its environment. If the 
system can be extended, such as in a browser with a plug-in architecture, the API must be made 
available to the appropriate developers. Data sheets outline the broad requirements, while detailed 
deployment requirements enable customers to prepare for the introduction of the system within their 
idiosyncratic IT environment. Performance and scalability whitepapers are common for any software 
that has a server component. 
Managing Cultural Differences in Software 
Development 
In the course of my career I've managed several groups of technical and marketing 
personnel, including those from Russia, Germany, India, Israel, China, Japan, Korea, 
Poland, Canada, and Mexico. At times I've had to manage a worldwide team focused on the 
same deliverable. There are, of course, several challenges in managing a worldwide development 
organization, and many of them are logistical. For example, it is nearly impossible to 
schedule a simple meeting without inconveniencing some members of the team—08:00 
U.S. PST is 16:00 in Israel. Some development teams have it even harder—12-hour time 
differences are common in Silicon Valley. Other examples exist in creating or adopting 
international standards for naming conventions, coding standards, source code management 
systems, and so forth. Most of these logistical challenges are relatively easy to overcome 
given a sufficiently motivated workforce. 
A bigger challenge, and one that I've found exhibits no ethnically based pattern, is the 
relationship that a given group of developers have to their software process. These 
relationships actually form a culture although not the kind we commonly associate with the 
word. My own bias is heavily weighted toward processes and practices promoted by the 
Agile Alliance (www.agilealliance.org). However, at times I need to subordinate my own 
preferences to accommodate the dominant culture of the team I'm managing. Thus, while I 
firmly believe that in most cases iterative/incremental development practices are most 
effective, sometimes waterfall models are more appropriate, not because they inherently 
produce a better result but because the culture of the team wants them. Marketects and 
tarchitects both must pay close attention to these potential cultural differences and choose 
approaches and processes that work for a given culture. 
The marketect is critically dependent on the flow of appropriate information from the tarchitect. An 
unfortunate, but all too common, situation occurs when last-minute changes must be made to 
customer-facing documentation and sales collateral because the tarchitect realizes that they contain 
some grave error resulting from a misunderstanding by the marketect. Even more common is when the 
tarchitect sheepishly informs the marketect that some key feature won't make the release. Printed 
material must be created weeks and sometimes even months in advance of a product launch, 
salespeople must be educated on the product, existing customers must prepare for the upgrade, and so 
forth. The marketect is partially responsible for making certain all of these happen on time and 
accurately. 
Working in Unison 
I reject the images perpetuated by Dilbert that marketing departments are buffoons and that 
engineering departments must bear the pain they incur. Instead, marketects and tarchitects should 
work together to ensure that the total system achieves its objectives. Lest I be misunderstood, I will try 
to be much more explicit: There is much for each side to gain from a strong, collaborative 
relationship. While this sounds good, learning to work in unison takes time and effort. Are the 
potential benefits worth the effort? 
Let's first consider this question from the perspective of the marketect. Over the years I've found that 
marketects routinely underestimate or fail to understand the true capabilities of the system created by 
the development team. Working with tarchitects or other developers can expose marketects to 
unexpected, and often delightful, system capabilities. Think about systems that can be extended via 
plug-ins or APIs. I was delighted when a member of the professional services team of an enterprise-
class software company I worked for elegantly solved a thorny customer problem by hooking up 
Excel directly to the system through the client-side COM API. We had never intended the API to be 
used in this manner, but who cares? One of the primary goals of creating extensible systems is that 
you believe in a future that you can't envision (extensibility is explored in greater detail in Chapter 8). Now consider features that can be offered because of choices the development team made when 
implementing one or more key requirements. In one project I managed, the development team had to 
build a functional replacement of an existing server. The old architecture had a way of specifying pre- 
and postprocessing hooks to server messages. Unfortunately, the old architecture's solution was 
difficult to use and was not widely adopted, so the development team implemented an elegant solution 
that was very easy to use. Among other things, they generalized the pre- and postprocessing hook 
message handlers so that an arbitrary number of hooks could be created and chained together. The 
generalization was not a requirement, but it created new features that the marketect could tap. 
A final set of examples illustrates marketing's ability to exploit development tools for customer gain. 
I've co-opted and subsequently productized developer-created regression test suites for customers so 
that the operational health of the system could be assessed by the customer onsite. I've converted log 
files originally created by developers so they could be used as sources of data for performance 
analysis tools. I'm not advocating goldplating, which is wasteful. But marketects who fail to 
understand the capabilities of the system from the perspective of its creators lose a valuable opening 
for leveraging latent opportunities. By establishing strong relationships with tarchitects, marketects 
can quickly capitalize on their fertile imaginations. 
Reflexively, a tarchitect's creative energy is most enjoyably directed toward solving the real problems 
of real customers. By maintaining a close relationship with marketects, tarchitects learn of these 
problems and work to solve them. I'm not referring to the problems that the tarchitect would like to 
solve, that would be cool to solve, or that would help them learn a new technology. I'm talking about 
the deep problems that don't lend themselves to an immediate solution and are captured on the maps 
described earlier. Working on these problems provides a clear outlet for the tarchitect's strategic 
energy. 
The following sections describe activities that have proven effective in fostering a healthy working 
relationship between the marketect and the tarchitect. 
Reaching Agreements 
Agreement on the project management principles and resultant practices driving the project. A 
variety of principles can drive any given project. Project leaders select the specific techniques for 
managing the project from them. Differences on principles and resulting techniques can cause 
unnecessary friction between marketects and tarchitects which will be felt throughout the entire 
project organization. 
To illustrate, many software projects are driven by a "good enough" approach to quality assurance, but 
some, especially those dealing with human safety, require much more rigor. These goals motivate 
marketects and tarchitects to utilize different principles. These different principles motivate different 
project management practices. Not better or worse, just different. 
Identifying and agreeing to the set of principles that drive the project, from the "style" of 
documentation (informal versus formal) to the project management tools used (MS Project or sticky 
notes on a shared wall), are an important step toward marketects and tarchitects working in unison. As 
described earlier, this agreement is also vital to meeting the cultural requirements of the development 
team. 
Making Data Available Visibility to maps and features is crucial. None of the approaches I've described for capturing and 
planning for the future are much good if the data are hidden. Get this information into a forum where 
everyone can share it. Some teams accomplish this through an intranet or a Lotus Notes database. 
Other teams are experimenting with Swikis, Twikis, or CoWebs with good results, although my own 
experience with these tools has been mixed and is heavily influenced by team culture. Other teams 
simply make lots of posters available to everyone. Visibility, in turn, is built on top of a corporate 
culture founded on trust and openness. Putting up posters merely to look good won't fool anyone. 
Making a real commitment to visibility—and dealing with the inevitable issues your project team 
members will raise—is a powerful tool to ensure marketect and tarchitect cooperation. 
Context Diagrams and Target Products 
Context diagrams are a great tool for keeping the marketect and the tarchitect in step. A context 
diagram shows your system in context with other systems or objects with which it interacts. It 
typically shows your system as a "single box" and other systems/objects as boxes or stylized icons, 
with interactions between systems shown using any number of notations. Avoid formal notations in 
context diagrams and instead focus on simple descriptions that capture the important aspects of the 
relationships between the items contained within the context diagram. Context diagrams are not a 
formal picture of the architecture but a "higher level" shot that shows the system in the context of its 
normal use. 
Context diagrams are useful for a number of reasons. 
•  They identify the technologies your customers use so that you can make certain you're 
creating something that "works" for their environment. This can range from making certain 
you're delivering your application using a platform that makes the most sense to ensuring that 
the right standards are used to promote interoperability among various components. 
•  They identify potential partnerships and market synergies. One of the most important 
applications of the whole-product concept is identifying partnerships that create a compelling 
augmented product and defining a map to a potential product. 
•  They clarify your value proposition. Clearly understanding your value proposition is the 
foundation of a winning business model. 
•  They identify the integration and extension options you need to support in the underlying 
architecture. A good context diagram will help you determine if you need to provide 
integration and/or extension capabilities at the database, logic, or even user interface levels of 
your application. They are a guide to the design of useful integration and extension 
approaches. (See Chapter 8 for more details.) 
•  They help you understand what deployment and target platform options make the most sense 
for your target customer. If you're selling to a target market that is generally running all other 
applications in house, it doesn't make sense to offer your part of the solution as an ASP. If 
your context diagram indicates that all of your partners use a specific technology to integrate 
their applications, it is probably best if you use it, too. 
The marketect must take primary responsibility for the context diagram, although, of course, other 
members of the team can and should provide input to it. For example, the tarchitect can identify key 
standards, salespeople may suggest new entries based on how customers use the product, and so forth. 
  
Chapter Summary 
•  The marketect (marketing architect) is responsible for the marketecture (marketing 
architecture). 
•  The tarchitect (technical architect) is responsible for the tarchitecture (technical architecture). 
•  Marketecture and tarchitecture are distinct but related. 
•  Three forces that are particularly influential in the early stages of solution development are 
the "ilities," the problem domain, and the technology base. 
•  To become an architect you have to have extensive experience in the problem space and have 
worked on systems in this space for a relatively long period of time. 
•  You should classify bugs along two dimensions: severity and priority. Severity refers to the 
impact of the bug on the customer. Priority refers to the importance of fixing it. 
•  Use the patterns in Appendix B to create a strategic view of your product and its evolution. 
•  Winning solutions are much more likely when marketects and tarchitects work together. 
•  Context diagrams are an essential tool for creating winning solutions. Learn to use them. 
 
Try This 
1.  What is the natural tarchitecture of your application domain? Do you have the requisite skills 
and experience to work effectively in this application domain? 
2.  What are the specific responsibilities of marketect? tarchitect? 
3.  How do the ilities match between the engineering/development team and the customer? Are 
there significant differences? 
4.  How do you obtain feedback from your customers? 