‘Miss Jane, take off your pinafore; what are you doing
there? Have you washed your hands and face this
morning?’ I gave another tug before I answered, for I
wanted the bird to be secure of its bread: the sash yielded;
I scattered the crumbs, some on the stone sill, some on the
cherry-tree bough, then, closing the window, I replied -
‘No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting.’
‘Troublesome, careless child! and what are you doing
now? You look quite red, as if you had been about some
mischief: what were you opening the window for?’
I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie
seemed in too great a hurry to listen to explanations; she
hauled me to the washstand, inflicted a merciless, but
happily brief scrub on my face and hands with soap, water,
and a coarse towel; disciplined my head with a bristly
brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurrying me
to the top of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I was
wanted in the breakfast-room.
I would have asked who wanted me: I would have
demanded if Mrs. Reed was there; but Bessie was already
gone, and had closed the nursery-door upon me. I slowly
descended. For nearly three months, I had never been
called to Mrs. Reed’s presence; restricted so long to the
nursery, the breakfast, dining, and drawing-rooms were become for me awful regions, on which it dismayed me to
intrude.
I now stood in the empty hall; before me was the
breakfast-room door, and I stopped, intimidated and
trembling. What a miserable little poltroon had fear,
engendered of unjust punishment, made of me in those
days! I feared to return to the nursery, and feared to go
forward to the parlour; ten minutes I stood in agitated
hesitation; the vehement ringing of the breakfast-room
bell decided me; I MUST enter.
‘Who could want me?’ I asked inwardly, as with both
hands I turned the stiff door-handle, which, for a second
or two, resisted my efforts. ‘What should I see besides
Aunt Reed in the apartment?—a man or a woman?’ The
handle turned, the door unclosed, and passing through and
curtseying low, I looked up at—a black pillar!—such, at
least, appeared to me, at first sight, the straight, narrow,
sable-clad shape standing erect on the rug: the grim face at
the top was like a carved mask, placed above the shaft by
way of capital.
Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she
made a signal to me to approach; I did so, and she
introduced me to the stony stranger with the words: ‘This
is the little girl respecting whom I applied to you.’  HE, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards
where I stood, and having examined me with the two
inquisitive-looking grey eyes which twinkled under a pair
of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in a bass voice, ‘Her
size is small: what is her age?’
‘Ten years.’
‘So much?’ was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged
his scrutiny for some minutes. Presently he addressed
me—‘Your name, little girl?’
‘Jane Eyre, sir.’
In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a
tall gentleman; but then I was very little; his features were
large, and they and all the lines of his frame were equally
harsh and prim.
‘Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child?’
Impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little
world held a contrary opinion: I was silent. Mrs. Reed
answered for me by an expressive shake of the head,
adding soon, ‘Perhaps the less said on that subject the
better, Mr. Brocklehurst.’
‘Sorry indeed to hear it! she and I must have some talk;’
and bending from the perpendicular, he installed his
person in the arm- chair opposite Mrs. Reed’s. ‘Come
here,’ he said. I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and
straight before him. What a face he had, now that it was
almost on a level with mine! what a great nose! and what a
mouth! and what large prominent teeth!
‘No sight so sad as that of a naughty child,’ he began,
‘especially a naughty little girl. Do you know where the
wicked go after death?’
‘They go to hell,’ was my ready and orthodox answer.
‘And what is hell? Can you tell me that?’
‘A pit full of fire.’
‘And should you like to fall into that pit, and to be
burning there for ever?’
‘No, sir.’
‘What must you do to avoid it?’
I deliberated a moment; my answer, when it did come,
was objectionable: ‘I must keep in good health, and not
die.’
‘How can you keep in good health? Children younger
than you die daily. I buried a little child of five years old
only a day or two since,—a good little child, whose soul is
now in heaven. It is to be feared the same could not be
said of you were you to be called hence.’ Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only
cast my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the
rug, and sighed, wishing myself far enough away.
‘I hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent
of ever having been the occasion of discomfort to your
excellent benefactress.’
‘Benefactress! benefactress!’ said I inwardly: ‘they all call
Mrs. Reed my benefactress; if so, a benefactress is a
disagreeable thing.’
‘Do you say your prayers night and morning?’
continued my interrogator.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Do you read your Bible?’
‘Sometimes.’
‘With pleasure? Are you fond of it?’
‘I like Revelations, and the book of Daniel, and
Genesis and Samuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some
parts of Kings and Chronicles, and Job and Jonah.’
‘And the Psalms? I hope you like them?’
‘No, sir.’
‘No? oh, shocking! I have a little boy, younger than
you, who knows six Psalms by heart: and when you ask
him which he would rather have, a gingerbread-nut to eat
or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says: ‘Oh! the verse of a Psalm! angels sing Psalms;’ says he, ‘I wish to be a little
angel here below;’ he then gets two nuts in recompense
for his infant piety.’
‘Psalms are not interesting,’ I remarked.
‘That proves you have a wicked heart; and you must
pray to God to change it: to give you a new and clean
one: to take away your heart of stone and give you a heart
of flesh.’
I was about to propound a question, touching the
manner in which that operation of changing my heart was
to be performed, when Mrs. Reed interposed, telling me
to sit down; she then proceeded to carry on the
conversation herself.
‘Mr. Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter
which I wrote to you three weeks ago, that this little girl
has not quite the character and disposition I could wish:
should you admit her into Lowood school, I should be
glad if the superintendent and teachers were requested to
keep a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against
her worst fault, a tendency to deceit. I mention this in
your hearing, Jane, that you may not attempt to impose
on Mr. Brocklehurst.’
Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for
it was her nature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence; however carefully I obeyed, however
strenuously I strove to please her, my efforts were still
repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above. Now,
uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the
heart; I dimly perceived that she was already obliterating
hope from the new phase of existence which she destined
me to enter; I felt, though I could not have expressed the
feeling, that she was sowing aversion and unkindness along
my future path; I saw myself transformed under Mr.
Brocklehurst’s eye into an artful, noxious child, and what
could I do to remedy the injury?
‘Nothing, indeed,’ thought I, as I struggled to repress a
sob, and hastily wiped away some tears, the impotent
evidences of my anguish.
‘Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child,’ said Mr.
Brocklehurst; ‘it is akin to falsehood, and all liars will have
their portion in the lake burning with fire and brimstone;
she shall, however, be watched, Mrs. Reed. I will speak to
Miss Temple and the teachers.’
‘I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting
her prospects,’ continued my benefactress; ‘to be made
useful, to be kept humble: as for the vacations, she will,
with your permission, spend them always at Lowood.’ ‘Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam,’
returned Mr. Brocklehurst. ‘Humility is a Christian grace,
and one peculiarly appropriate to the pupils of Lowood; I,
therefore, direct that especial care shall be bestowed on its
cultivation amongst them. I have studied how best to
mortify in them the worldly sentiment of pride; and, only
the other day, I had a pleasing proof of my success. My
second daughter, Augusta, went with her mama to visit
the school, and on her return she exclaimed: ‘Oh, dear
papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at Lowood look,
with their hair combed behind their ears, and their long
pinafores, and those little holland pockets outside their
frocks—they are almost like poor people’s children! and,’
said she, ‘they looked at my dress and mama’s, as if they
had never seen a silk gown before.’’
‘This is the state of things I quite approve,’ returned
Mrs. Reed; ‘had I sought all England over, I could scarcely
have found a system more exactly fitting a child like Jane
Eyre. Consistency, my dear Mr. Brocklehurst; I advocate
consistency in all things.’
‘Consistency, madam, is the first of Christian duties;
and it has been observed in every arrangement connected
with the establishment of Lowood: plain fare, simple
attire, unsophisticated accommodations, hardy and active habits; such is the order of the day in the house and its
inhabitants.’
‘Quite right, sir. I may then depend upon this child
being received as a pupil at Lowood, and there being
trained in conformity to her position and prospects?’
‘Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of
chosen plants, and I trust she will show herself grateful for
the inestimable privilege of her election.’
‘I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr.
Brocklehurst; for, I assure you, I feel anxious to be
relieved of a responsibility that was becoming too
irksome.’
‘No doubt, no doubt, madam; and now I wish you
good morning. I shall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the
course of a week or two: my good friend, the
Archdeacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner. I
shall send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new
girl, so that there will he no difficulty about receiving her.
Good-bye.’
‘Good-bye, Mr. Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs.
and Miss Brocklehurst, and to Augusta and Theodore, and
Master Broughton Brocklehurst.’
‘I will, madam. Little girl, here is a book entitled the
‘Child’s Guide,’ read it with prayer, especially that part held the tract containing the sudden death of the Liar, to
which narrative my attention had been pointed as to an
appropriate warning. What had just passed; what Mrs.
Reed had said concerning me to Mr. Brocklehurst; the
whole tenor of their conversation, was recent, raw, and
stinging in my mind; I had felt every word as acutely as I
had heard it plainly, and a passion of resentment fomented
now within me.
Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her eye settled
on mine, her fingers at the same time suspended their
nimble movements.
‘Go out of the room; return to the nursery,’ was her
mandate. My look or something else must have struck her
as offensive, for she spoke with extreme though suppressed
irritation. I got up, I went to the door; I came back again;
I walked to the window, across the room, then close up to
her.
SPEAK I must: I had been trodden on severely, and
MUST turn: but how? What strength had I to dart
retaliation at my antagonist? I gathered my energies and
launched them in this blunt sentence -
‘I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved you;
but I declare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of
anybody in the world except John Reed; and this book about the liar, you may give to your girl, Georgiana, for it
is she who tells lies, and not I.’
Mrs. Reed’s hands still lay on her work inactive: her
eye of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine.
‘What more have you to say?’ she asked, rather in the
tone in which a person might address an opponent of adult
age than such as is ordinarily used to a child.
That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I
had. Shaking from head to foot, thrilled with
ungovernable excitement, I continued -
‘I am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call
you aunt again as long as I live. I will never come to see
you when I am grown up; and if any one asks me how I
liked you, and how you treated me, I will say the very
thought of you makes me sick, and that you treated me
with miserable cruelty.’
‘How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?’
‘How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the
TRUTH. You think I have no feelings, and that I can do
without one bit of love or kindness; but I cannot live so:
and you have no pity. I shall remember how you thrust
me back—roughly and violently thrust me back—into the
red-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day;
though I was in agony; though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, ‘Have mercy! Have mercy, Aunt
Reed!’ And that punishment you made me suffer because
your wicked boy struck me—knocked me down for
nothing. I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this
exact tale. People think you a good woman, but you are
bad, hard- hearted. YOU are deceitful!’
Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand,
to exult, with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I
ever felt. It seemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and
that I had struggled out into unhoped-for liberty. Not
without cause was this sentiment: Mrs. Reed looked
frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she was
lifting up her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even
twisting her face as if she would cry.
‘Jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with
you? Why do you tremble so violently? Would you like to
drink some water?’
‘No, Mrs. Reed.’
‘Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you,
I desire to be your friend.’
‘Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad
character, a deceitful disposition; and I’ll let everybody at
Lowood know what you are, and what you have done.’ ‘Jane, you don’t understand these things: children must
be corrected for their faults.’
‘Deceit is not my fault!’ I cried out in a savage, high
voice.
‘But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow: and
now return to the nursery—there’s a dear—and lie down a
little.’
‘I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to
school soon, Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here.’
‘I will indeed send her to school soon,’ murmured Mrs.
Reed sotto voce; and gathering up her work, she abruptly
quitted the apartment.
I was left there alone—winner of the field. It was the
hardest battle I had fought, and the first victory I had
gained: I stood awhile on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst
had stood, and I enjoyed my conqueror’s solitude. First, I
smiled to myself and felt elate; but this fierce pleasure
subsided in me as fast as did the accelerated throb of my
pulses. A child cannot quarrel with its elders, as I had
done; cannot give its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as
I had given mine, without experiencing afterwards the
pang of remorse and the chill of reaction. A ridge of
lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring, would have been
a meet emblem of my mind when I accused and menaced Mrs. Reed: the same ridge, black and blasted after the
flames are dead, would have represented as meetly my
subsequent condition, when half-an-hour’s silence and
reflection had shown me the madness of my conduct, and
the dreariness of my hated and hating position.
Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time;
as aromatic wine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and
racy: its after-flavour, metallic and corroding, gave me a
sensation as if I had been poisoned. Willingly would I now
have gone and asked Mrs. Reed’s pardon; but I knew,
partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was
the way to make her repulse me with double scorn,
thereby re-exciting every turbulent impulse of my nature.
I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of
fierce speaking; fain find nourishment for some less
fiendish feeling than that of sombre indignation. I took a
book—some Arabian tales; I sat down and endeavoured to
read. I could make no sense of the subject; my own
thoughts swam always between me and the page I had
usually found fascinating. I opened the glass-door in the
breakfast-room: the shrubbery was quite still: the black
frost reigned, unbroken by sun or breeze, through the
grounds. I covered my head and arms with the skirt of my
frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation which was quite sequestrated; but I found no pleasure in
the silent trees, the falling fir-cones, the congealed relics of
autumn, russet leaves, swept by past winds in heaps, and
now stiffened together. I leaned against a gate, and looked
into an empty field where no sheep were feeding, where
the short grass was nipped and blanched. It was a very grey
day; a most opaque sky, ‘onding on snaw,’ canopied all;
thence flakes felt it intervals, which settled on the hard
path and on the hoary lea without melting. I stood, a
wretched child enough, whispering to myself over and
over again, ‘What shall I do?—what shall I do?’
All at once I heard a clear voice call, ‘Miss Jane! where
are you? Come to lunch!’
It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir;
her light step came tripping down the path.
‘You naughty little thing!’ she said. ‘Why don’t you
come when you are called?’
Bessie’s presence, compared with the thoughts over
which I had been brooding, seemed cheerful; even
though, as usual, she was somewhat cross. The fact is, after
my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed, I was not
disposed to care much for the nursemaid’s transitory anger;
and I WAS disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of  heart. I just put my two arms round her and said, ‘Come,
Bessie! don’t scold.’
The action was more frank and fearless than any I was
habituated to indulge in: somehow it pleased her.
‘You are a strange child, Miss Jane,’ she said, as she
looked down at me; ‘a little roving, solitary thing: and you
are going to school, I suppose?’
I nodded.
‘And won’t you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?’
‘What does Bessie care for me? She is always scolding
me.’
‘Because you’re such a queer, frightened, shy little
thing. You should be bolder.’
‘What! to get more knocks?’
‘Nonsense! But you are rather put upon, that’s certain.
My mother said, when she came to see me last week, that
she would not like a little one of her own to be in your
place.—Now, come in, and I’ve some good news for
you.’
‘I don’t think you have, Bessie.’
‘Child! what do you mean? What sorrowful eyes you
fix on me! Well, but Missis and the young ladies and
Master John are going out to tea this afternoon, and you
shall have tea with me. I’ll ask cook to bake you a little cake, and then you shall help me to look over your
drawers; for I am soon to pack your trunk. Missis intends
you to leave Gateshead in a day or two, and you shall
choose what toys you like to take with you.’
‘Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till
I go.’
‘Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and
don’t be afraid of me. Don’t start when I chance to speak
rather sharply; it’s so provoking.’
‘I don’t think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie,
because I have got used to you, and I shall soon have
another set of people to dread.’
‘If you dread them they’ll dislike you.’
‘As you do, Bessie?’
‘I don’t dislike you, Miss; I believe I am fonder of you
than of all the others.’
‘You don’t show it.’
‘You little sharp thing! you’ve got quite a new way of
talking. What makes you so venturesome and hardy?’
‘Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides’—I
was going to say something about what had passed
between me and Mrs. Reed, but on second thoughts I
considered it better to remain silent on that head.
‘And so you’re glad to leave me?’ ‘Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I’m rather sorry.’
‘Just now! and rather! How coolly my little lady says it!
I dare say now if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn’t
give it me: you’d say you’d RATHER not.’
‘I’ll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.’
Bessie stooped; we mutually embraced, and I followed her
into the house quite comforted. That afternoon lapsed in
peace and harmony; and in the evening Bessie told me
some of her most enchaining stories, and sang me some of
her sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams of
sunshine. Five o’clock had hardly struck on the morning of the
19th of January, when Bessie brought a candle into my
closet and found me already up and nearly dressed. I had
risen half-an-hour before her entrance, and had washed
my face, and put on my clothes by the light of a halfmoon
just setting, whose rays streamed through the
narrow window near my crib. I was to leave Gateshead
that day by a coach which passed the lodge gates at six
a.m. Bessie was the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire
in the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my
breakfast. Few children can eat when excited with the
thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed
me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and
bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits
in a paper and put them into my bag; then she helped me
on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrapping herself in a
shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs. Reed’s
bedroom, she said, ‘Will you go in and bid Missis goodbye?’
‘No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you
were gone down to supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or my cousins either; and she told me to
remember that she had always been my best friend, and to
speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly.’
‘What did you say, Miss?’
‘Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and
turned from her to the wall.’
‘That was wrong, Miss Jane.’
‘It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my
friend: she has been my foe.’
‘O Miss Jane! don’t say so!’
‘Good-bye to Gateshead!’ cried I, as we passed through
the hall and went out at the front door.
The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried
a lantern, whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road
sodden by a recent thaw. Raw and chill was the winter
morning: my teeth chattered as I hastened down the drive.
There was a light in the porter’s lodge: when we reached
it, we found the porter’s wife just kindling her fire: my
trunk, which had been carried down the evening before,
stood corded at the door. It wanted but a few minutes of
six, and shortly after that hour had struck, the distant roll
of wheels announced the coming coach; I went to the
door and watched its lamps approach rapidly through the
gloom. ‘Is she going by herself?’ asked the porter’s wife.
‘Yes.’
‘And how far is it?’
‘Fifty miles.’
‘What a long way! I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to
trust her so far alone.’
The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its
four horses and its top laden with passengers: the guard
and coachman loudly urged haste; my trunk was hoisted
up; I was taken from Bessie’s neck, to which I clung with
kisses.
‘Be sure and take good care of her,’ cried she to the
guard, as he lifted me into the inside.
‘Ay, ay!’ was the answer: the door was slapped to, a
voice exclaimed ‘All right,’ and on we drove. Thus was I
severed from Bessie and Gateshead; thus whirled away to
unknown, and, as I then deemed, remote and mysterious
regions.
I remember but little of the journey; I only know that
the day seemed to me of a preternatural length, and that
we appeared to travel over hundreds of miles of road. We
passed through several towns, and in one, a very large one,
the coach stopped; the horses were taken out, and the
passengers alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn, where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I
had no appetite, he left me in an immense room with a
fireplace at each end, a chandelier pendent from the
ceiling, and a little red gallery high up against the wall
filled with musical instruments. Here I walked about for a
long time, feeling very strange, and mortally apprehensive
of some one coming in and kidnapping me; for I believed
in kidnappers, their exploits having frequently figured in
Bessie’s fireside chronicles. At last the guard returned;
once more I was stowed away in the coach, my protector
mounted his own seat, sounded his hollow horn, and away
we rattled over the ‘stony street’ of L-.
The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it
waned into dusk, I began to feel that we were getting very
far indeed from Gateshead: we ceased to pass through
towns; the country changed; great grey hills heaved up
round the horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended a
valley, dark with wood, and long after night had
overclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing
amongst trees.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not
long slumbered when the sudden cessation of motion
awoke me; the coach- door was open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw her face and dress by the
light of the lamps.
‘Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?’ she asked. I
answered ‘Yes,’ and was then lifted out; my trunk was
handed down, and the coach instantly drove away.
I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the
noise and motion of the coach: Gathering my faculties, I
looked about me. Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air;
nevertheless, I dimly discerned a wall before me and a
door open in it; through this door I passed with my new
guide: she shut and locked it behind her. There was now
visible a house or houses—for the building spread far—
with many windows, and lights burning in some; we went
up a broad pebbly path, splashing wet, and were admitted
at a door; then the servant led me through a passage into a
room with a fire, where she left me alone.
I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze,
then I looked round; there was no candle, but the
uncertain light from the hearth showed, by intervals,
papered walls, carpet, curtains, shining mahogany
furniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious or splendid as
the drawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough.
I was puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, when the door opened, and an individual carrying a
light entered; another followed close behind.
The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a
pale and large forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in
a shawl, her countenance was grave, her bearing erect.
‘The child is very young to be sent alone,’ said she,
putting her candle down on the table. She considered me
attentively for a minute or two, then further added -
‘She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are
you tired?’ she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.
‘A little, ma’am.’
‘And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper
before she goes to bed, Miss Miller. Is this the first time
you have left your parents to come to school, my little
girl?’
I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired
how long they had been dead: then how old I was, what
was my name, whether I could read, write, and sew a
little: then she touched my cheek gently with her
forefinger, and saying, ‘She hoped I should be a good
child,’ dismissed me along with Miss Miller.
The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the
one who went with me appeared some years younger: the
first impressed me by her voice, look, and air. Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy in complexion, though of a
careworn countenance; hurried in gait and action, like one
who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: she
looked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, an
under-teacher. Led by her, I passed from compartment to
compartment, from passage to passage, of a large and
irregular building; till, emerging from the total and
somewhat dreary silence pervading that portion of the
house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of many
voices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with
great deal tables, two at each end, on each of which burnt
a pair of candles, and seated all round on benches, a
congregation of girls of every age, from nine or ten to
twenty. Seen by the dim light of the dips, their number to
me appeared countless, though not in reality exceeding
eighty; they were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks
of quaint fashion, and long holland pinafores. It was the
hour of study; they were engaged in conning over their
to- morrow’s task, and the hum I had heard was the
combined result of their whispered repetitions.
Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the
door, then walking up to the top of the long room she
cried out - ‘Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away!
Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round,
gathered the books and removed them. Miss Miller again
gave the word of command -
‘Monitors, fetch the supper-trays!’
The tall girls went out and returned presently, each
bearing a tray, with portions of something, I knew not
what, arranged thereon, and a pitcher of water and mug in
the middle of each tray. The portions were handed round;
those who liked took a draught of the water, the mug
being common to all. When it came to my turn, I drank,
for I was thirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement
and fatigue rendering me incapable of eating: I now saw,
however, that it was a thin oaten cake shared into
fragments.
The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and
the classes filed off, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered
by this time with weariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of
a place the bedroom was, except that, like the
schoolroom, I saw it was very long. To-night I was to be
Miss Miller’s bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: when
laid down I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of
which was quickly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes the single light was extinguished, and amidst
silence and complete darkness I fell asleep.
The night passed rapidly. I was too tired even to
dream; I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious
gusts, and the rain fall in torrents, and to be sensible that
Miss Miller had taken her place by my side. When I again
unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing; the girls were
up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and a
rushlight or two burned in the room. I too rose
reluctantly; it was bitter cold, and I dressed as well as I
could for shivering, and washed when there was a basin at
liberty, which did not occur soon, as there was but one
basin to six girls, on the stands down the middle of the
room. Again the bell rang: all formed in file, two and two,
and in that order descended the stairs and entered the cold
and dimly lit schoolroom: here prayers were read by Miss
Miller; afterwards she called out -
‘Form classes!’
A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during
which Miss Miller repeatedly exclaimed, ‘Silence!’ and
‘Order!’ When it subsided, I saw them all drawn up in
four semicircles, before four chairs, placed at the four
tables; all held books in their hands, and a great book, like
a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat. A pause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague
hum of numbers; Miss Miller walked from class to class,
hushing this indefinite sound.
A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered
the room, each walked to a table and took her seat. Miss
Miller assumed the fourth vacant chair, which was that
nearest the door, and around which the smallest of the
children were assembled: to this inferior class I was called,
and placed at the bottom of it.
Business now began, the day’s Collect was repeated,
then certain texts of Scripture were said, and to these
succeeded a protracted reading of chapters in the Bible,
which lasted an hour. By the time that exercise was
terminated, day had fully dawned. The indefatigable bell
now sounded for the fourth time: the classes were
marshalled and marched into another room to breakfast:
how glad I was to behold a prospect of getting something
to eat! I was now nearly sick from inanition, having taken
so little the day before.
The refectory was a great, low-ceiled, gloomy room;
on two long tables smoked basins of something hot,
which, however, to my dismay, sent forth an odour far
from inviting. I saw a universal manifestation of discontent
when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils of those destined to swallow it; from the van of the procession, the
tall girls of the first class, rose the whispered words -
‘Disgusting! The porridge is burnt again!’
‘Silence!’ ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller, but
one of the upper teachers, a little and dark personage,
smartly dressed, but of somewhat morose aspect, who
installed herself at the top of one table, while a more
buxom lady presided at the other. I looked in vain for her
I had first seen the night before; she was not visible: Miss
Miller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a
strange, foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher,
as I afterwards found, took the corresponding seat at the
other board. A long grace was said and a hymn sung; then
a servant brought in some tea for the teachers, and the
meal began.
Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful
or two of my portion without thinking of its taste; but the
first edge of hunger blunted, I perceived I had got in hand
a nauseous mess; burnt porridge is almost as bad as rotten
potatoes; famine itself soon sickens over it. The spoons
were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food and try
to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon
relinquished. Breakfast was over, and none had
breakfasted. Thanks being returned for what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectory was
evacuated for the schoolroom. I was one of the last to go
out, and in passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a
basin of the porridge and taste it; she looked at the others;
all their countenances expressed displeasure, and one of
them, the stout one, whispered -
‘Abominable stuff! How shameful!’
A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began,
during which the schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for
that space of time it seemed to be permitted to talk loud
and more freely, and they used their privilege. The whole
conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and all
abused roundly. Poor things! it was the sole consolation
they had. Miss Miller was now the only teacher in the
room: a group of great girls standing about her spoke with
serious and sullen gestures. I heard the name of Mr.
Brocklehurst pronounced by some lips; at which Miss
Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but she made no
great effort to cheek the general wrath; doubtless she
shared in it.
A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left
her circle, and standing in the middle of the room, cried -
‘Silence! To your seats! Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused
throng was resolved into order, and comparative silence
quelled the Babel clamour of tongues. The upper teachers
now punctually resumed their posts: but still, all seemed to
wait. Ranged on benches down the sides of the room, the
eighty girls sat motionless and erect; a quaint assemblage
they appeared, all with plain locks combed from their
faces, not a curl visible; in brown dresses, made high and
surrounded by a narrow tucker about the throat, with little
pockets of holland (shaped something like a Highlander’s
purse) tied in front of their frocks, and destined to serve
the purpose of a work- bag: all, too, wearing woollen
stockings and country-made shoes, fastened with brass
buckles. Above twenty of those clad in this costume were
full-grown girls, or rather young women; it suited them
ill, and gave an air of oddity even to the prettiest.
I was still looking at them, and also at intervals
examining the teachers—none of whom precisely pleased
me; for the stout one was a little coarse, the dark one not a
little fierce, the foreigner harsh and grotesque, and Miss
Miller, poor thing! looked purple, weather- beaten, and
over-worked—when, as my eye wandered from face to
face, the whole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was
puzzled. Ere I had gathered my wits, the classes were again
seated: but as all eyes were now turned to one point, mine
followed the general direction, and encountered the
personage who had received me last night. She stood at
the bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was
a fire at each end; she surveyed the two rows of girls
silently and gravely. Miss Miller approaching, seemed to
ask her a question, and having received her answer, went
back to her place, and said aloud -
‘Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!’
While the direction was being executed, the lady
consulted moved slowly up the room. I suppose I have a
considerable organ of veneration, for I retain yet the sense
of admiring awe with which my eyes traced her steps.
Seen now, in broad daylight, she looked tall, fair, and
shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in their irids,
and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved the
whiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her
hair, of a very dark brown, was clustered in round curls,
according to the fashion of those times, when neither
smooth bands nor long ringlets were in vogue; her dress,
also in the mode of the day, was of purple cloth, relieved
by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; a gold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at her
girdle. Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined
features; a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and
carriage, and he will have, at least, as clearly as words can
give it, a correct idea of the exterior of Miss Temple—
Maria Temple, as I afterwards saw the name written in a
prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.
The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady)
having taken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one
of the tables, summoned the first class round her, and
commenced giving a lesson on geography; the lower
classes were called by the teachers: repetitions in history,
grammar, &c., went on for an hour; writing and
arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by
Miss Temple to some of the elder girls. The duration of
each lesson was measured by the clock, which at last
struck twelve. The superintendent rose -
‘I have a word to address to the pupils,’ said she.
The tumult of cessation from lessons was already
breaking forth, but it sank at her voice. She went on -
‘You had this morning a breakfast which you could not
eat; you must be hungry:—I have ordered that a lunch of
bread and cheese shall be served to all.’
The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise. ‘It is to be done on my responsibility,’ she added, in an
explanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left
the room.
The bread and cheese was presently brought in and
distributed, to the high delight and refreshment of the
whole school. The order was now given ‘To the garden!’
Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, with strings of
coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze. I was similarly
equipped, and, following the stream, I made my way into
the open air.
The garden was a wide inclosure, surrounded with
walls so high as to exclude every glimpse of prospect; a
covered verandah ran down one side, and broad walks
bordered a middle space divided into scores of little beds:
these beds were assigned as gardens for the pupils to
cultivate, and each bed had an owner. When full of
flowers they would doubtless look pretty; but now, at the
latter end of January, all was wintry blight and brown
decay. I shuddered as I stood and looked round me: it was
an inclement day for outdoor exercise; not positively
rainy, but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all under
foot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday. The
stronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active
games, but sundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth in the verandah; and amongst these, as
the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames, I heard
frequently the sound of a hollow cough.
As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem
to take notice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that
feeling of isolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress
me much. I leant against a pillar of the verandah, drew my
grey mantle close about me, and, trying to forget the cold
which nipped me without, and the unsatisfied hunger
which gnawed me within, delivered myself up to the
employment of watching and thinking. My reflections
were too undefined and fragmentary to merit record: I
hardly yet knew where I was; Gateshead and my past life
seemed floated away to an immeasurable distance; the
present was vague and strange, and of the future I could
form no conjecture. I looked round the convent-like
garden, and then up at the house—a large building, half of
which seemed grey and old, the other half quite new. The
new part, containing the schoolroom and dormitory, was
lit by mullioned and latticed windows, which gave it a
church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore this
inscription:-
‘Lowood Institution.—This portion was rebuilt A.D.—
by Naomi Brocklehurst, of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.’ ‘Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven.’— St. Matt. v. 16.
I read these words over and over again: I felt that an
explanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to
penetrate their import. I was still pondering the
signification of ‘Institution,’ and endeavouring to make
out a connection between the first words and the verse of
Scripture, when the sound of a cough close behind me
made me turn my head. I saw a girl sitting on a stone
bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of
which she seemed intent: from where I stood I could see
the title—it was ‘Rasselas;’ a name that struck me as
strange, and consequently attractive. In turning a leaf she
happened to look up, and I said to her directly -
‘Is your book interesting?’ I had already formed the
intention of asking her to lend it to me some day.
‘I like it,’ she answered, after a pause of a second or
two, during which she examined me.
‘What is it about?’ I continued. I hardly know where I
found the hardihood thus to open a conversation with a
stranger; the step was contrary to my nature and habits:
but I think her occupation touched a chord of sympathy
somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of a frivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend the
serious or substantial.
‘You may look at it,’ replied the girl, offering me the
book.
I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the
contents were less taking than the title: ‘Rasselas’ looked
dull to my trifling taste; I saw nothing about fairies,
nothing about genii; no bright variety seemed spread over
the closely-printed pages. I returned it to her; she received
it quietly, and without saying anything she was about to
relapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured to
disturb her -
‘Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over
the door means? What is Lowood Institution?’
‘This house where you are come to live.’
‘And why do they call it Institution? Is it in any way
different from other schools?’
‘It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the rest
of us, are charity-children. I suppose you are an orphan:
are not either your father or your mother dead?’
‘Both died before I can remember.’
‘Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both
parents, and this is called an institution for educating
orphans.’ ‘Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing?’
‘We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for
each.’
‘Then why do they call us charity-children?’
‘Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and
teaching, and the deficiency is supplied by subscription.’
‘Who subscribes?’
‘Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in
this neighbourhood and in London.’
‘Who was Naomi Brocklehurst?’
‘The lady who built the new part of this house as that
tablet records, and whose son overlooks and directs
everything here.’
‘Why?’
‘Because he is treasurer and manager of the
establishment.’
‘Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who
wears a watch, and who said we were to have some bread
and cheese?’
‘To Miss Temple? Oh, no! I wish it did: she has to
answer to Mr. Brocklehurst for all she does. Mr.
Brocklehurst buys all our food and all our clothes.’
‘Does he live here?’
‘No—two miles off, at a large hall.’ ‘Is he a good man?’
‘He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of
good.’
‘Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?’
‘Yes.’
‘And what are the other teachers called?’
‘The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she
attends to the work, and cuts out—for we make our own
clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, and everything; the little
one with black hair is Miss Scatcherd; she teaches history
and grammar, and hears the second class repetitions; and
the one who wears a shawl, and has a pockethandkerchief
tied to her side with a yellow ribband, is
Madame Pierrot: she comes from Lisle, in France, and
teaches French.’
‘Do you like the teachers?’
‘Well enough.’
‘Do you like the little black one, and the Madame -?—
I cannot pronounce her name as you do.’
‘Miss Scatcherd is hasty—you must take care not to
offend her; Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person.’
‘But Miss Temple is the best—isn’t she?’
‘Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above
the rest, because she knows far more than they do.’ ‘Have you been long here?’
‘Two years.’
‘Are you an orphan?’
‘My mother is dead.’
‘Are you happy here?’
‘You ask rather too many questions. I have given you
answers enough for the present: now I want to read.’
But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner;
all re-entered the house. The odour which now filled the
refectory was scarcely more appetising than that which had
regaled our nostrils at breakfast: the dinner was served in
two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose a strong steam
redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist of
indifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat,
mixed and cooked together. Of this preparation a tolerably
abundant plateful was apportioned to each pupil. I ate
what I could, and wondered within myself whether every
day’s fare would be like this.
After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the
schoolroom: lessons recommenced, and were continued
till five o’clock.
The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw
the girl with whom I had conversed in the verandah
dismissed in disgrace by Miss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middle of the large
schoolroom. The punishment seemed to me in a high
degree ignominious, especially for so great a girl—she
looked thirteen or upwards. I expected she would show
signs of great distress and shame; but to my surprise she
neither wept nor blushed: composed, though grave, she
stood, the central mark of all eyes. ‘How can she bear it so
quietly—so firmly?’ I asked of myself. ‘Were I in her
place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to open and
swallow me up. She looks as if she were thinking of
something beyond her punishment—beyond her situation:
of something not round her nor before her. I have heard
of day-dreams—is she in a day-dream now? Her eyes are
fixed on the floor, but I am sure they do not see it— her
sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart: she is
looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what
is really present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is—
whether good or naughty.’
Soon after five p.m. we had another meal, consisting of
a small mug of coffee, and half-a-slice of brown bread. I
devoured my bread and drank my coffee with relish; but I
should have been glad of as much more—I was still
hungry. Half-an-hour’s recreation succeeded, then study; The next day commenced as before, getting up and
dressing by rushlight; but this morning we were obliged to
dispense with the ceremony of washing; the water in the
pitchers was frozen. A change had taken place in the
weather the preceding evening, and a keen north-east
wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom
windows all night long, had made us shiver in our beds,
and turned the contents of the ewers to ice.
Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Biblereading
was over, I felt ready to perish with cold.
Breakfast-time came at last, and this morning the porridge
was not burnt; the quality was eatable, the quantity small.
How small my portion seemed! I wished it had been
doubled.
In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the
fourth class, and regular tasks and occupations were
assigned me: hitherto, I had only been a spectator of the
proceedings at Lowood; I was now to become an actor
therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn by heart,
the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; the
frequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me; and I was glad when, about three o’clock in the afternoon,
Miss Smith put into my hands a border of muslin two
yards long, together with needle, thimble, &c., and sent
me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom, with
directions to hem the same. At that hour most of the
others were sewing likewise; but one class still stood round
Miss Scatcherd’s chair reading, and as all was quiet, the
subject of their lessons could be heard, together with the
manner in which each girl acquitted herself, and the
animadversions or commendations of Miss Scatcherd on
the performance. It was English history: among the readers
I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at the
commencement of the lesson, her place had been at the
top of the class, but for some error of pronunciation, or
some inattention to stops, she was suddenly sent to the
very bottom. Even in that obscure position, Miss
Scatcherd continued to make her an object of constant
notice: she was continually addressing to her such phrases
as the following:-
‘Burns’ (such it seems was her name: the girls here were
all called by their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), ‘Burns,
you are standing on the side of your shoe; turn your toes
out immediately.’ ‘Burns, you poke your chin most
unpleasantly; draw it in.’ ‘Burns, I insist on your holding your head up; I will not have you before me in that
attitude,’ &c. &c.
A chapter having been read through twice, the books
were closed and the girls examined. The lesson had
comprised part of the reign of Charles I., and there were
sundry questions about tonnage and poundage and shipmoney,
which most of them appeared unable to answer;
still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it
reached Burns: her memory seemed to have retained the
substance of the whole lesson, and she was ready with
answers on every point. I kept expecting that Miss
Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, instead of that,
she suddenly cried out -
‘You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned
your nails this morning!’
Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.
‘Why,’ thought I, ‘does she not explain that she could
neither clean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was
frozen?’
My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring
me to hold a skein of thread: while she was winding it, she
talked to me from time to time, asking whether I had ever
been at school before, whether I could mark, stitch, knit,
&c.; till she dismissed me, I could not pursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd’s movements. When I
returned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order
of which I did not catch the import; but Burns
immediately left the class, and going into the small inner
room where the books were kept, returned in half a
minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied
together at one end. This ominous tool she presented to
Miss Scatcherd with a respectful curtesy; then she quietly,
and without being told, unloosed her pinafore, and the
teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on her neck a dozen
strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose to Burns’
eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my
fingers quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of
unavailing and impotent anger, not a feature of her
pensive face altered its ordinary expression.
‘Hardened girl!’ exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; ‘nothing
can correct you of your slatternly habits: carry the rod
away.’
Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged
from the book-closet; she was just putting back her
handkerchief into her pocket, and the trace of a tear
glistened on her thin cheek.
The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest
fraction of the day at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffee swallowed at five o’clock had revived
vitality, if it had not satisfied hunger: the long restraint of
the day was slackened; the schoolroom felt warmer than in
the morning—its fires being allowed to burn a little more
brightly, to supply, in some measure, the place of candles,
not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licensed
uproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome
sense of liberty.
On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss
Scatcherd flog her pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual
among the forms and tables and laughing groups without a
companion, yet not feeling lonely: when I passed the
windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out; it
snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower
panes; putting my ear close to the window, I could
distinguish from the gleeful tumult within, the
disconsolate moan of the wind outside.
Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind
parents, this would have been the hour when I should
most keenly have regretted the separation; that wind
would then have saddened my heart; this obscure chaos
would have disturbed my peace! as it was, I derived from
both a strange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished the wind to howl more wildly, the gloom to
deepen to darkness, and the confusion to rise to clamour.
Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made
my way to one of the fire-places; there, kneeling by the
high wire fender, I found Burns, absorbed, silent,
abstracted from all round her by the companionship of a
book, which she read by the dim glare of the embers.
‘Is it still ‘Rasselas’?’ I asked, coming behind her.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘and I have just finished it.’
And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of
this. ‘Now,’ thought I, ‘I can perhaps get her to talk.’ I sat
down by her on the floor.
‘What is your name besides Burns?’
‘Helen.’
‘Do you come a long way from here?’
‘I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders
of Scotland.’
‘Will you ever go back?’
‘I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.’
‘You must wish to leave Lowood?’
‘No! why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an
education; and it would be of no use going away until I
have attained that object.’
‘But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?’ ‘Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my faults.’
‘And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I
should resist her. If she struck me with that rod, I should
get it from her hand; I should break it under her nose.’
‘Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you
did, Mr. Brocklehurst would expel you from the school;
that would be a great grief to your relations. It is far better
to endure patiently a smart which nobody feels but
yourself, than to commit a hasty action whose evil
consequences will extend to all connected with you; and
besides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.’
‘But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be
sent to stand in the middle of a room full of people; and
you are such a great girl: I am far younger than you, and I
could not bear it.’
‘Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not
avoid it: it is weak and silly to say you CANNOT BEAR
what it is your fate to be required to bear.’
I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this
doctrine of endurance; and still less could I understand or
sympathise with the forbearance she expressed for her
chastiser. Still I felt that Helen Burns considered things by
a light invisible to my eyes. I suspected she might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matter deeply;
like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.
‘You say you have faults, Helen: what are they? To me
you seem very good.’
‘Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I
am, as Miss Scatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and
never keep, things, in order; I am careless; I forget rules; I
read when I should learn my lessons; I have no method;
and sometimes I say, like you, I cannot BEAR to be
subjected to systematic arrangements. This is all very
provoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat,
punctual, and particular.’
‘And cross and cruel,’ I added; but Helen Burns would
not admit my addition: she kept silence.
‘Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Scatcherd?’
At the utterance of Miss Temple’s name, a soft smile
flitted over her grave face.
‘Miss Temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be
severe to any one, even the worst in the school: she sees
my errors, and tells me of them gently; and, if I do
anything worthy of praise, she gives me my meed liberally.
One strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is,
that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have not
influence to cure me of my faults; and even her praise,

