	-What is global warming? 



	The greenhouse effect is when the temperature rises because the sun’s heat and light is trapped in the earth’s atmosphere.  This is like when heat is trapped

 in a car. On a very hot day, the car gets hotter when it is out in the parking lot.  This is because the heat and light from the sun can get into the car, by going

 through the windows, but it can’t get back out.  This is what the greenhouse effect does to the earth.  The heat and light can get through the atmosphere, but it

 can’t get out.  As a result, the temperature rises.
	
	-What is the greenhouse effect?



	The sun’s heat can get into the car through the windows but is then trapped.  This makes what ever the place might be, a greenhouse, a car, a building, or the

 earth’s atmosphere, hotter.  This diagram shows the heat coming into a car as visible light (light you can see) and infrared light (heat).  Once the light is inside

 the car, it is trapped and the heat builds up, just like it does in the earth’s atmosphere.
 	
	Sometimes the temperature can change in a way that helps us.  The greenhouse effect makes the earth appropriate for people to live on.  Without it, the earth

 would be freezing, or on the other hand it would be burning hot.  It would be freezing at night because the sun would be down.  We would not get the sun’s heat and 

 light to make the night somewhat warm.  During the day, especially during the summer, it would be burning because the sun would be up with no atmosphere to filter 

 it, so people, plants, and animals would be exposed to all the light and heat.
 	
	Although the greenhouse effect makes the earth able to have people living on it, if there gets to be too many gases, the earth can get unusually warmer,

 and many plants, animals, and people will die.  They would die because there would be less food (plants like corn, wheat, and other vegetables and fruits).  This 

 would happen because the plants would not be able to take the heat.  This would cause us to have less food to eat, but it would also limit the food that animals have.

 With less food, like grass, for the animals that we need to survive (like cows) we would even have less food.  Gradually, people, plants, and animals would all 

 die of hunger.

	-What are greenhouse gasses?

	Greenhouse gasses are gasses are in the earth’s atmosphere that collect heat and light from the sun.  With too many greenhouse gasses in the air, the earth’s

 atmosphere will trap too much heat and the earth will get too hot.  As a result people, animals, and plants would die because the heat would be too strong. 

	-What is global warming doing to the environment?

	Global warming is affecting many parts of the world.  Global warming makes the sea rise, and when the sea rises, the water covers many low land islands. 

 This is a big problem for many of the plants, animals, and people on islands.  The water covers the plants and causes some of them to die. 

 When they die, the animals lose a source of food, along with their habitat.  Although animals have a better ability to adapt to what happens than plants do, they

 may die also.  When the plants and animals die, people lose two sources of food, plant food and animal food.  They may also lose their homes.  As a result, they 

 would also have to leave the area or die.  This would be called a break in the food chain, or a chain reaction, one thing happening that leads to another and so on.  

 The oceans are affected by global warming in other ways, as well.  Many things that are happening to the ocean are linked to global warming.  One thing that is 

 happening is warm water, caused from global warming, is harming and killing algae in the ocean.

	

	-What is global warming doing to the environment?



	Algae is a producer that you can see floating on the top of the water.  (A producer is something that makes food for other animals through photosynthesis, 

 like grass.)  This floating green algae is food to many consumers in the ocean.  (A consumer is something that eats the producers.)  One kind of a consumer is small

 fish.  There are many others like crabs, some whales, and many other animals.  Fewer algae is a problem because there is less food for us and many animals in the sea



	Global warming is doing many things to people as well as animals and plants.  It is killing algae, but it is also destroying many huge forests. 

 The pollution that causes global warming is linked to acid rain.  Acid rain gradually destroys almost everything it touches.  Global warming is also causing many 

 more fires that wipe out whole forests.  This happens because global warming can make the earth very hot.  In forests, some plants and trees leaves can be so dry that

 they catch on fire. 


	-What causes global warming?  



	Many things cause global warming.  One thing that causes global warming is electrical pollution.  Electricity causes pollution in many ways, some worse than

 others.  In most cases, fossil fuels are burned to create electricity.  Fossil fuels are made of dead plants and animals.  Some examples of fossil fuels are oil and

 petroleum.  Many pollutants (chemicals that pollute the air, water, and land) are sent into the air when fossil fuels are burned.  Some of these chemicals are called

 greenhouse gasses.



	We use these sources of energy much more than the sources that give off less pollution.  Petroleum, one of the sources of energy, is used a lot.  It is used

 for transportation, making electricity, and making many other things.  Although this source of energy gives off a lot of pollution, it is used for 38% of the United 

 States’ energy.



	Some other examples of using energy and polluting the air are:



 -Turning on a light


 -Watching T.V.


 -Listening to a stereo


 -Washing or drying clothes
 

 -Using a hair dryer
 

 -Riding in a car
 

 -Heating a meal in the microwave

 
 -Using an air conditioner

 
 -Playing a video game

 
 -Using a dish washer
 

	When you do these things, you are causing more greenhouse gasses to be sent into the air.  Greenhouse gasses are sent into the air because creating the

 electricity you use to do these things causes pollution.  If you think of how many times a day you do these things, it’s a lot.  You even have to add in how many

 other people do these things!  That turns out to be a lot of pollutants going into the air a day because of people like us using electricity. The least amount of

 electricity you use, the better.




	When we throw our garbage away, the garbage goes to landfills.  Landfills are those big hills that you go by on an expressway that stink.  They are full of

 garbage.  The garbage is then sometimes burned.  This sends an enormous amount of greenhouse gasses into the air and makes global warming worse.

 	

	Another thing that makes global warming worse is when people cut down trees.  Trees and other plants collect carbon dioxide (CO2), which is a greenhouse gas.

 Carbon dioxide is the air that our body lets out when we breathe. With fewer trees, it is harder for people to breathe because there is more CO2 in the air, and we
 
 don’t breathe CO2, we breathe oxygen.  Plants collect the CO2 that we breathe out, and they give back oxygen that we breathe in.  With less trees and other plants,

 such as algae, there is less air for us, and more greenhouse gases are sent into the air. This means that it is very important to protect our trees to stop the

 greenhouse effect, and also so we can breathe and live. This gas, CO2, collects light and heat (radiant energy), produced by the sun, and this makes the earth warmer.  The heat and light from the sun is produced in the

 center of the sun.  (The sun has layers just like the earth.) 
 	
	The dirty yellow color on outside is the surface.  The light and dark yellow colored area is the convection zone.  The orange colored area is the radiative

 zone, and the red colored area is the core.  The squiggle lines represent radiant energy.      
 

	This layer is called the core.  Just like a core of an apple, it is in the middle.  Here there is a very high temperature, about 27,000,000°F.  This heat

 escapes out of this layer to the next layer, the radiative zone. This layer is cooler, about 4,500,000°F.   Gradually, the heat and light will pass through the

 convection zone at a temperature of around 2,000,000°F.  When it gets to the surface, the temperature is about 10,000°F.  Finally, the heat and light is sent into

 space.  This is called radiant energy (heat and light).  The radiant energy reaches the earth’s atmosphere.  As a result of this process we get light and heat.

 When you pollute, you send chemicals into the air that destroy our atmosphere, so more heat and light cannot escape from the earth’s atmosphere.

  	-What are people doing to stop global warming?  

	People are doing many things to try to stop global warming.  One thing people are doing is carpooling.  Carpooling is driving with someone to a place that

 you are both going to.  This minimizes the amount of greenhouse gases put into the air by a car.


	Another thing that people are doing is being more careful about leaving things turned on like the television, computer, and the lights.  A lot of people are

 taking time away from the television, and instead, they are spending more time outdoors.  This helps our planet out a lot.  Now, more people are even riding busses,

 walking to school, and riding their bikes to lower the amount of greenhouse gases in the air.  Planting trees and recycling also helps.  If you recycle, less trash

 goes to the dump, and less trash gets burned.  As a result, there are fewer greenhouse gasses in our atmosphere. 

	Watch what you buy.  Many things, such as hairspray and deodorant, now are made to have less of an impact on the atmosphere.  Less greenhouse gasses will rise

 into the air, and global warming will slow down.

	-What is the government doing to stop global warming?

	The government is doing many things to help stop global warming. The government made a law called The Clean Air Act so there is less air pollution.  Global

 warming is making people get very bad illnesses that could make them disabled, very sick, and sometimes even die.  The Clean Air Act is making many companies change

 their products to decrease these problems.  Part of the law says that you may not put a certain amount of pollutants in the air.  Hairspray and some other products,

 like foam cups, had this problem.  Making and using these products let out too much volatile organic compounds (VOC’s), ozone-destroying chemicals

 (chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s), and related chemicals (such as CO2) into the air.  Now, almost all of these products have a label on them telling people what this

 product can do to the environment and many people.  By 2015 all products listed on the Clean Air Act will have this label on them:

	WARNING: contains or manufactured with (the chemical would go here.  For example chlorofluorocarbons (CFC’s), a substance which harms public health and the

 environment by destroying ozone in the upper atmosphere.  
 

	Almost all of the other chemicals that could be harmful will have this label on them hopefully by this time (2015) as well.

 The Clean Air Act has also made car companies change some of the things inside of the cars.  Cars pollute a lot.  While cars make more than half of the world’s smog

 (visible pollution in the air), many things that cars need to move and heat up make even more pollution.  Some things that are inside of cars, buses, trucks, and

 motorcycles, like gasoline, pollute the air when the fuel is burned.  It comes out as a chemical and when mixed in the air, forms smog.  Smog is a kind of pollution

 that you see in the form of a cloud.  If you have ever been to California you can see a lot of smog in some places.  Sometimes the smog gets so bad that you cannot

 see at all!  Smog forms when car exhaust, pollution from homes, and pollution from factories mixes in the air and has a chemical reaction.  The sun’s heat and light

 add to the reaction.

	 Cars, buses, and trucks are also responsible for over 50% of dangerous chemicals let into the air.  Some of these chemicals can cause cancer, birth defects,
	
 trouble breathing, brain and nerve damage, lung injures, and burning eyes.  Some of the pollutants are so harmful that they can even cause death.


	-What are some of the other dangerous chemicals?


	 Some other chemicals that cause air pollution and are bad for the environment and people are:

 Ozone- Ozone is produced when other pollution chemicals combine.  It is the basic element of smog.  It causes many different kinds of health issues dealing with the

 lungs.  It can damage plants and limit sight.  It can also cause a lot of property damage.
 
 	VOC’s (volatile organic compounds, smog formers)- VOC’s are let into the air when fuel is burned. This chemical can cause cancer.  It can also harm plants.
 
 NOx (nitrogen dioxide)- This chemical forms smog.  It is also formed by burning sources of energy, like gas, coal, and oil, and by cars.  This chemical causes

 problems in the respiratory system (including the lungs).  It causes acid rain, and it can damage trees.  This chemical can eat away buildings and statues.
 
 CO (carbon monoxide)- The source of this chemical is burning sources of energy.  It causes blood vessel problems and respiratory failures.
 
 PM-10 (particulate matter)- The source of this chemical is plowing and burning down fields.  It can cause death and lung damage.  It can make it hard for people to

 breathe.  The smoke, soot, ash, and dust formed by this chemical can make many cities dirty.
 
 	Sulfur Dioxide- This chemical is produced by making paper and metals.  This chemical can cause permanent lung damage.  It can cause acid rain which kills

 trees and damages building and statues.
 
	 Lead- This chemical is in paint, leaded gasoline, smelters, and in lead storage batteries.  It can cause many brain and nerve damages and digestive problems. 

 Test yourself on global warming by figuring out a word search at the website below.  When you enter this website, you will have to click on Global Warming Word Search

 to enter the page.  Click on the website below to test yourself on global warming.  http://globalwarming.enviroweb.org/games/
 
 

	Kid can help stop global warming, too!!

	Although adults do many things to help stop global warming, kids can do just as much.  Kids can’t do hard things like making a law, but we can do easier

 things like not watching as much TV.  You can listen to your parents when they say, turn off your lights or go play outside.  Listening to them and actually trying

 to help can help you, your environment, and the world.

	Over the past 100 years, the global average temperature has increased by approximately 0.6 °C and is projected to continue to rise at a rapid rate1. Although
 
 species have responded to climatic changes throughout their evolutionary history2, a primary concern for wild species and their ecosystems is this rapid rate of
 
 change3. We gathered information on species and global warming from 143 studies for our meta-analyses. These analyses reveal a consistent temperature-related shift,
 
 or 'fingerprint', in species ranging from molluscs to mammals and from grasses to trees. Indeed, more than 80% of the species that show changes are shifting in the
 
 direction expected on the basis of known physiological constraints of species. Consequently, the balance of evidence from these studies strongly suggests that a
 
 significant impact of global warming is already discernible in animal and plant populations. The synergism of rapid temperature rise and other stresses, in particular
 
 habitat destruction, could easily disrupt the connectedness among species and lead to a reformulation of species communities, reflecting differential changes in
 
 species, and to numerous extirpations and possibly extinctions.

	Global warming and global dimming are two big issues that have drawn attention in the recent years. Due to industrial revolution, increase in population,

 and growing demands of the people, global warming and global dimming issues are booming out. They pose great danger to our earth and the sole responsibility is in

 our hands. First, it is necessary to know about these two phenomenons and how it affects us. Let's start.
 
	What is Global Dimming?
 	
	Global dimming is a phenomenon that happens due to reduction in the solar rays falling on the earth's surface. The residues and particulates such as sulfur

 dioxide, ash, soot (black carbon), that are produced after combustion of fossil fuels cause global dimming. These pollutants evaporate and add to the droplets in

 the cloud. The clouds that contain the sulfate aerosols (cloud of solid or liquid particles in a gas), have a high reflective property, due to which they reflect the

 suns rays that fall on them, back to the space. Solar rays are very essential for the balance in water cycle. When the solar rays are reflected back to the space by

 these particulates, then what happens? It causes reduction in water vapor content in the atmosphere, which eventually results in less rainfall. The study about

 global dimming was first started by Gerry Stanhill, an English scientist who studied about solar radiations in Israel. Gerry Stanhill compared the amount of solar

 radiation from 1950s with the recent solar radiation records. He stated that "There was a staggering 22% drop in the sunlight, and that really amazed me".
 
	Impacts of Global Dimming
	
	We all know how significant is rainfall for our living. The clear-cut effect of global dimming is 'famine' and 'drought'. It was found that, the famines

 that happened during 1970s and 1980s were a direct effect of rainfall shortage which is a cause of global dimming. Billions of people from all over the world

 including America, Europe, Asia, Africa are affected due to global dimming, in the form of famines. Several areas in North Africa got dried out due to inadequate

 rainfall. Even though Africa did not contribute much to global dimming by burning of fossil fuels, industrialization etc., it was badly affected than any other

 developed and developing countries. The developed countries such as the US is affected by acid rain, which is caused by the aerosols in the clouds. The process

 of photosynthesis in the plants can reduce due to shortage of solar rays. The sulfur aerosols when inhaled, can cause respiratory diseases in human beings.
 
	Interesting Evidence of Global Dimming
	
	Three days after 9/11 attacks, scientists found that the sky was abnormally so clear. They found that the reason behind this kind of climatic change is due

 to grounding hundreds of fleets at the same time. The contrails (artificial vapor cloud created by the air crafts) from the jets and air crafts that landed in the

 US after the attack, were the causes for such a climatic change. It was later revealed by Travis, D.J., Carleton, a scientist who studied this phenomenon, that the

 temperature during the three days after 9/11, was reduced to 1 degree from the average range before 9/11 and few days after the incident. The 1 degree Celsius

 reduction in temperature is nothing much for a common man, but scientific records reveal that this kind of abrupt reduction in temperature can have adverse effects

 in future.
 
	What is Global Warming?
  	
	Global warming is a phenomenon caused by increase in the atmospheric temperature of the earth's surface, due to increase in concentration of greenhouse gases

 such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), etc. These greenhouse gases trap the solar rays and cause temperature rise in the earth's

 atmosphere. This process of trapping solar energy is called greenhouse effect. Increase in population causes demand in energy sources by burning of fossil fuels

 and cutting down trees (deforestation) which is major cause for global warming. It is clear that, burning of fossil fuels directly contributes to global warming by

 releasing greenhouse gases, but how does deforestation contribute to global warming? Trees and plants take in carbon dioxide and give out oxygen. If these plants

 and trees are cut down, the carbon dioxide will remain unused in the atmosphere, and increase the temperature of the earth's surface, which is called global warming!

 
	Impacts of Global Warming
	
	In recent years, we have heard a lot about floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, droughts, extinction of certain species, earthquakes, etc. What do you think about

 all these? Humans are interfering too much with the nature and act against it in many ways. The natural balance in the earth is being shaken by our activities and

 the direct result is global warming. Glaciers in the polar regions and mountains melt down and the sea level rises which is all due to increase in temperature, and

 it causes floods, and damage to the food crops. Large areas of lands are damaged permanently due to extraction of fossil fuels from deep underground. This leads to

 frequent earthquakes. Ozone layer is a blanket that entirely covers the earth's surface and protects it from harmful UV (ultraviolet) radiations. The CFC that is

 emitted from refrigerators and insecticides, depletes the ozone layer and makes our earth vulnerable to harmful UV rays.
 
	Difference Between Global Warming and Global Dimming •The basic difference between the two phenomenons is that, global warming causes heating effect in the

 earth's atmosphere, whereas global dimming causes cooling effect.
	
	 •Global warming is caused by greenhouse gases and global dimming is caused by aerosols.
	
	 •Global warming traps sunlight and global dimming blocks sunlight.
 	
	The common thing between global warming and global dimming is that, they both are destructive to our earth. They both cause environmental and ecological

 problems to earth. Government and people in developed and developing countries should be more cautious and take the necessary steps to mitigate the effects of global

 warming and global dimming, because in most cases, countries like Africa which is not a developed country is always most affected and falls prey to these

 phenomenons, due to industrialization and other acts of the people in the developed countries like the US. To avoid such a disparity, we all should join hands

 irrespective of the countries we belong to, and protect our earth from the adverse effects of global warming and global dimming. 

	Global warming is caused due to the rising levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that embraces the radiated heat and stores it, increasing the overall

 global temperatures to dangerous levels. The rising temperatures have caused the glaciers to melt, thus causing an increase in the sea level. Unpredictable weather

 and a strange change in climate patterns are also some of the effects of global warming. In fact, according to a recent study, over the past three decades our planet

 is said to be shrinking at a faster rate. Extreme climatic conditions like drought in some parts of the world while heavy rains in some others and record heat waves

 in most of the parts have send an alarming message to stop global warming. It is not that we are not trying to curb global warming; the governments of various

 countries and the UN (United Nations) have already started with their efforts to address the problem of global warming. They are doing their bit, and its time

 for us to address this sensitive problem on a personal level. Given below are a few things we can do to stop global warming.
 
	Simple Things We Can Do To Stop Global Warming
 


.Restrict the use of cars to travel longer distances, you can walk smaller distances or use a bicycle instead. This will only limit the increase of carbon dioxide

 and carbon monoxide in the atmosphere. You can also tune up your car regularly to increase its fuel efficiency.
 


.Switch off the lights, fans and air conditioners when not in use. Replacing your current tube lights and bulbs with fluorescent lights is a smart way to increase

 energy efficiency. They will also amount to huge energy savings in your monthly electricity bills.
 


.Minimize the use of deodorants, as they contain CFC (Chlorofluorocarbon) that contributes to the ozone depletion, which in turn gives rise to most destructive

 effects. CFC is also used as refrigerants and other solvents, you can go in for a deodorant or a refrigerator that is CFC free.
 


.Make sure you replace the filters of your air conditioners or water heaters to save electricity. In case your appliances are obsolete, replace them with newer

 energy efficient appliances.
 


.Switch off your television, computers and other devices when not in use. Usually we tend to leave these devices on a standby mode, this can use up to 40% of its

 energy in 20 hours. Therefore, it is important that you make use of the on/off button instead of leaving it on standby mode.
 


.Adjust your thermostat according to the climatic changes. Keeping you thermostat at constant temperatures throughout the season, would not only help in cutting down

 your electricity bills but also reduces carbon emission in the atmosphere. Another way of tackling the problem of global warming is installing solar panels, instead

 of using electric geysers.
 


.Lets decrease the amount of waste. We can use a reusable cloth bag instead of a paper or plastic bag. Adding up to the amount of waste, requires more energy to

 recycle them. In case it is unavoidable, and you are bound to use paper or plastic, at least make sure you use the recyclable ones.
 


.Forests play an important role in absorbing carbon dioxide, thus reducing the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Therefore, it becomes important for us to

 preserve the forests and discourage the encroachment in forest areas, converting them into concrete jungles.
 


.Encourage the use of renewable sources of energy like air, biomass, solar, etc. You can air dry your clothes instead of using a dyer. The use of solar power and

 biomass are ready to be deployed widely. But there are a few obstacles that are delaying the use of these technologies. If all of us stand together and break down

 those obstacles, we would contribute largely in reducing global warming.
 

.Coworkers or classmates staying close by in the same area, can use the carpooling or car sharing strategy. This will not only reduce the carbon dioxide emission,

 but also save your hundreds of dollars per year. You can also maximize the use of public transport instead of private.
 

.Buy fresh and organic foods instead of frozen foods. Frozen foods require 10 times more energy to produce, whereas organic foods store high levels of carbon

 dioxide. Thus, helping us remove a good amount of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
 


.Raise awareness! Educate people about global warming and its disastrous effects. Share various solutions to stop global warming. Make sure you take initiatives to

 help the environment and encourage others to do the same.
 


.The most important of all, let us all vow to plant at least one tree every year, may be on your birthday every year and nurture it. A single tree can absorb amazing

 amounts of carbon dioxide over its life time. Let us all contribute to making this world a better place to live in. You can also gift a sapling to your friend or

 relative on his/her birthday to raise awareness.
 
	These were some of the few things we can do to stop global warming. It is high time we realize the importance of addressing this sensitive issue and take 

 corrective steps to tackle the problem of global warming. I am doing my bit to save the planet, earth; are you? 

	The issue of global warming has been characterized by heated debate between environmentalists and anti-green lobby. Activists have maintained that the issue

 of climate change has been overlooked by every government as it will take a lot of sacrifices, both economical and political to create effective policies to counter

 this threat. The anti-green lobby on the other hand has certain arguements against global warming and believes that activists should focus their attention and efforts

 on more immediate issues rather than concentrating solely on global warming. They are of the view that global warming is a natural process and no amount of

 legislation or policies would be able to counter it.
 
	The debate has been around for a long time now, but the failure of talks between world leaders in Copenhagen was a serious blow to the efforts of

 environmentalists. Environmental activists have always taken the help of research that is being conducted on the effects of human activities on the environment.

 Scientists have found that the earth's temperature has increased by 1 F in the last hundred years, and it will increase by 1 F - 3 F in the next hundred years.

 This can cause ecological imbalance, apart from seriously putting the life of future generations at risk. Numerous studies carried out over the years have revealed

 one more potential problem. According to researchers, global warming is interfering with the water cycle, altering the distribution of available water. The increase

 in the earth's temperature causes an acceleration of the water cycle, that is, some places would experience more frequent storms and floods, and some would have

 long periods of droughts. Let us try and know how exactly is global warming interfering with the water cycle.
 
	How does Global Warming Affect the Water Cycle?
 
	To know the impact of global warning on water cycle, it is important to understand the functioning of the water cycle. The water cycle is made up of four

 stages: evaporation, transportation, condensation, and precipitation. All of these stages are important for maintaining the water cycle. In evaporation, sun rays

 heat the water in oceans, rivers, seas, and then water rises up in the atmosphere in the form of vapors. Transportation is similar to evaporation except that water

 from trees and plants rises up in the atmosphere. Condensation cools the hot vapors leading to the formation of clouds. Water from clouds comes down to oceans and

 rivers in the form of rain and snow, and this process is known as precipitation. An increase in the temperature causes more water to be evaporated from oceans, and

 makes the atmosphere to hold on to the water vapors for a longer duration. This makes more vapor to be converted into clouds, which in turn causes higher

 precipitation. It has been predicted that if the global warming increases by 7.2 F, there would be an increase of around 10% in the global precipitation levels.
 
	Anti-green lobby has long accused the researchers of being proficient in theory but they claim that there are no noticeable events that prove that global

 warming has indeed made changes to the water cycle. Environmental activists, on the other side claim that the increase in the daily temperatures, increased

 cloudiness and humidity at night, and the increase in the average atmospheric water-vapor concentration are clear indicators of the effect of global warming on the

 environment. Researchers are of the view that the precipitation levels have increased by 10% in the 20th century, and at the current rate of climate change, the

 precipitation levels would increase in near future as well. Polar regions would be the hardest hit as global warming has had the maximum impact in these regions,

 and sea ice which is crucial for the maintenance of water cycle, would keep on melting, resulting into more precipitation.
 
	Global warming is a real threat concerning all of us but lack of government policies has made it look like an issue that is just limited to the environmental

 activists. Civil society also has shown little interest in this issue in the last few years which has also contributed to the denial on climate change. It is high

 time that we all put in an effort to fight the menace of global warming, otherwise our future generations would have to pay for our follies.

	It runs shivers down the spine to think of our world a couple of decades from now. Day-to-day variations in climate, summers drier than before, and winters

 chillier than ever - as much as you and me want to neglect these facts, the truth is, they are very much a part of our lives. We take these changes for granted, but

 in reality, we and our future generations are going to have a hard time combating them. Global warming - it's no longer an emerging environmental issue. In fact, it

 is very much here, and is making its presence felt in a myriad ways, many of which, we're ignoring. But believe me, gone were the days when ignorance was a bliss -

 today, either we stop prattling about global warming and really do something about it, or we see our future generations blaming us, just like we do it currently,

 for the difficult life they're going to lead in the coming few decades. Harsh it is, but understanding how does global warming work will help us take initiatives

 in a better way, and contribute, even though a little, to this gargantuan environmental issue. Let's begin with understanding what is global warming.
 
	Global Warming Explained
 	
	Simply put, global warming can be defined as an increase in the average temperature of the Earth as a result of natural calamities and man-made destructions.

 While natural causes may include volcanic eruptions, movement in the tectonic plates, exploding of sunspots, or change in the Orbit of the Earth, man-made

 destructions include: deforestation, installation of power plants, burning fossil fuels and generation of poisonous gases. Greenhouse gases that occur naturally

 are held responsible for this increase in the Earth's climate, since the heat that is to be radiated back into the atmosphere, in reality, gets trapped, thus,

 leading to a sudden increase in the temperature. The following section explains in detail exactly how does global warming work towards disrupting the equilibrium

 of our blue planet, Earth.
 
	Global Warming: How Does it Work
 	
	Much has been said about the causes and effects of global warming. However, not much has been thoroughly discussed about the working of global warming, as

 in, how does it affect the atmosphere. To begin with, for the reason that greenhouse effect is the key cause behind global warming, that's where the working

 mechanism of global warming can be understood from. When the gas concentration of the Earth's shield is increased due to trapped gases, global temperature takes

 a hike, thus, leading to global warming.
 
	In addition, while weather analysts had a proper method of predicting weather patterns, for the reason that the temperature of Earth has increased, it has

 become an all the more difficult job to predict weather patterns now. Increase in temperature has led to violent storms, and has damaged many coastal areas of the

 world.
 
	Furthermore, the changing weather patterns as a result of global warming have led to flooding in some areas and drought in others. This instability in weather

 has led to the destruction of many areas, and has made others more vulnerable to such calamities. Also, global warming works against the seasonal water cycles,

 thereby, leading to excess seasonal flows by melting the glaciers. On the other hand, since many areas experience increased temperature, the rivers in those areas

 dry up easily, leading to water scarcity.
 
	The working mechanism of global warming has left no facet of the Earth untouched. From risen temperatures to vegetation, from wildlife to natural entities,

 the effects of global warming have disrupted the equilibrium of life on Earth. Global warming works its way by sending heat waves that may cause heat-related

 illnesses and deaths. While it is almost impossible to predict what is the degree of destruction can global warming do to the humankind, it can still be said that

 global warming is going to take a toll on the global economy by damaging it vastly, if not totally.Before it's too late, every human on planet Earth should take

 the responsibility of guiding others with respect to the pros and cons of global warming. Recycling, plantation of more and more trees, and reducing carbon gas

 emissions could be some of the first few steps that every person in this world can take for the purpose of contributing to the wellness of our planet Earth. Global

 warming is enormous, however, even the littlest of contribution confirms hope within all. On the side of contribution or destruction - you choose. 


	To begin with this segment, let us know a few basic facts on global warming. It is a natural phenomenon, characterized by the gradual rise in the average

 temperature of the Earth. But this definition does not only specify that things are getting warmer with time. Global warming refers to major long-term changes that

 are slowly becoming visible in the climate of different places on Earth. It is essentially related to the climate being stormier, drier, colder, and of course,

 warmer. Everything that is related to the atmosphere, like the rain, winds, and temperature, to name a few, are linked with this term that we are discussing here.

 The melting of glaciers, rising of the sea levels, disintegration of wildlife, drying up of forests, etc., are signs that are highly associated with global warming.

 So what is causing this slow-growing disaster? Decades of scientific research and findings have been spent to get to the answer of this hotly debated question.

 Experts have invested loads of time and capital in observing, recording and studying natural cycles and events that are known to influence changes in the climate.

 However, merely concentrating on such factors, were perhaps, not good enough to near the answer to the question cited above. So scientists came up with the theory of

 the 'greenhouse effect' to get to the bottom of the process which triggers the amount and pattern of warming, that has been building up in the Earth's atmosphere

 since the mid-20th century. And the very concept of the greenhouse effect would explain to you about how does carbon dioxide cause global warming...
 
	The Greenhouse Effect
 	
	In order to understand about how does carbon dioxide cause global warming, it is important to know about a few facts on greenhouse effect. So what is it? As

 the name suggests, this phenomenon is related to the working of a greenhouse. As most of us know, a greenhouse is a building where plants are kept and grown under

 a controlled environment. The structure is roofed with different covering but transparent materials such as that of plastic or glass. So what this building does is,

 it allows the solar radiation to be absorbed by the plants by letting it in, but does not allow the heat to escape. Now when it comes to global warming, a similar

 effect takes place but in an extensive manner.
 
	Water vapor, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, and carbon dioxide are known to be the main greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. What these gases do is,

 they form a kind of wall over the atmosphere, which although lets the solar radiation to enter, but keeps some of the heat that is radiated back, from escaping into

 the space; similar to what is done by a greenhouse. And this greenhouse effect is actually necessary to sustain life on the planet. If this process wasn't there,

 then the Earth's temperature would have been about 60 degrees Fahrenheit cooler. But in recent years, the concentration of greenhouse gases have climbed high in

 the atmosphere, eventually kicking off the phenomenon of global warming.
 
	Why Carbon Dioxide?
 	
	Continuing this article on "how does carbon dioxide cause global warming?", why is it that carbon dioxide (CO2) is a major factor in the development of global

 warming. According to scientists, this very gas is the major culprit for causing the most warming. Combustion of fossil fuels in vehicles, factories, homes, and in 
 
 the generation of electricity, produce CO2 in high amounts. But it is also important to know that each of the greenhouse gases, mentioned above, traps heat in

 different amounts. And it is interesting to know that, gases such as methane, nitrous oxide and chlorofluorocarbons (banned in most parts of the world) are

 100 to 1000 times more potent in trapping heat than CO2. Despite this, CO2 is the main player in causing global warming. Why? This is because of its severely high

 emission in the atmosphere that makes it greater in concentration than the other gases. So the warmth that is collected or trapped by the rest of the gases,

 is negligible when compared to what CO2 does. So with the increasing numbers of CO2-emitting sources in the world, you can imagine the amount of heat that is

 getting trapped in the atmosphere thus, contributing to global warming.
 
	Global Warming Effects
 	
	So that was about how does carbon dioxide cause global warming, and why it is the most responsible factor? Now let us go through some quick points on the

 various effects that global warming may have or is having on the various life forms on Earth. Global warming... •Is causing changes in the climate which are too

 rapid for some living things to adapt to
 
.Is causing Earth's ice sheets to melt thus, increasing the sea level
 
.Is causing weather to become extreme; characterized by the development of major storms, longer spells of drought, more rain than required, and alterations in the

 life-supporting ranges for the survival of plants and animals
 
.It may, or is causing heavy precipitation even in places which stopped receiving heavy rainfall
 
.Also causes water bodies to absorb heat more than usual. This is because, with the glaciers melting down, heat is reflected in low amounts and absorbed in

 high amounts by sea and oceans thus, further increasing the temperature
 
	The data presented in this article on how does carbon dioxide cause global warming, is a story about the whole process in a nutshell. There is much more to learn

 and understand, and scientists have been doing the same since decades. Hope the article was informative to you! 

Global warming… human-induced global warming to be precise, is undoubtedly the biggest threat that the planet is facing today. The fact that global warming effects on the planet are becoming more and more obvious is a sign of the approaching disaster. The first thing that comes to the mind when we hear effects of global warming on wildlife is loss of habitat for species like the polar bear or the Arctic fox. However, the actual effects of the same go much beyond this loss of habitat in polar region or at high altitudes. In fact, experts are of the opinion that going by the rate at which the planet is becoming warm, it will result in irreversible damage to various ecosystems within the next few years. One of the most prominent evidence of global warming effects on Earth is decline in population of species that is being witnessed all over the world.
 
Global Warming Effects on the Wildlife
 
The climatic system of our planet is vulnerable to changes in global temperature, as a result of which a rise in temperature by a few degrees can have severe repercussions on the overall climate pattern. While these changes were unheard of until a few years back, a look around and you will get to see some obvious modifications in your surroundings. While retreating glaciers and melting polar ice happen to be signs of climate change at high altitudes and in polar areas respectively, extremely hot summers, freezing of lakes well in advance, spring ice breaking way before schedule, untimely precipitation, are signs of the same in your own surroundings. The change in climatic pattern is also fueling natural disasters, and the rise in frequency of hurricanes, wildfires, etc., hint at this very fact. All these changes together are not just coming heavy on humans, but are also taking a toll on plants and animals on the planet. Discussed below are the details about the effects of global warming on wildlife.
 
	Loss of Habitat for Species
 	
	The impact of global warming on wildlife is best depicted by habitat loss for numerous species of plants as well as animals. The polar region is home to a

 number of species which have adapted themselves to the cold conditions that exist there. If average global temperature continues to soar, the polar climate will

 also change, and that in turn, will trigger a series of changes in the polar ecosystem. It will become difficult for animals like the Arctic fox, polar bear,

 caribou, snow owl, etc., to adapt to these quick changes, and they will start moving further north in search of ideal abiotic conditions. Similar situation will

 arise in high altitude regions, wherein the species will be forced to move higher in search of ideal abiotic conditions. More importantly, it's not just the animals

 which are moving north, but even plants - like the sugar maple trees, are doing the same thing. This will eventually trigger habitat loss for several species - as a

 result of which the competition within species will intensify, and eventually result in their extinction.
 
	One of the best examples of animals threatened by global warming is the polar bear. In fact, it deserves to be the mascot of global warming affected wild

 kingdom. Even though this species of bear is enlisted as vulnerable in the IUCN Red List as of today, experts are of the opinion that we will have to shift them to

 the list of endangered species sometime soon. In fact, trends suggest that the polar bear population will decline to one-third of what it is today by the year 2050.

 .These bears tend to rely on the massive chunks of floating ice when it comes to hunting, and melting of these ice chunks makes it difficult for them to hunt - thus

 leaving them without food.
 
 .Even though polar bears can swim, they require to take rest after short span of time and with no ice chunks to take rest on, things are becoming increasingly

 difficult for them.
 
.All this is taking a toll on their biology, and reproduction trends in this species hints at this very fact, with female polar bears having a tough time rearing

 their young ones.
 	
	Habitat loss triggered as a result of global warming has even more disastrous effects on species with a limited range, and the golden toad - native to

 Monteverde cloud forest of Costa Rica, is one of the best examples of the same. This species became extinct when a fungal epidemic swept through this region, thus

 bringing about a severe decline in golden toad population. This epidemic was attributed to warm temperature which resulted in conditions ideal for fungal growth.

 The few tadpoles which managed to survive this epidemic, eventually succumbed to drying of water sources as a result of increasing temperature. The golden toad is

 a representative of several amphibian species which succumbed to this condition somewhere between 1980s and 1990s.
 
	Change in Migration Pattern
 	
	The effects of global warming on animals which resort to migration have also become quite obvious over the last few years, as their migration timing and

 pattern are put out of sync by the changes in climatic conditions. Animals rely on temperature changes to begin their migratory journey. For instance, animals which

 migrate from cold regions of the higher latitudes to the warm regions of the tropics - and back, begin their migration when the temperature reaches certain degrees.

 The alteration in climate pattern of late is prompting these animals to begin their journey before schedule, as a result of which they reach their destination way

 before time, only to be welcomed by shortage of food. This is evident in various parts of the world wherein migratory species returning from breeding grounds to

 feeding grounds with their young ones before schedule are facing a severe shortage of food.
 
	Severe Shortage of Food
 	
	Shortage of food is also resulting in quite a few complications among species. Krill population in the Antarctic Ocean has come down by 80-85 percent, and

 this has left penguin species with krill as a major constituent of their with no food to eat. This has brought down the population of species like the Emperor

 penguin by 50 percent. The penguins are not the only ones who are affected by the decline in krill population in Antarctica, even animals like whales and seals are

 facing food problems because of this. It isn't much surprising that this dearth of food has prompted several species to resort to cannibalism as the last measure of

 survival.
 
	Change in Reproductive Behavior
 	
	All these changes induced by global warming have brought about several changes in the behavior of animals as well. Several species are giving birth to their

 young ones before or after schedule to make sure that the birth of these young ones coincides with availability of food. One of the apt examples of the same is the

 blue tit species (Parus caeruleus) which is known to feed on leaf-eating grubs. Unfurling of leaves before time is attracting leaf-eating grubs in large numbers.

 Blue tits have started laying their eggs two weeks earlier than the schedule so as to make sure that food is available in plenty for their young ones when these

 eggs hatch. Even hibernating animals - like marmots, have pre-poned their hibernation by approximately 3 weeks.
 
	Rising Instances of Pest Outbreaks

 	Warm temperatures have created conditions ideal for the growth of insects, and this in turn has increased the instances of pest outbreaks in various forests

 of the world. Insects that were restricted to the tropical regions of the world at one point of time, are now found in abundance in higher latitudes. Rise in the

 instances of spruce budworm outbreak is turning out to be lethal for the spruce trees, as they don't just lay eggs on these trees but also feed on their leaves.
 
With that we covered some of the astonishing facts on how global warming is changing the wild kingdom. If coyotes - native to North American prairie grasslands, and

 tigers - native to the sundarbans of southeast Asia, are encroaching on human settlements today, it is only because of loss of habitat and severe shortage of food

 that they are facing as a result of change in global temperature. This is just one example on how global warming effects can affect us indirectly. It wouldn't be

 surprising to see more of such instances in future, as more than a million plants and animals are expected to be put on an irreversible path of extinction by global

 warming by the year 2050. 





  

