Introduction to Quantum Mechanics
Planck's constant in action
Classical physics is dominated by two fundamental concepts. The first is the
concept of a particle, a discrete entity with definite position and momentum
which moves in accordance with Newton's laws of motion. The second is the
concept of an electromagnetic wave, an extended physical entity with a presence
at every point in space that is provided by electric and magnetic fields
which change in accordance with Maxwell's laws of electromagnetism. The
classical world picture is neat and tidy: the laws of particle motion account for
the material world around us and the laws of electromagnetic fields account
for the light waves which illuminate this world.
This classical picture began to crumble in 1900 whenMax Planck published a
theory of black-body radiation; i.e. a theory of thermal radiation in equilibrium
with a perfectly absorbing body. Planck provided an explanation of the observed
properties of black-body radiation by assuming that atoms emit and
absorb discrete quanta of radiation with energy E ? hn, where n is the frequency
of the radiation and h is a fundamental constant of nature with value
h ? 6:626  10
ÿ34 J s:
This constant is now called Planck's constant.
In this chapter we shall see that Planck's constant has a strange role of
linking wave-like and particle-like properties. In so doing it reveals that physics
cannot be based on two distinct, unrelated concepts, the concept of a particle
and the concept of a wave. These classical concepts, it seems, are at best
approximate descriptions of reality.
1.1 PHOTONS
Photons are particle-like quanta of electromagnetic radiation. They travel at
the speed of light c with momentum p and energy E given by
p ? h
l
and E ? hc
l
, (1:1)
where l is the wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation. In comparison with
macroscopic standards, the momentum and energy of a photon are tiny. For
example, the momentum and energy of a visible photon with wavelength
l ? 663nm are
p ? 10
ÿ27 J s and E ? 3  10
ÿ19 J:
We note that an electronvolt, 1 eV ? 1:602  10ÿ19 J, is a useful unit for the
energy of a photon: visible photons have energies of the order of an eV and
X-ray photons have energies of the order of 10 keV.
The evidence for the existence of photons emerged during the early years
of the twentieth century. In 1923 the evidence became compelling when
A. H. Compton showed that the wavelength of an X-ray increases when it is
scattered by an atomic electron. This effect, which is now called the Compton
effect, can be understood by assuming that the scattering process is a photon±
electron collision in which energy and momentum are conserved. As illustrated
in Fig. 1.1, the incident photon transfers momentum to a stationary electron so
that the scattered photon has a lower momentum and hence a longer wavelength.
In fact, when the photon is scattered through an angle y by a stationary
electron of mass me, the increase in wavelength is given by
Dl ? h
mec
(1 ÿ cos y): (1:2)
We note that the magnitude of this increase in wavelength is set by
Pf
p
i
p
f
q
Fig. 1.1 A photon±electron collision in which a photon is scattered by a stationary
electron through an angle y. Because the electron recoils with momentum Pf , the
magnitude of the photon momentum decreases from pi to pf and the photon wavelength
increases.
2 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
h
mec
? 2:43  10
ÿ12 m,
a fundamental length called the Compton wavelength of the electron.
The concept of a photon provides a natural explanation of the Compton
effect and of other particle-like electromagnetic phenomena such as the photoelectric
effect. However, it is not clear how the photon can account for the
wave-like properties of electromagnetic radiation. We shall illustrate this difficulty
by considering the two-slit interference experiment which was first used by
Thomas Young in 1801 to measure the wavelength of light.
The essential elements of a two-slit interference are shown in Fig. 1.2. When
electromagnetic radiation passes through the two slits it forms a pattern of
interference fringes on a screen. These fringes arise because wave-like disturbances
from each slit interfere constructively or destructively when they arrive at
the screen. But a close examination of the interference pattern reveals that it is
the result of innumerable photons which arrive at different points on the screen,
as illustrated in Fig. 1.3. In fact, when the intensity of the light is very low, the
interference pattern builds up slowly as photons arrive, one by one, at random
points on the screen after seemingly passing through both slits in a wave-like
way. These photons are not behaving like classical particles with well-defined
trajectories. Instead, when presented with two possible trajectories, one for
each slit, they seem to pass along both trajectories, arrive at a random point
on the screen and build up an interference pattern.
D
R2
R1
P
X
d
Wave-like entity
incident on two slits
Fig. 1.2 A schematic illustration of a two-slit interference experiment consisting of two
slits with separation d and an observation screen at distance D. Equally spaced bright
and dark fringes are observed when wave-like disturbances from the two slits interfere
constructively and destructively on the screen. Constructive interference occurs at the
point P, at a distance x from the centre of the screen, when the path difference R1 ÿ R2 is
an integer number of wavelengths. This path difference is equal to xd=D if d << D.
1.1 Photons 3
Pattern formed by 100 quantum particles
Pattern formed by 1000 quantum particles
Pattern formed by 10 000 quantum particles
Fig. 1.3 A computer generated simulation of the build-up of a two-slit interference
pattern. Each dot records the detection of a quantum particle on a screen positioned
behind two slits. Patterns formed by 100, 1000 and 10 000 quantum particles are
illustrated.
At first sight the particle-like and wave-like properties of the photon are
strange. But they are not peculiar. We shall soon see that electrons, neutrons,
atoms and molecules also behave in this strange way.
1.2 DE BROGLIE WAVES
The possibility that particles of matter like electrons could be both particle-like
and wave-like was first proposed by Louis de Broglie in 1923. Specifically he
proposed that a particle of matter with momentum p could act as a wave with
wavelength
l ? h
p
: (1:3)
This wavelength is now called the de Broglie wavelength.
4 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
It is often useful to write the de Broglie wavelength in terms of the energy of
the particle. The general relation between the relativistic energy E and the
momentum p of a particle of mass m is
E2 ÿ p2c2 ? m2c4: (1:4)
This implies that the de Broglie wavelength of a particle with relativistic energy
E is given by
l ? hc 
(E ÿ mc2)(E ? mc2)
p : (1:5)
When the particle is ultra-relativistic we can neglect mass energy mc2 and obtain
l ? hc
E
, (1:6)
an expression which agrees with the relation between energy and wavelength for
a photon given in Eq. (1.1). When the particle is non-relativistic, we can set
E ? mc2 ? E,
where E ? p2=2m is the kinetic energy of a non-relativistic particle, and obtain
l ? h 
2mE
p : (1:7)
In practice, the de Broglie wavelength of a particle of matter is small and
difficult to measure. However, we see from Eq. (1.7) that particles of lower
mass have longer wavelengths, which implies that the wave properties of the
lightest particle of matter, the electron, should be the easiest to detect. The
wavelength of a non-relativistic electron is obtained by substituting
m ? me ? 9:109  10ÿ31kg into Eq. (1.7). If we express the kinetic energy E
in electron volts, we obtain
l ?

1:5
E
r
nm: (1:8)
From this equation we immediately see that an electron with energy of 1.5 eV
has a wavelength of 1 nm and that an electron with energy of 15 keV has a
wavelength of 0.01 nm.
Because these wavelengths are comparable with the distances between atoms
in crystalline solids, electrons with energies in the eV to keV range are diffracted
1.2 De Broglie Waves 5
by crystal lattices. Indeed, the first experiments to demonstrate the wave
properties of electrons were crystal diffraction experiments by C. J. Davisson
and L. H. Germer and by G. P. Thomson in 1927. Davisson's experiment
involved electrons with energy around 54 eV and wavelength 0.17nm which
were diffracted by the regular array of atoms on the surface of a crystal of
nickel. In Thomson's experiment, electrons with energy around 40 keV and
wavelength 0.006nm were passed through a polycrystalline target and diffracted
by randomly orientated microcrystals. These experiments showed
beyond doubt that electrons can behave like waves with a wavelength given
by the de Broglie relation Eq. (1.3).
Since 1927, many experiments have shown that protons, neutrons, atoms and
molecules also have wave-like properties. However, the conceptual implications
of these properties are best explored by reconsidering the two-slit interference
experiment illustrated in Fig. 1.2. We recall that a photon passing through two
slits gives rise to wave-like disturbances which interfere constructively and
destructively when the photon is detected on a screen positioned behind the
slits. Particles of matter behave in a similar way. A particle of matter, like a
photon, gives rise to wave-like disturbances which interfere constructively and
destructively when the particle is detected on a screen. As more and more
particles pass through the slits, an interference pattern builds up on the observation
screen. This remarkable behaviour is illustrated in Fig. 1.3.
Interference patterns formed by a variety of particles passing through two
slits have been observed experimentally. For example, two-slit interference patterns
formed by electrons have been observed by A. Tonomura, J. Endo,
T. Matsuda, T. Kawasaki and H. Exawa (American Journal of Physics, vol. 57,
p. 117 (1989)). They also demonstrated that a pattern still emerges even when the
source is so weak that only one electron is in transit at any one time, confirming
that each electron seems to pass through both slits in a wave-like way before
detection at a random point on the observation screen. Two-slit interference
experiments have been carried out using neutrons by R. GaÈhler and A. Zeilinger
(American Journal of Physics, vol. 59, p. 316 (1991) ), and using atoms by
O. Carnal and J. Mlynek (Physical Review Letters, vol. 66, p. 2689 (1991) ).
Even molecules as complicated as C60 molecules have been observed to exhibit
similar interference effects as seen by M. Arndt et al. (Nature, vol. 401, p. 680
(1999) ).
These experiments demonstrate that particles of matter, like photons, are not
classical particles with well-defined trajectories. Instead, when presented with
two possible trajectories, one for each slit, they seem to pass along both
trajectories in a wave-like way, arrive at a random point on the screen and
build up an interference pattern. In all cases the pattern consists of fringes
with a spacing of lD=d, where d is the slit separation, D is the screen distance
and l is the de Broglie wavelength given by Eq. (1.3).
Physicists have continued to use the ambiguous word particle to describe
these remarkable microscopic objects. We shall live with this ambiguity, but we
6 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
shall occasionally use the term quantum particle to remind the reader that the
object under consideration has particle and wave-like properties. We have used
this term in Fig. 1.3 because this figure provides a compelling illustration of
particle and wave-like properties. Finally, we emphasize the role of Planck's
constant in linking the particle and wave-like properties of a quantum particle.
If Planck's constant were zero, all de Broglie wavelengths would be zero and
particles of matter would only exhibit classical, particle-like properties.
1.3 ATOMS
It is well known that atoms can exist in states with discrete or quantized energy.
For example, the energy levels for the hydrogen atom, consisting of an electron
and a proton, are shown in Fig. 1.4. Later in this book we shall show that
bound states of an electron and a proton have quantized energies given by
Continuum
of unbound
energy levels E` = 0
E3 = - 13.6
32
eV
E2 = - 13.6
22
eV
E1 = - 13.6
12
eV
Fig. 1.4 A simplified energy level diagram for the hydrogen atom. To a good approximation
the bound states have quantized energies given by En ? ÿ13:6=n2 eV where n, the
principal quantum number, can equal 1, 2, 3, . . . . When the excitation energy is above
13.6 eV, the atom is ionized and its energy can, in principle, take on any value in the
continuum between E ? 0 and E ? 1.
1.3 Atoms 7
En ? ÿ13:6
n2
eV, (1:9)
where n is a number, called the principal quantum number, which can take on an
infinite number of the values, n ? 1, 2, 3, . . . . The ground state of the hydrogen
atom has n ? 1, a first excited state has n ? 2 and so on. When the excitation
energy is above 13.6 eV, the electron is no longer bound to the proton; the atom
is ionized and its energy can, in principle, take on any value in the continuum
between E ? 0 and E ? 1.
The existence of quantized atomic energy levels is demonstrated by the
observation of electromagnetic spectra with sharp spectral lines that arise
when an atom makes a transition between two quantized energy levels. For
example, a transition between hydrogen-atom states with ni and nf leads to a
spectral line with a wavelength l given by
hc
l
? jEni
ÿ Enf
j:
Some of the spectral lines of atomic hydrogen are illustrated in Fig. 1.5.
Quantized energy levels of atoms may also be revealed by scattering processes.
For example, when an electron passes through mercury vapour it has a
high probability of losing energy when its energy exceeds 4.2 eV, which is the
quantized energy difference between the ground and first excited state of a
mercury atom. Moreover, when this happens the excited mercury atoms subsequently
emit photons with energy E ? 4:2 eV and wavelength
l ? hc
E
? 254 nm:
200 nm 400 nm 600 nm
Fig. 1.5 Spectral lines of atomic hydrogen. The series of lines in the visible part of the
electromagnetic spectrum, called the Balmer series, arises from transitions between
states with principal quantum number n ? 3, 4, 5, . . . and a state with n ? 2. The series
of lines in the ultraviolet, called the Lyman series, arises from transitions between states
with principal quantum number n ? 2, 3, . . . and the ground state with n ? 1.
8 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
But quantized energy levels are not the most amazing property of atoms.
Atoms are surprisingly resilient: in most situations they are unaffected when
they collide with neighbouring atoms, but if they are excited by such encounters
they quickly return to their original pristine condition. In addition, atoms of the
same chemical element are identical: somehow the atomic number Z, the
number of electrons in the atom, fixes a specific identity which is common to
all atoms with this number of electrons. Finally, there is a wide variation in
chemical properties, but there is a surprisingly small variation in size; for
example, an atom of mercury with 80 electrons is only three times bigger than
a hydrogen atom with one electron.
These remarkable properties show that atoms are not mini solar systems in
which particle-like electrons trace well-defined, classical orbits around a nucleus.
Such an atom would be unstable because the orbiting electrons would
radiate electromagnetic energy and fall into the nucleus. Even in the absence of
electromagnetic radiation, the pattern of orbits in such an atom would change
whenever the atom collided with another atom. Thus, this classical picture
cannot explain why atoms are stable, why atoms of the same chemical element
are always identical or why atoms have a surprisingly small variation in
size.
In fact, atoms can only be understood by focussing on the wave-like properties
of atomic electrons. To some extent atoms behave like musical instruments.
When a violin string vibrates with definite frequency, it forms a standing wave
pattern of specific shape. When wave-like electrons, with definite energy, are
confined inside an atom, they form a wave pattern of specific shape. An atom is
resilient because, when left alone, it assumes the shape of the electron wave
pattern of lowest energy, and when the atom is in this state of lowest energy
there is no tendency for the electrons to radiate energy and fall into the nucleus.
However, atomic electrons can be excited and assume the shapes of wave
patterns of higher quantized energy.
One of the most surprising characteristics of electron waves in an atom is that
they are entangled so that it is not possible to tell which electron is which. As a
result, the possible electron wave patterns are limited to those that are compatible
with a principle called the Pauli exclusion principle. These patterns, for an
atom with an atomic number Z, uniquely determine the chemical properties of
all atoms with this atomic number.
All these ideas will be considered in more detail in subsequent chapters, but
at this stage we can show that the wave nature of atomic electrons provides a
natural explanation for the typical size of atoms. Because the de Broglie
wavelength of an electron depends upon the magnitude of Planck's constant
h and the electron mass me, the size of an atom consisting of wave-like electrons
also depends upon h and me. We also expect a dependence on the strength of
the force which binds an electron to a nucleus; this is proportional to e2=4pE0,
where e is the magnitude of the charge on an electron and on a proton. Thus,
the order of magnitude of the size of atoms is expected to be a function of
1.3 Atoms 9
e2=4pE0, me and h (or h ? h=2p). In fact, the natural unit of length for atomic
size is the Bohr radius which is given by1
a0 ? 4pE0
e2
 
h2
me
? 0:529  10
ÿ10 m: (1:10)
Given this natural length, we can write down a natural unit for atomic
binding energies. This is called the Rydberg energy and it is given by
ER ? e2
8pE0a0
? 13:6 eV: (1:11)
We note, that the binding energy of a hydrogen-atom state with principal
quantum number n is ER=n2.
The Bohr radius was introduced by Niels Bohr in 1913 in a paper which
presented a very successful model of the atom. Even though the Bohr model is
an out-dated mixture of classical physics and ad-hoc postulates, the central idea
of the model is still relevant. This idea is that Planck's constant has a key role in
the mechanics of atomic electrons. Bohr expressed the idea in the following way:
The result of the discussion of these questions seems to be the general
acknowledgment of the inadequacy of the classical electrodynamics in
describing the behaviour of systems of atomic size. Whatever alteration in
the laws of motion of electrons may be, it seems necessary to introduce in
the laws in question a quantity foreign to the classical electrodynamics;
i.e., Planck's constant, or as it is often called, the elementary quantum of
action. By introduction of this quantity the question of the stable configuration
of the electrons in atoms is essentially changed, as this constant is
of such dimensions and magnitude that it, together with the mass and the
charge of the particles, can determine a length of the order of the magnitude
required.
Ten years after this was written, it was realised that Planck's constant has a role
in atoms because it links the particle-like and wave-like properties of atomic
electrons.
1.4 MEASUREMENT
In classical physics, the act of measurement need not affect the object under
observation because the disturbance associated with the measurement can be
1 In this dimensional analysis argument we have not included a dependence on the velocity of light c
because electrons in atoms are, to a good approximation, non-relativistic.
10 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
made arbitrarily small. Accordingly, the properties of a classical object can be
specified with precision and without reference to the process of measurement.
This is not the case in quantum physics. Here measurement plays an active and
disturbing role. Because of this, quantum particles are best described within the
context of the possible outcomes of measurements. We shall illustrate the role
of measurement in quantum mechanics by introducing the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle and then use this principle to show how measurement provides
a framework for describing particle-like and wave-like quantum particles.
The uncertainty principle
We shall introduce the uncertainty principle for the position and momentum of
a particle by considering a famous thought experiment due to Werner Heisenberg
in which the position of a particle is measured using a microscope. The
particle is illuminated and the scattered light is collected by the lens of a
microscope as shown in Fig. 1.6.
Because of the wave-like properties of light, the microscope has a finite
spatial resolving power. This means that the position of the observed particle
has an uncertainty given approximately by
Dx  l
sin a
, (1:12)
where l is the wavelength of the illumination and 2a is the angle subtended
by the lens at the particle. We note that the resolution can be improved by
reducing the wavelength of the radiation illuminating the particle; visible
light waves are better than microwaves, and X-rays are better than visible light
waves.
Scattered
radiation
Observed
particle
2a
Microscope
lens
Incident
radiation
Fig. 1.6 A schematic illustration of the observation of a particle using the Heisenberg
microscope. The particle scatters electromagnetic radiation with wavelength l into a lens
with angular aperture 2a and its position is determined with an uncertainty of
Dx  l= sin a.
1.4 Measurement 11
However, because of the particle-like properties of light, the process of
observation involves innumerable photon±particle collisions, with the scattered
photons entering the lens of the microscope. To enter the lens, a scattered
photon with wavelength l and momentum h=l must have a sideways momentum
between
ÿ h
l
sin a and ? h
l
sin a:
Thus the sideways momentum of the scattered photon is uncertain to the degree
Dp  h
l
sin a: (1:13)
The sideways momentum of the observed particle has a similar uncertainty,
because momentum is conserved when the photon scatters.
We note that we can reduce the uncertainty in the momentum of the observed
particle by increasing the wavelength of the radiation illuminating the particle,
but this would result in a poorer spatial resolution of the microscope and an
increase in the uncertainty in the position of the particle. Indeed, by combining
Eq. (1.12) and Eq. (1.13), we find that the uncertainties in the position and in the
momentum of the observed particle are approximately related by
Dx Dp  h: (1:14)
This result is called the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. It asserts that greater
accuracy in position is possible only at the expense of greater uncertainty in
momentum, and vice versa. The precise statement of the principle is that the
fundamental uncertainties in the simultaneous knowledge of the position and
momentum of a particle obey the inequality
DxDp  h
2
, where h ? h
2p
: (1:15)
We shall derive this inequality in Section 7.4 of Chapter 7.
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle suggests that a precise determination of
position, one with Dx ? 0, is possible at the expense of total uncertainty in
momentum. In fact, an analysis of the microscope experiment, which takes into
account the Compton effect, shows that a completely precise determination of
position is impossible. According to the Compton effect, Eq. (1.2), the wavelength
of a scattered photon is increased by
Dl ? h
mc
(1 ÿ cos y),
12 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
where m is the mass of the observed particle and y is an angle of scatter which
will take the photon into the microscope lens. This implies that, even if we
illuminate the particle with radiation of zero wavelength to get the best possible
spatial resolution, the radiation entering the microscope lens has a wavelength
of the order of h=mc. It follows that the resolution given by Eq. (1.12) is at best
Dx  l
sin a
 h
mc sin a
, (1:16)
which means that the minimum uncertainty in the position of an observed
particle of mass m is of the order of h=mc.
Our analysis of Heisenberg's microscope experiment has illustrated the role
of Planck's constant in a measurement: The minimum uncertainties in the
position and momentum of an observed particle are related by DxDp  h, and
the minimum uncertainty in position is not zero but of the order of h=mc.
However, readers are warned that Heisenberg's microscope experiment can be
misleading. In particular, readers should resist the temptation to believe that a
particle can really have a definite position and momentum, which, because of
the clumsy nature of the observation, cannot be measured. In fact, there is no
evidence for the existence of particles with definite position and momentum.
This concept is an unobservable idealization or a figment of the imagination of
classical physicists. Indeed, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle can be considered
as a danger signal which tells us how far we can go in using the classical
concepts of position and momentum without getting into trouble with reality.
Measurement and wave±particle duality
In practice, the particle-like properties of a quantum particle are observed when
it is detected, whereas its wave-like properties are inferred from the random
nature of the observed particle-like properties. For example, in a two-slit
experiment, particle-like properties are observed when the position of a quantum
particle is measured on the screen, but the wave-like passage of the
quantum particle through both the slits is not observed. It is inferred from a
pattern of arrival at the screen which could only arise from the interference of
two wave-like disturbances from the two slits.
However, the inferred properties of a quantum particle depend on the experiment
and on the measurements that can take place in this experiment. We shall
illustrate this subjective characteristic of a quantum particle by considering a
modification of the two-slit experiment in which the screen can either be held
fixed or be allowed to move as shown in Fig. 1.7.
When the pin in Fig. 1.7 is inserted, detectors on a fixed screen precisely
measure the position of each arriving particle and an interference pattern builds
with fringes separated by a distance of lD=d.
1.4 Measurement 13
d
Quantum particles
incident on two slits
Pin which
holds or
releases screen
Vertical
momentum
sensor
D
Fig. 1.7 A modified two-slit experiment in which the screen may move vertically and
become a part of a detection system which identifies the slit through which each particle
passes.
When the pin is withdrawn, the screen becomes a mobile detection system
which is sensitive to the momentum p ? h=l of the particles hitting the screen.
It recoils when a particle arrives and, by measuring this recoil accurately, we
can measure the vertical momentum of the particle detected at the screen and
hence identify the slit from which the particle came. For example, near the
centre of the screen, a particle from the upper slit has a downward momentum
of pd=2D and a particle from the lower slit has an upward momentum of
pd=2D. In general, the difference in vertical momenta of particles from the
two slits is approximately Dp  pd=D. Thus, if the momentum of the recoiling
screen is measured with an accuracy of
Dp  pd
D
, (1:17)
we can identify the slit from which each particle emerges. When this is the case,
a wave-like passage through both slits is not possible and an interference
pattern should not build up. This statement can be verified by considering the
uncertainties involved in the measurement of the momentum of the screen.
The screen is governed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and an
accurate measurement of its momentum is only possible at the expense of an
uncertainty in its position. In particular, if the uncertainty in the vertical
momentum of the screen is Dp  pd=D, so that we can just identify the slit
through which each particle passes, then the minimum uncertainty in the
vertical position of the screen is
Dx  h
Dp
 hD
pd
: (1:18)
14 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
This uncertainty in position can be rewritten in terms of the wavelength of the
particle. Using p ? h=l, we obtain
Dx  lD
d
: (1:19)
We note that this uncertainty in the vertical position of the screen is sufficient to
wash out the interference fringes which would have a spacing of lD=d. Hence,
when the pin in Fig. 1.7 is withdrawn so that the recoiling screen can signal the
slit from which a particle comes, no interference pattern builds up and no wavelike
passage through both slits is inferred.
This thought experiment illustrates how the concepts of measurement and
uncertainty can be used to provide a logical and consistent description of the
wave-particle properties of quantum particles. In particular, it shows that,
when it is possible to identify the slit through which a particle passes, there is
no wave-like passage through both slits, but when there is no possibility of
identifying the slit, the particle covertly passes through both slits in a wave-like
way. In fact, the wave-like behaviour of quantum particles is always covert.
Unlike a classical electromagnetic wave, the wave describing a quantum particle
cannot be directly observed.2
Finally, some readers may find it instructively disturbing to consider a
further variation of the two-slit experiment which was pointed out by Wheeler
in 1978. In this variation, we imagine a situation in which the choice of the
experimental arrangement in Fig. 1.7 is delayed until after the particle has
passed the slits. We could, for example, insert the pin and fix the position of
the screen just before each particle arrives at the screen. In this case an
interference pattern builds up, which is characteristic of wave-like particles
which pass through both slits. Alternatively, just before each particle arrives
at the screen, we could withdraw the pin so as to allow the screen to recoil and
determine the slit from which the particle comes. In this case, no interference
pattern builds up.
Thus, a delayed choice of the experimental arrangement seems to influence
the behaviour of the particle at an earlier time. The choice of arrangement
seems to make history, either a history in which the particle passes through
both slits or a history in which it passes through one or other of the slits. Before
you dismiss this as unacceptable behaviour, note that the history created in this
experiment is not classical history. The particles concerned are not classical
2 A real experiment of this kind is described by Greenberger (Reviews of Modern Physics vol. 55,
1983). In this experiment polarized neutrons, that is neutrons with their spin orientated in a
specific direction, pass through two slits. The polarization of the neutrons which pass through one
of the slits is reversed, and then the intensity of neutrons with a specific polarization is measured
at the screen. If the specific polarization at the screen is chosen so that one cannot infer through
which slit each neutron passes, an interference pattern builds up. If it is chosen so that one can
infer through which slit each neutron passes, no interference pattern builds up.
1.4 Measurement 15
particles which pass through one slit or the other, nor are they classical waves
which pass through both slits. They are quantum particles which have the
capability to behave in both of these ways, but only one of these ways may
be inferred in a particular experimental arrangement. The history created in a
delayed choice experiment is an inferred history of a quantum particle.
Measurement and non-locality
The most important implication of this discussion of measurement is that
quantum mechanics only describes what we can know about the world. For
example, because we cannot know the position and momentum of an electron
with precision, we cannot describe a world in which an electron has both a
precise position and momentum. In the standard interpretation of quantum
mechanics, a precise position or a precise momentum of an electron can be
brought into existence by a measurement, but no attempt is made to explain
how this occurs.
That properties are brought into existence by measurement is not restricted
to the measurement of the position or momentum of a single particle. It applies
to other observable properties of a quantum particle and also to systems of
quantum particles. Amazingly systems of quantum particles exist in which a
measurement at one location can bring into existence a property at a remote
location. In other words a measurement here can affect things over there. Thus,
measurements can have a non-local impact on our knowledge of the world.
The non-local nature of quantum mechanical measurement is best illustrated
by considering a particular situation in which two photons are emitted by
excited states of an atom. These photons may move off in opposite directions
with the same polarization in the following meaning of the word same: If the
photon moving to the East, say, is observed to have right-hand circular polarization,
then the photon moving to the West is certain to be found to have
right-hand circular polarization. But if the photon moving to the East is
observed to have left-hand circular polarization, then the photon moving to
the West is certain to be found to have left-hand circular polarization.
This behaviour would be unremarkable if right and left-hand polarization
were two alternatives which were created at the moment the two photons were
emitted. But this is not the case. At the moment of emission an entangled state is
created in which the photons are simultaneously right and left-handed, but only
one of these two alternatives is brought into existence by a subsequent measurement.
Amazingly, when this measurement is performed on one of the
photons, say the photon moving East, there are two outcomes: The observed
photon moving to the East has a specific polarization and the unobserved
photon moving West immediately has the same polarization.
This system of entangled photons is equivalent to having two ambidextrous
gloves separated by a large distance but linked in such a way that if one glove
16 Planck's constant in action Chap. 1
becomes a right-hand glove, the other automatically becomes a right-hand
glove. The quantum mechanical reasons for this unexpected togetherness of
distant objects are that:
(1) the initial state of the gloves is a superposition of right and left-handedness,
in much the same way as the state of a quantum particle can be a linear
superposition of two waves passing through two slits; and
(2) a measurement not only disturbs what is measured but also brings into
existence what is measured.
Needless to say, it is not possible to fully justify these arguments at the
beginning of a book whose aim is to introduce the theory of quantum particles.
But these arguments form a part of a logically consistent theory and they are
supported by experimental observations, particularly by Alain Aspect and his
colleagues; see, for example, The Quantum Challenge by G. Greenstein and
A. G. Zajonc, (Jones and Bartlett, 1997).
The topics considered in this chapter provide the guidelines for a theory of
quantum particles. Most importantly, the theory must provide a way of dealing
with the particle and wave-like properties of quantum particles and in so doing it
must involve the constant which links these properties, Planck's constant. In
addition, the theory must recognize that measurement is not a passive act which
has no effect on the observed system, but a way of creating a particular property
of the system. The basic elements of such a theory will be developed in the next
three chapters and then further developed by application in subsequent chapters.
This development necessarily entails abstract mathematical concepts, but the
results are not abstract because they describe what we can know about the world.
However, we shall limit our dissussion to a world of non-relativistic particles
Relativistic particles, like photons, will not be considered because this presents
the additional challenge of dealing with the creation and destruction of particles.
The SchroÈ dinger equation
The first step in the development of a logically consistent theory of nonrelativistic
quantum mechanics is to devise a wave equation which can describe
the covert, wave-like behaviour of a quantum particle. This equation is called
the SchroÈdinger equation.
The role of the SchroÈdinger equation in quantum mechanics is analogous to
that of Newton's Laws in classical mechanics. Both describe motion. Newton's
Second Law is a differential equation which describes how a classical particle
moves, whereas the SchroÈdinger equation is a partial differential equation
which describes how the wave function representing a quantum particle ebbs
and flows. In addition, both were postulated and then tested by experiment.
2.1 WAVES
As a prelude to the SchroÈdinger equation, we shall review how mathematics can
be used to describe waves of various shapes and sizes.
Sinusoidal waves
The most elegant wave is a sinusoidal travelling wave with definite wavelength
l and period t, or equivalently definite wave number, k ? 2p=l, and angular
frequency, ! ? 2p=t. Such a wave may be represented by the mathematical
function
C(x, t) ? Acos (kx ÿ !t) (2:1)
where A is a constant. At each point x, the function C(x, t) oscillates with
amplitude A and period 2p=!. At each time t, the function C(x, t) undulates
with amplitude A and wavelength 2p=k. Moreover, these undulations move,
like a Mexican wave, in the direction of increasing x with velocity !=k; for
example, the maximum of C(x, t) corresponding to kx ÿ !t ? 0 occurs at the
position x ? !t=k, and the minimum corresponding to kx ÿ !t ? p occurs at
the position x ? l=2 ? !t=k; in both cases the position moves with velocity
!=k.
The function sin (kx ÿ !t), like cos (kx ÿ !t), also represents a sinusoidal
travelling wave with wave number k and angular frequency !. Because
sin (kx ÿ !t) ? cos (kx ÿ !t ÿ p=2),
the undulations and oscillations of sin (kx ÿ !t) are out of step with those of
cos (kx ÿ !t); the waves sin (kx ÿ !t) and cos (kx ÿ !t) are said to have a phase
difference of p=2. The most general sinusoidal travelling wave with wave
number k and angular frequency ! is the linear superposition
C(x, t) ? Acos (kx ÿ !t) ? B sin (kx ÿ !t), (2:2)
where A and B are arbitrary constants.
Very often in classical physics, and invariably in quantum physics, sinusoidal
travelling waves are represented by complex exponential functions of the form
C(x, t) ? Aei(kxÿ!t): (2:3)
The representation of waves by complex exponentials in classical physics is
merely a mathematical convenience. For example, the pressure in a sound wave
may be described by the real function Acos (kx ÿ !t), but this real function
may be taken to be the real part of a complex exponential function Aei(kxÿ!t)
because
ei(kxÿ!t) ? cos (kx ÿ !t) ? i sin (kx ÿ !t):
Thus, in classical physics, we have the option of representing a real sinusoidal
wave by the real part of a complex exponential. In quantum physics, however,
the use of complex numbers is not an option and we shall see that a complex
exponential provides a natural description of a de Broglie wave.
Linear superpositions of sinusoidal waves
Two sinusoidal waves moving in opposite directions may be combined to form
standing waves. For example, the linear superposition
Acos (kx ÿ !t) ? Acos (kx ? !t)
22 The SchroÈdinger equation Chap. 2
gives rise to the wave 2Acos kx cos !t. This wave oscillates with period 2p=!
and undulates with wavelength 2p=k, but these oscillations and undulations do
not propagate; it is a non-Mexican wave which merely stands and waves.
Alternatively, many sinusoidal waves may be combined to form a wave
packet. For example, the mathematical form of a wave packet formed by a
linear superposition of sinusoidal waves with constant amplitude A and wave
numbers in the range k ÿ Dk to k ? Dk is
C(x, t) ?
Z k?Dk
kÿDk
Acos (k
0
x ÿ !
0
t) dk
0
: (2:4)
If k is positive, this wave packet travels in the positive x direction, and in the
negative x direction if k is negative.
The initial shape of the wave packet, i.e. the shape at t ? 0, may be obtained
by evaluating the integral
C(x, 0) ?
Z k?Dk
kÿDk
Acos k
0
x dk
0
:
This gives
C(x, 0) ? S(x) cos kx, where S(x) ? 2ADk
sin (Dkx)
(Dkx)
: (2:5)
If Dk << k, we have a rapidly varying sinusoidal, cos kx, with an amplitude
modulated by a slowly varying function S(x) which has a maximum at x ? 0
and zeros when x is an integer multiple of p=Dk. The net result is a wave packet
with an effective length of about 2p=Dk. Three such wave packets, with different
values for Dk, are illustrated in Fig. 2.1. We note that the wave packets
increase in length as the range of wave numbers decreases and that they would
become `monochromatic' waves of infinite extent as Dk ! 0. Similar behaviour
is exhibited by other types of wave packets.
The velocity of propagation of a wave packet, and the possible change of
shape as it propagates, depend crucially on the relation between the angular
frequency and wave number. This relation, the function !(k), is called the
dispersion relation because it determines whether the waves are dispersive or
non-dispersive.
Dispersive and non-dispersive waves
The most familiar example of a non-dispersive wave is an electromagnetic wave
in the vacuum. A non-dispersive wave has a dispersion relation of the form
! ? ck, where c is a constant so that the velocity of a sinusoidal wave, !=k ? c,
2.1 Waves 23
(A)
(B)
(C)
Fig. 2.1 The initial shapes of the wave packets given by a linear superposition of
sinusoidal waves with constant amplitude A and wave numbers in the range k ÿ Dk to
k ? Dk; see Eq. (2.5). The three diagrams show how the length of a wave packet increases
as the range of wave numbers Dk decreases. The value of ADk is constant, but Dk equals
k=8 in diagram (A), Dk equals k=16 in diagram (B) and Dk equals k=32 in diagram (C).
In general, the length of a wave packet is inversely proportional to Dk and becomes
infinite in extent as Dk ! 0:
is independent of the wave number k. A wave packet formed from a linear
superposition of such sinusoidal waves travels without change of shape because
each sinusoidal component has the same velocity.
Non-dispersive waves are governed by a partial differential equation called the
classical wave equation. For waves travelling in three dimensions, it has the form
r2C ÿ 1
c2
]2C
]t2
? 0, where r2 ? ]2
]x2
? ]2
]y2
? ]2
]z2
, (2:6)
and for waves travelling in one dimension, the x direction say, it has the form
]2C
]x2
ÿ 1
c2
]2C
]t2
? 0: (2:7)
24 The SchroÈdinger equation Chap. 2
The classical wave equation has an infinite number of solutions corresponding
to an infinite variety of wave forms. For example, the sinusoidal waves,
Acos (kx ÿ !t), Asin (kx ÿ !t), or Aei(kxÿ!t),
are solutions provided !2 ? c2k2, as may be shown by direct substitution into
Eq. (2.7); solutions with k ? ?!=c describe waves travelling in the positive x
direction and solutions with k ? ÿ!=c describe waves travelling in the negative
x direction. Because each term in the classical wave equation is linear in C, a
linear superposition of sinusoidal waves is also a solution. For example, a
superposition like Eq. (2.4) is a solution which describes a wave packet which
propagates without change of shape.
However, the majority of waves encountered in classical and in quantum
physics are dispersive waves. A dispersive wave is governed by a partial differential
equation which is more complicated than the classical wave equation,
Eq. (2.7).1 The dispersion relation is more complicated than ! ? ck so that the
velocity of propagation of a sinusoidal wave, !=k, depends upon the wave
number k. Hence a packet of dispersive waves will, in general, change shape as
it propagates. However, if the packet is composed of waves with a narrow range
of wave numbers, it has a well-defined velocity of propagation. This velocity is
called the group velocity and it is given by
ugroup ? d!
dk
, (2:8)
whereas the velocity of a simple sinusoidal wave, !=k, is called the phase
velocity.
To understand Eq. (2.8), we note that the group velocity describes the motion
of a localized disturbance due to constructive interference of many sinusoidal
waves. Let us focus on the point of constructive interference of two sinusoidal
waves with wave numbers k1 and k2 and angular frequencies !1 and !2 which is
formed when the waves are in phase; i.e. when
k1x ÿ !1t ? k2x ÿ !2t:
By rearranging this equation, we find that the position of this point of constructive
interference is given by
x ? !1 ÿ !2
k1 ÿ k2
 
t:
1 In fact, Eq. (2.7) with the constant c replaced by a frequency-dependent velocity is often used to
describe dispersive waves.
2.1 Waves 25
Thus our point of constructive interference is located at x ? 0 when t ? 0 and it
moves with a velocity given by (!1 ÿ !2)=(k1 ÿ k2), or by Eq. (2.8) if jk1 ÿ k2j is
small. Of course, with two sinusoidal waves, there are an infinite number of
points of constructive interference, but many sinusoidal waves can form a
localized region of constructive interference which moves with a velocity
given by Eq. (2.8).
To illustrate how a group velocity can be derived from Eq. (2.8), we consider
the example of water waves of long wavelength which obey the dispersion
relation
! ?

gk
p
,
where g is the acceleration due to gravity. The velocity of a sinusoidal water
wave, the so-called phase velocity, is
uphase ? !
k
?

g
k
r
,
and the velocity of a packet of water waves with a narrow range of wave
numbers near k is
ugroup ? d!
dk
? 1
2

g
k
r
:
Thus, for water waves, the group velocity is exactly one-half of the phase
velocity. In other words, the sinusoidal waves forming the packet, travel at
twice the speed of the region of maximum disturbance formed by the interference
of these waves. However, the shape of the disturbance will change as it
propagates; in general it will tend to spread out.
2.2 PARTICLE WAVE EQUATIONS
In classical physics, fundamental laws of physics are used to derive the wave
equations which describe wave-like phenomena; for example, Maxwell's laws of
electromagnetism can be used to derive the classical wave equation (2.6) which
governs electromagnetic waves in the vacuum. In contrast, we shall view the
wave equation governing the wave-like properties of a quantum particle as
a fundamental equation which cannot be derived from underlying basic physical
principles. We, like the inventors of quantum theory, can only guess the
form of this wave equation and then test for consistency and agreement with
experiment.
26 The SchroÈdinger equation Chap. 2
A wave equation for a free particle
We shall construct a possible wave equation for a freely moving non-relativistic
particle by considering the properties of the de Broglie waves describing the
particle.
According to Eq. (1.3) a particle with momentum p has a de Broglie wavelength
given by l ? h=p. This implies that a de Broglie wave with wave number
k ? 2p=l describes a particle with momentum
p ? hk, where h ? h
2p
: (2:9)
We shall extend this idea by assuming that a de Broglie wave packet with a
range of wave numbers between k ÿ Dk and k ? Dk describes a particle with an
uncertain momentum
Dp  hDk: (2:10)
We shall also assume that the length of this wave packet is a measure of Dx, the
uncertainty in the position of the particle. Using Eq. (2.5) and Fig. 2.1 as a
guide, we write
Dx  2p
Dk
: (2:11)
If we multiply these uncertainties, we obtain
Dx Dp  h,
in agreement with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, Eq. (1.14). Thus, a de
Broglie wave packet can account for the uncertainties in the position and
momentum of a quantum particle.
However, we note that a de Broglie wave must be transformed by a measurement.
If a precise measurement of the position is made, the new wave packet
describing the particle must be very short, a superposition of sinusoidal waves
with a very wide range of wavelengths. Similarly, if a precise measurement of
the momentum is made, the new wave packet is very long with a sharply
defined wavelength. This implies that the wave packet is a fragile entity which
is transformed by a measurement. No one knows how this happens.
We shall now impose the condition that the wave packet represents a moving
quantum particle. Specifically, we shall require that the group velocity of the
packet is equal to the velocity of a particle with mass m and momentum p ? hk;
i.e. we shall require that
2.2 Particle Wave Equations 27
d!
dk
? hk
m
: (2:12)
This equation may be integrated to give the following dispersion relation for
the de Broglie waves describing a freely moving quantum particle of mass m:
! ? hk2
2m
: (2:13)
In obtaining this relation we have set the constant of integration to zero
because this constant gives rise to no observable consequences in non-relativistic
quantum mechanics.
Our task is to find a wave equation which has sinusoidal solutions which
obey this dispersion relation. The simplest such wave equation is called the
SchroÈdinger equation. For a free particle moving in one dimension, it has the
form
ih
]C
]t
? ÿ h2
2m
]2C
]x2 : (2:14)
It is easy to verify that the complex exponential
C(x, t) ? Aei(kxÿ!t) (2:15)
is a solution of this equation provided ! and k obey the dispersion relation
Eq. (2.13). If we substitute into Eq. (2.14), the left-hand side yields
ih
]C
]t
? ih( ÿ i!)Aei(kxÿ!t) ? h!Aei(kxÿ!t),
and the right-hand side yields
ÿ h2
2m
]2C
]x2
? h2k2
2m
Aei(kxÿ!t),
and we have a solution provided h! ? h2k2=2m.
Because the sinusoidal solution, Eq. (2.15), describes a wave moving in the x
direction with wave number k and angular velocity !, we shall assume that it
represents a free particle moving in the x direction with a sharply defined
momentum p ? hk and energy E ? p2=2m ? h!. There are, of course, many
other solutions of the SchroÈdinger equation which represent other states of
motion of the particle.
We emphasize that in order to accommodate the dispersion relation for de
Broglie waves, Eq. (2.13), we have arrived at a wave equation, the free-particle
28 The SchroÈdinger equation Chap. 2
SchroÈdinger equation Eq. (2.14), whose solutions are necessarily complex
functions of space and time. These complex functions are called wave functions.
We recall that classical waves are often represented by complex functions, but
this representation is purely a matter of mathematical convenience; classical
waves are real functions of space and time. In contrast, SchroÈdinger wave
functions are not real functions of space and time. They are complex functions
which describe the covert wave-like behaviour of a quantum particle.
So far we have only considered sinusoidal solutions of the SchroÈdinger
equation, but given these solutions we can construct other types of solutions.
Because each term in the SchroÈdinger equation is linear in the wave function C,
a superposition of solutions is also a solution. For example,
C(x, t) ? A1 ei(k1xÿ!1t) ? A2 ei(k2xÿ!2t),
with
h!1 ? h2k21
2m
and h!2 ? h2k22
2m
,
where A1 and A2 are arbitrary complex constants, is a solution of Eq. (2.14);
this may easily be confirmed by direct substitution. Indeed, the most general
solution is a superposition of sinusoidal waves with all possible angular frequencies
and wave numbers; i.e.
C(x, t) ?
Z ?1
ÿ1
A(k
0
) ei(k0xÿ!0t) dk
0
with h!
0 ? h2k02
2m
: (2:16)
In this superposition, A(k0) is an arbitrary complex function of k0 and the
integral represents a sum over all possible values of k0. If the function A(k0) is
such that the sum involves a narrow range of wave numbers around a positive
value k, this superposition yields a wave packet moving in the positive x
direction with a group velocity hk=m. Such a wave packet represents a quantum
particle which moves with velocity hk=m, but with position and momentum in
accordance with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Wave equation for a particle in a potential energy field
The interactions of a non-relativistic particle can usually be described in terms
of a potential energy field. For example, an electron in a hydrogen atom can be
thought of as moving in the potential energy field V(r) ? ÿe2=4pE0r of a
nucleus. In classical mechanics, this field implies that an electron at a distance
r from the nucleus experiences an attractive force of magnitude e2=4pE0r2. In
2.2 Particle Wave Equations 29
quantum mechanics, it implies that the wave equation for the electron is not the
simple free-particle wave equation given by Eq. (2.14).
In 1926, Erwin SchroÈdinger invented a wave equation for a quantum particle
in a potential energy field which led to a successful description of atoms and
other microscopic systems. It is a generalization of the wave equation for a free
particle given by Eq. (2.14). The SchroÈdinger equation for a particle moving in
the three-dimensional potential energy field V(r) is
ih
]C
]t
? ÿ h2
2m
r2 ? V(r)
" #
C: (2:17)
When the particle moves in a one-dimensional potential V(x) the SchroÈdinger
equation simplifies to
ih
]C
]t
? ÿ h2
2m
]2
]x2
? V(x)
" #
C: (2:18)
It is easy to find solutions of the SchroÈdinger equation when the potential
energy is a constant. For example, when a particle moves along the x axis with
constant potential energy V0, the wave function
C(x, t) ? Aei(kxÿ!t)
is a solution of Eq. (2.18) provided
h! ? h2k2
2m
? V0:
This wave function represents a particle with sharply defined total energy E and
momentum p given by
E ? p2
2m
? V0 and p ? hk:
In later chapters we shall find solutions of the SchroÈdinger equation for a
variety of potential energy fields, including the most important case of the
Coulomb potential energy of an electron in an atom. But our next task is to
explore the meaning of the SchroÈdinger equation