A Tale of One Who Traveled to Learn What Shivering Meant
A father had two sons, the elder of whom was forward and clever enough to do almost any thing; but the younger was so stupid that he could learn nothing, and when the people saw him they said, “Will thy
father still keep thee as a burden to him?” So if any thing was to be done, the elder had at all times to do it; but sometimes the father would call him to fetch something in the dead of night, and perhaps the
way led through the churchyard or by a dismal place, and then he used to answer, “No, father, I cannot go there, I am afraid,” for he was a coward. Or sometimes, of an evening, tales were told by the
fireside which made one shudder, and the listeners exclaimed, “Oh, it makes us shiver!” In a corner, meanwhile, sat the younger son listening, but he could not comprehend what was said, and he thought,
“They say continually, ‘Oh, it makes us shiver, it makes us shiver!’ but perhaps shivering is an art which I cannot comprehend.” One day, however, his father said to him, “Do you hear, you there in the
corner? You are growing stout and big; you must learn some trade to get your living by. Do you see how your brother works? But as for you, you are not worth malt and hops.”
“Ah, father!” answered he, “I would willingly learn something. What shall I begin? I want to know what shivering means, for of that I can understand nothing.”
The elder brother laughed when he heard this speech, and thought to himself, “Ah! my brother is such a simpleton that he cannot earn his own living. He who would be a woodcutter must stoop betimes.”
But the father sighed and said, “What shivering means you may learn soon enough, but you will never get your bread by that.”
Soon after the parish sextonb came in for a gossip, so the father told him his troubles, and how that his younger son was such a simpleton that he knew nothing, and could learn nothing. “Just fancy, when
I asked him how he intended to earn his bread, he desired to learn what shivering meant.” “Oh, if that be all,” answered the sexton, “he can learn that soon enough with me; just send him to my place, and I
will soon teach him.” The father was very glad, because he thought that it would do the boy good; so the sexton took him home to ring the bells. About two days afterwards he called him up at midnight to
go into the church tower to toll the bell. “You shall soon learn what shivering means,” thought the sexton, and getting up he went out. As soon as the boy reached the belfry, and turned himself round to seize
the rope, he saw upon the stairs, near the sounding hole, a white figure. “Who’s there?” he called out; but the figure gave no answer, and neither stirred nor spoke. “Answer,” said the boy, “or make haste
off; you have no business here to-night.” But the sexton did not stir, so that the boy might think that it was a ghost.
The boy called out a second time, “What are you doing here? Speak, if you are an honest fellow, or else I will throw you down stairs.”
The sexton said to himself, “That is not a bad thought,” but he remained quiet as if he were a stone. Then the boy called out for the third time, but it produced no effect; so, making a spring, he threw the
ghost down the stairs, so that it rolled ten steps and then lay motionless in a corner. Thereupon he rang the bell, and then going home he lay down without saying a word, and fell fast asleep. The sexton’s
wife waited some time for her husband, but he did not come; so at last she became anxious, woke the boy, and asked him if he knew where her husband was, who had gone before him to the tower.
“No,” answered the boy; “but there was some one standing on the steps, who would not give any answer, nor go away, so I took him for a thief and threw him downstairs. Go now, and see where he is;
perhaps it may be he, but I should be sorry for it.” The wife ran off, and found her husband lying in a corner, groaning, with one of his ribs broken.
She took him up and ran with loud outcries to the boy’s father, and told him, “Your son has brought a great misfortune on us; he has thrown my husband down and broken his bones. Take the good-fornothing
fellow from our house.”
The terrified father came in haste and scolded the boy. “What do these wicked tricks mean? They will only bring misfortune upon you.”
“Father,” answered the lad, “hear me! I am quite innocent. He stood there at midnight, like one who had done some evil; I did not know who it was, and cried three times, ‘Speak, or be off!’ ”
“Ah!” said the father, “every thing goes badly with you. Get out of my sight; I do not wish to see you again.”
“Yes, father, willingly; wait but one day, then will I go out and learn what shivering means. I now understand one business which will support me.”
“Learn what you will,” replied the father; “all is the same to me. Here are fifty dollars; go forth with them into the world, and tell no man whence you came, or who your father is, for I am ashamed of you.”
“Yes, father, as you wish; if you desire nothing else, I shall esteem that very lightly.”
As soon as day broke, the youth put his fifty dollars into a knapsack, and went out upon the high road, saying continually, “Oh, if I could but shiver!”
Presently a man came up, who heard the boy talking to himself; and as they were just passing the place where the gallows stood, the man said, “Do you see? There is the tree where seven fellows have
married the hempen maid, and now swing to and fro. Sit yourself down there and wait till midnight, and then you will know what it is to shiver.”
“Oh! if that be all,” answered the boy, “I can very easily do that. But if I learn so speedily what shivering is, then you shall have my fifty dollars if you come again in the morning.”
Then the boy went to the gallows, sat down, and waited for evening; and, as he felt cold, he made a fire. But about midnight the wind blew so sharp that, in spite of the fire, he could not keep himself
warm. The wind blew the bodies against one another, so that they swung backwards and forwards, and he thought, “If I am cold here below by the fire, how must they freeze and tremble above!” So his
compassion was excited, and contriving a ladder, he mounted, and unloosening them one after another, he brought down all seven. Then he poked and blew the fire, and sat them round that they might
warm themselves; but, as they sat still without moving, their clothing caught fire. So he said, “Take care of yourselves, or I will hang all of you up again.” The dead heard not, and silently allowed their rags to
burn. This made him so angry that he said, “If you will not hear, I cannot help you; but I will not burn with you!” So he hung them up again in a row, and sitting down by the fire he soon went to sleep. The next
morning the man came, expecting to receive his fifty dollars, and asked, “Now do you know what shivering means?” “No,” he answered; “how should I know.” Those fellows up there have not opened their
mouths, and were so stupid that they let the old rags on their bodies be burnt.” Then the man saw that he should not carry away the fifty dollars that day, so he went away saying, “I never met with such an
one before.”
The boy also went on his way, and began again to say, “Ah, if only I could but shiver; if I could but shiver!” A wagonerc walking behind overheard him, and asked, “Who are you?”
“I do not know,” answered the boy.
The wagoner asked again, “What do you here?”
“I know not.”
“Who is your father?”
“I dare not say.”
“What is it you are continually grumbling about?”
“Oh,” replied the youth, “I wish to learn what shivering is, but nobody can teach me.”
“Cease your silly talk,” said the wagoner. “Come with me, and I will see what I can do for you.” So the boy went with the wagoner, and about evening time they arrived at an inn where they put up for the
night, and while they were going into the parlour he said, quite aloud, “Oh, if I could but shiver, if I could but shiver!” The host overheard him, and said, laughingly, “Oh, if that is all you wish, you shall soon
have the opportunity.” “Hold your tongue,” said his wife; “so many imprudent people have already lost their lives, it were a shame and sin to such beautiful eyes that they should not see the light again.” But
the youth said, “If it were ever so difficult I would at once learn it; for that reason I left home;” and he never let the host have any peace till he told him that not far off stood an enchanted castle, where any one
might soon learn to shiver if he would watch there three nights. The King had promised his daughter in marriage to whomever would venture, and she was the most beautiful young lady that the sun ever
shone upon. And he further told him that inside the castle there was an immense amount of treasure, guarded by evil spirits; enough to make any one free, and turn a poor man into a very rich one. Many
had, he added, already ventured into this castle, but no one had ever come out again.
The next morning this youth went to the King, and said, “If you will allow me, I wish to watch three nights in the enchanted castle.” The King looked at him, and because his appearance pleased him, he
said, “You may make three requests, but they must be inanimate things you ask for, and such as you can take with you into the castle.” So the youth asked for a fire, a lathe, and a cutting-board.
The King let him take these things by day into the castle, and when it was evening the youth went in and made himself a bright fire in one of the rooms, and, placing his cutting-board and knife near it, he
sat down upon his lathe. “Ah, if I could but shiver!” said he. “But even here I shall never learn.” At midnight he got up to stir the fire, and, as he poked it, there shrieked suddenly in one corner, “Miau, miau,
how cold I am!” “You simpleton!” he exclaimed, “what are you shrieking for; if you are so cold, come and sit down by the fire and warm yourself!” As he was speaking two great black cats sprang up to him
with an immense jump, and sat down one on each side, looking at him quite wildly with their fiery eyes. When they had warmed themselves for a little while they said, “Comrade, shall we have a game of
cards?” “Certainly,” he replied; “but let me see your paws first.” So they stretched out their claws, and he said, “Ah, what long nails you have got; wait a bit, I must cut them off first;” and so saying, he caught
them up by their necks and put them on his board and screwed their feet down. “Since I have seen what you are about I have lost my relish for a game at cards,” said he, and instantly killing them, threw
them away into the water. But no sooner had he quieted these two, and thought of sitting down again by his fire, than there came out of every hole and corner black cats and black dogs, with glowing
chains, continually more and more, so that he could not hide himself. They howled fearfully, and jumped upon his fire and scattered it about as if they would extinguish it. He looked on quietly for some time,
but at last getting angry he took up his knife and called out, “Away with you, you vagabonds!” and chasing them about, a part ran off, and the rest he killed and threw into the pond. As soon as he returned
he blew up the sparks of his fire again, and warmed himself, and while he sat, his eyes began to feel very heavy and he wished to go to sleep. So looking round he saw a great bed in one corner in which
he laid down; but no sooner had he closed his eyes, than the bed began to move of itself and traveled all around the castle. “Just so,” said he, “only better still;” whereupon the bed galloped away as if six
horses pulled it up and down steps and stairs, until at last all at once it overset, bottom upwards, and laid upon him like a mountain; but up he got, threw pillows and mattresses into the air, and saying,
“Now, he who wishes may travel,” laid himself down by the fire and slept till day broke. In the morning the King came, and seeing the youth lying on the ground, he thought that the spectres had killed him,
and that he was dead; so he said, “It is a great misfortune that the finest men are thus killed;” but the youth, hearing this, sprang up, saying, “It is not come to that with me yet!” The King was much
astonished, but still very glad, and asked him how he had fared. “Very well,” replied he; “as one night has passed, so also may the other two.” Soon after he met his landlord, who opened his eyes when he
saw him. “I never thought to see you alive again,” said he; “have you learnt now what shivering means?” “No,” said he; “it is all of no use. Oh, if any one would but tell me!”
The second night he went up again into the castle, and sitting down by the fire began his old song, “If I could but shiver!” When midnight came, a ringing and rattling noise was heard, gentle at first, and
louder and louder by degrees; then there was a pause, and presently with a loud outcry half a man’s body came down the chimney and fell at his feet. “Holloa!” he exclaimed, “only half a man answered that
ringing; that is too little.” Then the ringing began afresh, and a roaring and howling was heard, and the other half fell down. “Wait a bit,” said he; “I will poke up the fire first.” When he had done so and
looked round again, the two pieces had joined themselves together, and an ugly man was sitting in his place. “I did not bargain for that,” said the youth; “the bench is mine.” The man tried to push him away,
but the youth would not let him, and giving him a violent push set himself down in his old place. Presently more men fell down the chimney, one after the other, who brought nine thigh bones and two skulls,
which they set up, and then they began to play at ninepins.d At this the youth wished also to play, so he asked whether he might join them. “Yes, if you have money!” “Money enough,” he replied, “but your
balls are not quite round;” so saying he took up the skulls, and, placing them on his lathe, turned them round. “Ah, now you will roll well,” said he. “Holloa! now we will go at it merrily.” So he played with them
and lost some of his money, but as it struck twelve every thing disappeared. Then he laid down and went to sleep quietly. On the morrow the King came for news, and asked him how he had fared this
time. “I have been playing ninepins,” he replied, “and lost a couple of dollars.” “Have you not shivered?” “No!” “I have enjoyed myself very much; but I wish some one would teach me that!”
On the third night he sat down again on his bench, saying in great vexation, “Oh, if I could only shiver!” When it grew late, six tall men came in bearing a coffin between them, “Ah, ah,” said he, “that is
surely my little cousin, who died two days ago;” and beckoning with his finger he called, “Come, little cousin, come!” The men set down the coffin upon the ground, and he went up and took off the lid, and
there lay a dead man within, and as he felt the face it was as cold as ice. “Stop a moment,” he cried; “I will warm it in a trice;” and stepping up to the fire he warmed his hands, and then laid them upon the
face, but it remained cold. So he took up the body, and sitting down by the fire, he laid it on his lap and rubbed the arms that the blood might circulate again. But all this was of no avail, and he thought to
himself if two lie in a bed together they warm each other; so he put the body in the bed, and covering it up laid himself down by its side. After a little while the body became warm and began to move about.
“See, my cousin,” he exclaimed, “have I not warmed you?” But the body got up and exclaimed, “Now I will strangle you.” “Is that your gratitude?” cried the youth. “Then you shall get into your coffin again;”
and taking it up, he threw the body in, and made the lid fast. Then the six men came in again and bore it away. “Oh, deary me,” said he, “I shall never be able to shiver if I stop here all my lifetime!” At these
words in came a man who was taller than all the others, and looked more horrible; but he was very old and had a long white beard. “Oh, you wretch,” he exclaimed, “now thou shalt learn what shivering
means, for thou shalt die!”
“Not so quick,” answered the youth; “if I die I must be brought to it first.”
“I will quickly seize you,” replied the ugly one.
“Softly, softly; be not too sure. I am as strong as you, and perhaps stronger.”
“That we will see,” said the ugly man. “If you are stronger than I, I will let you go; come, let us try!” and he led him away through a dark passage to a smith’s forge. Then taking up an axe he cut through the
anvil at one blow down to the ground. “I can do that still better,” said the youth, and went to another anvil, while the old man followed him and watched him with his long beard hanging down. Then the youth
took up an axe, and, splitting the anvil in one blow, wedged the old man’s beard in it. “Now I have you; now death comes upon you!” and, taking up an iron bar, he beat the old man until he groaned, and
begged him to stop and he would give him great riches. So the youth drew out the axe, and let him loose. Then the old man, leading him back into the castle, showed him three chests full of gold in a cellar.
“One share of this,” said he, “belongs to the poor, another to the King, and the third to yourself.” And just then it struck twelve and the old man vanished, leaving the youth in the dark. “I must help myself out
here,” said he, and groping round he found his way back to his room and went to sleep by the fire.
The next morning the King came and inquired, “Now have you learnt to shiver?” “No,” replied the youth; “what is it? My dead cousin came here, and a bearded man, who showed me a lot of gold down
below; but what shivering means no one has showed me!” Then the King said, “You have won the castle, and shall marry my daughter.”
“This is all very fine,” replied the youth, “but still I don’t know what shivering means.”
So the gold was fetched, and the wedding was celebrated, but the young Prince (for the youth was a Prince now), notwithstanding his love for his bride, and his great contentment, was still continually
crying, “If I could but shiver! if I could but shiver!” At last it fell out in this wise: one of the chambermaids said to the Princess, “Let me bring in my aid to teach him what shivering is.” So she went to the
brook which flowed through the garden, and drew up a pail of water full of little fish; and, at night, when the young Prince was asleep, his bride drew away the covering and poured the pail of cold water and
the little fish over him, so that they slipped all about him. Then the Prince woke up directly, calling out, “Oh! that makes me shiver! dear wife, that makes me shiver! Yes now I know what shivering means!”
The Wolf and the Seven Little Goats
Once upon a time there lived an old Goat who had seven young ones, whom she loved as every mother loves her children. One day she wanted to go into the forest to fetch some food, so, calling her
seven young ones together, she said, “Dear children, I am going away into the wood; be on your guard against the Wolf, for if he comes here, he will eat you all up—skin, hair, and all. He often disguises
himself, but you may know him by his rough voice and his black feet.” The little Goats replied “Dear mother, we will pay great attention to what you say; you may go away without any anxiety.” So the old one
bleated and ran off, quite contented upon her road.
Not long afterwards, somebody knocked at the hut-door and called out, “Open, my dear children; your mother is here and has brought you each something. But the little Goats perceived from the rough
voice that it was a Wolf, and so they said, “We will not undo the door; you are not our mother; she has a gentle and loving voice; but yours is gruff; you are a Wolf.” So the Wolf went to a shop and bought a
great piece of chalk, which he ate, and by that means rendered his voice more gentle. Then he came back, knocked at the hut-door, and called out, “Open, my dear children; your mother has come home,
and has brought you each something.” But the Wolf had placed his black paws upon the window-sill, so the Goats saw them, and replied, “No, we will not open the door; our mother has not black feet; you
are a Wolf.” So the Wolf went to a baker and said, “I have hurt my foot, put some dough on it.” And when the baker had done so, he ran to the miller, saying, “Strew some white flour upon my feet.” But the
miller, thinking he was going to deceive somebody, hesitated, till the Wolf said, “If you do not do it at once, I will eat you.” This made the miller afraid, so he powdered his feet with flour. Such are men.
Now, the villain went for the third time to the hut, and knocking at the door, called out, “Open to me, my children; your dear mother is come, and has brought with her something for each of you out of the
forest.” The little Goats exclaimed, “Show us first your feet, that we may see whether you are our mother.” So the Wolf put his feet up on the window-sill, and when they saw that they were white, they thought
it was all right, and undid the door. But who should come in? The Wolf. They were terribly frightened, and tried to hide themselves. One ran under the table, the second got into the bed, the third into the
cupboard, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the oven, the sixth into the wash-tub, and the seventh into the clock-case. But the Wolf found them all out, and did not delay, but swallowed them all up one
after another: only the youngest one, hid in the clock-case, he did not discover. When the Wolf had satisfied his appetite, he dragged himself out, and, lying down upon the green meadow under a tree,
went fast asleep.
Soon after the old Goat came home out of the forest. Ah, what a sight she saw! The hut-door stood wide open; the table, stools, and benches were overturned; the wash-tub was broken to pieces, and
the sheets and pillows pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but could find them nowhere. She called them by name, one after the other; but no one answered. At last, when she came to the name of
the youngest, a little voice replied, “Here I am, dear mother, in the clock-case.” She took her out, and heard how the Wolf had come and swallowed all the others. You cannot think how she wept for her
poor little ones.
At last she went out in all her misery, and the young Goat ran by her side; and when they came to the meadow, there lay the Wolf under the tree, snoring so that the boughs quivered. She viewed him on
all sides, and perceived that something moved and stirred about in his body. “Ah, mercy!” thought she, “should my poor children, whom he has swallowed for his dinner, be yet alive!” So saying, she ran
home and fetched a pair of scissors and a needle and thread. Then she cut open the monster’s hairy coat, and had scarcely made one slit, before one little Goat put his head out, and as she cut further,
out jumped one after another, all six, still alive, and without any injury, for the monster, in his eagerness, had gulped them down quite whole. There was a joy! They hugged their dear mother, and jumped
about like tailors keeping their wedding-day. But the old mother said, “Go and pick up at once some large stones, that we may fill the monster’s stomach, while he lies fast asleep.” So the seven little
Goats dragged up in great haste a pile of stones, and put them in the Wolf’s stomach, as many as they could bring; and then the old mother went, and, looking at him in a great hurry, saw that he was still
insensible, and did not stir, and so she sewed up the slit.
When the Wolf at last woke up, he raised himself upon his legs, and, because the stones which were lying in his stomach made him feel thirsty, he went to a brook in order to drink. But as he went along,
rolling from side to side, the stones began to tumble about in his body, and he called out
“What rattles, what rattles
Against my poor bones!
Not little goats, I think,
But only big stones!”
And when the Wolf came to the brook he stooped down to drink, and the heavy stones made him lose his balance, so that he fell, and sunk beneath the water.
As soon as the seven little Goats saw this, they came running up, singing aloud, “The Wolf is dead! the Wolf is dead!” and they danced for joy around their mother by the side of the brook.
Faithful John
O nce upon a time there lived an old King, who fell very sick, and thought he was lying upon his death-bed so he said, “Let faithful John come to me.” This faithful John was his affectionate servant, and was
so called because he had been true to him all his lifetime. As soon as John came to the bedside, the King said, “My faithful John, I feel that my end approaches, and I have no other care than about my son,
who is still so young that he cannot always guide himself aright. If you do not promise to instruct him in every thing he ought to know, and to be his guardian, I cannot close mine eyes in peace.” Then John
answered, “I will never leave him; I will always serve him truly, even if it cost me my life.” So the old King was comforted, and said, “Now I can die in peace. After my death you must show him all the
chambers, halls, and vaults in the castle, and all the treasures which are in them; but the last room in the long corridor you must not show him, for in it hangs the portrait of the daughter of the King of the
Golden Palace; if he sees her picture, he will conceive a great love for her, and will fall down in a swoon, and on her account undergo great perils, therefore you must keep him away.” The faithful John
pressed his master’s hand again in token of assent, and soon after the King laid his head upon the pillow and expired.
After the old King had been laid in his grave, the faithful John related to the young King all that his father had said upon his death-bed, and declared, “All this I will certainly fulfil; I will be as true to you as I
was to him, if it cost me my life.” When the time of mourning was passed, John said to the young King, “It is now time for you to see your inheritance; I will show you your paternal castle.” So he led the King
all over it, up-stairs and down-stairs, and showed him all the riches, and all the splendid chambers; only one room he did not open, containing the perilous portrait, which was so placed that one saw it
directly the door was opened, and, moreover, it was so beautifully painted, that one thought it breathed and moved; nothing in all the world could be more lifelike or more beautiful. The young King
remarked, however, that the faithful John always passed by one door, so he asked, “Why do you not open that one?” “There is something in it,” he replied, “which will frighten you.”
But the King said, “I have seen all the rest of the castle, and I will know what is in there;” and he went and tried to open the door by force. The faithful John pulled him back, and said, “I promised your
father before he died that you should not see the contents of that room; it would bring great misfortunes both upon you and me.”
“Oh, no,” replied the young King, “if I do not go in, it will be my certain ruin; I should have no peace night nor day until I had seen it with my own eyes. Now I will not stir from the place till you unlock the
door.”
Then the faithful John saw that it was of no use talking, so, with a heavy heart and many sighs, he picked the key out of the great bunch. When he had opened the door he went in first, and thought he
would cover up the picture that the King should not see it; but it was of no use, for the King stepped upon tiptoes and looked over his shoulder; and as soon as he saw the portrait of the maiden, which was
so beautiful and glittered with precious stones, he fell down on the ground insensible. The faithful John lifted him up and carried him to his bed, and thought with great concern, “Mercy on us! the misfortune
has happened; what will come of it?” and he gave the young King wine until he came to himself. The first words he spoke were, “Ah, who is that beautiful picture?”—“That is the daughter of the King of the
Golden Palace,” was the reply.
“Then,” said the King, “my love for her is so great that if all the leaves on the trees had tongues they should not gainsay it; my life is set upon the search for her. You are my faithful John, you must
accompany me.”
The trusty servant deliberated for a long while how to set about this business, for it was very difficult to get into the presence of the King’s daughter. At last he be-thought himself of a way, and said to the
King, “Every thing that she has around her is of gold,—chairs, tables, dishes, bowls, and all the household utensils. Among your treasures are five tons of gold; let one of the goldsmiths of your kingdom
manufacture vessels and utensils of all kinds therefrom—all kinds of birds, and wild and wonderful beasts, such as will please her; then we will travel with these and try our luck.” Then the King summoned
all his goldsmiths, who worked day and night until many very beautiful things were ready. When all had been placed on board a ship, the faithful John put on merchant’s clothes, and the King likewise, so
that they might travel quite unknown. Then they sailed over the wide sea, and sailed away until they came to the city where dwelt the daughter of the King of the Golden Palace.
The faithful John told the King to remain in the ship and wait for him. “Perhaps,” said he, “I shall bring the King’s daughter with me; therefore take care that all is in order, and set out the golden vessels
and adorn the whole ship.” Thereupon John placed in a napkin some of the golden cups, stepped upon land, and went straight to the King’s palace. When he came into the castleyard, a beautiful maid
stood by the brook, who had two golden pails in her hand drawing water; and when she had filled them, and had turned round, she saw a strange man, and asked who he was. Then John answered, “I am
a merchant,” and opening his napkin, he showed her its contents. Then she exclaimed, “Oh, what beautiful golden things!” and setting the pails down she looked at the cups one after another, and said,
“The King’s daughter must see these; she is so pleased with any thing made of gold that she will buy all these.” And taking him by the hand she led him in, for she was the lady’s maid. When the King’s
daughter saw the golden cups she was much pleased, and said, “They are so finely worked that I will purchase them all.” But the faithful John replied, “I am only the servant of a rich merchant; what I have
here is nothing in comparison to those which my master has in his ship, than which nothing more delicate or costly has ever been worked in gold.” Then the King’s daughter wished to have them all
brought, but he said, “It would take many days, and so great is the quantity that your palace has not halls enough in it to place them around.” Then her curiosity and desire was still more excited, and at last
she said, “Take me to the ship; I will go myself and look at your master’s treasure.”
The faithful John conducted her to the ship with great joy, and the King, when he beheld her, saw that her beauty was still greater than the picture had represented, and thought nothing else but that his
heart would jump out of his mouth. Presently she stepped on board, and the King conducted her below; but the faithful John remained on deck by the steersman, and told him to unmoor the ship and put on
all the sail he could, that it might fly as a bird in the air. Meanwhile the King showed the Princess all the golden treasures,—the dishes, cups, bowls, the birds, the wild and wonderful beasts. Many hours
passed away while she looked at everything, and in her joy she did not remark that the ship sailed on and on. As soon as she had looked at the last, and thanked the merchant, she wished to depart. But
when she came on deck she perceived that they were upon the high sea, far from the shore, and were hastening on with all sail. “Ah!” she exclaimed in affright, “I am betrayed; I am carried off and taken
away in the power of a strange merchant. I would rather die!”
But the King, taking her by the hand, said, “I am not a merchant, but a king, thine equal in birth. It is true that I have carried thee off, but that is because of my overwhelming love for thee. Dost thou know
that when I first saw the portrait of thy beauteous face that I fell down in a swoon before it?” When the King’s daughter heard these words she was reassured, and her heart was inclined towards him, so
that she willingly became his bride. While they thus went on their voyage on the high sea, it happened that the faithful John, as he sat on the deck of the ship playing music, saw three crows in the air, who
came flying towards them. He stopped playing and listened to what they were saying to each other, for he understood them perfectly. The first one exclaimed, “There he is, carrying home the daughter of
the King of the Golden Palace.” “But he is not home yet,” replied the second. “But he has her,” said the third; “she is sitting by him in the ship.” Then the first began again and exclaimed, “What matters
that? When they go on shore, a fox-coloured horse will spring towards him, on which he will mount; and as soon as he is on it will jump up with him into the air, so that he will never again see his bride.” The
second one said, “Is there no escape?” “Oh yes, if another gets on quickly and takes the firearms which are in the holster out, and with them shoots the horse dead, then the young King will be saved. But
who knows that? And if any one does know it and tells him, such an one will be turned to stone from the toe to the knee.” Then the second spoke again, “I know still more; if the horse should be killed, the
young King will not then retain his bride; for when they come into the castle a beautiful bridal shirt will lie there upon a dish, and seem to be woven of gold and silver, but it is nothing but sulphur and pitch,
and if he puts it on, it will burn him to his marrow and bones.” Then the third crow asked, “Is there no escape?” “Oh, yes,” answered the second; “if some one takes up the shirt with his gloves on, and
throws it into the fire so that it is burnt, the young King will be saved. But what does that signify? Whoever knows it and tells him will be turned to stone from his knee to his heart.” Then the third crow spoke:
—“I know still more: even if the bridal shirt be consumed, still the young King will not retain his bride. For if, after the wedding, a dance is held, while the young Queen dances she will suddenly turn pale,
and fall down as if dead and if some one does not raise her up, and take three drops of blood from her right breast and throw them away, she will die. But whoever knows that and tells it will have his whole
body turned to stone, from the crown of his head to the toe of his foot.”
After the crows had thus talked with one another, they flew away, and the trusty John, who had perfectly understood all they had said, was from that time very quiet and sad; for if he concealed from his
master what he had heard, misfortune would happen to him, and if he told him all he must give up his own life. But at last he thought “I will save my master, even if I destroy myself.”
As soon as they came on shore it happened just as the crow had foretold, and an immense fox-red horse sprang up. “Capital!” said the King; “this shall carry me to my castle,” and he tried to mount; but
the faithful John came straight up, and, swinging himself quickly on, drew the firearms out of the holster and shot the horse dead. Then the other servants of the King, who were not on good terms with the
faithful John, exclaimed, “How shameful to kill the beautiful creature, which might have borne the King to the castle!” But the King replied, “Be silent, and let him go; he is my very faithful John—who knows
the good he may have done?” Now they went into the castle, and there stood a dish in the hall, and the splendid bridal shirt lay in it, and seemed nothing else than gold and silver. The young King went up
to it and wished to take it up, but the faithful John pushed him away, and, taking it up with his gloves on, bore it quickly to the fire and let it burn. The other servants thereupon began to murmur, saying,
“See, now he is burning the King’s bridal shirt!” But the young King replied, “Who knows what good he has done? Let him alone—he is my faithful John.”
Soon after, the wedding was celebrated, and a grand ball was given, and the bride began to dance. So the faithful John paid great attention, and watched her countenance; all at once she grew pale,
and fell as if dead to the ground. Then he sprang up hastily, raised her up and bore her to a chamber, where he laid her down, kneeled beside her, and, drawing the three drops of blood out of her right
breast, threw them away. As soon as she breathed again, she raised herself up; but the young King had witnessed every thing, and not knowing why the faithful John had done this, was very angry, and
called out, “Throw him into prison!” The next morning the trusty John was brought up for trial, and led to the gallows; and as he stood upon them, and was about to be executed, he said, “Every one
condemned to die may once before his death speak. Shall I also have that privilege?” “Yes,” answered the King, “it shall be granted to you.” Then the faithful John replied, “I have been unrighteously judged,
and have always been true to you;” and he narrated the conversation of the crows which he heard at sea; and how, in order to save his master, he was obliged to do all he had done. Then the King cried
out, “Oh, my most trusty John, pardon, pardon; lead him away!” But the trusty John had fallen down at the last word and was turned into stone.
At this event both the King and the Queen were in great grief, and the King asked, “Ah, how wickedly have I rewarded his great fidelity!” and he had the stone statue raised up and placed in his sleeping
chamber, near his bed; and as often as he looked at it he wept and said, “Ah, could I bring you back to life again, my faithful John!”
After some time had passed the Queen bore twins, two little sons, who were her great joy. Once, when the Queen was in church, and the two children at home playing by their father’s side, he looked up
at the stone statue full of sorrow, and exclaimed with a sigh, “Ah, could I restore you to life, my faithful John!” At these words the stone began to speak, saying, “Yes, you can make me alive again, if you will
bestow on me that which is dearest to you.” The King replied, “All that I have in the world I will give up for you.” The stone spake again: “If you, with your own hand, cut off the heads of both your children and
sprinkle me with their blood, I shall be brought to life again.” The King was terrified when he heard that he must himself kill his two dear children; but he remembered his servant’s great fidelity, and how the
faithful John had died for him, and drawing his sword he cut off the heads of both his children with his own hand. And as soon as he had sprinkled the stone with blood the life came back to it, and the trusty
John stood again alive and well before him, and said, “Your faith shall not go unrewarded;” and taking the heads of the two children he set them on again, and anointed their wounds with their blood, and
thereupon they healed again in a moment, and the children sprang away and played as if nothing had happened.
Now the King was full of happiness, and as soon as he saw the Queen coming he hid the faithful John and both the children in a great cupboard. As soon as she came in he said to her, “Have you
prayed in the church?” “Yes,” she answered; “but I thought continually of the faithful John, who has come to such misfortune through us.” Then he replied, “My dear wife, we can restore his life again to him,
but it will cost us both our little sons, whom we must sacrifice.” The Queen became pale and was terrified at heart, but she said, “We are guilty of his life on account of his great fidelity.” Then he was very
glad that she thought as he did, and going up to the cupboard he unlocked it, brought out the children and the faithful John, saying, “God be praised! he is saved, and we have still our little sons;” and then
he told her all that had happened. Afterwards they lived happily together to the end of their days.
The Musicians of Bremen
A certain man had an ass which had served him faithfully for many long years, but whose strength was so far gone that at last it was quite unfit for work. So his master was thinking how much he could
make of the skin, but the Ass, perceiving that no good wind was blowing, ran away along the road to Bremen. “There,” thought he, “I can be town-musician.” When he had run some way, he found a Hound
lying by the road-side, yawning like one who was very tired. “What are you yawning for now, you big fellow?” asked the Ass.
“Ah,” replied the Hound, “because every day I grow older and weaker; I cannot go any more to the hunt, and my master has well nigh beaten me to death, so that I took to flight; and now I do not know
how to earn my bread.
“Well! do you know,” said the Ass, “I am going to Bremen to be town-musician there; suppose you go with me and take a share in the music. I will play on the lute, and you shall beat the kettledrums.” The
Dog was satisfied, and off they set.
Presently they came to a Cat sitting in the middle of the path with a face like three rainy days! “Now then, old shaver, what has crossed you?” asked the Ass.
“How can one be merry when one’s neck has been pinched like mine?” answered the Cat. “Because I am growing old, and my teeth are all worn to stumps, and because I would rather sit by the fire and
spin, than run after mice, my mistress wanted to drown me; and so I ran away. But now, good advice is dear, and I do not know what to do.”
“Go with us to Bremen. You understand nocturnal music, so you can be a town-musician.” The Cat consented, and went with them. The three vagabonds soon came near a farm-yard, where upon the
barn-door the Cock was sitting crowing with all his might. “You crow through marrow and bone,” said the Ass; “what do you do that for?”
“That is the way I prophesy fine weather,” said the Cock; “but, because grand guests are coming for the Sunday, the housewife has no pity, and has told the cookmaid to make me into soup for the
morrow; and this evening my head will be cut off. Now I am crowing with a full throat as long as I can.”
“Ah, but you, Red-comb,” replied the Ass, “rather come away with us. We are going to Bremen, to find there something better than death; you have a good voice, and if we make music together, it will
have full play.”
The Cock consented to this plan, and so all four travelled on together. They could not however reach Bremen in one day, and at evening they came into a forest, where they meant to pass the night. The
Ass and the Dog laid themselves down under a large tree, the Cat and the Cock climbed up into the branches, but the latter flew right to the top, where he was most safe. Before he went to sleep, he
looked all round the four quarters, and soon thought he saw a little spark in the distance; so, calling his companions, he said they were not far from a house, for he saw a light. The Ass said, “If it is so, we
had better get up and go further, for the pasturage here is very bad;” and continued the Dog, “Yes, indeed! a couple of bones with some meat on, would also be very acceptable!” So they made haste
towards the spot where the light was, which shone now brighter and brighter, until they came to a well-lighted robbers’ cottage. The Ass, as the biggest, went to the window and peeped in. “What do you
see, Gray-horse?” asked the Cock. “What do I see!” replied the Ass; “a table laid out with savoury meats and drinks; with robbers sitting around enjoying themselves.”
“That were the right sort of thing for us,” said the Cock.
“Yes, yes, I wish we were there,” replied the Ass. Then these animals took counsel together how they should contrive to drive away the robbers, and at last they thought of a way. The Ass had to place his
fore-feet upon the window-ledge, the Hound got on his back, the Cat climbed up upon the Dog, and lastly the Cock flew up and perched upon the head of the Cat. When this was accomplished, at a given
signal they commenced together to perform their music; the Ass brayed, the Dog barked, the Cat mewed, and the Cock crew! and they made such a tremendous noise, and so loud, that the panes of the
window were shivered! Terrified at these unearthly sounds, the robbers got up with great precipitation, thinking nothing less than that some spirits had come, and fled off into the forest. The four
companions immediately sat down at the table, and quickly ate up all that was left, as if they had been fasting for six weeks.
As soon as the four players had finished, they extinguished the light, and each sought for himself a sleeping place, according to his nature and custom. The Ass laid himself down upon some straw, the
Hound behind the door, the Cat upon the hearth near the warm ashes, and the Cock flew up upon a beam which ran across the room. Weary with their long walk they soon went to sleep.
At midnight, the robbers perceived from their retreat that no light was burning in their house, and all appeared quiet; so the captain said, “We need not to have been frightened into fits;” and, calling one
of the band, he sent him forward to reconnoiter. The messenger finding all still, went into the kitchen to strike a light, and, taking the glistening fiery eyes of the Cat for live coals, he held a lucifer-match to
them, expecting it to take fire. But the Cat, not understanding the joke, flew in his face, spitting and scratching, which dreadfully frightened him, so that he made for the back-door; but the Dog, who lay
there, sprung up and bit his leg; and as soon as he limped upon the straw whereupon lay the Ass, it gave him a powerful kick with its hind foot. This was not all, for the Cock, awaking at the noise, stretched
himself, and cried from the beam, “Cock-a-doodle-doo, cock-a-doodle-doo!”
Then the robber ran back as well as he could to his captain, and said, “Ah, my master, there dwells a horrible witch in the house, who spat on me and scratched my face with her long nails; and then
before the door stands a man with a knife, who chopped at my leg; and in the yard there lies a black monster, who beat me with a great wooden club; and, besides all, upon the roof sits a judge, who
called out, ‘Bring the knave up, do!’ so I ran away as fast as I could.”
After this the robbers dared not again go near their house; but every thing prospered so well with the four town-musicians of Bremen, that they did not forsake their situation! And there they are to this
day, for any thing I know!
The Twelve Brothers
O nce upon a time there lived happily together a Queen and a King, who had twelve children, all boys. One day the King said to his consort, “If the thirteenth child, whom you are about to bring into the
world, should be a girl, then shall the twelve boys die, that her riches may be great, and that the kingdom may fall to her alone.” He then ordered twelve coffins to be made, which were filled with shavings,
and in each a pillow was placed, and, all of them having been locked up in a room, he gave the key thereof to the Queen, and bade her tell nobody about the matter.
But the mother sat crying the whole day long, so that her youngest child, who was always with her, and whom she had named Benjamin, said to her, “Mother dear, why are you so sorrowful?” “My dearest
child,” she replied, “I dare not tell you.” But he let her have no peace until she went and unlocked the room and showed him the twelve coffins filled with shavings. Then she said, “My dearest Benjamin,
these coffins your father has had prepared for yourself and your eleven brothers, for, if I bring a little girl into the world, you will be all killed together and buried in them.” And, as she wept while she spoke
these words, the son comforted her, saying, “Do not cry, dear mother; we will help ourselves and go away.” But she said, “Go with your eleven brothers into the woods, and let one of you climb into the
highest tree which is to be found, and keep watch, looking towards the tower of the castle here. If I bear a little son, I will hang out a white flag, and you may venture home again; but if I bear a little daughter I
will hang out a red flag; and then flee away as quickly as you can, and God preserve you. Every night I will arise and pray for you; in winter, that you may have a fire to warm yourselves; and in summer, that
you may not be melted with the heat.”
Soon after she gave her blessing to all her sons, and they went away into the forest. Each kept watch in turn, sitting upon the highest oak-tree, and looking towards the tower. When eleven days had
passed by, and it came to Benjamin’s turn, he perceived a flag hung out; but it was not the white but the red flag, which announced that they must all die. As the brothers heard this, they became very angry,
and said, “Shall we suffer death on account of a maiden? Let us swear that we will avenge ourselves; wherever we find a maiden, her red blood shall flow.”
Thereupon they went deeper into the forest, and in the middle, where it was most gloomy, they found a little charmed cottage standing empty, and they said, “Here we will dwell, and you, Benjamin, as
you are the youngest and the weakest, shall stop here, and keep house, while we go out to fetch meat.” So they set forth into the forest, and shot hares, wild fawns, birds, and pigeons, and what else they
could find. These they brought home to Benjamin, who cooked them for them to appease their hunger. In this little cottage they lived ten years together, and the time passed very quickly.
The little daughter, whom their mother, the Queen, had borne, was now grown up; she had a kind heart, was very beautiful, and always wore a golden star upon her brow. Once, when there was a great
wash, she saw twelve boys’ shirts hanging up, and she asked her mother, “To whom do these twelve shirts belong, for they are much too small for my father?” Then she answered with a heavy heart, “My
dear child, they belong to your twelve brothers.” The maiden replied, “Where are my twelve brothers? I have never yet heard of them.” The Queen answered, “God only knows where they are; they have
wandered into the wide world.” Then she took the maiden, and unlocking the room, showed her twelve coffins with the shavings and pillows. “These coffins,” said she, “were ordered for your brothers, but
they went away secretly, before you were born;” and she told her how every thing had happened. Then the maiden said, “Do not cry, dear mother; I will go forth, and seek my brothers;” and taking the twelve
shirts, she set out at once straight into the great forest. All day long she walked on and on, and in the evening she came to the charmed house, into which she stepped. There she found a young lad, who
asked her, “Whence dost thou come, and whither goest thou?” and he stood astonished to see how beautiful she was, and at the queenly robes she wore, and the star upon her brow. Then she answered,
“I am a King’s daughter, and am seeking my twelve brothers, and will go as far as heaven is blue until I find them;” and she showed him the twelve shirts which belonged to them. Benjamin perceived at
once that it was his sister, and he said, “I am Benjamin, thy youngest brother.” At his words she began to weep for joy, and Benjamin wept also, and they kissed and embraced one another with the
greatest affection. Presently he said, “Dear sister, there is one terrible condition we have agreed together, that every maiden whom we meet shall die, because we were obliged to leave our kingdom on
account of a maiden.”
Then the maiden replied, “I will willingly die, if I can by that means release my twelve brothers.”
“No,” answered he, “thou shalt not die; hide thyself under this tub until our eleven brothers come home, with whom I shall then be united.” She did so; and, when night came, the others returned from
hunting, and their dinner was made ready, and as they sat at the table, eating, they asked, “What is the news?” Benjamin said, “Do you not know?”
“No,” they answered. Then he spoke again. “You have been in the forest and I have stopped at home, yet I know more than you.”
“Tell us directly,” they exclaimed. He answered, “First promise me that you will not kill the first maiden who shall meet us.”
“Yes, we promise,” they exclaimed, “she shall have pardon; now tell us at once.” Then he said, “Our sister is here,” and, lifting up the tub, the King’s daughter came from beneath, looking most beautiful,
delicate, and gentle in her royal robes, and with the golden star upon her brow. The sight gladdened them all, and, falling upon her neck, they kissed her, and loved her with all their hearts.
Now she stopped at home with Benjamin, and helped him in his work, while the eleven others went into the wood and caught wild animals, deer, birds, and pigeons, for their eating, which their sister and
brother took care to make ready. The sister sought for wood for the fire, and for the vegetables which she dressed, and put the pots on the fire, so that their dinner was always ready when the eleven came
home. She also kept order in the cottage, and covered the beds with beautiful white and clean sheets, and the brothers were always contented, and they all lived in great unity.
One day when the brother and sister had made ready a most excellent meal, and they were all assembled, they sat down and ate and drank, and were full of happiness. But there was a little garden
belonging to the charmed house, in which stood twelve lilies (which are also called “student-lilies”) and the sister, thinking to give her twelve brothers a pleasure, broke off the twelve flowers, intending to
give each of them one. But as she broke off the flowers at the same moment the twelve brothers were changed into twelve crows, and flew off into the forest, and at the same moment the house and
garden both disappeared.
Thus the poor maiden was alone in the wild forest, and as she looked round an old woman stood near her, who said, “My child, what has thou done? Why didst thou not leave the twelve white flowers?
They were thy brothers, who are now changed into crows.” Then the maiden asked with tears, “Is there no means of saving them?” “There is but one way in the whole world,” said the old woman, “but that is
so difficult that thou canst not free them. Thou must be dumb for seven years, thou mayest not speak, nor laugh, and if thou speakest but a single word, even if it wants but one hour of the seven years, all
will be in vain, and thy brothers will die at that single word.”
Then the maiden said in her heart, “I know for certain that I shall free my brothers;” and she went and sought a lofty tree, and, sitting upon it, she spun, and neither spoke nor laughed.
Now it happened once that a King was hunting in the forest, who had a large greyhound, which ran to the tree on which the maiden sat, and, springing round, barked furiously. So the King came up and
saw the beautiful girl with the golden star upon her brow, and was so enchanted with her beauty, that he asked her if she would become his bride. To this she gave no answer, but slightly nodded with her
head; so the King, mounting the tree himself, brought her down, and, placing her upon his horse, carried her home.
Then the wedding was celebrated with great pomp and joy, but the bride neither spoke nor laughed.
After they had lived contentedly together two years, the King’s mother, who was a wicked woman, began to slander the young Queen, and said to the King, “This is a common beggar girl whom you have
brought home with you: who knows what impish tricks she practised at home? If she be dumb and not able to speak, she might still laugh once, but they who do not laugh have a bad conscience.” The King
would not at first believe it, but the old woman persisted in it so long, and accused the Queen of so many wicked things, that the King at last let himself be persuaded, and she was condemned to die.
Now, a great fire was kindled in the courtyard, in which she was to be burnt; and the King, standing above at a window, looked on with tearful eyes, because he still loved her so much. And now she was
bound to the stake, and the fire began to lick her clothing with its red tongues;—and just at that time the last moment of the seven years expired. Then a whirring was heard in the air, and twelve crows
came flying by, and sank down to the earth, and as they alighted on the ground they became her twelve brothers whom she had freed. They tore away the fire from around her, and extinguishing the flames,
set their sister free, and kissed and embraced her. And now, as she could open her mouth and speak, she told the King why she was dumb, and why she never laughed.
And the King was highly pleased when he heard she was innocent, and they all lived together in great happiness to the end of their lives.
The Little Brother and Sister
There was once a little Brother who took his Sister by the hand, and said, “Since our own dear mother’s death we have not had one happy hour; our stepmother beats us every day, and, if we come near
her, kicks us away with her foot. Our food is the hard crusts of bread which are left, and even the dog under the table fares better than we, for he often gets a nice morsel. Come, let us wander forth into the
wide world.” So the whole day long they travelled over meadows, fields, and stones, and when it rained the Sister said, “It is Heaven crying with our hearts.” By evening they came into a large forest, and
were so wearied with grief, hunger, and their long walk, that they laid themselves down in a hollow tree, and went to sleep. When they awoke the next morning, the sun had already risen high in the
heavens, and it shone quite hot into the tree, so that the little Boy said to his Sister, “I am so thirsty, if I knew where there was a brook I would go and drink. Ah! I think I hear one running;” and so saying he
got up, and, taking his Sister’s hand, they went in search of the brook.
The wicked stepmother, however, was a witch, and had remarked the departure of the two children; and sneaking after them secretly, as is the habit of witches, she had bewitched all the springs in the
forest.
Presently they found a brook which ran trippingly over the pebbles, and the Brother would have drunk out of it, but the Sister heard how it said as it ran along, “Who drinks of me will become a tiger!” So
the Sister exclaimed, “I pray you, Brother, drink not, or you will become a tiger, and tear me to pieces!” So the Brother did not drink, although his thirst was so great, and he said, “I will wait till the next
brook.” As they came to the second, the Sister heard it say, “Who drinks of me becomes a wolf!” The Sister ran up crying, “Brother, do not, pray, do not drink, or you will become a wolf, and eat me up!”
Then the Brother did not drink, saying, “I will wait until we come to the next spring, but then I must drink, you may say what you will; my thirst is much too great.” Just as they reached the third brook, the
Sister heard the voice saying, “Who drinks of me will become a fawn,—who drinks of me will become a fawn!” So the Sister said, “Oh, my Brother, do not drink, or you will be changed to a fawn, and run
away from me!” But he had already kneeled down, and drunk of the water, and, as the first drops passed his lips, his form became that of a fawn.
The Little Brother and Sister
At first the Sister cried over her little changed Brother, and he wept too, and knelt by her very sorrowful; but at last the Maiden said, “Be still, dear little Fawn, and I will never forsake you;” and undoing her
golden garter she put it round his neck, and weaving rushes made a white girdle to lead him with. This she tied to him, and, taking the other end in her hand, she led him away, and they travelled deeper
and deeper into the forest. After they had walked a long distance they came to a little hut, and the Maiden peeping in, found it empty, and thought, “Here we can stay and dwell.” Then she looked for leaves
and moss to make a soft couch for the Fawn, and every morning she went out and collected roots and berries and nuts for herself, and tender grass for the Fawn, which he ate out of her hand, and played
happily around her. In the evening, when the Sister was tired, and had said her prayers, she laid her head upon the back of the Fawn, which served for a pillow, on which she slept soundly. Had but the
Brother regained his own proper form, their life would have been happy indeed.
Thus they dwelt in this wilderness, and some time had elapsed, when it happened that the King of the country held a great hunt in the forest, and now resounded through the trees the blowing of horns,
the barking of dogs, and the lusty cries of the hunters, so that the little Fawn heard them, and wanted very much to join. “Ah!” said he to his Sister, “let me go to the hunt, I cannot restrain myself any longer,”
and he begged so hard that at last she consented. “But,” said she to him, “return again in the evening, for I shall shut my door against the wild huntsmen, and, that I may know you, do you knock, and say,
‘Sister, let me in,’ and if you do not speak I shall not open the door.” As soon as she had said this, the little Fawn sprang off, quite glad and merry in the fresh breeze. The King and his huntsmen perceived
the beautiful animal, and pursued him; but they could not catch him, and, when they thought they had him for certain, he sprang away over the bushes, and got out of sight. Just as it was getting dark, he ran
up to the hut, and, knocking, said, “Sister mine, let me in.” Then she undid the little door, and he went in, and rested all night long upon his soft couch. The next morning the hunt was commenced again, and
as soon as the little Fawn heard the horns and the tally-ho of the sportsmen he could not rest, and said, “Sister, dear, open the door, I must be off.” The sister opened it, saying, “Return at evening, mind,
and say the words as before.” When the King and his huntsmen saw again the Fawn with the golden necklace, they followed him close, but he was too nimble and quick for them. The whole day long they
kept up with him, but towards evening the huntsmen made a circle round him, and one wounded him slightly in the foot behind so that he could only run slowly. Then one of them slipped after him to the little
hut, and heard him say, “Sister, dear, open the door,” and saw that the door was opened and immediately shut behind him. The huntsman, having observed all this, went and told the King what he had seen
and heard, and he said, “On the morrow I will once more pursue him.”
The Sister, however, was terribly frightened when she saw her Fawn was wounded, and washing off the blood she put herbs upon the foot, and said, “Go and rest upon your bed, dear Fawn, that the
wound may heal.” It was so slight that the next morning he felt nothing of it, and when he heard the hunting cries outside, he exclaimed, “I cannot stop away, I must be there, and none shall catch me so
easily again!” The Sister wept very much, and told him “Soon they will kill you, and I shall be here all alone in this forest, forsaken by all the world; I cannot let you go.”
“I shall die here in vexation,” answered the Fawn, “if you do not, for when I hear the horn I think I shall jump out of my shoes.” The Sister, finding she could not prevent him, opened the door with a heavy
heart, and the Fawn jumped out, quite delighted, into the forest. As soon as the King perceived him, he said to his huntsmen, “Follow him all day long till the evening, but let no one do him an injury.” When
the sun had set, the King asked his huntsmen to show him the hut, and as they came to it he knocked at the door, and said, “Let me in, dear sister.” Then the door was opened, and, stepping in, the King
saw a maiden more beautiful than he had ever before seen. She was frightened when she saw, not her Fawn, but a man step in, who had a golden crown upon his head. But the King, looking at her with a
friendly glance, reached her his hand, saying, “Will you go with me to my castle and be my dear wife?” “Oh yes,” replied the maiden, “but the Fawn must go too; him I will never forsake.” The King replied,
“He shall remain with you as long as you live, and shall want for nothing.” In the mean time the Fawn had come in, and the Sister, binding the girdle to him, again took it in her hand and led him away with
her out of the hut.
The King took the beautiful maiden upon his horse, and rode to his castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great splendour, and she became queen, and they lived together a long time, while the
Fawn was taken care of and lived well, playing about the castle-garden. The wicked stepmother, however, on whose account the children had wandered forth into the world, did not think but that the Sister
had been torn in pieces by the wild beasts, and the little Brother hunted to death in his Fawn’s shape by the hunters. As soon as she heard how happy they had become, and how every thing prospered
with them, envy and jealousy were aroused in her heart and left her no peace; and she was always thinking in what way she could work misfortune to them. Her own daughter, who was as ugly as night, and
had but one eye, for which she was continually reproached, said, “The luck of being a Queen has never yet happened to me.” “Be quiet now,” said the old woman, “and make yourself contented: when the
time comes I shall be at hand.” As soon, then, as the time came when the Queen brought into the world a beautiful little boy, which happened when the King was out hunting, the old witch took the form of a
chambermaid, and got into the room where the Queen was lying, and said to her, “The bath is ready, which will restore you and give you fresh strength: be quick, before it gets cold.” Her daughter being at
hand, they carried the weak Queen between them into the room, and laid her in the bath, and then, shutting the door, they ran off; but first they had made up an immense fire in the stove which must soon
suffocate the young Queen.
When this was done, the old woman took her daughter, and, putting a cap on her, laid her in the bed in the Queen’s place. She gave her, too, the form and appearance of the real Queen as far as she
could, but she could not restore the lost eye, and, so that the King might not notice it, she turned upon that side where there was no eye. When he came home at evening, and heard that a son was born to
him, he was much delighted, and prepared to go to his wife’s bedside to see how she did. So the old woman called out in a great hurry, “For your life, do not undraw the curtains; the Queen must not yet
see the light, and must be kept quiet.” So the King went away, and did not discover that a false Queen was laid in the bed.
When midnight came, and every one was asleep, the nurse, who sat by herself, wide awake, near the cradle, in the nursery, saw the door open and the true Queen come in. She took the child in her
arms and rocked it awhile, and then shaking up its pillow, laid it down in its cradle and covered it over again. She did not forget the Fawn either, but, going to the corner where he was, stroked his back,
and then went silently out at the door. The nurse asked in the morning of the guards if any one had passed into the castle during the night, but they answered, “No, we have seen nobody.” For many nights
afterwards she came constantly, and never spoke a word; and the nurse saw her always, but she would not trust herself to speak about it to any one.
When some time had passed away, the Queen one night began to speak, and said,
“How fares my child, how fares my fawn!
Twice more will I come, but never again.”
The nurse made no reply, but, when she had disappeared, went to the King and told him all. The King exclaimed, “Oh Heavens! what does this mean? The next night I will watch myself by the child.” In the
evening he went into the nursery, and about midnight the Queen appeared and said,
“How fares my child, how fares my fawn!
Once more will I come, but never again.”
And she nursed the child, as she was used to do, and then disappeared. The King dared not speak, but he watched the following night, and this time she said,
“How fares my child, how fares my fawn!
This time will I come, but never again.”
At these words the King could hold back no longer, but sprang up, and said, “You can be no other than my dear wife!” Then she answered, “Yes, I am your dear wife!” and at that moment her life was
restored by God’s mercy, and she was again as beautiful and charming as ever. She told the King the fraud which the witch and her daughter had practised upon him, and he had them both tried and
sentence pronounced against them. The daughter was taken into the forest, where the wild beasts tore her in pieces, but the old witch was led to the fire and miserably burnt. And as soon as she was
reduced to ashes the little Fawn was unbewitched, and received again his human form; and the Brother and Sister lived happily together to the end of their days.
The Three Little Men in the Wood
Once upon a time there lived a man, whose wife had died; and a woman, also, who had lost her husband: and this man and this woman had each a daughter. These two maidens were friendly with each
other, and used to walk together, and one day they came by the widow’s house. Then the widow said to the man’s daughter, “Do you hear, tell your father I wish to marry him, and you shall every morning
wash in milk and drink wine, but my daughter shall wash in water and drink water.” So the girl went home and told her father what the woman had said, and he replied, “What shall I do? marriage is a
comfort, but it is also a torment!” At last, as he could form no conclusion, he drew off his boot and said, “Take this boot, which has a hole in the sole, and go with it out of doors and hang it on the great nail,
and then pour water into it. If it holds the water, I will again take a wife; but if it runs through, I will not have her.” The girl did as he bid her, but the water drew the hole together and the boot became full to
overflowing. So she told her father how it had happened, and he, getting up, saw it was quite true; and going to the widow, he settled the matter, and the wedding was celebrated.
The next morning, when the two girls arose, milk to wash in and wine to drink were set for the man’s daughter, but only water, both for washing and drinking, for the woman’s daughter. The second
morning, water for washing and drinking stood before both the man’s daughter and the woman’s; and on the third morning, water to wash in and water to drink were set before the man’s daughter, and milk
to wash in and wine to drink before the woman’s daughter, and so it continued.
Soon the woman had a deadly hatred of her step-daughter, and knew not how to behave badly enough to her, from day to day. She was envious, too, because her step-daughter was beautiful and lovely,
and her own daughter was ugly and hateful.
Once, in the winter time, when water had frozen as hard as a stone, and hill and valley were covered with snow, the woman made a cloak of paper, and called the maiden to her and said, “Put on this
cloak, and go away into the wood to fetch me a little basketful of strawberries, for I have a wish for some.”
“Mercy on us!” said the maiden, “in winter there are no strawberries growing; the ground is frozen, and the snow, too, has covered up every thing. And why must I go in that paper cloak? It is so cold out
of doors that it freezes one’s breath even, and the wind will blow it off, and the thorns will tear it from my body.”
“Will you dare to contradict me?” said the step-mother. “Make haste off, and let me not see you again until you have found me a basket of strawberries.” Then she gave her a small piece of dry bread,
saying, “On that you must subsist the whole day.” But she thought—out of doors she will be frozen and starved, so that my eyes will never see her again!
So the girl did as she was told, and put on the paper cloak, and went away with the basket. Far and near there was nothing but snow, and not a green blade was to be seen. When she came to the forest
she discovered a little cottage, out of which three little Dwarfs were peeping. The girl wished them good-morning, and knocked gently at the door. They called her in, and, entering the room, she sat down
on a bench by the fire to warm herself, and eat her breakfast. The Dwarfs called out, “Give us some of it?” “Willingly,” she replied, and dividing her bread in two, she gave them half. They asked, “What do
you here in the forest, in the winter time, in this thin cloak?”
“Ah!” she answered, “I must seek a basketful of strawberries, and I dare not return home until I can take them with me.” When she had eaten her bread, they gave her a broom, saying, “Sweep away the
snow with this from the back door.” But when she was gone out of doors the three Dwarfs said to one another, “What shall we give her, because she is so gentle and good, and has shared her bread with
us?” Then said the first, “I grant to her that she shall become more beautiful every day.” The second said, “I grant that a piece of gold shall fall out of her mouth for every word she speaks.” The third said, “I
grant that a King shall come and make her his bride.”
Meanwhile, the girl had done as the Dwarfs had bidden her, and had swept away the snow from behind the house. And what do you think she found there? Actually, ripe strawberries! which came quite
red and sweet up under the snow. So, filling her basket in great glee, she thanked the little men and gave them each her hand, and then ran home to take her stepmother what she wished for. As she went
in and said, “Good-evening,” a piece of gold fell from her mouth. Thereupon she related what had happened to her in the forest; but at every word she spoke a piece of gold fell, so that the whole floor was
covered.
“Just see her arrogance,” said the step-sister, “to throw away money in that way!” but in her heart she was jealous, and wished to go into the forest too, to seek strawberries. Her mother said, “No, my
dear daughter; it is too cold, you will be frozen!” but as her girl let her have no peace, she at last consented, and made her a beautiful fur cloak to put on; she also gave her buttered bread and cooked meat
to eat on the way.
The girl went into the forest and came straight to the little cottage. The three Dwarfs were peeping out again, but she did not greet them; and, stumbling on without looking at them or speaking, she
entered the room, and, seating herself by the fire, began to eat the bread and butter and meat. “Give us some of that,” exclaimed the Dwarfs; but she answered, “I have not got enough for myself, so how
can I give any away?” When she had finished they said, “You have a broom there, go and sweep the back door clean.” “Oh, sweep it yourself,” she replied, “I am not your servant.” When she saw that they
would not give her any thing she went out at the door, and the three Dwarfs said to each other, “What shall we give her? she is so ill-behaved, and has such a bad and envious disposition, that nobody can
wish well to her.” The first said, “I grant that she becomes more ugly every day.” The second said, “I grant that every word she speaks a toad shall spring out of her mouth.” The third said, “I grant that she
shall die a miserable death.” Meanwhile the girl had been looking for strawberries out of doors, but as she could find none she went home very peevish. When she opened her mouth to tell her mother what
had happened to her in the forest, a toad jumped out of her mouth at each word, so that every one fled away from her in horror.
The stepmother was now still more vexed, and was always thinking how she could do the most harm to her husband’s daughter, who every day became more beautiful. At last she took a kettle, set it on
the fire, and boiled a net therein. When it was sodden she hung in on the shoulder of the poor girl, and gave her an axe, that she might go upon the frozen pond and cut a hole in the ice to drag the net. She
obeyed, and went away and cut an ice-hole; and while she was cutting, an elegant carriage came by, in which the King sat. The carriage stopped, and the King asked, “My child, who are you? and what do
you here?” “I am a poor girl, and am dragging a net,” said she. Then the King pitied her, and saw how beautiful she was, and said, “Will you go with me.” “Yes, indeed, with all my heart,” she replied, for she
was glad to get out of the sight of her mother and sister.
So she was handed into the carriage, and driven away with the King; and as soon as they arrived at his castle the wedding was celebrated with great splendour, as the Dwarfs had granted to the
maiden. After a year the young Queen bore a son; and when the stepmother heard of her great good fortune, she came to the castle with her daughter, and behaved as if she had come on a visit. But one
day, when the King had gone out, and no one was present, this bad woman seized the Queen by the head, and her daughter caught hold of her feet, and, raising her out of bed, they threw her out of the
window into the river which ran past. Then, laying her ugly daughter in the bed, the old woman covered her up, even over her head; and when the King came back he wished to speak to his wife, but the old
woman exclaimed, “Softly, softly! do not go near her; she is lying in a beautiful sleep, and must be kept quiet to-day.” The King, not thinking of any evil design, came again the next morning the first thing;
and when he spoke to his wife, and she answered, a toad sprang out of her mouth at every word, as before a piece of gold had done. So he asked what had happened, and the old woman said, “That is
produced by her weakness, she will soon lose it again.”
But in the night the kitchen-boy saw a duck swimming through the brook, and the duck said,
King, King, what are you doing!
Are you sleeping, or are you waking!
And as he gave no answer, the duck said,
What are my guests a-doing!
Then the boy answered,
They all sleep sound.
And she asked him,
How fares my child!
And he replied,
In his cradle he sleeps.
Then she came up in the form of the Queen to the cradle, and gave the child drink, shook up his bed, and covered him up, and then swam again away as a duck through the brook. The second night she
came again, and on the third she said to the kitchen-boy, “Go and tell the King to take his sword, and swing it thrice over me, on the threshold.” Then the boy ran and told the King, who came with his
sword, and swung it thrice over the duck; and at the third time his bride stood before him, bright, living, and healthful, as she had been before.
Now the King was in great happiness, but he hid the Queen in a chamber until the Sunday when the child was to be christened; and when all was finished he asked, “What ought to be done to one who
takes another out of bed and throws her into the river?” “Nothing could be more proper,” said the old woman, “than to put such an one into a cask, stuck round with nails, and to roll it down the hill into the
water.” Then the King said, “You have spoken your own sentence;” and, ordering a cask to be fetched, he caused the old woman and her daughter to be put into it, and the bottom being nailed up, the cask
was rolled down the hill until it fell into the water.
The Three Spinsters
There was once a lazy girl who would not spin, and let her mother say what she would she could not get her to work. At last the mother, getting both angry and impatient, gave her a blow, which made the
girl cry very loud; just then the Queen, passing by, heard the noise, and, stopping the carriage, she stepped into the house, and asked the mother why she beat her daughter in such a way that the passersby
in the street heard her shrieks. The mother, however, was ashamed that her daughter’s laziness should be known, and said, “I cannot make her leave off spinning; she will spin for ever and ever, and I
am so poor that I cannot procure the flax.” The Queen replied, “I never heard any thing I like better than spinning, and I am never more pleased than when the wheels are whirring. Let your daughter go with
me to the castle; I have flax enough, and she may spin as much as she pleases.” The mother was very glad at heart, and the Queen took the girl home with her. As soon as they entered the castle she led
her up into three rooms, which were all full of the finest flax from top to bottom. “Now, spin this flax for me,” said the Queen, “and, when you have prepared it all, you shall have my eldest son for a husband.
Although you are poor, I do not despise you on that account; your unwearied industry is dowry enough.” The girl, however, was inwardly frightened, for she could not have spun the flax had she sat there
from morning till night until she was three hundred years old. When she was left alone she began to cry, and thus she sat three days without stirring a hand. On the third day the Queen came, and when she
saw that nothing was yet spun she wondered, and the maiden excused herself by saying that she had not been able to begin yet, on account of her great sorrow at leaving her mother’s house. So the
Queen was satisfied; but on leaving she said, “You must begin to work for me to-morrow.”
As soon as the girl was again alone she knew not how to act or help herself, and in her vexation she went and looked out of the window. She saw three women passing by, the first of whom had a broad
flat foot, the second such a large under-lip that it reached nearly to her chin, and the third a very big thumb. They stopped before the window, and looking up asked the girl what she wanted. She told them
her trouble, and they offered her their help, saying, “Will you invite us to the wedding, and not be ashamed of us, but call us your aunts, and let us sit at your table? If you do all these, we will spin the flax in a
very short time for you.”
“With all my heart,” replied the girl; “come in and begin at once.” Then she let in these three women, and, making a clear place in the first room, they sat themselves down and began spinning. One drew
the thread and trod the wheel, the other moistened the thread, and the third pressed it and beat with her fingers on the table; and as often as she did so a pile of thread fell on the ground, which was spun in
the finest manner. The girl hid the three spinsters, however, from the Queen, and showed her, as often as she came, the heaps of spun yarn; so that she received no end of praise. When the first room was
empty the three women went to the second, and at length to the third, so that soon all was cleared out. Now the three spinsters took leave, saying to the girl, “Do not forget what you promised us; it will
make your fortune.”
When the girl showed the Queen the empty rooms and the great pile of thread, the wedding was performed, and the bridegroom was glad that he had such a clever and industrious wife, and praised her
exceedingly.
“I have three aunts,” said the girl, “who have done me much service; so I would not willingly forget them in my good fortune. Allow me, therefore, to invite them to the wedding, and sit with me at table.”
The Queen and the bridegroom asked, “Why should we not allow it?”
When the feast was begun the three old maids entered in great splendour, and the bride said, “You are welcome dear aunts.”
“Ah,” said the bridegroom, “how do you come by such ugly friends?” and, going up to the one with the big foot, he asked, “Why have you such a broad foot?”—“From treading, from treading,” she
replied. Then he went to the second and asked, “Why have you such an overhanging lip?”—“From licking,” she answered, “from licking.” Then he asked the third, “Why have you such a broad
thumb?”—“From pressing the thread,” she replied, “from pressing the thread.” At this the Prince was frightened, and said, “Therefore my bride shall never touch a spinning-wheel again.”
And so she was set free from the unlucky flax-spinning.
Hansel and Grethel2
Once upon a time there dwelt near a large wood a poor woodcutter with his wife and two children by his former marriage, a little boy called Hansel, and a girl named Grethel. He had little enough to break
or bite, and once, when there was a great famine in the land, he could not procure even his daily bread; and as he lay thinking in his bed one evening, rolling about for trouble, he sighed, and said to his
wife, “What will become of us? How can we feed our children when we have no more than we can eat ourselves?”
“Know, then, my husband,” answered she, “we will lead them away quite early in the morning into the thickest part of the wood, and there make them a fire, and give them each a little piece of bread;
then we will go to our work and leave them alone, so they will not find the way home again and we shall be freed from them.” “No, wife,” replied he, “that I can never do; how can you bring your heart to leave
my children all alone in the wood, for the wild beasts will soon come and tear them to pieces?”
“Oh, you simpleton!” said she, “then we must all four die of hunger; you had better plane the coffins for us.” But she left him no peace till he consented, saying, “Ah, but I shall regret the poor children.”
The two children, however, had not gone to sleep for very hunger, and so they overheard what the stepmother said to their father. Grethel wept bitterly, and said to Hansel, “What will become of us?” “Be
quiet, Grethel,” said he; “do not cry, I will soon help you.” And as soon as their parents had fallen asleep, he got up, put on his coat, and, unbarring the back-door, slipped out. The moon shone brightly, and
the white pebbles which lay before the door seemed like silver pieces, they glittered so brightly. Hansel stooped down, and put as many into his pocket as it would hold, and then going back he said to
Grethel, “Be comforted, dear sister, and sleep in peace; God will not forsake us;” and so saying he went to bed again.
Hansel and Grethel
The next morning, before the sun arose, the wife went and awoke the two children. “Get up, you lazy things; we are going into the forest to chop wood.” Then she gave them each a piece of bread,
saying, “There is something for your dinner; do not eat it before the time, for you will get nothing else.” Grethel took the bread in her apron, for Hansel’s pocket was full of pebbles; and so they all set out
upon their way. When they had gone a little distance Hansel stood still, and peeped back at the house; and this he repeated several times, till his father said, “Hansel, what are you peeping at, and why do
you lag behind? Take care, and remember your legs.”
“Ah! father,” said Hansel, “I am looking at my white cat sitting upon the roof of the house, and trying to say good-bye.” “You simpleton!” said the wife, “that is not a cat; it is only the sun shining on the white
chimney.” But in reality Hansel was not looking at a cat; but every time he stopped he dropped a pebble out of his pocket upon the path.
When they came to the middle of the wood the father told the children to collect wood, and he would make them a fire, so that they should not be cold; so Hansel and Grethel gathered together quite a
little mountain of twigs. Then they set fire to them, and as the flame burnt up high the wife said, “Now, you children, lie down near the fire and rest yourselves, whilst we go into the forest and chop wood;
when we are ready, I will come and call you.”
Hansel and Grethel sat down by the fire, and when it was noon each ate the piece of bread, and, because they could hear the blows of an axe, they thought their father was near; but it was not an axe,
but a branch which he had bound to a withered tree, so as to be blown to and fro by the wind. They waited so long that at last their eyes closed from weariness, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke it
was quite dark, and Grethel began to cry; “How shall we get out of the wood?” But Hansel tried to comfort her by saying, “Wait a little while till the moon rises, and then we will quickly find the way.” The
moon soon shone forth, and Hansel, taking his sister’s hand, followed the pebbles, which glittered like new-coined silver pieces, and showed them the path. All night long they walked on, and as day broke
they came to their father’s house. They knocked at the door, and when the wife opened it, and saw Hansel and Grethel, she exclaimed, “You wicked children! Why did you sleep so long in the wood? We
thought you were never coming home again.” But their father was very glad, for it had grieved his heart to leave them all alone.
Not long afterwards there was again great scarcity in every corner of the land; and one night the children overheard their mother saying to their father, “Every thing is again consumed; we have only half a
loaf left, and then the song is ended: the children must be sent away. We will take them deeper into the wood, so that they may not find the way out again; it is the only means of escape for us.”
But her husband felt heavy at heart, and thought, “It were better to share the last crust with the children.” His wife, however, would listen to nothing that he said, and scolded and reproached him without
end.
He who says A must say B too; and he who consents the first time must also the second.
The children, however, had heard the conversation as they lay awake, and as soon as the old people went to sleep Hansel got up, intending to pick up some pebbles as before; but the wife had locked
the door, so that he could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted Grethel, saying, “Do not cry; sleep in quiet; the good God will not forsake us.”
Early in the morning the stepmother came and pulled them out of bed, and gave them each a slice of bread, which was still smaller than the former piece. On the way Hansel broke his in his pocket, and,
stopping every now and then, dropped a crumb upon the path. “Hansel, why do you stop and look about?” said the father, “keep in the path.”—“I am looking at my little dove,” answered Hansel, “nodding a
good-bye to me.” “Simpleton!” said the wife, “that is no dove, but only the sun shining on the chimney.” So Hansel kept still dropping crumbs as he went along.
The mother led the children deep into the wood, where they had never been before, and there making an immense fire she said to them, “Sit down here and rest, and when you feel tired you can sleep
for a little while. We are going into the forest to hew wood, and in the evening, when we are ready, we will come and fetch you.”
When noon came Grethel shared her bread with Hansel, who had strewn his on the path. Then they went to sleep; but the evening arrived, and no one came to visit the poor children, and in the dark night
they awoke, and Hansel comforted his sister by saying, “Only wait, Grethel, till the moon comes out, then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have dropped, and they will show us the way home.” The
moon shone and they got up, but they could not see any crumbs, for the thousands of birds which had been flying about in the woods and fields had picked them all up. Hansel kept saying to Grethel, “We
will soon find the way;” but they did not, and they walked the whole night long and the next day, but still they did not come out of the wood; and they got so hungry, for they had nothing to eat but the berries
which they found upon the bushes. Soon they got so tired that they could not drag themselves along, so they laid down under a tree and went to sleep.
It was now the third morning since they had left their father’s house, and they still walked on; but they only got deeper and deeper into the wood, and Hansel saw that if help did not come very soon they
would die of hunger. As soon as it was noon they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting upon a bough, which sang so sweetly that they stood still and listened to it. It soon left off, and spreading its wings
flew off; and they followed it until it arrived at a cottage, upon the roof of which it perched; and when they went close up to it they saw that the cottage was made of bread and cakes, and the window panes
were of clear sugar.
“We will go in there,” said Hansel, “and have a glorious feast. I will eat a piece of the roof, and you can eat the window. Will they not be sweet?” So Hansel reached up and broke a piece off the roof, in
order to see how it tasted; while Grethel stepped up to the window and began to bite it. Then a sweet voice called out in the room, “Tip-tap, tip-tap, who raps at my door?” and the children answered, “The
wind, the wind, the child of heaven;” and they went on eating without interruption. Hansel thought the roof tasted very nice, and so he tore off a great piece; while Grethel broke a large round pane out of the
window, and sat down quite contentedly. Just then the door opened, and a very old woman, walking upon crutches, came out. Hansel and Grethel were so frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands; but the old woman, nodding her head, said, “Ah, you dear children, what has brought you here? Come in and stop with me, and no harm shall befall you;” and so saying she took them both by the
hand, and led them into her cottage. A good meal of milk and pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts, were spread on the table, and in the back room were two nice little beds, covered with white, where
Hansel and Grethel laid themselves down, and thought themselves in heaven. The old woman had behaved very kindly to them, but in reality she was a wicked witch who waylaid children, and built the
bread-house in order to entice them in; but as soon as they were in her power she killed them, cooked and ate them, and made a great festival of the day. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see very far;
but they have a fine sense of smelling, like wild beasts, so that they know when children approach them. When Hansel and Grethel came near the witch’s house she laughed wickedly, saying, “Here come
two who shall not escape me.” And early in the morning, before they awoke, she went up to them, and saw how lovingly they lay sleeping, with their chubby red cheeks; and she mumbled to herself, “That
will be a good bite.” Then she took up Hansel with her rough hand, and shut him up in a little cage with a lattice-door; and although he screamed loudly it was of no use. Grethel came next, and, shaking her
till she awoke, she said, “Get up, you lazy thing, and fetch some water to cook something good for your brother, who must remain in that stall and get fat; when he is fat enough I shall eat him.” Grethel
began to cry, but it was all useless, for the old witch made her do as she wished. So a nice meal was cooked for Hansel, but Grethel got nothing else but a crab’s claw.
Every morning the old witch came to the cage and said, “Hansel, stretch your finger that I may feel whether you are getting fat.” But Hansel used to stretch out a bone, and the old woman, having very bad
sight, thought it was his finger, and wondered very much that it did not get fat. When four weeks had passed, and Hansel still kept quite lean, she lost all her patience and would not wait any longer.
“Grethel,” she called out in a passion, “get some water quickly; be Hansel fat or lean, this morning I will kill and cook him.” Oh, how the poor little sister grieved, as she was forced to fetch the water, and
how fast the tears ran down her cheeks! “Dear good God, help us now!” she exclaimed. “Had we only been eaten by the wild beasts in the wood then we should have died together.” But the old witch
called out, “Leave off that noise; it will not help you a bit.”
So early in the morning Grethel was forced to go out and fill the kettle, and make a fire. “First we will bake, however,” said the old woman; “I have already heated the oven and kneaded the dough; and so
saying she pushed poor Grethel up to the oven, out of which the flames were burning fiercely. “Creep in,” said the witch, “and see if it is hot enough, and then we will put in the bread;” but she intended
when Grethel got in to shut up the oven and let her bake, so that she might eat her as well as Hansel. Grethel perceived what her thoughts were, and said, “I do not know how to do it; how shall I get in?”
“You stupid goose,” said she, “the opening is big enough. See, I could even get in myself!” and she got up and put her head into the oven. Then Grethel gave her a push, so that she fell right in, and then
shutting the iron door she bolted it. Oh! how horribly she howled; but Grethel ran away, and left the ungodly witch to burn to ashes.
Now she ran to Hansel, and, opening his door, called out, “Hansel, we are saved; the old witch is dead!” So he sprang out, like a bird out of his cage when the door is opened; and they were so glad that
they fell upon each other’s neck, and kissed each other over and over again. And now, as there was nothing to fear, they went into the witch’s house, where in every corner were caskets full of pearls and
precious stones. “These are better than pebbles,” said Hansel, putting as many into his pocket as it would hold; while Grethel thought, “I will take some home too,” and filled her apron full. “We must be off
now,” said Hansel, “and get out of this bewitched forest;” but when they had walked for two hours they came to a large piece of water. “We cannot get over,” said Hansel. “I can see no bridge at all.” “And
there is no boat either,” said Grethel; “but there swims a white duck, I will ask her to help us over;” and she sang,
“Little duck, good little duck,
Grethel and Hansel, here we stand,
There is neither stile nor bridge,
Take us on your back to land.”
Take us on your back to land.”
So the duck came to them, and Hansel sat himself on, and bade his sister sit behind him. “No,” answered Grethel, “that will be too much for the duck, she shall take us over one at a time.” This the good
little bird did, and when both were happily arrived on the other side, and had gone a little way, they came to a well-known wood, which they knew the better every step they went, and at last they perceived
their father’s house. Then they began to run, and, bursting into the house, they fell on their father’s neck. He had not had one happy hour since he had left the children in the forest; and his wife was dead.
Grethel shook her apron, and the pearls and precious stones rolled out upon the floor, and Hansel threw down one handful after the other out of his pocket. Then all their sorrows were ended, and they lived
together in great happiness.
My tale is done. There runs a mouse: whoever catches her may make a great, great cap out of her fur.