Thyra Samter Winslow

From the time she was thirteen Rilla Mabry had been ashamed of her appearance. It was then that she started growing taller than the other girls. She was also awkward as well as tall and she was too thin.
By the time she was twenty she was fully convinced that her appearance was really something terrible . All of the other girls seemed little and cute and attractive. No matter what Rilla wore it seemed wrong. She was much too tall to wear tailored clothes. And thin dresses hung around her loosely.
All of the girls and boys in the group liked Rilla. She was a fine girl – if you could forget the way she looked. Even her hair was wrong-rather stringy- but she had a pleasant and attractive face.
In spite of her looks Rilla had a boy friend. He was Patrick Redding and his father kept a grocery store. Pat wasn’t any great price –but then you couldn’t expect Rilla, with her looks to do any better. People feel that Rilla ought to be satisfied. Pat was a nice looking boy, and he shouldn’t be considered unimportant.
Rilla didn’t consider Pat unimportant. She was grateful to him for being nice to her. She was as pleasant and as friendly as she could be. As a matter of fact she liked Patrick a lot. He was fun to be with. She would have been perfectly satisfied except for the fact that she was in love with Shane Tennant. All of which did her little good – for Shane was the price of the town. Shane’s father was a banker – and rich.

His mother was the social leader of the town. Shane was well much taller than Rilla- and handsome besides.
Pat went into the grocery business with her father. Shane went into the bank. That’s the way sons do in small towns unless they have definite ideals about law or one of the other professions. Rilla didn’t do anything. Her parents have just enough money so she didn’t have to work. She went to parties with Patrick- and admired for Shane from a distance. The towns people felt that she would marry with Pat, that he’d take over his father’s grocery store, and that they’d settle down.

That might have happened if it hadn’t been for Leslie Durant. Leslie Durant was - and still is-a well known magazine illustrator. And he came to Morrisville to visit an aunt. And he was taken an anywhere to all of the parties , of course. He was the social lion of the season. He stayed in town only for few days – but that was long enough for a lot to happen.
It was a small window with narrow pieces of paper pasted across it to prevent its breaking during the heavy air raids. In the small space at the center that remained, a little man with eyeglasses was carefully setting out his display of clocks and watches. He paid no attention to many Londoners hurrying by to begin another day.
When he finished placing his merchandise, the little man came out of the shop and stared in the window. He had placed the clocks and watches with great care – the clocks in a row at the back, and in front of them lying flat, a semicircle of watches. All the clocks had their faces neatly divided in the middle by hands that pointed to six o’clock; all the watches, thin or fat, had their hands pointing straight at three o’clock.
“Yes,” said the jeweler with a satisfied look. “Very nice.”
About an hour later a passenger got out of the bus at the corner. He was a tall man with a blonde mustache, and he wore a heavy overcoat and black hat. He was slightly lame and carried a cane. He smiled when the policeman at the corner said “Good morning” to him. The lame man’s name was Gebhardt, and the policeman’s superior officers would have been very glad to know that.
Gebhardt walked slowly, leaning heavily on his cane. The meeting with the policeman never failed to amuse him., and he smiled to himself at the stupidity of the English. Gebhardt looked into the jewelry shop window.
There was no expression on his face as he looked from the clocks that said six to the watches that said three. He had passed the shop faithfully every day for two weeks, but had never gone in. Gebhardt set his wristwatch and pushed open the door.
A salesman was talking to the jeweler at the far end of the counter, but they turned as the door shut. The jeweler walked toward Gebhardt and stared at him. “Yes?” asked the little man.
“My watch,” said Gebhardt. “It seems to have stopped. An hour or so ago.” He took off his watch and laid it on the counter.
The watch’s hands indicated nine o’clock. “I see,” said the jeweler, “Stopped.”
Gebhardt looked toward the salesman but salesman was busy examining a catalogue. The jeweler picked up the watch.
Gebhardt said: “And you might change the strap. That one is about worn up.
He leaned against the counter and waited. Once he looked into the back room where the jeweler had taken his watch. He could see the old man, bent over a desk, examining his watch. Gebhardt lit a cigarette and waited.
It was less then five minutes when the little man came back. He held out the watch with its new strap and Gebhardt put it on. “You should be careful,” said the jeweler. “That is a fine watch.”
“Yes, I know,” said Gebhardt casually. “And I’m sure it will work perfectly now.” He paid the jeweler and left the shop.
All the way back to his room Gebhardt was conscious of the strap on his wrist, but he did not look at the watch even once. After all, in his business you couldn’t be too careful.
Once inside the small room where he had lived since he first came to London, Gebhardt put aside all appearance of lameness and moved about the room with quick sureness, locking the door, pulling down the curtains. Finally, he lit the light over his desk and took of his wristwatch.
Working rapidly, he removed the straps from both ends of the watch. Then with a knife he opened the end of the straps and, finally, from one hand took out of a small piece of very thin paper. He spread the paper out on his desk and with a glass began to study the message, which was written in code.
The message was short and to the point. It read: “Trucks from King Charles Square will transport Regiment 55 tomorrow A.M. Act at once.”
“So,” said Gebhardt softly. He burned the paper in the ashtray. For a moment he sat thinking. He previously knew that a large number of trucks in King Charles Square would be used to carry soldiers from London to the coast. And somewhere along the route trucks and soldiers would be blown to pieces with explosives.
Gebhardt drew his suitcase from under the bed and opened it on the desk. From its nest of cotton he picked up one of the bombs. It was wide and flat, quite different in form from the usual, old-fashioned type of bomb. Attached with wire to the bottom of an automobile engine the bomb was deadly when the motor heated.
He decided to take with him in a small package about fourteen of the bombs. That was about all he could take care of in two hours. He had detailed information on King Charles Square. By midnight all the soldiers and mechanics were gone; at two o’clock a policeman looked in to check up. Gebhardt was very much pleased with himself. Thanks to British’s inefficiency, he would have the place to himself between twelve o’clock and two o’clock.
Thinking of the importance of time suddenly reminded him, and he put a new strap on his watch and then put the watch on his wrist then he sat very still, looking into space, mentally checking every detail of the plan.
Gebhardt smiled. Of course! Outside the jeweler shop he had set his watch back sixty-four minutes for the signal to the jeweler. He smiled again as he now moved the minute hand of his watch exactly sixty-for minutes ahead. Never forgetting these small details made him a good secret agent, and he knew it.
When the time came, Gebhardt moved carefully through the darkness of the blacked-out streets.
In the alley behind King Charles Square he stopped and looked at his watch. Twelve o’clock exactly. Gebhardt smiled. The whole thing was going like clockwork. He waited another ten minutes just to be on the safe side.
Gebhardt climbed a fence, moved carefully along a narrow space between two buildings, and came out in King Charles Square. He stood a moment, counting the black forms of the trucks.
Gebhardt moved over to the nearest truck. He set down his package, took some wire and a wire cutter from a pocket. He slid under the truck and felt along the bottom of the engine. Lying flat on his back, working in the dark, he began to wire the bomb to the exact place he wanted it.
Somebody stepped on his ankle.
Pain shot up Gebhardt’s leg, and he bit his lip, not breathing. No, he thought, there can’t be anyone here. There is never anyone at this hour. I have checked it many times. But that weight kept pressing into his ankle.
“All right, mister,” said a voice. “Come out of there.”
The wire cutter fell down from his fingers. Hands grabbed at Gebhardt’s legs, pulled. In a panic, he kicked himself loose, got up, and run wildly.
A man shouted. Someone blew a whistle. A form jumped from nowhere and knocked him to the ground. Gebhardt drove his fist into a face, twice, pulled away free, ran on. He ran into a wall, turned the wrong way. A flashlight focused on him. He turned back but too late.
“There! Get him!”
Gebhardt drew his revolver. As he ran, he heard them shout as they came closer to him.
There was the noise of rapid gunfire behind him, and something struck him in the back. No, thought Gebhardt, the plan was perfect. There was a sharp pain. He said weakly: “No.” He was dead when the soldiers reached him. He lay with his one arm stretched out in front of him, his wristwatch showing the hour

“Imagine the nerve of the guy!” said a young soldier. “He walked in here as though we didn’t even exist. That’s a nice watch he has on. But it broke when he fell.”
“It’s an hour fast,” said a second soldier. “How did that happen?”
the little jeweler was even more surprised when he read the newspaper report the next day about Gebhardt. “I can’t understand it,” he thought. “The man must have been careless. Nothing went wrong on my part. Why, I even set his watch correctly before I gave it back to him.”

He saw Rilla Mabry. Rilla was standing near the door and she was looking at Shane Tennant. She never knew her face how much showed what she was thinking about. No one else noticed- but Durant being knew, understood the situation. He saw Rilla standing not quite straight because she didn’t feel quite as tall that way, in a badly fitted dress and her hair not quite smooth- and he saw Shane, perfectly dressed, self confident, good looking. And then Pat came to ask Rilla for the dance.

On the second day of his visit Durant made his remarkable statement. He told anyone who would listen
to him that Rilla Mabry was by far the best looking girl in town. One of the best looking girl he’d ever seen.
Rilla never had a compliment about her looks before. She had always been shy, self conscious, and often unhappy about her appearance. And now the first authority in beauty who had ever been in town claimed that she was the price.
When Durant, himself told her what he thought of her she was filled with confusion. She managed finally to thank him. And later, very shyly , she went up to him.
“I do wish that you would tell me how can look better,“ she said.
“That’s not really my particular kind of work, “ he told her, “ but may be if we get together …..”
They got together the next morning. Durant came to Rilla’s house. And with Rilla’s mother acting as helper, they did things to Rilla and to Rilla’s clothes. Durant made her stand up straight . and he rearranged her hair. And he told her what was wrong with the clothes she wore.
That night there was a dance for Durant- his last evening in town. And, as he had thought when he started things, Rilla was, for the first time in her life, the center of attention. Toward the end of the evening Durant had the satisfaction of seeing Shane Tennant dancing very attentively with Rilla, Shane Tenant whom Rilla had looked at with longing eyes – and who had paid any attention to her.

Durant went back to his home and his work in New York and forgot about the whole thing. Years passed. And then, just the other day, this happened:
Durant was lunching alone at a restaurant when an attractive, tall woman, past her first youth, came up to him.
“ You don’t remember me ?” she said.
Durant didn’t remember her.
“ I am Rilla tenant – I was Rilla Mabry when you knew me. You came to my home town and – and rather made my life over. Remember now ?”
“Of course I do “ said Durant. “ I remember very well. It was my one attempt at changing the destiny of another person. “
“You did a wonderful job.“ said Rilla. There was a strange note in her voice which he didn’t understand.
“You married the boy you were in love with. I see. His name was Tannent wasn’t it ?”
“Why, yes” said Rilla. “ But how did you remember the name ? And how did you know I was in love with him?”
“I am good at remembering names. And I saw you looking at him. Simplicity itself! And to think that I was the cause!
“Yes you were” said Rilla.“ It was very funny when you look back on it. There I was going with Patrick Redding, and in love with Shane, and terribly unhappy and awkward. And you came down and said I was a beauty- so automatically I became a beauty. And the boys all wanted to go out with me. And I married Shane.”
“Wonderful “ said Durant. And he smiled happily. “ How are you getting along , now ? “
“That is the difficult part. “ said Rilla. “ You shouldn’t have asked. “
“Shane and I got married. And it didn’t get along very well though I was awfully happy in the beginning. The Tennant lost all of their money in a bank failure- and my family had its money in the Tennant bank by that time, so our money went, too. Then Shane fell in love with a chorus girl. I got a divorce of course. I’ve been teaching in a girls’ school for the past three years. “
“ That’s too bad!” said Durant. “ But maybe that was better than marrying that other boy whom you didn’t love.”
“ May be,” said Rilla. “You can never tell. Love goes … Patrick Redding took his father’s grocery store and married the cutest girl in town. They have three children and are very happy. And, oh , yes he became quite ambitious and started a chain of grocery store. Now he is the richest and most important man in town”
Swallow and sparrow became close friends. They started walking around in together. Other swallows said nothing at the beginning about this circumstance. However, the things changed when the swallow started bringing the sparrow to its nest. Nest of the swallow was under the eaves of an empty wooden house and there were many nests of swallow next to it. Going there from and thereto made swallows disturbed.

Swallows held a meeting and they appointed a spokesman. This spokesman told about this circumstance with it in a suitable time and said it not to bring this sparrow to its nest.

Although the swallow showed some obstinacy, it finally was obliged to obey by this requirement.
One night the sparrow suddenly wakened while it was sleeping. Tree on which it built up its nest among its branches was swinging. It flied away and had a look-see round the environment. Thereupon, it recognised that it was an earthquake.

Its close friend, the swallow, came to its mind. It arrived at its nest and it weakened its close friend. It said the swallow to weaken other swallows and the wooden house may be fallen onto the ground. The swallow fulfilled what it said. Once the last swallow flied away there, the wooden house was fallen onto the ground. Later, swallows set up new nests under eaves of another house and they did make no rejection for the sparrow to go from and to the nest of the swallow for the reason that they were owed their life to it.
Ahmet’s mother and father were poor. They were living in a small house with only one room. Since his father’s lungs were ill, he compulsorily retired. Ahmet finished primary school in difficulty by selling pretzel out of school time. Later by the help of his neighbour he started to work in a restaurant to do the washing up. Ahmet had taken the first step to realize his dreams. He had met the wonderful meals which he formerly used to see behind the restaurant windows. Now he had full three courses a day. He had kept Uncle Veli, who was cooking in the restaurant, observing. He would learn cooking from him and he would be a cook himself, too but Ahmet would work not in somebody else’s restaurant but in his own one.

Ahmet opened a restaurant in the city centre after he had done his military service. Because his meals were very delicious, the restaurant was full of customers. He was earning well. Sometimes poor people used to come to the restaurant and eat free meal.

The waiters working in the restaurant and the customers couldn’t find any sense of Ahmet’s going and leaving two plates of meals to an empty table during lunch times. How would they know that they were Ahmet’s present to his mother and father, whom the poverty had finished years ago? They also wouldn’t be able to hear that while putting the plates on the table Ahmet was murmuring “you aren’t going stay hungry any more from now on mummy and daddy. Have your meals and get yourself very full.”
There was a rabbit imagining itself like a lion. One day this rabbit convened all rabbits in the vicinity on a high hill and said them that it would frighten wolf, jackal, fox in the case they would pass through the rough path in the downstairs. Rabbits listened to it with no movement.

Ten minutes later, a wolf was passing through this path and it was suddenly surprised to see a rabbit shouting and running toward itself, and this circumstance caused it to frighten, and it urgently run away and disappeared there.
There was a fox hanging wings on it and stealing hens from poultry-houses upper sides of which were uncovered. Once poultry-house owner recognised this circumstance, they covered upper-sides of them.

A fox never likes being hungry and remaining with no remedy. It learnt soil digging work from one mole and started entering into poultry-houses through underground. Poultry-house owners thought that mole was stealing the hens and always hoped to catch a mole.
One of the jackals found a rifle while it was walking in the jungle. It recognised there
were two cartridge in the rifle, and it immediately started robberies. Animals in
the jungle, properties of which were stolen and were under threat convened and
they arrived before lion.
The lion was informed about the circumstance and this made it very angry and thereafter, it followed the jackal around.

The lion seeing the jackal to walk some ahead has roared. The jackal
pointed its gun at it when it saw that the lion was approaching, and immediately before opening fire, the lion frightened and started running away. Thereupon, the jackal run after the lion, too. Just then, a river appeared in front of them. Both of them swam and crossed the river.The lion run a while and then suddenly stopped running. The jackal stopped as well. The lion turned back and walked over the jackal.

The jackal realized that wet rifle did not open fire and thrown the rifle out and it crossed back the river. The lion followed the jackal.The lion chased the jackal for a long time in the jungle, and it hit a fiston it as soon as caught it. The jackal escaped with great difficulty its life from the lion. From then, no body has seen it in the surrounding.
Our dear world; which is turning around silently somewhere in the universe, which is full of mysteries, secrets and a lot of unknown. The living creatures, which you have allowed to live on you, survive and take shelter for ten thousands of years, existing maybe only on you with everything of them. The idealists with their genuine talent of thought, with their power of imagination; who are possible to appear always and everywhere with their stubbornness and by leaving the normality of the life, which they have to live with pleasure, desire; and by getting a little over the normality to know an unknown, to help the solutions of problems and assimilating some kinds of efforts, searches for the benefit of that normalitists who they left behind.

Although a young octopus travelled a lot of places on the blue sea, the things he saw weren’t strange to him; he was indifferent to the things he saw as if he had seen them before and the motivating passion occurring in his thought, made him decide to reach the source, the spring of the river when he first realized it, which was flowing into the sea.
The young octopus started to move forward slowly. He could always have the chance to watch closely the trees, the grass, the flowers, the birds and the large and small living creatures by the river because he was taking pains to swim on the surface. As the days passed one after the other, the broadness of the river started to become narrow, the water started to flow a little more wildly and the slope started to increase. Since the young octopus was swimming towards the stream, he realized that he started to be some more compelled every passing day. If he didn’t suffer the difficulty and leave himself, he would be able to return to the sea. However, this was a matter that he wouldn’t be able to do. Now that he was an idealist and he had come till here for the sake of an idea, returning back could never be possible.

When the young octopus arrived at the side of the snowy mountain, which was difficult to see from faraway, a waterfall; whose water was falling from quite high, appeared. He had to cross this waterfall and go on his way, but how? A few attempts he made showed that it was impossible for now. Anyway he was tired. He had come till here without stopping, and by exerting himself to the utmost for days. He thought “I should relax for a while, gain my energy; when I believe that I can cross this waterfall, I will come and cross it and go on my way. I will take one of the paths I saw yesterday while I was coming, I will look for a place where I will be able to pass my days in peace. Let the waterfall wait for now.”
The young octopus returned back and took one of the paths. He reached a lake in the end by saying this or that way. The young octopus’ life in the lake lasted quite long. Actually time wasn’t very important for an idealist. Let the time pass. What was important was to be able to use the time skillfully. You would always improve and show progress in point of thought. You already had this idealism from birth. The conditions would force you to this whether you wanted or didn’t. When you started to support an idea, namely when you became an idealist, you would think carefully of your past and you would realize and be surprised that even how the unhappy, pessimistic, desperate days, which you don’t want to remember now, had educated you, and had made you experienced.

Several years passed and the young octopus had grown up and had become a mature octopus by the passing years. He always had good relationships with the living creatures in and around the lake; he had had quite a lot of accumulation of knowledge by adding his observations on the things they told. Everything was very well; perhaps it would be much better if the peole hadn’t pitched a camp near the lake. As soon as the octopus saw the people, he had listened to his common sense saying “be careful”, he had withdrawn to his cave at the bottom of the lake. He was passing his days in his cave; he was sometimes touring at the depth of the lake. On some days he saw a few boats on the lake but he couldn’t do anything more than watching the people’s in the boats rowing from the depth of the lake while swimming.

One day, while a boat was going near to the middle of the lake, it suddenly got dark. A heavy rain started. The wind blowing gradually harder was building big waves on the lake. The efforts of the people on the boat who were trying to escape from the storm were useless. They weren’t able to prevent their boat from capsizing and sinking. The octopus had felt the storm in advanced; he had taken the risk to be seen by the people on the boat and he had come a few metres close to the boat. He had covered two people, who were flopping about when the boat sank, with his strong arms, had come to the surface to prevent them drowning and started to swim quickly towards the shore. After leaving the unconscious people to a safe place, the octopus withdrew to his cave in the depth of the lake.

On the following ten days after this event, the octopus, who couldn’t see any boats on the surface of the lake, came to the surface because he thought that the people might have gone and he looked at the shore, where the camp was, from far away. The first thing that called his attention was the huge, iron boats. The people had also built wooden sheds near the tents, where the camp was pitched. There were lots of people on the shore. He started to swim towards the branch, which let the superfluous water of the lake float into the river. He was planning to come out of the lake going without making the people realize. However, when he reached the exit, he realized with sadness that there were barbed wires around, which were preventing him going. He was afraid of making a mistake. He could pull the wires to pieces, throw away and go on his way. There were the possibilities of getting injured and being undersized. The waterfall on the river was already a big problem on his way. It wouldn’t be proper to be powerless after crossing the waterfall.

On the following days the surface of the lake suddenly got into action. The ships that the people made by putting together the pieces, which they brought till the lake shore by lorries, started to move constantly. The divers started dive from the ships and examine the bottom of the lake. The harpoons that were in the divers’ hands would direct to the octopus as soon as it was seen. There was a huge octopus with eight arms, each of whose length was nearly five metres, and the one who would kill this octopus would be rewarded. It was necessary to think now. This octopus, who was wanted to be killed, saved certainly two people’s lives in a stormy weather. They had seen the octopus before they fainted and they informed the others too, there was even a reward. It is necessary to consider this situation as a labyrinth without an exit.

The octopus had understood that it was impossible to live in the lake now. Although all his goodwill, the people wouldn’t let him search some more in this lake. It was also unnecessary to live more in this lake. The things he learnt were enough and more than enough. The octopus got out of his cave with rancor. He came with a terrible speed out to the water surface just opposite the ships being anchored in front of the camp. He was puffing up and up and was causing artificial waves on the lake as he was saying “you have been looking for me for days, here I ** and I’m not afraid of you”. He suddenly directed to his left. He entered the branch by pulling the barbed wires at the exit of the lake to pieces under the amazed looks of the people on the shore and he reached the river after a while. He came before the waterfall by withstanding easily to the river’s stream and he went up by holding his both arms out and by holding of the rocks there.

On the following days the octopus continued the intensive efforts to reach the source of the river. He was passing in difficulty through the gorges at the sides of the mountain where the source existed and he was moving forward step by step at the places where the depth didn’t let him swim. The rain falling on the sides of the mountains was turning into snow because of the weather’s getting gradually cold and trembling in the ice cold water under the snow was teaching him how difficult the life was in the mountains. When he started to think that it was impossible to go more forward, he found the source of the river. The source was coming out of rocks, it was coming out of a place like a cave and it was appearing on the earth.
The octopus summarized the topic: “Now that the source had been here. It comes out to the earth from that narrow place, it is fed by the rain and snow water, it goes down till the waterfall by gathering some of the little rivers’ water. After passing the waterfall, the water gathering a lot of branches from both sides gradually grows and it reaches the sea, where I was born, as a river and integrates with the sea. And the lake, where I lived for a long while, was nothing more than a drift of water, which let its superfluous water flow into the river by means of a branch.

On his way back, while coming closer to the waterfall, the octopus started to think. He wondered if the people would wait for him there. It was a fifty fifty possibility. Namely, they’d either wait or wouldn’t wait. It wouldn’t be definite. The octopus wasn’t absolutely frightened. Anyway, fear was the last think to be considered by an idealist in such a situation. There was no reason to be frightened. After the octopus evaluated the situation, considered what he would do after what might happen, he went down the waterfall. He went past the branch, which was connecting the lake to the river, by swimming bravely on the water.

The octopus reached the sea a few days later. He had set off years ago for the sake of an ideal when he was a young octopus; after years, he had turned back as a mature octopus. However, the ideal still wasn’t an ideal. An idealist should teach the others the things he learnt and should acquaint them too. As well as you couldn’t say you have enough knowledge for yourself so you wouldn’t need to learn more, you couldn’t also say you were more knowledgeable than the others; let the others not learn the things I knew. After relaxing for a while, the octopus wanted to start his attempts. He would teach the others the things he learnt and he would acquaint them too. Until there would be no other knowledge in his mind what he knew but the others didn’t…

f you have unwanted brown spots, dark spots or dark patches spreading on your face or other places, and you want them to vanish completely, giving your skin lasting clarity and beauty, then you'll want to treat your brown spots with our Miracle Cure.

Epilators like Silk Epil from Braun remove hair from the root, and so they are similar to waxing, as waxing also removes hair from the root. However, you may get more in-growths if you use these machines, so you should scrub your body with a pumice stone while bathing to counter this problem. You need to give more details about the brown spot. Is it a freckle or is it a mole? How big is the spot? If it is a mole, you should visit a dermatologist.

Prevention is the easy part—apply sunscreen to your hands, arms, face, and scalp (if not covered with hair) every day, whether you plan to go outside or not. You see, sun damage comes in two forms: UVA and UVB. Ultraviolet A rays are known as “aging rays”; UVA sunlight makes up 90-95% of all sunlight that reaches the earth’s surface. It penetrates windows of houses and cars; it gets through clouds; it’s present 365 days a year. Even more troublesome is the fact that UVA exposure is “silent”. You don’t get a tan or sunburn from UVA exposure. UVB rays, also called “burning rays,” cause tanning and burning of the skin, so you know when it’s happening. Enough said? So from this day forward, you’ll apply sunscreen with an SPF of 30? 

A laser generates and intense beam of light. This beam brings energy to a specific site, through a small hand piece connected to the laser. The laser light is absorbed by oxyhemoglobin (bright red blood cells carrying oxygen) and melanin/pigment (black or brown pigment found in the skin) causing decomposition or destruction by heat of unwanted cells while leaving healthy cells intact.

Microdermabrasion is another way to remove brown spots. By gently abrading the skin with ultra-fine crystal particulates, microdermabrasion can reduce unwanted pigmentary changes and age spots. It can also benefit our acne patients.

The face, neck, chest and hands are the most popular areas to treat. A progressive series of 5-8 treatments are gently performed 2-4 weeks apart. Peels are often combined with microdermabrasion producing even better results.

Laser is the best way to remove moles. It is good that you have visited a doctor since moles can be the symptoms of other problems. Since that is not the case, simply get them removed through laser.

Sunscreen, protective clothing, and sunglasses help prevent further sun damage. Exposure time in the sun should be limited and seek shade when outdoors. Try to avoid outdoor activities between 10 am and 3 pm, when the ultraviolet rays are strongest. See a dermatologist yearly for a skin examination to check for any abnormal moles or skin cancer.

After crying a river of tears, having too much booze the night before, or spending little time for sleep, you may find yourself with red puffy eyes. Although you can cover your eye bags with a cool pair of sunglasses, you still have to deal with your eye problem when you have to remove your shades. What's more, bags under the eyes are usually accompanied by other problems such as dark circles or extreme redness.

Puffy eyes usually last for hours or a couple of days. If you are not going anywhere, it is actually good for you to just let nature determine when your poofed-up eyes are going to deflate. However, if you have an important meeting, a date, or you are going to attend a special occasion, having eye bag woes can really be annoying. Here are some tricks on how you can de-puff your eye bags in a jiffy:

Prevention Is Best

Some people are prone to eye bags, while others are not. If you are one of the individuals who seem to be prone to having swollen eyes, then you should stay away from things that are causing your eyes to puff.

If you have an important date, you should remember to sleep well the night before. Also, make sure that you don't go on an alcohol spree, which may be responsible for fluid retention. Getting easy with salty foods may also be a good idea because like alcohol, too much salt can also make you retain much water.

Simple Eye Massage

If you were not able to prevent your eyes from becoming swollen, then do not despair. There are plenty of things you can do, such as performing eye massage to help reduce inflammation.

Using your ring finger, simply massage your eye area in circular motion, starting from your nasal sinuses then to the cheeks. Make sure that you slightly push the skin upwards so as not to cause wrinkles. Repeat the massage for about five times on each eye. Gently massaging the area will help flush out pooled fluid faster.

Soothe Your Eyes With A Cool Eye Mask

Placing a chilled eye mask (choose the one without holes for more coverage) on your eyes for 10 to 15 minutes will help soothe your eyes. Moreover, your blood vessels will constrict or tighten due to the cold temperature. This will help facilitate draining of fluid located beneath the skin under your eyes. If you do not have a plastic eye mask, you can use chilled cucumbers or used teabags.

Stay Away From Hot Beverages

If you have swollen eyes, it would be best for you to drink plenty of cold water or other cold beverages. As mentioned earlier, the cool temperature encourages blood vessels to constrict, which will help in promoting better fluid drainage. Basically, the bags under your eyes are simply water or fluid that was not properly flushed out of your system.

Say No To Exfoliation

It would be best for you to skip using products that have ingredients such as salicylic acid, alpha hydroxy acid, and retinoids. These ingredients could irritate your skin and make swelling much worse.

Skip The Eyeliner

If you still have eye bags even after you performed the tricks above, then you need to skip eyeliner for the day. This makeup is used to enhance the shape of the eyes so if you have swollen eyes, the eyeliner will only highlight the flaw. Instead, use an eye shadow that is of the same shade of your upper eyelid to mask the swelling. You can also sweep the same color just beneath your lower lashes to help cover the flaw.

Since puffy eyes are usually accompanied by other eye problems, such as dark circles, crow's feet and wrinkles, you should use natural and high-quality eye creams. One eye product that could help reduce fine lines and skin discoloration around the eyes is Eyevive.

Freckles are flat, circular small spots of melanin on human skin in people of fair complexion. The spots develop randomly on the skin, especially after repeated exposure to sunlight. They may vary in color - they may be red, yellow, tan, light-brown, brown, or black. They are usually more often seen in the summer, especially among lighter-skinned people and people with light or red hair. Both men and women get freckles at an equal rate.

Causes of Freckle

Exposure of skin to sun is one of the main cause of developing freckles. Freckles will fade when sun exposure is reduced or eliminated. The basic cause of freckles are some special cells in the skin that produce a pigment called melanin. If you have melanin in your body, going on accumulating at one place, then it may result in freckles age spots.
Freckles are influenced by genetic factor also. Hormone Abnormalities can cause freckles since estrogen over-stimulates pigment-producing cells, causing them to generate excess color when exposed to sunlight.

Signs and Symptoms of Freckles

In some cases, freckles are sporadic, individual spots and sometimes there are several grouped together, making them appear larger and cover a greater portion of the skin. Freckles, age spots and pregnancy mask have several things in common. They are formed in sun exposed areas: face, hands, chest and back. These unwelcome brown patches are nothing more than accumulation of skin pigment melanin which is always produced by the skin.

Types

Ephelides (singular: ephelis, the Greek word for freckle): This term refers to flat spots that are red or light-brown and typically appear during the sunny months and fade in the winter.
Lentigines (singular: lentigo, from the Latin word for lentil): Children may develop a small tan, brown, or black spot which tends to be darker than an ephelis-type freckle and which does not fade in the winter.

Effective Freckle Treatments

Bleaching Creams - The use of hydroquinone and kojic acid are one of the beneficial treatment for freckles. They may help in lightning freckles if they are applied consistently over a period of months.

Cryosurgery: A light freeze with liquid nitrogen can be used to treat freckles.

Chemical Peels: Chemical peels are used to remove age spots, freckles, discoloration, wrinkles and fine lines. They generally help to make the skin smooth and firm and also help in curing freckles gradually.

Freckle Laser Removal

The most effective freckle removal method is freckle laser removal. There are a number of available laser treatments that are safe. A laser projects an intense light on the area that is affected, causing the light to be absorbed by the oxyhemoglobin and melanin so that the darker cells are destroyed and the healthy cells are left in tact. Your will need to protect your eyes from the intense light by wearing goggles. The light is directed using a very thin piece of equipment.

Intense Pulsed Light Therapy (IPL): IPL is one of the newer forms of facial rejuvenation. IPL delivers energy to both the superficial (epidermis) and deep (dermis) layers of the skin, the epidermis is spared from damage. Thus, there is virtually no recovery time.

Tretinoin: Tretinoin (vitamin A acid, Retin-A) also helps to make freckles lighter when applied over a period of time.

Doctor needs to cut and clean the abscess area. Cleaning the pus might reduce the chance of infection. The ultimate goal of the treatment is to cure the skin abscess. Doctors give specific medication in forms of antibiotics and regular cleaning of the affected skin. Heat packs in various ways help in reducing the swelling and pain of the affected area. One can prevent from this problem by proper cleaning of it. Using antibiotic lotions and medicated soaps is quite helpful.

Small abscesses may be helped by applying warm compresses to the area several times a day. This will sometimes promote spontaneous drainage of the abscess. The goal of treatment is to cure the infection. The doctor may cut and drain the abscess to clean the area and control the infection. Antibiotics are given to control the infection.

Heat (such as warm compresses) may speed healing, reduce inflammation, and make the area feel better. Raise the affected part to reduce swelling and inflammation. Most skin abscesses can be cured with proper treatment. A doctor treats an abscess by cutting it open and draining the pus. After draining the abscess, a doctor makes sure all of the pus has been removed by washing out the pocket with a sterile salt solution. Sometimes the drained abscess is packed with gauze, which is removed 24 to 48 hours later. If the abscess is completely drained, antibiotics usually are not needed. However, if the infection has spread or if the abscess is on the middle or upper part of the face, antibiotics that kill staphylococci, such as dicloxacillin and cephalexin, may be used because of the high risk that the infection will spread to the brain.


Hepar sulphuris and Silica are homeopathic remedies to treat the skin abscesses. Applying a warm compress or soaking the boil in warm water can help alleviate the pain.

The goal of treatment is to cure the infection. The doctor may cut and drain the abscess to clean the area and control the infection. Antibiotics are given to control the infection.
Heat (such as warm compresses) may speed healing, reduce inflammation, and make the area feel better. Raise the affected part to reduce swelling and inflammation.

Whenever a boil is noticed, start the treatment at home. Initially, apply heat with the aid of hot packs and hot soaks. Due to the heat, blood circulation in the area increases. More white blood cells and antibodies are dispatched to the region of infection. This enables the body to combat the infection better naturally. When the skin abscess is tiny and firm, opening and draining it will not prove useful. Only, when the boil forms a head, it must be inferred that the time is apt to drain it. Smaller boils drain on their own. For larger boils, approach a healthcare practitioner to lance it.

Identifying and avoiding the potential irritants, which can mainly result in contact dermatitis, could be quite helpful for you to reduce the irritation of your skin.

If you have a fever or long-term illness, such as cancer or diabetes, or are taking medications that suppress the immune system, you should contact your health-care practitioner if you develop a boil (abscess).

Urea Cream is often recommended for treating Keratosis pilaris. However, before you use urea creams, think about this. Nitrogen, which is a waste product of protein metabolism in humans, is removed from the blood and converted to urea. Urea is transferred into the urine and removed from the body. Medically it is used in creams, supposedly, to restore moisture. There are more natural and healthier alternatives for moisturizing the skin such as Vitamin E oil, borage oil, and a many others; why use a toxic waste byproduct to do the job.

Cucumber is an excellent source of silica, which is a trace mineral that contributes to the strength of our connective tissue. Connective tissue is what holds our body together. Cucumbers are effective when used for various skin problems, including swelling under the eyes and sunburn. They also contain ascorbic and caffeic acids. These acids prevent water retention. That may explain why when cucumbers are applied topically they are often helpful for swollen eyes, burns, and dermatitis.

Cucumber is a vegetable that belongs to the same family as pumpkins, zucchinis and other squashes. It has a dark green skin, which reveals whitish or very light green flesh, when peeled. There are basically two types of cucumbers - the pickling varieties and the slicing varieties. Of these, the pickling variety is relatively small, around 2 - 4 inches long.

Today we see the cucumber as a provider of a very healthy juice beneficial for its places as an increaser of the flowing of weewee and as a complement to the outcomes of apium graveolens dulce and carrot juice for rheumatic statuses, while at the same clip being a soothing skin lotion.
Ads by Google

As a beauty aid, the cucumber provides immediate relief to puffy eyes; a fresh cucumber can be cut into thin slices, and these placed on the eyes for 5-10 minutes. This works incredibly well after a tiring day at work in front of the computer, and helps to relieve stress and dark circles around the eye area as well. Grated cucumber can be used as a mask and tonic for the entire face and neck.

Cucumbers are scientifically known as Cucumis sativus, which belongs to the same family as pumpkin, zucchini, watermelon and squash.

Cucumber’s nutritional benefits include natural salts, enzymes, and vitamins essential for strong cell growth and repair. In addition, the high mineral content and minerals in cucumber peel offer a natural source for a fresh, powerful antioxidant. The alkalinity of cucumber is also a positive attribute, and because of its water base, the cucumber is also a top choice as a diuretic.

The high water content makes cucumbers a diuretic and it also has a cleansing action within the body by removing accumulated pockets of old waste material and chemical toxins. Cucumbers help eliminate uric acid which is beneficial for those who has arthritis and its fibre-rich skin and their high levels of potassium and manganese helps regulate blood pressure and help promote nutrient functions. The magnesium content in cucumbers also relaxes nerves and muscles and keeps blood circulating smoothly.

Cucumber is good for those who are dieting as it is very low in calories. It has a cleansing action within the body by removing accumulated pockets of old waste material and chemical toxins. It helps eliminate uric acid so it is good for those who has arthritis. Its juice is a nourishing vitamin for our hair and skin. It is also a good rejuvenator and makes us feel and look younger.

It is believed that cucumber helps in reducing swelling around the eyes or the big dark circles under your eyes. This is world-wide treatment which is being used to its maximum extent.

here might be the case when you ask your friends on how to get rid of scars. Let’s know what this article exactly talks about and what the scars are? When there is an injury, our skin automatically produces more cells in order to re-grow the injured skin. This tissue is known as scars. These scars are easily visible because the cells that grow in making up the scars are of lesser quality than the original cells. They are less resistant to UV radiation and are not able to grow any hair since they have no follicles.

When we look for the questions likes ‘how can I get rid of my scars’ or ‘how can I remove my scars’, we should be well familiar with the fact that scars can never be completely healed. There are a number of medical and cosmetic methods to cover up scars, but none of them can claim to remove them completely.
Ads by Google
GentleLASE Laser Service
Repair & Service for Candela lasers Fibers, Sliders, Cryogen, Windows www.LaserScientific.com
Fast Fade Cream - 14 Days
Yes it's possible with Meladerm! Fade Dark Spots on the skin fast. CivantSkinCare.com/Fade-Cream

There are many natural and herbal treatments to remove scars. These herbal methods are safe, simple and cost effective. These methods are generally simple home treatments, and they have no harmful effects. You can try these methods before going in for complicated surgical procedures.

Herbal remedies to remove scars

There are several natural and herbal remedies to prevent and treat scars by opening the kitchen cabinet. These herbal methods are inexpensive and safe to use.

- Cucumber - The cucumber is very helpful in the removal of scar tissues. Prepare a paste of cucumber and apply directly onto the scars. This will help the scars to smoothen out after a few applications left overnight.

- Indian Gooseberry - The Indian gooseberry (amalaki) is very beneficial in the prevention of scars after healing. Gooseberry is a good source of vitamin C, which is very essential for cementing the open wounds.

- Garlic - Cut a clove of garlic into half and rub it on the acne scars. This helps to treat the acne without leaving a scar behind later on.

- Aloe Vera - Aloe Vera is also an effective herbal remedy for the treatment of residual scars. Its juice acts as natural bleach. When applied directly onto the scars it helps the scar to slowly reduce and vanish.

Disclaimer: This article is not meant to provide health advice and is for general information only. Always seek the insights of a qualified health professional before embarking on any health program.
Located on the corner ofAbdel Moneim Riyad Street's intersection withEl Batal Ahmed Abdel Aziz Streetin Mohandiseen, Les Elites is a tiny hair salon that consists of one front room that packs six hairstyling chairs, three hair washing seats and a small waiting couch by the entrance.

The salon doesn't offer a private room for manicures or facial treatments – at least not during this reviewer's visit – instead; the manicurist will take care of your mangled nails at your seat while you're getting your hair cut or blow-dried. While this is fine for some, others who feel shy about getting their face threaded in front of the whole room may find this awkward.  Also, the fact that only one woman is available for these services means you'll have to wait a while, even if you have an appointment.

That being said, the manicurist does a pretty thorough job on your nails and toenails, cutting and shaping painlessly. The major downside is that the utensils weren't sterilized or even cleaned in front of this reviewer's eyes; so we're not at all sure how hygiene-conscious the salon is. The fact that the pumice stone had lost its sharp edge wasn't at all comforting either. Manicures, pedicures and eyebrow tweezing will set you back a total of 115LE.

The highlight of Les Elites is unquestionably Maroun, the laidback and charming Lebanese hairstylist and owner of the salon. Unlike other Lebanese hairdressers inCairowho use their heavy accent and charm to persuade you into a haircut you don't want; Maron actually gives sensible advice on cuts and colours that would suit your hair texture and colour. His haircuts are quick and effortless, and the results look both natural and befitting your face shape.

If you have thick wavy hair; rejoice: Maroun is good at shaping difficult hair into cuts that not only suit you, but require minimum maintenance to look good. If you're the type that rarely goes further than using leave in conditioner or serum; communicate that to Maroun and he will give you an appropriate cut. If you also like your blow-dry and hairstyle to be simple and natural looking; come to Maroun. He's good at creating up-dos that accentuate the face and hair without going overboard on the hairpins and hair spray.

Maroun charges 100LE for a haircut; that's higher than several major hair salons inCairo, but given the outcome, this reviewer thought it was worth it. Hair colouring and highlights cost between 200LE and 300LE using L'Oreal colour products. This reviewer paid 300LE for a full head of subtle, natural highlights.






