
It’s really weird how certain memories stick like fish in a hot iron skillet. They lay dormant for years, like a sleeping volcano, and suddenly explode to life without warning, particularly the ones that you would like to forget! So it is with a memory in my past, early in my flying career.



 Miserable is the only description that fits for that gulf-coast summer morning in July, 1985. Don’t get me wrong, the sun was shining brightly, but the temperature and dew point were the same, and both were in the upper seventies. Anyone in the aviation industry, particularly the flying end of it, knows that those two numbers, when in the seventies and low eighties is a recipe for boomers. I had a long day ahead, six legs and all single pilot. I was to leave PNS (Pensacola) and fly to MSY (New Orleans) for the first leg, MSY to PFN (Panama City, Fl.) the second. Then to TPA (Tampa, Fl.) for the third, JAX (Jacksonville, Fl.) for the fourth, back to PFN for the fifth and finally back to PNS. The first leg is the only one that went as planned. It was to be a twelve hour duty day, long by today’s standards with two pilots, insane as a single pilot. I knew it would be difficult, but I also knew that it would be great Pilot- in- Command time that I desperately needed if I ever wanted to land that airline job. By the end of the day there existed one very broken airplane, that would more than likely never see the air again, and one frightened, young pilot that was very thankful to be on the green side of the grass!
 
High pressure off the coast of Florida dominated the south east, pumping in very wet air from the Gulf of Mexico. There was a fast-moving cold front extending out of a strong Low pressure approaching from the West; the “Bulls Eye” was centered between PNS and MSY, my route for the first two legs.
 
The Piper Navajo Chieftain’s huge Continental TSIO-540’s roared to life right on cue and right on schedule. A quick taxi to runway 16, followed by systems and run-up check, and my long day was underway. I only had five people, minimum luggage, and a scant fuel load, IFR minimums plus reserves. But, even with this light load, I was surprised how sluggishly she climbed in the hot and humid gulf-coast summer air.
 
At my cruise altitude of eight thousand feet, autopilot engaged, I switched on the weather radar for a test. Test pattern… check! Tilt control… check! There’s already a cell at 40 miles at my two o’clock position. Using my tilt I’ll see how high this thing is. Hmmmm….this radar will not paint that cell even at this distance. No maintenance in New Orleans, I’ll write that up when I get back to PNS.
 
I scanned the skies, the CU’s were rapidly becoming TCU’s and still building, thirty minutes into a one hour and 15 minute flight and I was already dodging the tops. By the time I descended into MSY there was a line of storms behind me, east of my position and west of my next destination. Buildups were rapidly turning into cells and super cells, requiring wide deviations during the approach and landing. I called dispatch for a weather briefing and to discuss the radar situation, and negotiate the next route of flight to Panama City, Fl. Had I known at that time, what I know now, I would never have left MSY with broken weather radar. I was young and st… uh… inexperienced, with just over 1500 hours total time, just enough to exercise privileges of A.T.P, and just enough also to learn how nasty a super cell can be! My Dispatcher consisted of a person in an office with a telephone to Flight Service. Looking back, I should have called from the company phone in New Orleans; I would have asked the right questions.
 
The line of building super-cells extended from 100 miles into Alabama to 60 miles into the Gulf of Mexico and was building rapidly, already containing tops above 30,000 feet. My cruise altitude to Panama City was filed for nine thousand feet. I turned on the weather radar, more out of habit, knowing already that it was a futile effort. It showed the same as the first leg, nothing but a test pattern. Lightning flashed to the North; there were rain showers out the bottoms to the south. Houston Center frequency was busy with commercial airlines deviating and diverting for fuel. I should have done the same. Gulfport, Mississippi was directly below with gusty winds but still in the clear. Like a fool, I pressed on. I listened in on company frequency; our flight from New Orleans to Pensacola was just a few miles ahead, in the building weather. He said his routing was just light to occasional moderate turbulence with no precipitation. I asked ATC to vector me on the same path as the company aircraft in front of me. This sounded like a good idea at the time, but due to my experience level, (or lack thereof) I forgot to take into consideration the movement of the line. The few miles that separated my flight and the flight in front of me was enough to put me directly in the path of a building super-cell. The first down-draft hit like a giant hand pushing down on the top of the airplane. I need power! Mixtures full rich, props full forward, throttles… push, push, they’re all the way to the stops! I was still descending, eight thousand, seven thousand, finally stopping at six thousand feet. Out the windshield was an ominous green color, about the color of a sprout of peas. As quickly as the downdraft stopped, an updraft started. No matter what I tried, I could not hold altitude. Throttles idle! Control yoke push forward! Push, Push, Push hard! The updraft ended very abruptly, like hitting a ceiling. The altimeter started unwinding one more time, but this time the artificial horizon tumbled. The abrupt end to the updraft did internal damage, loosening the forward instrument panel. One male passenger was screaming, begging me to get him out of this storm. I was doing all I could just to hang on. The resulting downdraft, after the horizontal brick wall sent me tumbling down, I still had all the pieces but without the ADI, I could no longer tell which way was up, although I knew I was descending rapidly. Something flew past my head (I later figured out it was my Jepp binder). I managed a quick radio call to Houston Center: “center, flight 142 going down!” Houston’s response was short but to the point, wanting to know the problem for my impending demise. I did not answer; I could not answer, I could just barely hang on to this wild ride.
 
As quickly as this nightmare started it ended; spitting me out the bottom of the cell at 1500 feet, nearly bottom side up; I would estimate 100 to 110 degrees of bank to the left, nose pointing down My Attitude Indicator was tumbled, showing only black. Out my windshield looking up I saw water, and quickly orienting myself, very abruptly righted myself with a violent control input. When right-side-up, I noticed that PNS was directly in front of me, called the tower there, dropped the gear and landed. Never in my life, even to this day, have I ever been so happy to be back on terra firma. At the gate the aircraft was damaged, with a buckled right wing main spar and a twisted fuselage, but all the pieces were still intact. I needed to sit on the exit step for a few minutes before I walked into the terminal. My knees had the consistency of melted butter, my hands were shaking, and I was sweating profusely. Fear had finally set in, especially when I realized how close I had just come to ending my own life and the lives of my passengers. As they exited the aircraft, they didn’t say a word, not to each other and not to me; they were probably just as frightened as me, possibly more, although I find that hard to believe.
 
I learned several lessons that day: 1.) Trust your gut. If your gut is telling you not to do something, do not do it! 2.) If weather radar doesn’t test, don’t for a minute believe that it will work anyway. 3.) If there is an airport that is clear and close and the weather in front is severe, land and wait. Thunderstorms always move, or rain themselves out. The safest maneuver is called a 180 degree turn. 4.) Never follow someone else into a line of weather. Remember, its building and moving at the same time. 5.) If commercial airlines are deviating and diverting, and you are in a light aircraft, do the same. 

It’s much better to be on the outside of a thunderstorm looking in, and enjoying the beauty and awesome power of it, than it is to be on the inside, wishing you were out. Avoid these weather phenomena at all cost. Although beautiful to look at, they are very dangerous to be close to in any aircraft. 


Captain Doug Lofton and his copilot, Fred Jones, are busy running the check-list in a Douglas DC-9. It is dark out on the ramp, but the dawn is breaking. There is a tug attached to the nose wheel, preparing to push the twin engine Delta passenger jet back from the terminal building for departure. The passenger loading door is open and the loading bridge (jetway) is attached. The cockpit door is ajar, awaiting final paperwork from operations.



 It was the early 70’s. At that time the BWI terminal building lay-out required that several security check points be set up. The security passenger search was preformed right at the loading gates. They had an armed officer at each position.

 
Passengers are finding their seats and stowing their carry-on bags when all hell breaks loose.
 
An enraged man approaches the security point. He unceremoniously and without warning, shoots and kills the armed officer – didn’t even say “good morning”.
 
The madman races down the jetway and enters the aircraft. He closes and locks the passenger entrance door. He is excited and determined to get the aircraft airborne and then crash into a building in nearby Washington - guess which building. The desperate man orders the captain at gun point to get the aircraft into the air. 

A uniformed officer is lying in a pool of blood on the floor just inside the terminal, so the crazed man knows they are coming for him.
 
Captain Lofton is known for not being cooperative when confronted, but this time he is simply telling the truth. “The cargo doors are open and there is a tug attached to the nose wheel - we can’t back out of here!” Doug explains.
 Captain Lofton does not know that an officer just inside the building has already been shot in the head and killed.
 
The gunman promptly shoots the copilot in the head at close range.

In recent years there has been an influx of airlines who have become involved in Formula One. The most prominent of these have been Virgin, Kingfisher and Air Asia. 

In a period blighted by economic hardship and unemployment, are the airlines wasting their money as some critics have suggested or is it a shrewd move aimed at generating additional custom?



 The negative viewpoint
 On the 17th February 2009, Virgin Atlantic announced that it was looking to make 600 redundancies. This was decided upon in response to a decline in the company profits which was sparked by consumers struggling financially on the back of the credit crunch. Virgin Atlantic Chief Executive Steve Ridgway commented: “No airline is immune from the recession and we continue to reshape our business to ensure we're in the best position for the longer term.”
 


Click for large version



 Photo © John Thompson


 
Just over one month later on the eve of a new Formula One season, Sir Richard Branson announced that Virgin would sponsor the Brawn GP team throughout 2009 in a multi-million pound deal. The 600 employees whose jobs were on the line were rightly outraged. 

Twelve months later, Virgin’s F1 sponsorship programme had expanded exponentially as they now owned a significant stake in a debutant Formula One team which Ferrari President Luca Di Montezemolo claimed had little chance of success.
 
In contrast, the Toyota car company pulled the plug on support for its own team at the end of 2008 claiming that it was no longer viable to plough money into the sport at a time when job cuts were being made. It surely won’t have escaped the attention of the 600 employees who were made redundant by Virgin that the F1 sponsorship budget could easily have secured their jobs for another twelve months.
 
The positive viewpoint
 Formula One has a global television viewing audience of almost 600 million people, a figure which is only beaten by the World Cup and the Olympics which only occur every four years. It is estimated that Red Bull spent $240 million on Formula One participation in 2010, which was enough for them to win the world championship with their own Red Bull Racing team and finish a respectable ninth with the junior team called Toro Rosso. 

 
Independent newspaper journalist Christian Sylt and Caroline Reid publish a book each year called Formula Money. The book contains facts, figures and analysis into all the major business transaction revolving around Formula One. In 2010, Formula Money calculated that the combined brand exposure that Red Bull inherited in television air time by having its logos emblazed across both its teams’ cars would be worth $358.5 million if it were to be bought via traditional television advertisement techniques such as commercials. 

This means that Red Bull actually bought television time for $118 million cheaper than it was worth. It should also be noted that commercial tend to be watched by a much smaller proportion of the population that statistics suggest, as people often do not remain seated in front of the television during advertising breaks. 

Involvement in sports such as Formula One also engenders fan affiliation, something which marketing academics such as Pedro Dionisio believe are of incalculable worth to a company such as Red Bull which is keen to differentiate itself in an overcrowded market place. Indeed, it is the opinion of most people involved in marketing that the key benefits of sponsorship are immeasurable. This is obviously contended by people working in the finance industry who like to see an obvious return on investment. 

Virgin Case Study
 Although Formula One sponsorship is working for Red Bull, can the same be said for Virgin whose team has never even scored a championship point? 

The Virgin Racing team entered the sport with the intention of sticking to a £40 million annual budget. This ambition has been aided by the team becoming the first to design a car using only CAD (Computer Aided Design) techniques and completely avoiding expensive wind tunnels. This means that the team don’t actually have to win races, as the amount of television time they require to recover costs is much less than what is required by Red Bull. This is a less risky strategy than what has been employed by its rivals at Kingfisher, who are easily spending double that amount in an attempt to win the races that would help recover their expenditure- a pursuit which may ultimately prove fruitless. 


 
On top of this strategy being financially beneficial, it has also helped the company support its brand personality of being the perennial underdog fighting against the odds. Virgin have pointed this out by setting up a twitter account for its racing team, allowing it to interact with racing fans around the world while at the same time building up what is referred to as “brand affiliation”, where people become enamoured to the company. This ultimately helps draw customers as the company is making itself stand out from its competitors, placing itself as a consumer champion who is fighting on behalf of normal people against large and dominant corporations whether it is Ferrari or British Airways. 

This type of strategy would be unlikely to work for a company such as Emirates who differentiate themselves from their competitors by emphasising their quality service, which likely explains why the company sponsored the McLaren team in 2006, an entrant who are known to be one of the most technologically advanced in the business. This perfectly gelled with Emirates brand personality, but the amount of space on the car which the company could afford with its budget rendered the benefits largely void due to the limited television air time they received. The deal was not continued into the 2007 season. 

Is F1 sponsorship the right thing to do?
 It is easy to brand Virgin’s F1 sponsorship exploits as a pointless waste of money, with it possible that the sponsorship budget could have been used to avoid painful redundancies. However, this is an unfair assessment and it should not be forgotten that the whole purpose of marketing is to generate a larger profit through additional custom. By building up its brand personality, garnering fan affiliation and picking up television airtime for £40 million, it is likely that Virgin is actually making a profit from its motor racing ventures. 

However, as proven by Emirates, sponsoring a Formula One team does not always prove fruitful. Emirates brand personality emphasising quality ultimately required them to pursue sponsorship with one of the sports leading teams, and in order to make any sort of return on this investment they would have had to have had a large presence on the exterior of the car, something which their budget ultimately didn’t allow. 

By pushing its underdog qualities, Virgin is in a unique position in that it can get away with spending a small amount of money on its own team and not damage its brand image which will actually benefit from its valiant failures. The same could not be said for Kingfisher, whose quality image would be tainted if it were to pursue a similar strategy. 

In summary, while Virgin’s F1 involvement is likely generating them additional business and profits, the true worth of the involvement of other airlines such as Kingfisher is far less obvious. As with anything in marketing, what works for one company may not necessarily work for another. 
 
Still there is no way to move the aircraft. Desperation grows in the hijacker. He repeats his demand four times. Each time Doug tries to explain why they cannot move; he is shot. With four bullets in his body, Doug slumps in his seat. He is bleeding badly, but miraculously, he is still conscious. The want-to-be hijacker leaves the cockpit feeling defeated. He squats on the floor behind the incapacitated pilots. His position is just across from the locked passenger entrance door.
 
During the commotion the flight attendants have ordered the passengers out through the emergency exit window and onto the wing; except for one ‘little old lady’. She is safely out on the wing, when she decides to return to get her package from the forward closet.
 
The wounded captain can hear the disturbed man weeping just behind the cockpit. Doug told me later that he was thinking, “I’ve got to get up and go back there and kill him.” 

Doug can’t get out of his seat, but he can hear an angry woman lecturing the intruder in her most motherly tones. 

“Young man you should not be shooting people…” She makes her speech and heads back for the over wing exit with her package in hand. ‘Mom’ had just left the scene when the officers start shooting holes in the passenger door.
 
At this point the deranged man shoots himself. He dies instantly. It has been reported that a security officer shot the intruder – Doug told me the man shot himself.
 
Doug was rushed to the nearest medical facility because of his heavy bleeding. It was a veterinarian’s clinic, but it worked, they stopped the bleeding and saved his life before taking him on to a hospital. 

Doug had a long recovery - they never did get all the lead out of his body. 
Much of this information was related to me by Doug after he finally returned to work several years later. No one expected him to return to the cockpit after such a tragic experience. 

“The doctors told me I would eventually have a complete nervous breakdown after seeing Freddy killed at close range, but I never did.” Doug told me with a sly smile on his face that scared me a little.
 
I loved Doug Lofton like a brother; I never knew him to be anything but pleasant and friendly. If he had a fault, it was his fondness for the ladies – when he got wounded, 3 women (that I know of) came to hospital claiming to be his favorite. 

Captain Lofton was not an ordinary man; in fact he left a legacy of ‘Doug’ stories. He passed away a few years ago from complications of the lead in his body. I miss him!
 
Fred Jones’ life was taken in his prime. It was a senseless tragedy and my sympathies go out to his family. Fred’s home town, Linden, Alabama, named their airport after him – “Fred Jones Field”. 

I had only been a captain for about three years when my DC-9 flight out of Chicago was commandeered. We were headed to Nashville with 30 souls on board. We flew nonstop to Havana without refueling. The bad guy had no control of the bomb he had taped to his body. We were incredibly lucky that day.



 The airlines only put enough fuel on each airplane to reach the destination, plus a calculated reserve. If the weather is forecast to be bad when arriving at the destination, there is fuel enough to make an approach and then proceed to a suitable alternate airport. 

Why not just fill it up… The airlines are in business to make money. Fuel is heavy and it cost money to carry unneeded fuel. The airline dispatchers spend a lot of time evaluating the weather and adjusting the fuel load as necessary to save a buck. If the Captain disagrees with the dispatcher, he can request more fuel. In my 33 years with Delta, I can only remember a handful of times when the Captain asked for more fuel. 

I was a captain for 25 of my 33 years. I only requested more fuel on one occasion. It was granted without any discussion; just an exchange of teletype messages.

 International flights are different. It was common for the L-1011 aircraft to depart Portland, Oregon with full fuel tanks for our flights to Korea. Believe me, we needed it all.
 
Unbelievably, the only time I ever departed with full fuel tanks on a domestic flight was the day I was hijacked. On that day, it turned out; we had enough fuel to go nonstop from Chicago to Havana. Having full tanks probably saved the aircraft and all the lives on board. I think about it a lot. What are the odds of things coming together like that? The only conclusion; it had to be luck – incredible luck. 

We were scheduled to go from Chicago to Nashville. Nashville had zero visibility in fog, with no forecast for improvement. The nearest suitable alternate airport was Dallas. Our “short” DC-9 carried 25,000 pounds (approximately 4200 gallons) of fuel. We left Chicago, headed for Nashville with full tanks. At departure, it looked like we would end up in Dallas, for sure.
 
Our short DC-9 had a crew of four; two pilots and two flight attendants. We had twenty-six passengers onboard. While we were climbing to our planned cruising altitude (26,000 feet) for the relatively short flight to Nashville, a passenger in the rear of the aircraft was busy implementing an ill-advised plan to hijack the aircraft.
 
The hijacker was an educated black man. He was an ex-con and he had received a bad conduct discharge (BCD) from the U.S. Army. He boarded the aircraft in Chicago with the bomb materials in his brief case. 

Security in 1971 was practically nonexistent. There was no body scan, no x-ray equipment, no metal detector and they were not required to look into your briefcase or your purse. There was no TSA. 

Passengers were ‘profiled’. Our man fit the profile; he had paid cash for a one way ticket on a short flight and he did not check any luggage. He fit the profile, but they boarded him anyway. It was a common practice for station personnel to ignore the rules and put suspicious passengers and drunks on the aircraft. The station’s people were not equipped to deal with them. 

In this case, the Chicago base personnel were fortunate. The hijacker had liquid nitro in his carry-on briefcase. A jolt of any kind would have set it off and people would have been killed or injured inside the terminal building.
 
The hijacker entered the aircraft and took a seat in the rear of the tourist cabin. He was educated, but he was not too smart. He had no control of the bomb he was about to put together; there was no need for a fuse, just shake it a little. After take-off, he opened his briefcase and began to tape three vials of the nitro onto his chest. He put one on each leg, just above the ankle. He was holding one in his hand. 

When he taped the explosive to his body, he raised the temperature of the liquid from room temperature (72` F) toward body temperature (98.6` F). As the temperature rises nitro becomes more unstable and more unpredictable.

 After he transformed himself into a human bomb, he wrote a note and gave it to the flight attendant for delivery to the cockpit. The flight attendant watched him write the note after he was seated in the rear cabin. It was well written with excellent grammar and clarity.
 
The female flight attendant entered the cockpit and said, “I think we have been hijacked. A man in tourist has something taped to his body and he wrote this note for you.”
 
I can’t remember the note verbatim, but this is basically what it said: “I have a bomb. I want to go to Havana. I plan to join Castro’s people and work with the Cuban Revolutionaries in the sugar cane fields. I will follow the flight out the window. There will be no descending or refueling until we reach Cuba.”
 
I turned his note over and wrote, “We are on the way.” That is what they teach today. It is a statement designed to calm things down and give the crew time to evaluate the situation and plan a strategy. 

I handed the note to the flight attendant and said, “Give him this and ask him to come up here.” 
That is not what they teach today, as every fifth grader knows. However, at that point, I was not convinced the liquid was indeed an explosive and we expected him to come bursting into the cockpit at any minute, anyway. 

It was a mistake to invite him to the cockpit, but consider this: a bomb in the tail of an aircraft is just as dangerous as a bomb in the front of the aircraft. I really wanted to look him in the eye and have a talk with him. 

Things were different in 1971. Airlines had already had several hijackings, but no one had ever demanded anything except transportation to a different destination. 

Once we determined we had sufficient fuel to make the trip safely, there was no reason to take any other action. I knew we could drop him off in Cuba and get back to Miami in time for dinner.
 
We called ATC for a vector to Havana and switched the transponder to the hijack squawk. Air Traffic Control turned us 5 degrees to the right and answered with a simple, “Roger.” No big deal.
 
The cockpit door opened and I expected to see the bad guy. It was the flight attendant, “He says he is going to stay in his seat, and he wants you to stay in the cockpit.” I didn’t have a problem with that, and it gave me a better understanding of his intentions.
 
We asked for a climb to 31,000 feet. Jets use less fuel at higher altitudes. I made some quick calculations and determined we could make Havana and have 45 minutes fuel remaining.
 
We were on the radio with the company in Atlanta. Delta dispatchers confirmed my fuel calculation and suggested we continue our climb to 33,000 feet (FL 330) to extend our range.
 
The copilot and I discussed the fact that the hijacker was atypical. The typical hijacker wants to enter the cockpit and take control. Our man was hesitant to walk, because he did not want to jolt the nitro and blow himself into the hereafter. He wanted to live long enough to get to Cuba. He thought he would be welcomed in Havana as a hero. That did not happen – he went straight to jail.
 
There was no commotion on the plane, so the other 25 passengers had no idea what was taking place. I intended to keep it that way; I did not want anyone to scuffle with our human bomb. We eventually made an announcement saying we were going to an alternate airport because of the dense fog in Nashville. We gave our passengers an estimated time of arrival and opened the bar. I authorized a free drink, compliments of Delta Airline. The booze was offered as compensation for passing Nashville; it was company policy.
 
As we winged our way south, things were calm and relatively quiet. Finally, the flight attendant suggested we quit serving alcohol – the passengers were starting to party down.
 
We were out over the Gulf of Mexico, west of Tampa, when we encountered turbulence. It was similar to driving your car over a corduroy road. It is referred to by pilots as a chop. 

The moderate chop caused our hijacker to pale and perspire. The liquid was shaking around in the vials. The flight attendant came to the cockpit and reported. “It is really cool back there and he is very tense and he is sweating like crazy.”
 
We were on the verge of a disaster, but I did not want to believe there was any immediate danger. The copilot and I laughed, but the flight attendant wanted her captain to turn off the turbulence. She gave us a disgusted look and left. 

About 110 miles north of Havana we started our descent for landing. Miami ATC handed us off to Havana Air Traffic Control just like it was a common occurrence. The controllers in Cuba spoke good English; it was a smooth transition. 

The air was smooth during the descent, but there was a gusty crosswind reported at Jose Marti Airport. It was the copilot’s leg. He made a good landing.*
 
During taxi to the terminal building, the hijacker stood up and walked to the rear lavatory. He removed the explosives from his body and wrapped them carefully in crumpled up newspaper.
 
We made an announcement: “We are in Havana. Everyone please stay seated.” Some of the passengers were surprised, but most had already figured out what was happening.
 
The DC-9 had exit stairs built into the aircraft. Usually the stairs were extended by the agent on the ground. The tower called us and requested that we extend the stairs and open the door from the inside. I had never done that before, but the instructions were on the control panel near the front exit door.
 
When I left the cockpit to open the door, the hijacker was standing in the aisle with the package containing the explosives held carefully in both hands. He was smiling and apparently very pleased with himself. 

I opened the passenger exit door and spoke to him politely. “Are you our ________ passenger?”
 
“Yes, I am. I hope you are not in trouble.” He answered pleasantly.
 
I could not help but notice that he had an abnormally narrow head and face. I have thought about it, and I feel sure his appearance may have contributed to the fact that he had lived a troubled life. 

Four uniformed Cubans came up the steps and approached the hijacker. 

“Where is it?” They asked in English.
 
He handed them the package and they left the aircraft in single file with our man sandwiched in between. The Cuban’s were all wearing side arms. They marched into the building and we did not see him again.
 
The crew and the passengers were directed to separate rooms inside the terminal building. There were two sailors in uniform in one room, the civilian passengers in another room, and the two flight attendants, my copilot and myself in another room.

 We waited; soon two armed young men in uniform came into the room. They helped each of us fill out a form. It was a simple immigration form. We did it quickly and they left.
 
After about 30 minutes a man opened our door and commanded. “Follow me.” We followed him to an upstairs restaurant and joined our passengers for lunch.
 
Our passengers were finishing their free lunch when we arrived. Bobby Goldsboro and his band were among our passengers. Bobby was at the heights of his popularity. He sang and played the guitar and he had some big songs. You might remember his two biggest hits, “Honey” and “Watching Scotty Grow”. 

Each table had a white table cloth with nice china and silverware. The only choice was steak cooked medium rare with all the trimmings. It was good, but my copilot advised me it was probably horsemeat, and he would not eat his. It was a good idea for one of us to not eat, just in case. The food was delicious and no one got sick. We expected a Cuban cigar for a keepsake, but they gave us a pack of Cuban cigarettes. That was a disappointment.

 The U.S. did not have relations with the Castro government then, and they still don’t today. There was a representative from the Swiss Embassy at the airport. He was there to meet our flight, he paid for our lunch and he paid for the fuel. Delta Airlines eventually got the bill. 

Neither the copilot nor I had ever refueled a DC-9. I was asked which grade of fuel we required. I saw an Iberian DC-8 on the ramp and said, “Whatever you put in that DC-8 will be just fine for us.” We found the refueling door under the wing and the instructions were on a placard inside the compartment. The fuel truck pumped slowly, so it took about 45 minutes. We got it done.
 
The Delta dispatcher in Atlanta had sent a ‘fuel load’ and a flight plan to Jose Marti operations, so it was just a matter of following instructions. We were flying to Miami with a light fuel load. Miami weather was excellent and it was just 100 miles away.
 
There were military vehicles lining the runway when we took off. All of our passengers, except one, had full bellies and ready to head home. We were met in Miami by the FBI and the FAA and our crew was taken immediately into a room for debriefing. A new crew was waiting to take the aircraft and the passengers to Nashville. 

The next day we were ordered to appear at Delta headquarters in Atlanta for another debriefing. This one was for the company. By that time, I was hoarse from telling the same story over and over. Each debriefing started like this: “Start at the beginning and tell us what happened.” It wasn’t difficult, but it was a long process.
 
The hijacker was held in a Cuban jail for almost five years. He was finally released and allowed to fly over to Barbados (a U.S. territory). He was met and arrested by U.S. Marshalls. The Marshalls took him back to Chicago where he was jailed awaiting trial.
 
I was called to the U.S. Attorney’s office in Chicago to deliver a deposition. I was very impressed by the government attorneys. They were efficient and polite with an emphasis on following the law. I sensed they were being extremely careful to avoid technical mistakes that might cause a mistrial.
 
I was not called to testify at the trial. He was given 30 years, even though he had already served over five years in Cuba and Chicago. I never learned his name.

 During the time he was still in jail in Cuba. A man came to our home in Atlanta with photographs. He laid out the pictures of several men on our living room coffee table and asked if I could identify the man who hijacked the flight. All the men in the photos were beaten and their faces swollen. I did not see anyone who looked familiar.
 
As he was leaving, I asked. “What was that liquid he brought on board?”
 
“It was nitro.” I was a little surprised; he answered frankly and without hesitation. 

“What would it take to set it off?” I was digging.
 
“Hold it about waist high and drop it on a tile floor.” He said.
 
I wasn’t surprised, but until that point, I didn’t know for sure. I felt lucky. I still feel lucky.
 
*I dedicate this story to my copilot, Jerry Alcini. Jerry passed away several years ago and I miss him. He was a good pilot and a great guy. 


Stephen Koewler takes us through his journey into the world of aviation, culminating in his flight in his flight with Julie Clark, renowned aerobatic air show pilot.



 
When people see how much time I spend in and around airplanes (and how much money I spend), one of the first things they ask is how I came to find this passion within myself. They often assume that my dad is a pilot, or that I grew up around airplanes, but in fact neither are true. It is true, however, that I have been interested (obsessed) in airplanes and flying for most of my life, and the conversation often leads to me telling the story of my introduction to the world of aviation at the age of four. 

I can’t remember a lot of my childhood, but the day I first saw airplanes up close was one I can never forget. My mom, dad, grandfather and uncle, a commercial pilot, and a few others went to the Stockton Airshow in 1996. I remember being so thrilled and amazed by it—my mom did not share my same sentiment. It was so unbearably hot, but as an energetic six-year-old, I wasn’t even slowed down; my mom felt differently. To her, the airshow simply wasn’t worth the sweat, and she was ready to head for the air-conditioned comforts of home. I tried with all the tears I could muster to convince her to stay, but her mind was made up. Julie Clark was one of the shows headliners, and she had just painted her famous heart-shaped loop in the sky with her trademark red white and blue smoke, I was in awe; my mom, unimpressed. We started gathering our things and heading for the gate as Julie wrapped up her routine and came in to land. I had had one of her autograph cards in my hand all day. The card was adorned with her picture, her airplane and of course, the Mopar logo, all that was missing was her autograph. As my mom inched us toward the car, I put up as much of a fight as a six-year-old could. I dragged my feet, I cried, I pouted, I tried everything to get back to the airfield, towards the runway, towards the airplanes, but my efforts were all in vain. After a while my mom relented and got some helicopter pilot who was wearing a flight suit to sign Julie’s picture, but it didn’t even distract me. Stockton is not far from Sacramento, but I made it seem like the longest car ride of our lives. It took a while, but I eventually stopped my pouting, though the seeds of my passion were securely planted
 
After five years of waiting, several book reports on the Wright Brothers, and countless viewings of Top Gun, I finally got a ride in an airplane. It was a Saturday morning in the spring of 2001 when my uncle Pete, who was living with us at the time, offered me a chance to go flying with him and one of his buddies. He cautioned me that I would have to sit in the back, and that they would be busy up front, but I had no problems with that. As we were on our way to the airport, Pete’s friend called him and said that he was not going to be able to make the flight. For the first time in my life I got upgraded to first class, and in a big way.
 
We got to the airport and headed for Executive Flyers, where in addition to the key for the airplane, Pete also grabbed a phonebook for me to sit on so I could see over the dash. He decided it would be more fun (cheaper) to take a Cessna 152 than the 172, which he had initially planned on taking. With that, we headed out to the ramp and out towards N68280, an old 152 with a red, white, and blue paint scheme. When I first saw it, I must admit I was a little disappointed. It wasn’t shiny like Julie’s polished T-34, and it lacked the afterburner that Maverick’s Tomcat had, but she would prove herself. 


Pete set a great example for me as we went straight down the checklist on the preflight walk-around. We hopped in, me on a phone book in the left seat, the pilot’s seat, Pete on the right, the copilot’s seat. We got gas and before I knew it, I was struggling to follow what seemed like gibberish when Pete called up the tower and requested permission to taxi. We headed for the runway, did a short run-up and lined up on runway 20. I remember still struggling to see over the dash, so I looked out the window to my left. As we picked up speed I remember seeing foxes scatter away from the runway as we buzzed by, and soon, I saw the earth retreat. I felt a new yet comfortable sensation in my stomach that definitely let me know we were no longer attached to the ground. We headed out to the Southeast where Pete tried to scare me a little bit. 

We leveled off at about three thousand feet when Pete threw us into an abrupt steep turn to the left in an effort to scare me. It was to no avail, and as soon as he righted the airplane, I asked if we could do it again. He tried again with stalls and some very unusual attitudes, but nothing worked on me. I loved every minute of it. We went out over some soft rolling hills, where cattle grazed peacefully. Pete eased the nose down, minutes later we were down among the trees. I remember laughing hysterically as I looked out the window as cows scattered just a couple hundred feet below our wheels. We made another pass or two, and then climbed back up to altitude. Pete told me to put my hands on the control wheel, which I did without hesitation. He told me good job, and that I was flying the airplane all by myself. I glanced over and saw that his hands were resting in his lap; I don’t think I’ve ever been so focused on any one thing before or since that moment. Pete talked me through a few turns and taught me how to maintain altitude and how to use references outside the airplane to determine our attitude.
 
Pete motioned out to the left and said “Take us over there.” I rolled the airplane very gently and applied the slightest bit of backpressure; Pete worked his feet on the pedals, keeping us coordinated. After about ten minutes of an impromptu flight lesson, Pete took back the airplane, and we headed for home. I was in love with the air and have spent the rest of my life gazing skyward, fulfilling DaVinci’s prophecy. 

Fast-forward nine years: I’m 20 years old and on summer vacation between my second and third years at Seattle University. I’m a student pilot doing everything I can to become involved in the world of aviation. I’m a manager for the 2010 California Capital Airshow, and more importantly, a frequent guest of Duncan Miller’s hangar in Vacaville, CA. Duncan is a lifelong aviator, he owns 12 airplanes that fill up his 5 hangars on the Nut Tree Airport; he is a friend and mentor to his countless guests that visit his hangar weekly. When Duncan isn’t entertaining his guests, he is out buzzing around in his 1940 Piper Cub, which he flies almost daily. Duncan had a great gathering for his 89th birthday during July of that summer. I was initially supposed to miss the party due to a prior engagement in San Francisco, luckily it finished early and my dad and I were able to stop by the airport for the last hour or so of the party. Just as we were parking the car we see a yellow T-28 make a low pass over the runway. By the time we walked across the ramp to meet at Duncan’s hangar, the T-28 was right behind us. A large group gathered to greet the incoming pilot and long-time friend of Duncan’s. Iris Taggart, who had been the one to introduce me to Duncan and all my friends at Nut Tree Airport, grabbed me and as the propeller slowed to a stop she informed me that this was Julie Clark’s T-28. I was excited to finally meet her, as Iris had been trying to introduce me to her for the better part of a year. 

Despite my excitement, I couldn’t help but mingle with other friends while a swarm of Julie’s fans and friends surrounded her airplane as she jumped off the wing. It seemed that all Julie wanted to do was take care of her airplane, but the hordes of people prevented her from doing that. Needless to say, she was irritated. After a while the party died down, the crowd shrank, and the sun was headed for the horizon. By this time, Iris had introduced my dad and I to Julie and we had been talking for a while. Iris explained to Julie that she had had one of the biggest roles in sparking my passion for aviation, and my dad joked that she nearly bankrupted him in doing so. Julie began getting ready to depart and the rest of us wished her well.
 
There were about ten people still hanging around when the time came for Julie to climb in and fire up. When she did, an incredible amount of smoke began pouring out of the exhaust as if she were flying her routine for an airshow. As she was doing everything she could to keep the engine running smoothly, one of the bystanders went up to the side of the airplane and wiped his hand down the cowling. He held his hand up for her to see and when she saw it was covered in oil, she killed the engine immediately. When the smoke cleared we could see that there was oil thrown out of the exhaust that streaked the entire length of the airplane. She climbed out and with the help of all the bystanders the mess was cleaned up in minutes. She explained that she was throwing so much oil due to the failure of her pre-oil pump. Because this pump was inoperative, she chose not to scavenge the excess oil out of the cylinders when she shut down so that there would at least be some oil in the engine when she went to crank up. 

Julie realized how much of a mess this was going to be when she got back to her home at Cameron Park. I took a step forward and offered to do all the cleaning if I could just ride with her home. “You’re so sweet,” She laughed as if I were joking. “I’m serious!” I replied. She began to consider it and asked how I would get home, as Cameron Park is twenty miles past my home, which was forty miles from where we were in Vacaville. I pointed to my dad and put on the biggest smile I could. My dad rolled his eyes and sighed, “Yeah, I’ll pick you up.” I looked back at Julie and she told me to climb up. I climbed up, strapped on the parachute, and tightened my seatbelts as Julie briefed me about how to jettison the canopy if we needed to get out in a hurry. Julie strapped herself in, scavenged the oil out of the bottom cylinders and crossed her fingers that there would be enough lubrication for the pistons to move freely. 

The pistons moved, the crankshaft spun and the engine roared to life. The North American T-28 Trojan is a monstrous airplane compared to the Pipers and Cessnas in which I had done most of my flying. It was a trainer for both the Air Force and the Navy in the fifties, sixties, and seventies. Two steps are built into the flaps that must be lowered in order to climb onto the airplane. The bottom of the fuselage sits more than three feet above the ground on top of massive landing gear legs. The cockpit is quite roomy when sitting behind that huge Wright 1820 9-cylinder engine and I found myself surprisingly comfortable.
 
As we taxied out to the Runway, the group followed to see us off. We did a short run-up and taxied onto the numbers, seconds later we were dipping the left wing giving our spectators a goodbye wave. Julie is sponsored by Chevron so we decided to stop at Lincoln airport on the way home where Chevron gas is sold so she could pump 91 gallons of 100 low lead, courtesy of the oil industry. The flight to Lincoln was reminiscent of any other cross-country flight except for the obvious increase in performance. We climbed with low power and still achieved an ascent of 2200 feet per minute; we leveled off and cruised very comfortably at just under 200 knots. 
After our short pit stop in Lincoln, we hopped back in and headed for Cameron Park. We climbed out at high power and leveled off at about 7500 feet; once we got out over Folsom Lake Julie threw the throttle forward and pulled us into a smooth and comfortable 4g barrel roll. Having little aerobatic experience, my g-tolerance was quite limited, so I began to gray out before we completed the maneuver. She went almost immediately into an aileron roll, demonstrating the quick roll rate of the giant bird. We continued on our way to Cameron Park, but first she had to fly over her grandkids’ house and give them a wave. After that was done, Julie righted the airplane and handed it over to me.
 I slid my feet forward onto the pedals, placed my left hand on the throttle, and grasped the stick with my right hand. I played around for a bit getting to know the airplane. Before then, I’d always thought of the T-28 as a big, ugly, brutish airplane, but let me tell you, she is a sweetheart to fly. She flies like an airplane ought to fly. She’s unbelievably light on the controls, the throttle is responsive, the visibility is unobstructed, and the cockpit layout makes it all too easy. I made some steep turns to the left and to the right and just rolled her back and forth trying to get my hands and feet coordinated. After an affair that was all too brief, I pointed us in the direction of Cameron Park, and we resumed on our way, but now I was the pilot, Julie the passenger. I started a descent rather late, so Julie flipped a switch, extending the speed brake on the belly of the airplane. I brought us down to pattern altitude while maneuvering for the 45-degree entry into the downwind leg, and it all seemed so easy. It was as if I just thought about where I wanted the airplane to go, and it went there. Julie helped me out a bit with the trim, which constantly needs to be adjusted because the airplane gets lighter by about six pounds every minute as it burns fuel. 

I handed the airplane back over to Julie when we were on base leg for runway 13 at Cameron Park, and she set her down right on the numbers. We rolled off the runway and taxied right up to her hangar, which is attached to her house. As usual, a small crowd of people began to form as Julie scavenged the oil out of the bottom cylinders and we prepared to climb out, this time, it was her neighbors. The flight ended all too soon, but what an incredible flight it was. I began making good on my promise to wipe the oil off the sides of the airplane, but it wasn’t nearly as bad as before. As Julie towed the airplane into her hangar, I spotted Iris and my dad driving up the street toward us. The sun had just fallen completely below the horizon, and the streetlights buzzed on. We got the airplane into the hangar and I continued cleaning up the oil, my dad grabbed a rag and helped me as Julie and Iris chatted and retrieved things out of the cockpit.
 
After we were finished, we headed inside for a visit and a drink. The four of us talked and drank until after two in the morning, when something I had always wanted finally happened. Julie Clark is a Certificated Flight Instructor, which means that she was able to endorse my logbook for flight training I had received, and I would get the autograph I once wanted so badly. It was certainly worth the wait.


Ben Zwebner returns with a journal from a ferry flight that demonstrates that getting from point A to point B isn't as easy as it sometimes seems.

 
So I need to get from Lewiston, Idaho to Gaithersburg, Maryland. That’s what I said to myself as I began to plan my travel itinerary, but instead of clicking the "Find Flights" of an airline website, I opened up an aeronautical chart, checked the weather and started drawing lines and checking performance graphs.
 
Rewind to a week before. I was contracted to ferry a Cessna 182 from Idaho to Maryland. The client provided me with information about the navigational capabilities of the aircraft; Garmin 530 GPS, fully functional VOR's, a DME and even the ADF worked! A walk in the park I thought, as just the week prior, I ferried a Piper Warrior from Rhode Island that had less operational equipment than a Model-T Ford. I estimated that the trip would take 3 days. The first day being just travel to get to the Cessna and the next two days spent on the actual transport. The client accompanied me on this ferry. He is a student pilot and he was joining me to gain experience on his new airplane.



 We left from Dulles (where my client left his car) on a hop, skip and a jump flight to Spokane, Washington that took us through Chicago and Denver. The seller of the aircraft, who is a retired Pan Am 727 captain, picked us up and we drove down to Lewiston, ID. We arrived at Lewiston at roughly 6PM and we went to look at the airplane. This is where the client started to go over the last details regarding his purchase with the seller and I went on to check the general airworthiness of the airplane. The plane is a 1979 Cessna 182Q and is in excellent condition. The windshields were clear as crystal, the paint was good, the interior excellent, and the maintenance logs were flawless. I spoke with the seller to get some tips for flying the area from a local and we called it a night after a very long day.


 The next morning I woke up bright and early. I had a goal in mind. That goal was to get the aircraft from Lewiston to the final destination in two days. The aircraft had the range, it had the performance needed to get over the Rockies and I had the oxygen that I would need. What I didn’t have was the right weather. This wasn’t too much of a surprise. I checked the weather the night before and I knew that there might be a problem. I went to bed hoping for the best and I pretty much woke up to the disappointing truth. Right over the Rockies, from north all the way south was a weather system. The kind of weather system that during the summer might not be a problem, however to fly through such a system in the winter would be dangerous if not fatal due to ice build up.
 
So I need to get from Lewiston, ID to Gaithersburg, MD and I have to get around this system. It's either that or stay in Lewiston for a day or two. I opened up my charts again and I checked the winds aloft. I was looking at the winds and it hit me! Winds around a low pressure system move in a counter-clockwise direction around the center of the system and the way the system was situated, I could take advantage of those winds and use them to swing south and then east and not lose a day. I started looking for fuel stops. Technically the Cessna can fly for 8 hours without refueling but I try to keep my legs to a maximum of 4 hours between rest stops to combat fatigue. 

We departed Lewiston around 10AM and we headed out to the west. That’s right, to the west. The reason being that we had to stop at Pasco, WA in order to purchase some charts that we would need as we got further south, also going west allowed us to clear the west side of that weather system. After Pasco we headed south, taking advantage of 30 to 50 knot tailwinds which gave us the great groundspeed that I was counting on. As we climbed through 10,000 feet we turned on our oxygen system and continued to cruise at 13,000 feet. This was my first time flying the Rockies and I am sure that anyone who has flown the Rockies would agree with me, you might be at 13,000 feet but those mountains make you feel like you are flying at sea level. I kept thinking about a Far Side comic strip that I laughed at years ago:
 



After a little more than 4 hours we put down in Elko, NV. Elko's airport sits in a stunning valley and had little more than a runway, quaint FBO and a Piper Pawnee or two. My client went to arrange to refill our oxygen supply and put fuel in the plane while I went to check weather and plan our next leg. Looking at the options I decided that Phoenix was going to be the best bet, the reason being that the same system that sent us south, moved south with us. We picked up lunch at a local Mexican restaurant and took off on our second leg, an estimated 3 hour flight to Deer Valley Regional Airport just north of Phoenix. 




The flight to Elko was uneventful. I was in awe of the beauty of the mountains and at their size and vastness of the mountain range. The flight from Elko to Deer Valley was very much the same but very different scenery. About an hour after we left Elko the terrain changed. The snow covered mountain range gave way to red sands, canyons and deserts. The clouds were gone, so was the chill in the air and it was replaced by haze and warmth. Now, when I say warmth that’s all relative, I pretty much mean that the temperature was at freezing rather than below freezing. 




As we proceeded south the sun started to set, painting the terrain with an orange glow that just added to the natural red of the desert. The next thing I knew I was that I was over the Grand Canyon. I never imagined that this trip would take me over the Grand Canyon and this was the first time that I had ever seen it. It's for times like these that I love aviation. The Grand Canyon at sunset from the air, what more could I ask for? 




As the skies changed from orange to purple we made our descent into Deer Valley Regional Airport. The lights of Phoenix twinkled in the distance and silhouettes of mountains painted the darkened horizon as I turned the airplane from base to final. Touch down was roughly 3 hours and 20 minutes after we left Elko. We pulled in to Cutter Aviation, ordered fuel and I went to check the weather again for our third leg of the day. 

Checking the weather I was disappointed to discover that the favorable winds that I had seen that morning were no longer, furthermore, the weather was still less than friendly to the east. That and seeing that it was already night and we were after a 10 hour day, I decided to make Deer Valley our home for the night.


 Yet another early morning, we grabbed breakfast at the hotel and headed for the airport. I got to say, I tip my hat to the controllers in the tower at Deer Valley. Deer Valley, like many other airports around Phoenix is home to a flight academy. Just like clockwork these guys start their engines. It's like a finely tuned machine. One after the other they start their engines and taxi for departure. Piper after Piper, a Warrior, a Seminole, another Warrior and so forth line up for departure short of runway 7R, in each plane an instructor and their student from somewhere in the Far East. The controllers work the radio in a manner that would make those who wrote the AIM sound like slackers. 




We took off in the early morning sun and headed yet further south on our way to El-Paso, TX. Phoenix is green this time of the year and it looked like a tropical island from the air, minus the ocean of course. 


We continued towards El-Paso with air temperatures slightly above the freezing mark when we entered the clouds. There forecasts showed areas of strong precipitation and thunder storms to the north of our routing but besides that, the weather wasn’t supposed to be hazardous. That proved to be wrong. The minimum en-route altitudes allowed for us to fly below the freezing level but for some reason ATC did not allow us down that low. It wasn’t long before I started to notice the first traces of ice forming on the landing gear and wing struts. We were roughly half way to El-Paso, TX when I asked the controller for lower altitudes where the temperatures were warmer. ATC gave us lower but not enough. After about 10 minutes we still had a respectable rate of ice build up. I asked again for lower and the controller wasn’t of much help. Don’t get me wrong, I am not blaming him. I am sure that he had his reasons. So, if we can't get to warmer temperatures, we need to climb out of the clouds. We were cleared for a climb and we just managed to break out of the clouds at around 11,000 feet. Once in the clear I started to assess our situation. From what I could see we had about a quarter of an inch of rime ice on the leading surfaces and landing gear. 

We stayed above the clouds as long as we could. I asked for a block altitude and was cleared for one between 9,000 and 11,000 feet. For those who are unfamiliar with the term, Block Altitude allows me to make altitude changes at my discretion between the altitudes assigned to me. This allowed me to dodge cloud tops. The good thing about being on top of the clouds was that it allowed the sun to heat up the aircraft surfaces a bit and started to melt some of the ice. We were instructed to descend again as we closed in on El-Paso and we found ourselves back in the clouds and rain. The ice began to accumulate again but luckily enough, just as we were vectored over Juarez, Mexico, we broke out below the cloud deck and the temperatures were finally warm enough to melt the ice that glazed my wing. I flew the localizer/DME approach that brought us through the mountains and the landing was uneventful. Total flight time to El-Paso was 3 hour and 40 minutes.
 
After we taxied to yet another Cutter FBO (their service is excellent by the way), and parked we noticed that there were signs of an oil leak. We rationalized that the oil was leaking out of the breather tube but we got a mechanic to check it out anyway. The only problem with that was that it ate up 2 hours of our day.


Trying to make up for the lost time, I filed a flight that would take us from El-Paso all the way to Texarkana, AR. We departed and found ourselves in solid clouds the whole flight. This was fine because the temperatures kept us well in the clear of any danger of ice. As we punched along through the clouds, the tailwinds from the day before were no where to be found. After 4 hours of flying in near solid clouds, we needed a rest. We diverted to McKinney, TX just north east of Dallas. Now this wasn’t planned but we found ourselves parking at yet another Cutter FBO. We found ourselves a Holiday Inn and decided to call it a day after flying for about 8 and a half hours.


 Guess what? Yup, another early morning! Today was the day, the day we finally get the plane back into Maryland. We left McKinney and heading east on our way to Parsons, TN. Why Parsons? Because it had the best fuel prices in that area, at least that I could find. At this stage of the trip there really wasn’t anything too extraordinary. 4 hours later, we landed in Parsons, KPVE. If you haven’t been there yet, they are a small top notch FBO. They are very friendly people and have a small town atmosphere. They let us use the crew car to get some lunch and warned us of the local sheriffs' favorite speed trap and sure enough, the sheriff was right there, just as they described!
 
The last two legs were also uneventful. The first of the two brought us into Dulles so that my client can go pick up his car and drive it back to Gaithersburg to meet me. The second leg had me flying solo from Dulles to Gaithersburg, MD. By the time I got in to Gaithersburg it was 7PM and dark outside. The landing at Gaithersburg was normal but it had a bittersweet feel to it. I felt great that I successfully ferried another airplane safe and sound but that feeling was mixed with a slight sadness that the adventure was over. Yes, I do this for a living, but that’s not why I do it. I do it because every leg, every airplane poses unique challenges and every ferry that I do is an adventure in its own right and I know no better way to make a living, than by waking up early in the morning, not knowing what lies ahead except that it's going to be an adventure.
 