Brain and Language 70, 309–335 (1999)
Article ID brln.1999.2143, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on
Is a Picture Worth a Thousand Words? Evidence from
Concept Definitions by Patients with
Semantic Dementia
Matthew A. Lambon Ralph, Kim S. Graham, and Karalyn Patterson
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and
John R. Hodges
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom; and University
Neurology Unit, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Nine patients with semantic dementia (the temporal lobe variant of frontotemporal
dementia) were asked to define concrete concepts either from presentation of a picture
of the object or from its spoken name. As expected, the patients with the most
severe semantic impairment produced the least detailed definitions, and the quality
of the definitions overall was significantly related to concept familiarity. Further
analyses of the definitions were designed to assess two key theoretical aspects of
semantic organization. (i) Do objects and their corresponding names activate conceptual
information in two neuroanatomically separable (modality-specific) semantic
systems? If so, then—apart from any expected commonality in performance
attributable to factors such as concept familiarity—one would not predict striking
item-specific similarities in a patient’s picture- and word-elicited definitions. (ii) Do
sensory/perceptual features and more associative/functional attributes of conceptual
knowledge form two neuroanatomically separable subsystems? If so, then one
would predict significant dissociations in the prominence of these two types of information
in the patients’ definitions. The results lead us to favor a model of the semantic
system that is divided by attribute type but not by modality. ã 1999 Academic
Press
We are indebted to the continuing participation of the patients included in this paper; to
Jim Becker, Kellie Doyle, and Steve DeKoskey (University of Pittsburgh) for allowing us to
report GC’s data; and to Marge Eldridge for her assistance with scoring the patients’ definitions.
The research was supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health (USA)
and the Medical Research Council (UK). Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr.
M. A. Lambon Ralph, MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge
CB1 2EF, United Kingdom. E-mail: matt.lambon.ralph@msc-cbu.cam.ac.uk.
309
0093-934X/99 $30.00
Copyright ã 1999 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
310 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
INTRODUCTION
Semantic dementia or progressive fluent aphasia arises from a neurodegenerative
disease that, at least in early to moderate stages, is associated with
highly circumscribed atrophy of the inferior and lateral aspects of the temporal
neocortex (Hodges & Patterson, 1996; Hodges, Patterson, Oxbury, &
Funnell, 1992; Mummery, Patterson, Wise, Price, & Hodges, 1999; Snowden,
Goulding, & Neary, 1989). The cognitive decline in this form of frontotemporal
dementia is characterized by a progressive loss of conceptual
knowledge leading to poor comprehension and pronounced word-finding difficulties.
Performance on tasks that tap other aspects of perceptual and cognitive
processing—for example, those that assess day-to-day memory, syntax,
single word phonology, spatial abilities, and nonverbal reasoning—remains
relatively intact (Hodges et al., 1992; Hodges, Patterson, & Tyler, 1994). As
noted initially by Warrington (1975) and Schwartz, Marin, and Saffran
(1979), the selective impairment of semantic memory in these patients allows
researchers to observe the nature and consequences of degraded conceptual
knowledge without the cooccurring symptoms in other disorders that also
lead to semantic impairment, such as dementia of Alzheimer’s type (DAT)
or herpes simplex virus encephalitis (HSVE).
In this study nine patients with semantic dementia were asked to provide
definitions of 48 concepts, presented (on separate occasions) as both pictures
and spoken names of the concepts. The analyses of these definitions were
designed to assess two theoretical aspects of semantic organization: whether
patterns of selective impairment require theorists to postulate (i) separate
conceptual representations accessed by objects (pictures) and words and (ii)
separate subsets of semantic attributes differentiated by feature type. Note
that by separable subsystems we mean two component processes that need
not be completely independent when functioning normally, but nevertheless
have sufficiently separate neuroanatomical bases as to be selectively disruptable
by circumscribed lesions (Shallice, 1988a). For example, as we shall
argue later, sensory/perceptual and associative/functional attributes may be
underpinned by different neuroanatomical regions and therefore differentially
vulnerable to lesion. Under normal circumstances, however, these separate
brain regions are mutually active and interactive, giving rise to the multifaceted
representations of semantic memory.
Modality-Specific Semantic Organization?
Some theorists have argued for separate sets of conceptual representations
associated with different input modalities (McCarthy & Warrington, 1986;
McCarthy & Warrington, 1988; Shallice, 1988b; Shallice, 1993; Warrington
& McCarthy, 1994). We should note at the outset that, by modality,
these theorists mean not sensory systems of input (vision, hearing, touch)
but rather objects (or pictures of them) versus words (spoken or written).
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 311
According to this view, it should be possible to identify patients who form
a double dissociation between picture and word comprehension. At least a
single dissociation in this regard seems well established, as a number of
patients have been documented with poor comprehension of words relative
to pictures (e.g., Bub, Black, Hampson, & Kertesz, 1988; Graham, Becker,
Patterson, & Hodges, 1997a; Lambon Ralph, Howard, Nightingale, & Ellis,
1998b; Lauro-Grotto, Piccini, & Shallice, 1997; McCarthy & Warrington,
1988; Tanabe, Nakagawa, Ikeda, Hashimoto, Yamada, Kazui, Nishikawa, &
Okuda, 1996).
The opposite pattern, impaired visual semantics but intact verbal comprehension,
has also been reported. For example McCarthy and Warrington
(1986) described patient FRA who was able to define spoken words but could
not mime or name some of the same items when presented as pictures. Mc-
Carthy and Warrington argued for a semantic locus for this effect on two
grounds. First, FRA made semantic errors in naming/defining pictures; second,
the patient demonstrated a category-specific advantage for the naming
of actions (83%) over objects (50%). In another case described by Warrington
and McCarthy (1994), patient DRS was error-free (15/15) in naming
from description but had a degree of anomia for object pictures (Graded
Naming Test—11/30: McKenna & Warrington, 1980). Although he failed to
show a category-specific deficit on naming colored photographs of manmade
objects and animals, DRS exhibited significantly worse performance for
common objects than for animals when required to match the same item
across two different views (visual–visual matching) or in word-to-picture
matching. Given the combination of a category-specific pattern and a specific
deficit in the recognition of visually presented items, Warrington and McCarthy
concluded that DRS’s performance arose from a selective impairment
of visual semantics.
In contrast to the multiple semantics hypothesis, other researchers have
proposed theories in which stimuli from each modality access the same set
of conceptual representations (Caramazza, Hillis, Rapp, & Romani, 1990;
Hillis, Rapp, & Caramazza, 1995; Lambon Ralph, Patterson, & Hodges,
1997; Rapp, Hillis, & Caramazza, 1993; Riddoch, Humphreys, Coltheart, &
Funnell, 1988). In a functional imaging study with normal subjects, Vandenberghe,
Price, Wise, Josephs, and Frackowiak (1996) identified a large semantic
network activated in common by both words and pictures that extended
from the left superior occipital gyrus through the middle and inferior
temporal cortex to the inferior frontal gyrus. In studies of semantic memory
in patients with DAT, Hodges, Patterson, Graham, and Dawson (1996) and
Lambon Ralph et al. (1997) found a clear relationship between the richness
of semantic attributes given in definitions to concept names and the patients’
success on the same items when presented as pictures for naming to confrontation.
If the subsets of knowledge accessed by pictures and words are represented
in separate systems, there is no reason to expect a reliable associa312
LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
tion across these two tasks in patients with a central semantic deficit. In a
similar study of the semantic impairment in DAT, Chertkow, Bub, and
Caplan (1992) also observed a strong association between performance
on probe questions whether presented with a picture or the corresponding
name.
The item-by-item association reported in neuropsychological studies by
Chertkow et al. (1992), Hodges et al. (1996), and Lambon Ralph et al. (1997),
plus the common neural substrate for word and picture comprehension highlighted
by the functional imaging study of Vandenberghe et al. (1996), seems
to conflict with the apparent evidence for a double dissociation between visual
and verbal semantic systems. We suggest, however, that there might be
alternative explanations for the evidence presented in favor of the modalityspecific
semantics view. For example, it is possible that FRA (McCarthy &
Warrington, 1986) and/or DRS (Warrington & McCarthy, 1994) had a subtle
perceptual deficit that might have contributed to the apparent disadvantage
for visual comprehension. Although these patients succeeded on some perceptual
assessments that required no verbal output, both had lesions to occipital
or occipito-temporal regions, were completely alexic, and demonstrated
better naming in response to a verbal description of an object than to a picture
of it. Warrington and McCarthy argued for a semantic locus in these two
cases, and thus for the existence of a separate visual semantic system, because
performance in each was affected by semantic category and because
FRA’s predominant error type was semantic. There are, however, other possible
interpretations of the category-specific pattern. For example, a mild
visual perceptual deficit and a mild category-specific deficit at the conceptual
level could combine to form an apparent category-specific deficit in the visual
domain. Alternatively, the category-specific deficits may relate in part
to factors such as familiarity that can yield differential levels of difficulty for
the two domains. Furthermore, with regard to the semantic errors observed in
patient FRA, it is possible that a pre-semantic visual impairment might engender
this type of error. In fact it is clear from implemented computational
models that error type and locus of impairment do not have a one-to-one
relationship (cf. Plaut & Shallice, 1993).
Without additional evidence for a selective impairment of visual semantics,
one-half of the double dissociation that underpins the modality-specific
view remains in doubt. If we turn our attention to the opposite pattern, we
could ask how do the amodal semantic theories account for the patients with
disproportionately poor verbal comprehension? Many theorists have emphasized
the underlying difference between words and objects in terms of their
relationship with conceptual knowledge: the surface form of a word, unlike
an object or picture, has an arbitrary relationship with its meaning. Morton
(p. 223, 1985) noted that ‘‘if we recognize part of an object we can often
say a great deal about what the object is’’ and invoked Gibson’s (1979)
notion of affordance to refer to those properties of the whole object that can
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 313
be determined without full recognition of its specific identity. Affordance
seems similar in many ways to the processing assumptions adopted by Caramazza
and colleagues (Caramazza et al., 1990; Hillis et al., 1995). They
suggest that object stimuli, but not words, allow direct access to meaning
(the assumption of privileged access) and that, because the relationship between
form and function is not arbitrary, knowledge about the structural
aspects of an object will be closely linked to the semantic properties that
specify function (the assumption of privileged relationships). These two assumptions
taken together imply that not only structural but also functional
aspects of concept knowledge should be more readily accessed from the
object (or a picture of it) than from its name.
In addition to the notion of affordance, a number of additional observations
are worthy of consideration with regard to the patients reported to have
poorer comprehension of words than pictures. Graham et al. (1997a) analyzed
the definitions given by a patient with semantic dementia (GC) to a
set of concepts presented as either pictures or words. Although GC did produce
better definitions in response to picture stimuli, Graham et al. argued
that this extra information was largely attributable to the features that were
visible in, or inferable from, the picture itself. Furthermore, GC’s definitions
for picture stimuli (and comprehension assessed in other object-based tasks
such as the Pyramids and Palm Trees test: Howard & Patterson, 1992) were
not normal either. Other patients with selectively impaired verbal comprehension
have had measurable deficits in picture comprehension, too, when this
has been assessed in some detail. For example, the patient RM described by
Lauro-Grotto et al. (1997) performed at chance when required to sort pictures
at the level of subordinate features and was extremely impaired on the picture
as well as the word version of the Pyramids and Palm Trees test. Although
she exhibited a large advantage in demonstrating the appropriate cooking
procedure for the real item relative to its name, she provided little or no
information in response to a number of the foodstuffs, including two that,
presumably, were premorbidly very familiar to this Italian subject (aubergine
and gnocchi).
In summary, it is not clear that there is compelling evidence for the modality-
specific view of semantic organization. One of the lessons to be learned
from connectionist models is that the underlying relationship between two
sets of representations has a major impact on behavior. Performance is more
robust to the effects of damage if the input and output representations have
a principled relationship (quasi-regular systems, cf. Plaut, McClelland,
Seidenberg, & Patterson, 1996). Within this framework verbal comprehension
suffers from the arbitrary relationship between the surface form
(phonology/orthography) and meaning. For pictures, however, there is a degree
of systematicity in the mapping from the surface form to meaning and
it is this systematicity that leads to the affordances enjoyed by object comprehension.
314 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
Selective Impairment to a Subset of Semantic Attributes
A number of theorists have proposed that conceptual representations are
made up from a distributed pattern of sensory and associative/functional
attributes (e.g., Allport, 1985; Lambon Ralph et al., 1997; Saffran &
Schwartz, 1994; Saffran & Sholl, in press; Warrington & McCarthy, 1987).
These different types of attribute will contribute, in general, to each and
every conceptual representation, but the relative weighting will vary across
objects and possibly across different semantic categories. If we assume that,
because they are linked to different sources of input and are learned in different
ways, these types of attribute are underpinned by different brain regions,
then it should be possible to find patients for whom certain types of knowledge
have been selectively compromised. Relatively impaired visuo-perceptual
information has been reported in a number of patients (e.g., Basso, Capitani,
& Laiacona, 1988; Breedin, Saffran, & Coslett, 1994b; Carbonnel,
Charnallet, David, & Pellat, 1997; Cardebat, Demonet, Celsis, & Puel, 1996;
Coltheart, Inglis, Cupples, Michie, Bates, & Budd, 1998; Lambon Ralph et
al., 1998b; Marshall, Pring, Chiat, & Robson, 1996; Moss, Tyler, Hodges, &
Patterson, 1995; Sirigu, Duhamel, & Poncet, 1991; Srinivas, Breedin, Coslett,
& Saffran, 1997; Tyler & Moss, 1997).
The possibility that it is particularly knowledge of the visuo-perceptual
features of concepts that is degraded in semantic dementia takes on special
interest given that the disorder is associated with progressive atrophy of the
inferolateral temporal lobe (Hodges et al., 1992; Mummery et al., 1999)—
a region that is commonly linked to high-order visual processing and object
recognition (Milner & Goodale, 1995; Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982). Although
not the main focus of many existing papers in the literature, poor
knowledge of sensory/visual attributes has been noted in a number of studies
of semantic dementia. For example, patient DM (Breedin, Martin, & Saffran,
1994b; Srinivas et al., 1997) was less successful at answering perceptual
questions about animals and objects (perceptual questions, 69%; nonperceptual
questions, 86%). Furthermore, although he achieved respectable performance
on many aspects of verb knowledge, he was poor at matching the
meaning of verbs on the basis of manner for which, it is argued, sensorimotor
features are critical. Tyler and her colleagues (Moss et al., 1995; Tyler &
Moss, 1997, 1998) have reported several patients with significant semantic
priming based on a functional relationship between prime and target (e.g.,
fox–sly) but either no priming or reduced priming with regard to perceptual
features (e.g., fox–red). The patient reported by Lambon Ralph et al. (1998b)
was less likely to match a definition to the name of the correct concept if
the definition contained perceptual rather than functional/associative information,
was significantly worse at answering questions about sensory than
nonsensory attributes, and produced significantly less perceptual than nonperceptual
information in her definitions of words.
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 315
In this case-series study we report the analyses of definitions given by
nine patients with semantic dementia for a set of 48 different concepts. Patients
were asked to give definitions (on different occasions) both to a picture
and to the spoken name of each concept. The results are reported in two
main sections designed to address the aspects of semantic organization noted
above; namely, does the conceptual knowledge accessed by words and pictures
form two separable components of the semantic system, and do visual/
sensory and associative features of conceptual knowledge form two separable
components of the semantic system?
CASE REPORTS
Some of the nine patients tested in this study have been described in previous
papers (Graham & Hodges, 1997; Graham, Hodges, & Patterson, 1994;
Graham, Lambon Ralph, & Hodges, 1997b; Graham, Murre, & Hodges, in
press; Hodges & Graham, 1998; Knott, Patterson, & Hodges, 1997; Lambon
Ralph, Graham, Ellis, & Hodges, 1998a; Mummery et al., 1999; Tyler &
Moss, 1997, 1998), including an analysis of the definition data included here
for one of the patients (GC, Graham et al., 1997a). Table 1 shows background
neuropsychological and neuroanatomical information for the nine patients
at the time that definitions of pictures and words were collected. Where available,
scores for a group of 24 age-matched control subjects are also included
in Table 1 (mainly from Hodges & Patterson, 1995). In Table 1 and the
subsequent figures, the patients are ordered first by the relative laterality
of their temporal lobe damage (see below) and then by comprehension (as
measured by word–picture matching) with the least impaired patient on the
left of each group.
Although there was evidence of bilateral involvement in all nine cases,
assessment of coronal T1-weighted MRI sections revealed predominantly
left-sided temporal lobe atrophy in seven cases (JC through AM), with
greater atrophy of the right temporal lobe in the remaining two patients (BM
and DG). Most of the patients produced a good copy of the Rey Figure
(Osterrieth, 1944) and some recalled as much after a 45-min delay as control
subjects do (as the standard deviation on normal performance suggests, intact
subjects’ performance varies a great deal). Forward and backward digit span
was within the normal range for all nine patients. Nonverbal problem solving
as assessed by Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (Raven, 1962) was
equal to or better than the age-appropriate norm in the patients tested.
The patients’ semantic impairments and profound anomia were highlighted
by a series of assessments. Fluency was reduced in all nine patients
for eight different semantic categories (four living categories: land animals,
birds, water creatures, and dogs; and four man-made classes: household
items, vehicles, musical instruments, and boats). All patients were anomic,
some profoundly so, as measured by naming of a set of 48 simple line draw316
LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
TABLE 1
Background Neuropsychological Test Results
Test Condition N JC GCB MS JH GC PS AM BM DG Controls (n 5 24)
Pattern of temporal lobe damage L .R L.R L.R L. R Left L .R L.R R.L R. L
Rey figure Copy /36 27 36 21.5 31 36 32 36 36 24 34.0 (2.9)
Recall /36 10 9 5 12 8.5 3.5 0 16 0 15.2 (7.4)
Digit Span Forward 8 5 6 7 6 5 8 8 5 6.8 (1.0)
Backward 4 4 3 4 5 4 5 7 3 4.7 (1.2)
Raven’s Coloured Progressive /36 26 NT NT 29 33 NT NT 31 NT 50th percentile 5
Matrices 25/36
Category Fluency (8 categories) 35 52 7 11 12 11 7 37 39 113.7 (19.4)
Picture Naming /48 26 27 4 6 5 5 1 11 10 43.6 (2.3)
Word-to-Picture Matching /48 40 37 26 26 23 23 19 28 23 47.4 (1.1)
Pyramids and Palm Trees Pictures /52 47 43 36 33 47 42 37 30 22 51.2 (1.4)
Words /52 44 32 39 35 NT 32 33 41 34 51.2 (1.4)
Benton’s judgment of line /30 NT 30a NT NT NT 27b 27b 27b 14c —
orientation
BORB Foreshortened Match /20 NT NT NT NT NT 20 NT 19 9 19.3 (0.9)
BORB Minimal Feature Match /20 NT NT NT NT NT 20 NT 17 16 19.7 (0.4)
BORB Object Decision /64 NT NT NT NT NT 47 NT NT 32 57.4 (3.1)
Note. NT, not tested; L . R, left temporal lobe damage greater than right; R . L, right temporal lobe damage greater than left.
a Superior.
b High average.
c Severely defective.
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 317
ings of common objects (24 animals and 24 artifacts drawn from Snodgrass
& Vanderwart, 1980) and all performed outside the normal range when
asked to match the spoken name to the corresponding picture for the same
set of items (in this word-to-picture matching test the target is presented with
seven other items from the same semantic category). Their poor comprehension
was confirmed by performance on the Pyramids and Palm Trees test
(Howard & Patterson, 1992). Two observations about this latter assessment
are relevant to the current study. First, all nine patients were outside the
normal range for both picture and word versions confirming impaired comprehension
for both input modalities. Second, relative performance for pictures
and words seems to align with the pattern of temporal lobe damage:
the patients with predominantly left-sided atrophy produced either similar
scores for the two versions or better performance for pictures over words;
the two patients with relatively right-sided temporal lobe atrophy (BM and
DG), however, achieved higher scores for words than for pictures. Indeed
neither BM nor DG exceeded chance level (50%) with pictures.
At the time that the definitions were collected, we did not systematically
investigate perceptual functioning in these patients. The limited results available
are shown at the bottom of Table 1. Four of the five patients assessed
performed at the high average or superior range on Benton’s Judgement of
Line Orientation (Benton, Hamsher, Varney, & Spreen, 1983), but DG’s
score classifies as severely defective. On three tasks taken from the Birmingham
Object Recognition Battery (BORB: Riddoch & Humphreys,
1992), PS performed at ceiling on the two matching tests but outside the
normal range for object decision. Patient BM was within the normal range
for the Foreshortened Match assessment but fell outside the normal range
on the simple Minimal Feature Match test. DG’s poor perceptual processing
was confirmed with these tasks: she performed at chance on the Foreshortened
Match and Object Decision tests and was outside the normal range on
the Minimal Feature Match assessment. It is interesting to note at this point,
prior to consideration of their definitions to pictures and words, that BM’s
and DG’s better performance on the Pyramid and Palm Trees test with
words than pictures coincided with poor matching of objects across different
views.
Definitions for the same 48 items used in the word-to-picture matching
and naming tasks (reported in Table 1) were collected from each patient. On
one occasion each patient was asked to define the 48 items presented as
Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980) line drawings, and on the other they were
asked to define the spoken name of each concept. On both occasions the
patients were encouraged to provide as rich a definition as possible, as though
the listener was completely unfamiliar with all the items. Following the
guidelines described in Hodges et al. (1996), each definition was scored for
the following information: whether the information provided was sufficient
to define the core meaning of the object, that is, contained enough informa318
LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
tion for another person to identify the concept from the definition; the total
number of correct features produced with regard to physical/sensory attributes
(e.g., a table has four legs, an ostrich has a long neck, etc.) and of an
associative/functional nature (e.g., a table is used for eating at, ostriches live
in Africa, etc.); and the presence or absence of a superordinate category label.
An attribute was classified as physical/sensory if it referred to any physical
feature that a person might know about an object, whether or not it can be
perceived in a simple line drawing. The classification of associative/functional
was used for all nonphysical information, encompassing knowledge
about an object’s function, information that is associated with an item, and
any encyclopedic facts. For definitions of pictures the number of physical
attributes was further subdivided into the number of physical features that are
included in the picture itself versus the number of novel physical attributes
mentioned. When a specific feature was repeated in a definition, the attribute
was only counted once; i.e., the value reported for each type of feature reflects
the type count, and not a token count.
We should note here that, for the sake of objective scoring, each definition
was taken at face value—i.e., only those attributes mentioned by each patient
were included. Additional knowledge that might be inferred from the definition
was not credited. So, for example, when one patient (DG) initially responded
‘‘Is that a fish?’’ to a picture of a crocodile, her scores for that item
were not credited with additional features such as that she considered the
target picture to represent a water creature. Our experience with these patients,
both clinical and experimental, suggests that it is very easy to overestimate
the degree of remaining comprehension by making this kind of inference
from the patient’s responses. In fact, the conservative scoring scheme
adopted here was justified by DG’s continuing definition of the crocodile in
that she subsequently commented, ‘‘Ain’t a dog, is it?’’
Preliminary Analyses
Despite only having nine patients within this case series, we found a significant
relationship between the quality of the patients’ definitions and the
degree of their semantic impairment: that is, cross-sectionally, the total
amount of information produced to words and pictures declined as comprehension
decreased (correlation between the patients’ word-to-picture matching
score and the total number of novel features produced for pictures: r 5
.66, Pone-tailed 5 .03; correlation between the patients’ word-to-picture matching
score and the total number of features produced for words: r 5 .63,
Pone-tailed 5 .03). The familiarity of the concept also significantly affected the
patients’ performance: the total number of features produced to words and
pictures declined as the concepts became relatively less familiar (correlation
between rated familiarity of each item and the number of features produced
per word: r 5 .37, Pone-tailed , .001; correlation between rated familiarity of
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 319
TABLE 2
The Relationship between Core Definitions Given
to Pictures and to Their Names
Core word
definition
6 3
6 247 41
Core picture definition 3 55 89
Note. C 5 .44, p , .001.
each item and the number of novel features produced per picture: r 5 .20,
Pone-tailed , .001). These two preliminary results confirm (a) that definitions
are a sensitive measure of the deterioration of conceptual knowledge characteristic
of semantic dementia (Warrington, 1975) and (b) that this deterioration
is modulated by the frequency or familiarity of the concepts assessed,
with less familiar items more vulnerable (Funnell, 1995).
Modality-Specific Semantic Impairments?
Table 2 shows the distribution of definitions for pictures and words collected
from all nine patients, where each definition was scored for the presence
of sufficient information to be categorized as a core definition. There
was a clear and significant concordance between performance on the same
items presented as words and pictures (C 5 .44, p , .001). As the patients
had been asked, on a separate occasion, to name each of the 48 pictures (see
Table 1), we were also able to compare naming accuracy against definitions
to words. If the information produced was scored to the core definition criterion,
there was also a significant item-specific concordance between picture
naming and definitions of concept names (see Table 3, C 5 .50, p , .001).
We have already demonstrated that the quality of the patients’ definitions
was influenced by item familiarity, a fact that would—in and of itself—
TABLE 3
The Relationship between Picture Naming
Accuracy and Core Definitions
to Picture Names
Core word
definition
6 3
6 283 54
Picture naming 3 19 76
Note. C 5 .50, p , .001.
320 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
yield some consistency (cf. Behrmann & Bub, 1992; Coltheart & Funnell,
1987; Howard, 1995). That is, some items will always be hard, because of
low familiarity (and any other item-specific properties affecting difficulty),
and thus engender poor definitions and low naming scores. Other items will
be easy and so produce consistently better performance. This alternative explanation
for the item-specific associations was assessed via two simultaneous
logistic regression analyses. Picture naming accuracy was predicted by
word definition performance, and word definition by picture definition. In
both analyses rated concept familiarity and a range of other psycholinguistic
factors that might have influenced performance were included in the regression
equation (name length in phonemes; combined frequency per million
from Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993; and rated visual complexity,
imageability, age-of-acquisition, and familiarity from Coltheart, 1981).
Word definition performance was found to be a significant predictor of naming
accuracy even after the influence of the six factors was taken into account
(Wald 5 55.9, p , .0001). Likewise, success in picture definition was a
significant predictor of word definition accuracy (Wald 5 50.2, p , .0001)
with the influence of the other six factors removed.
In the Introduction we noted two results from studies of patients with
DAT—a significant association between picture naming success and quality
of definitions to the picture names (Lambon Ralph et al., 1997) and a strong
association between performance on probe questions whether presented with
a picture or the corresponding name (Chertkow et al., 1992). These patterns
are replicated by our data from nine patients with semantic dementia, where
the association between quality of concept definition to word and picture,
and also between picture naming and word definition, was significant over
and above the influence of item familiarity and other variables. These reliable
associations are a clear prediction from the hypothesis of an amodal semantic
system that is addressed by both word and picture input.
The patients’ definitions were compared further by studying the number
of attributes produced to pictures and words, illustrated in Fig. 1. Two numbers
are given for picture definitions. The first (Picture: Total) represents the
total number of attributes produced, both associative and physical; the second
(Picture: Novel) includes associative features and only those perceptual
physical features that are not contained within the stimulus picture itself.
Thus the measure Picture: Novel is a more conservative estimate of what a
subject knows about a pictured concept rather than of what he or she can
find in the stimulus.
Graham et al. (1997a) noted that patient GC tended to produce information
in picture definitions that was visible in the drawing itself. This tendency
can also be seen for a few of the cases in Fig. 1, as the difference between
the total number of features produced in response to pictures and the number
of novel attributes given (Picture: Total vs. Picture: Novel). This figure also
demonstrates that, despite their impoverished semantic knowledge, the maIS
A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 321
FIG. 1. The number of attributes produced to pictures and words. Picture: Total—the
total number of attributes produced to pictures. Picture: Novel—the total number of associative
features and only those perceptual physical features that are not contained within the stimulus
picture itself. Word: Total—the total number of attributes produced to words.
jority of the patients did not resort to this kind of simple listing of the details
contained in the pictures. The clear exception to this, apart from GC himself,
was DG who produced 335 separate pieces of information to the 48 line
drawings, of which 278 features (83%) were present in the picture. Returning
to DG’s definition of a crocodile as an example, her full response was, ‘‘Is
that a fish? I don’t know what it is? Got a head, four legs and a tail. Ain’t
a dog is it? A bit flat, tail, four legs, head, two eyes, mouth, toes, several
toes.’’ DG’s apparent strategy to list components of the item pictured is
important for the comparison between word and picture definitions: based
on total number of features produced, this comparison would suggest that
DG provided more information to pictures than to words; but if only the
novel physical information is counted, then DG’s performance was, in fact,
substantially worse for pictures than for words.
As a group, the patients with relatively greater left temporal lobe damage
produced significantly more correct information in response to pictures
(novel physical plus associative) than to words (Wilcoxon Z 5 5.45, p ,
.001). The reverse was true for the two patients with greater right temporal
lobe atrophy (combined data: Wilcoxon Z 5 5.97, P , .001). If each patient’s
data are considered individually, then the advantage for pictures over
words was significant in four of the patients with left-sided atrophy (by Wilcoxon,
GCB: Z 5 2.15, p 5 .03; JH: Z 5 3.49, p , .001; GC: Z 5 5.41,
p , .001; PS: Z 5 2.34, p 5 .02) but did not reach significance in the
322 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
remaining three individuals (JC, for whom in fact the nonsignificant difference
was in the opposite direction, MS, and AM). Both patients with relatively
right-sided temporal atrophy produced significantly richer definitions
to words than to pictures (BM: Z 5 3.77, p , .001; DG: Z 5 4.62, p ,
.001).
The notion of an inherent difference between pictures and words in the
nature of their relationship to conceptual attributes—principled in the case
of pictures, arbitrary for words—leads to the following prediction. When
semantic knowledge is degraded, patients should still often be able to say
something appropriate about concepts presented as pictures, at least with
regard to properties of the correct semantic category, whereas for words there
should be a much greater proportion of occasions on which the patient is
unable to say anything appropriate about the concept. This prediction was
supported by the patients’ definition data. Combining across all nine patients
the number of items for which absolutely no appropriate attributes were produced
was much greater for words (46% of the items) than for the corresponding
pictures, whether the picture definitions were scored to include all
the information produced (18% of the items: a significant difference: Sign
test, p , .001) or to disregard description of the physical information included
within the picture (27% of the items: Sign test, p , .001). If each
patient’s data are considered individually, then for six of the patients (JC,
GCB, JH, GC, PS, and DG) the number of items for which absolutely no
appropriate attributes were produced was significantly greater for words (the
proportion for individual patients ranged from 19 to 77% of the concepts)
than for the corresponding pictures scored to include all the information produced
(the proportions ranged from 0 to 23%: individual patient Sign tests,
p values ranged from p , .001 to p 5 .02). The difference failed to reach
significance for three patients (AM, MS, and BM). With one exception, the
pattern for each patient was unchanged if the Picture: Novel data were substituted
for Picture: Total. The exception was DG who failed to produce any
appropriate attributes for 33% of the words. If her picture definitions are
scored by the lenient criterion, then she produced some information for every
picture (a significant difference: Sign test, p , .001) but if the physical information
included within the stimulus picture itself is discounted there is no
significant difference (DG failed to produce any novel information for 38%
of the pictures).
In summary of this aspect of the results, there was an impressive degree
of item-specific consistency between the patients’ definitions to pictures and
words (and also between their definitions and naming to confrontation) that
could not be attributed to factors such as concept familiarity. Furthermore,
although some of the patients achieved significantly better definitions to either
pictures or words (relative to the other modality), we claim that these
differences can be explained without recourse to modality specific semantic
subsystems. In particular, (a) the superiority in picture definitions is almost
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 323
certainly explicable in terms of information afforded by picture stimuli, and
(b) the less frequently observed advantage for words is most likely to reflect
a presemantic visuo-perceptual deficit cooccurring with degraded conceptual
knowledge. These views are expanded in the General Discussion.
Selective Impairment to a Subset of Semantic Attributes?
Figures 2a and 2b illustrate how the total number of features produced by
each patient divides into associative and physical attributes, for picture and
word definitions respectively.1 In nearly all cases the overwhelming proportion
of information provided, for both picture and word stimuli, was associative.
In some cases the amount of physical information produced was extremely
small (all nine patients, on average, produced less than one novel
physical attribute per item for pictures, and the same is true for seven of the
nine patients in the word definitions; recall that the values in Fig. 2 are total
number of features across all 48 target items). If all nine patients are included
in a group analysis then significantly more associative than physical information
was produced in both picture definition (Wilcoxon Z 5 13.0, p , .001)
and word definition (Z 5 9.57, p , .001). This pattern is repeated for each
individual patient’s results (Wilcoxon Z ranges from 2.68 to 4.47, all p ,
.01) with the exception of DG for whom there was no significant difference
between the number of physical and associative features produced, for either
pictures or words.
The final analyses of the patients’ definitions assessed any potential differences
in performance for concepts related to living things and artifacts. The
mean numbers of novel physical and associative attributes produced for the
24 living things and 24 artifacts are illustrated in Tables 4a and 4b for picture
and word definitions, respectively. Two ANOVAs revealed significant main
effects of attribute type (picture definitions: F(1, 430) 5 315.8, p , .001;
word definitions: F(1, 430) 5 113.0, p , .001), semantic category (picture
definitions: F(1, 430) 5 5.3, p 5 .02; word definitions: F(1, 430) 5 9.3,
p 5 .002), and feature type 3 semantic category interactions (picture definitions:
F(1, 430) 5 62.6, p , .001; word definitions: F(1, 430) 5 28.4, p ,
.001). Post-hoc t tests confirm that the interactions arose because a significantly
greater number of associative features were produced for artifacts than
for living things (picture definition: t 5 5.45, p , .001; word definition: t 5
4.84, p , .001), but there was no difference across category for physical
attributes produced in word definition (t , 1), and the patients gave a smaller
number of novel physical features for artifacts in picture definition (t 5 6.94,
p , .001).
The influence of semantic category noted in these analyses raises the possi-
1 Note that in Fig. 2a the bars corresponding to Total are the same figures as Picture: Novel
in Fig. 1, likewise the Total bars in Fig. 2b are the same as Word: Total in Fig. 1.
324 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
FIG. 2. (a) The number of novel physical and associative features produced in picture
definitions. (b) The number of physical and associative features produced in word definitions.
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 325
TABLE 4a
The Mean Number of Features Produced in Each Picture Definition Split by Attribute
Type and Semantic Domain
Attribute type
Semantic domain Physical (Novel) Associative Overall
Living things 0.49 (0.82) 1.23 (1.38) 1.72 (1.67)
Artifacts 0.08 (0.29) 2.01 (1.58) 2.09 (1.63)
Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
bility that some or all of these patients were demonstrating a category-specific
deficit for living things. The nine patients did produce more featurerich
definitions to artifact concepts than to living things both for words and
pictures (see Tables 4a and 4b). If the number of features produced per item
is predicted in a linear regression model by category, then the difference
favoring artifacts is significant for both words (t 5 3.05, p 5 .002) and
pictures (t52.30, p5.02). We have noted above, however, that the patients’
definition performance was significantly modulated by concept familiarity,
and there is a significant discrepancy between the two categories on this
dimension (mean rated familiarity: artifacts 5 3.25, living things 5 2.28;
t 5 4.07, p , .001). If rated familiarity and category are included in the
simultaneous linear regression model, the patients produced the greatest
amount of information for the most familiar concepts both for words (t 5
7.54, p ,.001) and for pictures (t5 3.63, p, .001), but no effect of category
remains once familiarity is taken into account (words: t , 1; pictures: t 5
21.15, n.s.).
In summary of the results presented in this section, although the patients’
performances were not significantly affected by semantic category once concept
familiarity was taken into account, the clear and striking finding was
TABLE 4b
The Mean Number of Features Produced in Each Word Definition
Split by Attribute Type and Semantic Domain
Attribute type
Semantic domain Physical Associative Overall
Living things 0.54 (1.07) 0.94 (1.41) 1.48 (2.11)
Artifacts 0.45 (1.16) 1.68 (1.73) 2.13 (2.33)
Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
326 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
that each and every patient produced more (in eight of nine cases, significantly
more) associative than physical features in both word and picture
definitions. This result implies a substantial degree of functional localization
of these two aspects of conceptual knowledge, with the physical attributes
of object knowledge particularly reliant on the inferior temporal regions that
are compromised in semantic dementia.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
As described in previous reports of semantic dementia (Hodges et al.,
1992; Snowden et al., 1989), the patients in this study presented with a relatively
selective progressive semantic impairment resulting in poor comprehension
and profound word-finding difficulties. Not surprisingly, the patients
with the severest impairment produced the least detailed definitions in response
to both words and pictures. Our analyses were designed to assess
two key theoretical aspects of semantic organization: first, whether there are
separate central semantic subsystems accessed by objects (or in this case,
pictures of them) and words and, second, whether there are separate semantic
subsystems for different classes of conceptual knowledge, namely, sensory/
physical and functional/associative attributes.
In the Introduction we reviewed some of the evidence taken for and against
a modality-specific organization of semantic knowledge. One of the difficulties
for research in this area is that a number of key assumptions underlying
this view are still underspecified. Deriving an exact set of empirical predictions
is, consequently, rather difficult. One approach to this problem is to
treat the amodal single semantic hypothesis as the default, because it is the
more parsimonious, theoretical position, and to ask whether there is any evidence
that compels us to accept more than one system for semantic representations
of concrete concepts.
The comparison of definitions in response to words and pictures for the
nine patients presented here seems, in many ways, to reflect the existing
claims in the literature for separate verbal and visual semantic systems. All
these patients make confusions between exemplars drawn from the same
category in comprehension tasks like word-to-picture matching and make
frank semantic errors in naming. Such data provide converging evidence for
a semantic locus to the functional impairment in all nine cases. Some of the
patients (four out of nine) produced significantly better definitions to pictures
than to words and likewise achieved higher scores in comprehension tasks
like the Pyramids and Palm Trees test with picture stimuli than with word
stimuli. Two other patients exhibited the reverse pattern. Consequently, at
this level of analysis the data seem to reinforce the apparent double dissociation
formed by individual cases reported in the literature, e.g., patients RM
(Lauro-Grotto et al., 1997) vs. FRA and DRS (McCarthy & Warrington,
1986; Warrington & McCarthy, 1994).
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 327
The point that we wish to emphasize is that this double dissociation in
performance does not necessarily demonstrate multiple semantic systems. In
fact, as we intimated in the Introduction, the evidence taken as favoring the
modality-specific hypothesis has legitimate alternative interpretations. First,
it is important to note that, although some of the patients exhibited a degree
of differential word/picture performance, in no case could this be considered
to approach a classical dissociation (Shallice, 1988a). That is, all nine subjects
displayed impaired comprehension of both pictures and words. This
means that, with a modality-specific theory, we would need to postulate damage
to both semantic systems albeit to different degrees. The amodal theory,
on the other hand, predicts an impact of a semantic deficit on comprehension
in all modalities. The fact that many patients achieve poorer scores on tests
of word relative to picture comprehension could result from the fact that the
surface form of a word has an arbitrary relationship with its meaning whereas
the meaning of an object is signaled substantially more by features present
in the stimulus. The systematicity in the mapping, or the affordance, from
objects or pictures to semantics means that comprehension of these should
be relatively resistant to disruption.
This notion of an inherent bias toward an advantage for objects or pictures
requires us to explain how there can be any patients who present with relatively
better comprehension of words than of pictures (patients BM and DG
in the present study. Our response is that it is not clear that the less-detailed
definitions produced by BM and DG for pictures than for words do constitute
evidence for a dissociation within central conceptual knowledge. Although
there is no doubt that both patients had a central semantic impairment, both
also performed poorly and well below both the normal range and the other
patients with semantic dementia on simple assessments of presemantic perceptual
processing (e.g., matching the same object across two different
views). Given a combination of impaired conceptual knowledge and a visuoperceptual
deficit, it is unsurprising that these patients produce relatively
poor definitions of picture input and are disproportionately impaired on other
tests of picture comprehension.
In addition to the fact that a single amodal semantic system may sensibly
be considered the theoretical default, we have reported some data in this
study that seem to argue positively in favor of this hypothesis. In line with
the results of three previous studies of the semantic impairment in dementia
of Alzheimer’s type (Chertkow et al., 1992; Hodges et al., 1996; Lambon
Ralph et al., 1997), we identified significant associations between word and
picture definitions and between picture naming and word definitions. Furthermore,
these reliable associations were not explicable by the influence of additional
factors such as concept familiarity on the patients’ performance. The
associations indicate that the status of conceptual information when probed
from verbal input (the concept name) is a good predictor of the quality of
328 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
semantic knowledge when accessed from pictorial input, either for comprehension
or for naming.2
The functional imaging study reported by Vandenberghe et al. (1996) also
points toward a common distributed semantic system for words and pictures.
In addition, however, these authors reported increased regional cerebral
blood flow (rCBF) specifically for word comprehension in the left superior
temporal sulcus, left anterior middle temporal gyrus, and left inferior frontal
sulcus and for the picture semantic tasks in the left posterior inferior temporal
sulcus. Vandenberghe et al. suggested that rCBF increases in these regions
may be attributable either to activation of modality-specific input representations
(structural descriptions in the case of pictures, form-based representations
for words) or to the transmission of activation from these input representations
to shared conceptual knowledge. The results from this functional
imaging study are consistent with the view proposed here, in which we attribute
the extra-poor definitions provided by DG and BM for pictures to the
additional presemantic visuo-perceptual deficits observed in these two patients.
Our assessment is that there is currently no empirical evidence, either
from studies of behavioral deficits in patients or from functional imaging of
intact subjects, that necessitates a modality-specific viewpoint. If anything,
the item consistency noted in this and previous studies would seem to favor
the single, amodal hypothesis.
Semantic dementia arises from progressive atrophy of the inferior and
lateral aspects of the temporal lobes (Hodges & Patterson, 1996; Hodges et
al., 1992; Mummery et al., 1999), areas assumed to underpin knowledge
about the physical form of objects and animals (Ungerleider & Mishkin,
1982). This anatomical specificity would suggest that, on top of their generalized
semantic degradation, these patients should exhibit disproportionate loss
of conceptual knowledge with respect to this specific type of semantic feature.
We noted in the Introduction that previously studied patients had demonstrated
this effect across a variety of tasks (Basso et al., 1988; Breedin et
al., 1994b; Cardebat et al., 1996; Lambon Ralph et al., 1998b; Moss et al.,
1995; Tyler & Moss, 1997). The analyses of the definitions provided by the
nine patients included in this study replicate these previous findings: whether
2 The problem of resolving empirical predictions from the modality-specific hypothesis is
highlighted here. If we consider the verbal and visual semantics as distinct, independent entities,
then there would be no reason to expect that damage to one or both modalities should
produce the type of item consistency that has been observed here (i.e., consistency greater
than that expected on the basis of concept familiarity and other variables). If the two systems
are linked, or coupled (Shallice, 1988a), in some way, such that activation can pass between
corresponding semantic representations, then the prediction is less than clear. In the limit,
damage affecting a representation in one modality may make it less likely for the corresponding
concept to be activated in the other. At a functional level of description, therefore, a highly
interactive modality-specific view of this sort may well behave in exactly the same way as
an impaired amodal semantic system.
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 329
defining pictures or words, all patients produced strikingly less physical/
sensory than associative/functional information. This pattern is not true of
normal control subjects who, if anything, produce more physical than associative
information (Hodges et al., 1996). In some cases the patients’ definitions
contained almost no physical/sensory attributes. These results, as well
as data from a recent PET imaging study of normal subjects (Cappa, Perani,
Schmur, Tettamanti, & Fazio, 1998; Mummery, Patterson, Hodges, & Price,
1998), support models of semantic memory in which distributed conceptual
representations are composed of subsets of sensory and associative/functional
attributes based on partially different cortical regions (e.g., Allport,
1985; Lambon Ralph et al., 1997; Saffran & Sholl, in press; Warrington &
McCarthy, 1987).
A popular hypothesis of category structure in semantic memory views
living things as primarily differentiated on the basis of sensory features,
while function is thought to be the key distinguishing aspect of artifacts (Farah
& McClelland, 1991; Lambon Ralph et al., 1997; Saffran & Schwartz,
1994; Saffran & Sholl, in press; Warrington & Shallice, 1984). Farah and
McClelland demonstrated that, if this asymmetric weighting of sensory and
functional features were encoded within a connectionist model of semantic
memory, then apparent category-specific deficits for living things would
arise from a selective ‘lesion’ of sensory attributes. Given the apparently
sparse knowledge of patients with semantic dementia about the physical form
of objects and animals, one might predict that the great majority of these
patients should exhibit disproportionately poor performance on living things.
Category-specific deficits for natural kinds have been reported for a few individual
patients with semantic dementia (Barbarotto, Capitani, Spinnler, &
Trivelli, 1995; Basso et al., 1988; Breedin, Martin, & Saffran, 1994a; Cardebat
et al., 1996; McCarthy & Warrington, 1988); but with the exception of
the study by Barbarotto et al., it is unclear whether these effects could be
explained by a difference between categories on factors such as familiarity
and frequency which are known to have a significant impact on performance
(Funnell, 1995; Lambon Ralph et al., 1998a). Patient MF, reported by Barbarotto
et al. (1995), did demonstrate a significant category-specific effect
after various other pertinent factors were taken into account; conversely, MF
did not exhibit a significant difference between sensory and associative
knowledge—a pattern also reported in several other recent papers on category-
specific deficits (Caramazza & Shelton, 1998; Funnell & De Mornay
Davies, 1996; Laiacona, Barbarotto, & Capitani, 1993; Laiacona, Capitani, &
Barbarotto, 1997; Lambon Ralph et al., 1998b; Moss, Tyler, Durrant-Peatfield,
& Bunn, 1998; Samson, De Wilde, & Pillon, 1998).
Do the patients described here exhibit significant category specific effects?
There are three sets of relevant results. Analyses of the definition data from
the present study revealed that the patients as a group did produce richer
definitions for artifact concepts than for living things both to words and pic330
LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
tures. The patients’ definition performance was also significantly modulated
by concept familiarity, however, and when this factor is taken into account,
no category effect remains. Hodges, Garrard, and Patterson (1998) analyzed
data from the word-to-picture matching and naming tasks (Hodges & Patterson,
1996) for a set of eight patients, including a number of the cases
reported here. With rated familiarity controlled, there was a significant advantage
for artifacts relative to natural kinds in the word-to-picture matching
task, but no effect of category type on naming to confrontation. Six of the
patients were also included in a case-series study of the factors that affect
naming accuracy for a set of 132 pictures from the Snodgrass and Vanderwart
corpus (Lambon Ralph et al., 1998a). As a group there was no effect
of category on naming accuracy and in the individual analyses only one
patient exhibited significantly better performance for the artifacts.
In summary, the weight of evidence appears not to favor models of semantic
memory in which category-specific deficits arise from a differential
weighting of sensory and functional features for living kinds and artifacts.
On the other hand it is, of course, difficult to draw firm conclusions from
a set of null results. All the patients reported here produced impoverished
definitions overall, and although they gave strikingly little sensory/physical
information, they also only tended to produce, on average, between one and
three pieces of associative information per item (see Figs. 2a and 2b). With
such a severe reduction in both physical and associative aspects of conceptual
knowledge, one might not expect a measurable category effect.
CONCLUSIONS
Analysis of word and picture definitions given by nine patients with semantic
dementia revealed (a) that the quality of the information produced
by the patients declined with disease severity, (b) that more satisfactory
(though still impoverished) definitions were given to the most familiar concepts,
and (c) that once concept familiarity was taken into account the patients’
performance was equivalent for artifacts and living things. With regard
to the specific theoretical questions to which the study was addressed,
we found a striking reduction in the physical attributes of conceptual knowledge
produced by all nine patients to both words and pictures. In addition,
the ability to give a core definition to a specific word was highly predictive
of the patients’ success in both picture comprehension and confrontation
naming for the same item, suggesting impairment of a single amodal semantic
system. The relatively poorer definitions to pictures than to words produced
by two of the nine patients was explicable by their combined conceptual
and presemantic, visuo-perceptual deficits. It is our contention, therefore,
that there is no evidence from this study (or perhaps in the literature as a
whole) that necessitates a modality-specific semantic organization. Rather
than positing impairment to a separate conceptual system for verbal compreIS
A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 331
hension as an explanation for the relatively common pattern of poorer performance
with words than with pictures, we would argue that this pattern arises
from the underlying difference in mapping to meaning that makes a picture
worth a thousand words.
REFERENCES
Allport, D. A. 1985. Distributed memory, modular subsystems and dysphasia. In S. Newman &
R. Epstein (Eds.), Current perspectives in dysphasia. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Baayen, R. H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. 1993. The CELEX lexical database [CDROM].
Philadelphia, PA: Linguistics Data Consortium, Univ. of Pennsylvania.
Barbarotto, R., Capitani, E., Spinnler, H., & Trivelli, C. 1995. Slowly progressive semantic
impairment with category specificity. Neurocase, 1, 107–119.
Basso, A., Capitani, E., & Laiacona, M. 1988. Progressive language impairment without dementia:
A case with isolated category specific semantic defect. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 51, 1201–1207.
Behrmann, M., & Bub, D. 1992. Surface dyslexia and dysgraphia: Dual routes, single lexicon.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 9, 209–251.
Benton, A. L., Hamsher, K., Varney, N., &Spreen, O. 1983. Contributions to neuropsychological
assessment. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Breedin, S. D., Martin, N., & Saffran, E. M. 1994a. Category-specific semantic impairments:
An infrequent occurrence. Brain and Language, 47, 383–386.
Breedin, S. D., Saffran, E. M., & Coslett, H. B. 1994b. Reversal of the concreteness effect
in a patient with semantic dementia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 11, 617–660.
Bub, D., Black, S., Hampson, E., & Kertesz, A. 1988. Semantic encoding of pictures and
words: Some neuropsychological observations. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5, 27–66.
Cappa, S. F., Perani, D., Schmur, T., Tettamanti, M., & Fazio, F. 1998. The effects of semantic
category and knowledge type on lexical-semantic access: A PET study. Neuroimage, 8,
350–359.
Caramazza, A., Hills, A. E., Rapp, B. C., & Romani, C. 1990. Multiple semantics or multiple
confusions? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 7, 161–168.
Caramazza, A., & Shelton, J. R. 1998. Domain-specific knowledge systems in the brain: The
animate–inanimate distinction. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 1–34.
Carbonnel, S., Charnallet, A., David, D., & Pellat, J. 1997. One or several semantic systems(s)?
Maybe none: Evidence from a case of modality and category-specific ‘‘semantic’’ impairment.
Cortex, 33, 391–417.
Cardebat, D., Demonet, J. F., Celsis, P., & Puel, M. 1996. Living/non-living dissociation in
a case of semantic dementia: A SPECT activation study. Neuropsychologia, 34, 1175–
1179.
Chertkow, H., Bub, D., & Caplan, D. 1992. Constraining theories of semantic memory processing:
Evidence from dementia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 9, 327–365.
Coltheart, M. 1981. The MRC psycholinguistic database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 33, 497–505.
Coltheart, M., & Funnell, E. 1987. Reading and writing: One lexicon or two? In D. A. Allport,
D. G. MacKay, W. Prinz, & E. Scheerer (Eds.), Language perception and production:
Shared mechanisms in listening, reading and writing. London: Academic Press.
Coltheart, M., Inglis, L., Cupples, L., Michie, P., Bates, A., & Budd, B. 1998. A semantic
332 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
subsystem specific to the storage of information about visual attributes of animate and
inanimate objects. Neurocase, 4, 353–370.
Farah, M. J., & McClelland, J. L. 1991. A computational model of semantic memory impairment:
Modality specificity and emergent category specificity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology General, 120, 339–357.
Funnell, E. 1995. Objects and properties: A study of the breakdown of semantic memory.
Memory, 3, 497–518.
Funnell, E., & De Mornay Davies, P. 1996. JBR: A reassessment of concept familiarity and
a category-specific disorder for living things. Neurocase, 2, 461–474.
Gibson, J. J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Graham, K. S., Becker, J. T., Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. R. 1997a. Lost for words: A case
of primary progressive aphasia? In A. J. Parkin (Ed.), Case studies in the neuropsychology
of memory. Hove: Erlbaum.
Graham, K. S., & Hodges, J. R. 1997. Differentiating the roles of the hippocampal complex
and the neocortex in long-term memory storage: Evidence from the study of semantic
dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology, 11, 77–89.
Graham, K. S., Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K. E. 1994. The relationship between comprehension
and oral reading in progressive fluent aphasia. Neuropsychologia, 32, 299–316.
Graham, K. S., Lambon Ralph, M. A., & Hodges, J. R. 1997b. Determining the impact of
autobiographical experience on ‘meaning’: New insights from investigating sports-related
vocabulary and knowledge in two cases with semantic dementia. Cognitive Neuropsychology,
14, 801–837.
Graham, K. S., Murre, J. M. J., & Hodges, J. R. in press. Episodic memory in semantic
dementia: A computational approach based on the TraceLink model. In J. Reggia, E.
Ruppin, & D. Glanzman (Eds.), Neural modelling in brain disorders. Oxford: Elsevier.
Hillis, A. E., Rapp, B., & Caramazza, A. 1995. Constraining claims about theories of semantic
memory: More on unitary versus multiple semantics. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 12,
175–186.
Hodges, J. R., Garrard, P., & Patterson, K. 1998. Semantic dementia. In A. Kertesz & D. G.
Munoz (Eds.), Pick’s disease and Pick complex. New York: Wylie–Liss.
Hodges, J. R., & Graham, K. S. 1998. A reversal of the temporal gradient for famous person
knowledge in semantic dementia: Implications for the neural organisation of long-term
memory. Neuropsychologia, 36, 803–825.
Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K. 1995. Is semantic memory consistently impaired early in the
course of Alzheimer’s disease? Neuroanatomical and diagnostic implications. Neuropsychologia,
33, 441–459.
Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K. 1996. Nonfluent progressive aphasia and semantic dementia: A
comparative neuropsychological study. Journal of the International Neuropsychological
Society, 2, 511–524.
Hodges, J. R., Patterson, K., Graham, N., & Dawson, K. 1996. Naming and knowing in dementia
of Alzheimer’s type. Brain and Language, 54, 302–325.
Hodges, J. R., Patterson, K., Oxbury, S., & Funnell, E. 1992. Semantic dementia: Progressive
fluent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy. Brain, 115, 1783–1806.
Hodges, J. R., Patterson, K., & Tyler, L. K. 1994. Loss of semantic memory: Implications
for the modularity of mind. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 11, 505–542.
Howard, D. 1995. Lexical anomia: Or the case of the missing lexical entries. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology Human Experimental Psychology, 48a, 999–1023.
Howard, D., & Patterson, K. 1992. The Pyramids and Palm Trees Test: A test of semantic
access from words and pictures. Bury St. Edmunds: Thames Valley Test Company.
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 333
Knott, R., Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. R. 1997. Lexical and semantic binding effects in shortterm
memory: Evidence from semantic memory Cognitive Neuropsychology, 8, 1165–
1216.
Laiacona, M., Barbarotto, R., & Capitani, E. 1993. Perceptual and associative knowledge in
category specific impairment of semantic memory: A study of two cases. Cortex, 29,
727–740.
Laiacona, M., Capitani, E., & Barbarotto, R. 1997. Semantic category dissociations: A longitudinal
study of two cases. Cortex, 33, 441–461.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Graham, K. S., Ellis, A. W., & Hodges, J. R. 1998a. Naming in semantic
dementia—What matters? Neuropsychologia, 36, 775–784.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Howard, D., Nightingale, G., & Ellis, A. W. 1998b. Are living and
non-living category-specific deficits causally linked to impaired perceptual or associative
knowledge? Evidence from a category-specific double dissociation. Neurocase, 4, 311–
338.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Patterson, K., & Hodges, J. R. 1997. The relationship between naming
and semantic knowledge for different categories in dementia of Alzheimer’s type. Neuropsychologia,
35, 1251–1260.
Lauro-Grotto, R., Piccini, C., & Shallice, T. 1997. Modality-specific operations in semantic
dementia. Cortex, 33, 593–622.
Marshall, J., Pring, T., Chiat, S., & Robson, J. 1996. Calling a salad a federation: An investigation
of semantic jargon. Part 1—Nouns. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 9, 237–250.
McCarthy, R. A., & Warrington, E. K. 1986. Visual associative agnosia: A clinico-anatomical
study of a single case. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 49, 1233–
1240.
McCarthy, R. A., & Warrington, E. K. 1988. Evidence for modality-specific meaning systems
in the brain. Nature, 334, 428–430.
McKenna, P., & Warrington, E. K. 1980. A test for nominal dysphasia. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 43, 781–788.
Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A. 1995. The visual brain in action. Oxford: Oxford Univ.
Press.
Morton, J. 1985. Naming. In S. Newman & R. Epstein (Eds.), Current perspectives in dysphasia.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Moss, H. E., Tyler, L. K., Durrant-Peatfield, M., & Bunn, E. M. 1998. Two eyes of a seethrough:
Impaired and intact semantic knowledge in a case of selective deficit for living
things. Neurocase, 4, 291–310.
Moss, H. E., Tyler, L. K., Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K. 1995. Exploring the loss of semantic
memory in semantic dementia: Evidence from a primed monitoring study. Neuropsychology,
9, 16–26.
Mummery, C. J., Patterson, K., Hodges, J. R., & Price, C. J. 1998. Functional neuroanatomy
of the semantic system: Divisible by what? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 766–
777.
Mummery, C. J., Patterson, K., Wise, R. J. S., Price, C. J., & Hodges, J. R. 1999. Disrupted
temporal lobe connections in semantic dementia. Brain, 122, 61–73.
Osterrieth, P. 1944. Le test de copie d’une figure complexe. Archives de Psychologie, 30,
205–550.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., & Patterson, K. 1996. Understanding normal
and impaired word reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular domains. Psychological
Review, 103, 56–115.
334 LAMBON RALPH ET AL.
Plaut, D. C., & Shallice, T. 1993. Deep dyslexia: A case study of connectionist neuropsychology.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10, 377–500.
Rapp, B. C., Hillis, A. E., & Caramazza, A. 1993. The role of representations in cognitive
theory: More on multiple semantics and the agnosias. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10,
235–249.
Raven, J. C. 1962. Coloured progressive matrices: Sets A, AB, B. London: HK Lewis.
Riddoch, M. J., & Humphreys, G. W. 1992. The Birmingham Object Recognition Battery
(BORB). Hove: Erlbaum.
Riddoch, M. J., Humphreys, G. W., Coltheart, M., & Funnell, E. 1988. Semantic systems or
system? Neuropsychological evidence re-examined. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5, 3–
25.
Saffran, E. M., & Schwartz, M. F. 1994. Of cabbages and things: Semantic memory from a
neuropsychological perspective—A tutorial review. Attention and Performance, 25, 507–
536.
Saffran, E. M., & Sholl, A. in press. Clues to the functional and neural architecture of word
meaning. In P. Hagoort & C. Brown (Eds.), Neurocognition of language. Oxford: Oxford
Univ. Press.
Samson, D., De Wilde, V., & Pillon, A. 1998. Impaired knowledge of visual and nonvisual
attributes in a patient with a naming impairment for living entities: A case of a true
category-specific deficit. Neurocase, 4, 273–290.
Schwartz, M. F., Marin, O. S. M., & Saffran, E. M. 1979. Dissociations of language function
in dementia: A case study. Brain and Language, 7, 277–306.
Shallice, T. 1988a. From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press.
Shallice, T. 1988b. Specialisation within the semantic system. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5,
133–142.
Shallice, T. 1993. Multiple semantics: Whose confusions? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 10,
251–261.
Sirigu, A., Duhamel, J.-R., & Poncet, M. 1991. The role of sensorimotor experience in object
recognition. Brain, 1991, 2555–2573.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. 1980. A standardised set of 260 pictures: Norms for name
agreement, image agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 174–215.
Snowden, J. S., Goulding, P. J., & Neary, D. 1989. Semantic dementia: A form of circumscribed
cerebral atrophy. Behavioural Neurology, 2, 167–182.
Srinivas, K., Breedin, S. D., Coslett, H. B., & Saffran, E. M. 1997. Intact perceptual priming
in a patient with damage to the anterior inferior temporal lobes. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 9, 490–511.
Tanabe, H., Nakagawa, Y., Ikeda, M., Hashimoto, M., Yamada, N., Kazui, H., Nishikawa,
T., & Okuda, J. 1996. Selective loss of semantic memory for words. In K. Ishikawa,
J. L. McGaugh, & H. Sakata (Eds.), Brain Processes and Memory. B. V.: Elsevier.
Tyler, L. K., & Moss, H. E. 1997. Functional properties of concepts: Studies of normal and
brain-damaged patients. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14, 511–545.
Tyler, L. K., & Moss, H. E. 1998. Going, going, gone? . . . Implicit and explicit tests of
conceptual knowledge in longitudinal study of semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia,
36, 1313–1323.
Ungerleider, L. G., & Mishkin, M. 1982. Two cortical visual systems. In D. J. Ingle, M. A.
Goodale, & R. J. W. Mansfield (Eds.), Analysis of visual behaviour. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
IS A PICTURE WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS? 335
Vandenberghe, R., Price, C., Wise, R., Josephs, O., & Frackowiak, R. S. J. 1996. Functionalanatomy
of a common semantic system for words and pictures. Nature, 383, 254–256.
Warrington, E. K. 1975. The selective impairment of semantic memory. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 27, 635–657.
Warrington, E. K., & McCarthy, R. 1987. Categories of knowledge: Further fractionations
and an attempted integration. Brain, 110, 1273–1296.
Warrington, E. K., & McCarthy, R. A. 1994. Multiple meaning systems in the brain: A case
for visual semantics. Neuropsychologia, 32, 1465–1473.
Warrington, E. K., & Shallice, T. 1984. Category specific semantic impairments. Brain, 107,
829–854.