Preface xi
Acknowledgments xv
PART ONE What Is Business Statistics? 1
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 7
Doing Without Statistics 7
Statistics are Cheap 8
Lying with Statistics 9
So Many Choices, So Little Time 10
Math and Mystery 11
Where Is Statistics Used? 12
The Statistical Study 16
The Statistical Report 17
Quiz 17
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 20
Measurement 21
Error 30
Sampling 36
Analysis 42
Quiz 45
v
For more information about this title, click here
CHAPTER 3 What Is Probability? 47
How Probability Fits in With Statistics 48
Measuring Likelihoods 48
Three Types of Probability 52
Using Probability for Statistics 62
The Laws of Probability 83
Quiz 84
Exam for Part One 87
PART TWO Preparing a Statistical Report 93
CHAPTER 4 What Is a Statistical Study? 95
Why Do a Study? 97
Why Use Statistics? 97
What Are the Key Steps in a
Statistical Study? 99
Planning a Study 101
What Are Data and Why Do We Need Them? 102
Gathering Data: Where and
How to Get Data 104
Writing a Statistical Report for Business 107
Reading a Statistical Report 107
Quiz 109
CHAPTER 5 Planning a Statistical Study 111
Determining Plan Objectives 113
Defining the Research Questions 113
Assessing the Practicality of the Study 116
Preparing the Data Collection Plan 116
Planning Data Analysis 118
Planning the Preparation of the
Statistical Report 119
Writing Up the Plan 120
Quiz 123
vi CONTENTS
CHAPTER 6 Getting the Data 125
Stealing Statistics: Pros and Cons 125
Someone Else’s Data: Pros and Cons 127
Doing it Yourself: Pros and Cons 129
Survey Data 132
Experimental and Quasi-Experimental
Data 137
Quiz 138
CHAPTER 7 Statistics Without Numbers:
Graphs and Charts 140
When to Use Pictures: Clarity and
Precision 141
Parts is Parts: The Pie Chart 142
Compare and Contrast: The Bar Chart 144
Change: The Line Graph 152
Comparing Two Variables: The Scatter
Plot 154
Don’t Get Stuck in a Rut: Other
Types of Figures 156
Do’s and Don’ts: Best Practices in
Statistical Graphics 160
Quiz 171
CHAPTER 8 Common Statistical Measures 173
Fundamental Measures 174
Descriptive Statistics: Characterizing
Distributions 179
Measuring Measurement 195
Quiz 205
CHAPTER 9 A Difference That Makes a Difference.
When Do Statistics Mean Something? 208
The Scientific Approach 209
CONTENTS vii
Hypothesis Testing 212
Statistical Significance In Business 227
Quiz 236
CHAPTER 10 Reporting the Results 238
Three Contexts for Decision Support 238
Good Reports and Presentations 239
Reports and Presentations Before the
Decision 244
Reports and Presentations After the
Decision 245
Advertisements and Sales Tools Using
Statistics 246
Quiz 247
Exam for Part Two 249
PART THREE Statistical Inference: Basic Procedures 255
CHAPTER 11 Estimation: Summarizing Data About
One Variable 257
Basic Principles of Estimation 258
Single-Sample Inferences: Using
Estimates to Make Inferences 262
CHAPTER 12 Correlation and Regression 267
Relations Between Variables 268
Regression Analysis: The Measured
and the Unmeasured 273
Multiple Regression 281
CHAPTER 13 Group Differences: Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) and Designed Experiments 285
Making Sense of Experiments With Groups 286
Group Tests 289
Fun With ANOVA 295
viii CONTENTS
CHAPTER 14 Nonparametric Statistics 298
Problems With Populations 298
A Solution: Sturdy Statistics 299
Popular Nonparametric Tests 301
Exam for Part Three 312
PART FOUR Making Business Decisions 317
CHAPTER 15 Creating Surveys 319
Planning and Design 319
Conducting the Survey 324
Interpreting and Reporting the Results 325
Quiz 325
CHAPTER 16 Forecasting 327
The Future Is Good To Know 328
The Measurement Model 329
Descriptive Statistics 335
Inferential Statistics 337
Cautions About Forecasting 340
Quiz 344
CHAPTER 17 Quality Management 346
Key Quality Concepts 346
Root Cause Analysis 348
Statistical Process Control 353
Quiz 358
APPENDIX A Basic Math for Statistics 361
APPENDIX B Answers to Quizzes and Exams 364
APPENDIX C Resources for Learning 366
Index 369
CONTENTS ix
This page intentionally left blank
PREFACE
Many people find statistics challenging, but most statistics professors do not.
As a result, it is sometimes hard for our professors and the authors of statistics
textbooks to make statistics clear and practical for business students,
managers, and executives. Business Statistics Demystified fills that gap. We
begin slowly, introducing statistical concepts without mathematics. We
build step by step, from defining statistics in Part One providing the basic
tools for creating and understanding statistical reports in Part Two, introducing
the statistical measures commonly—and some not-so-commonly—used
in business in Part Three and, in Part Four, applying statistics to practical
business situations with forecasting, quality management, and more.
Our approach is to focus on understanding statistics and how to use it to
support business decisions. The math comes in when it is needed. In fact,
most of the math in statistics is done by computers now, anyway. When the
ideas are clear, the math will follow fairly easily.
Business Statistics Demystified is for you if:
. You are in a business statistics class, and you find it challenging.
Whether you just can’t seem to think like a statistician, or it’s the
math, or you’re not sure what the problem is, the answer is here. We
take you through all the rough spots step by step.
. You are in a business statistics class, and you want to excel. You will
learn how to use statistics in real business situations, and how to
prepare top-quality statistical reports for your assignments.
. You are studying business statistics to move up the career ladder. We
show you where statistics can—and can’t—be applied in practical
business situations.
xi
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.
We wrote this book so that you would be able to apply statistics in a
practical way. When you have finished with this book, you will find that
you can:
. Understand and evaluate statistical reports
. Help perform statistical studies and author statistical reports
. Detect problems and limitations in statistical studies
. Select the correct statistical measures and techniques for making most
basic statistical decisions
. Understand how to select the appropriate statistical techniques for
making common business decisions
. Be familiar with statistical tools used in the most common areas of
business
. Avoid all the most common errors in working with and presenting
statistics
. Present effective statistical reports that support business decisions
HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF THIS BOOK
If you are just learning statistics, we recommend you start at the beginning,
and work your way through. We demystify the things that other books jump
over too quickly, leaving your head spinning. In fact, you might read
Part One before you look at other books, so you can avoid getting mystified
in the first place!
If you are comfortable with statistics, skim Part One and see if it clarifies
some of the vague ideas we can all carry around without knowing it, and then
use the rest of the book as you see fit. If you want to focus on performing
statistical studies and preparing statistical reports—or even just reading
them—then Part Two will be a big help. Part Three is a useful reference for
the more advanced statistical techniques used in business. And Part Four
makes the link between statistics and business interesting and exciting.
SIDEBARS FOR EASY LEARNING
In Business Statistics Demystified, we want to make it easy for you to learn
and to find what you need to know. So we’ve created several different types
of sidebars that will introduce key ideas. Here they are:
. Tips on Terms. Definitions and crucial terminology.
. Critical Cautions. Something statistical you must do—or must avoid—
to get things right.
xii PREFACE
. Study Review. Key points for exam preparation.
. Survival Strategies. What to do on the job.
. Handy Hints. Other practical advice.
. Fun Facts. A little bit on the lighter side.
. Case Studies. Real-world examples that teach what works—and what
doesn’t.
. Bio Bites. The authors’ experience—if you learn from what we’ve been
through, your statistical work will be easier.
. Quick Quotes. Bits of wisdom from folks much smarter than we are.
PREFACE xiii
This page intentionally left blank
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our first thanks go to Scott Hoffheiser, our administrative assistant, whose
understanding of statistics, proofreading skill, and skills with Microsoft
Equation Editor and in creating graphs with Microsoft Excel were indispensable,
and are well illustrated in Business Statistics Demystified. If you
like the quizzes, then you will be as grateful as we are to Anna Romero,
Ph.D. Professor Mark Appelbaum, currently of the University of
California, San Diego, was the first person to be successful in teaching me
(Steve) statistics and deserves special thanks for that. Our Dad, Bernie
Kemp, a now retired professor of economics, offered some wonderful suggestions,
which improved the book immensely. More importantly, he taught us
about numbers before we learned them in school. Most importantly, we
learned all about the uncertainty of the world and the limits of measurement
at his knee. Our Mom, Edie Kemp, provided support, which allowed us the
time to write, always the sine qua non of any book, as did Kris Lindbeck,
Sid’s wife.
Dave Eckerman and Peter Ornstein, both of the Psychology Department
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, have supported the first
author’s affiliation with that institution, whose extensive research resources
were invaluable in the preparation of the manuscript of the book.
xv
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.
This page intentionally left blank
PART ONE
What Is Business
Statistics?
People in business want to make good decisions and implement them. When
we do, our businesses flourish, we solve problems, we make money, we
succeed in developing new opportunities, etc. In the work of implementation—
executing business plans—statistics can’t play much of a part. But in
the making of good decisions—in planning, choosing among options, finding
out what our customers, our manufacturing plants, or our staff are thinking
and doing, and controlling the work of people and machinery—business
people need all the help we can get. And statistics can help a great deal.
To understand how statistics can help business people understand the
world, it is important to see the bigger picture, of which business statistics is a
part. This is illustrated in Fig. I-1.
Let’s start at the top. Philosophy is the field that asks, and tries to answer,
questions that folks in other fields take for granted. These include questions
like: What is business? What is mathematics? How can we relate mathematics
to science, engineering, and statistics? We left out the arrows because
1
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.
philosophy takes every other field as its field of study. And the first piece of
good news is that, while the authors of a good statistics book may need to
worry about philosophy, you don’t.
Next, mathematics can’t help business directly, because it is a pure
abstraction, and business people want to understand, make decisions about,
work in, and change the real world. Statistics brings the power of
mathematics to the real world by gathering real-world data and applying
mathematics to them. The second piece of good news is that, while statistics
often uses mathematics, statisticians often don’t need to. In the practical
world of business statistics, we leave the math (or at least the calculations) to
Observation,
measurement,
and sampling
Tools
Formulas
Observation,
analysis,
and interpretation
Tools
Formulas
Interpretation
Justification
of Confidence
Fig. I-1. Business statistics, mathematics, probability, models, and the real world.
2 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
computers. But we do need to understand enough math to:
. understand the equations in statistical tools,
. know which equations to use when, and
. pass the exams in our statistics classes.
QUICK QUOTE
All real statistics can be done on an empty beach drawing in the sand with a stick.
The rest is just calculation.
John Tukey
The next point is key: statistics is not a part of mathematics. It is its own
field, its own discipline, independent of math or other fields. But it does make
use of mathematics. And it has important links to science, engineering,
business models of the world, and probability.
KEY POINT
Statistics Stands by Itself
Statistics is not part of mathematics, probability, business, science, or engineering. It
stands independent of the others. At the same time, statistics does make use of, and
relate to, mathematics, probability, science, and engineering. And it can help
business people make good decisions.
A fundamental problem of business—perhaps the fundamental problem of
life—is that we would love to know exactly how the world works and know
everything that is going on, but we can’t. Instead, we have only partial
information—all too often inaccurate information—about what is going on
in the real world. We also have a bunch of guesses—often called theories, but
we will call them models—about how the real world works. The guesses we
use in business often come from experts in science, engineering, the social
sciences, and business theory.
When business executives turn to experts for help in making decisions, we
often run into a problem. We understand that the experts know their stuff.
But what if their whole model is wrong? The most we can give to anyone
coming to us with a model of how the world works—a business model, a
PART ONE What Is Business Statistics? 3
scientific model, a social model, or an engineering model—is this: If your
model is right, then your advice will improve my chances of getting me to the
right decision. But what if your model is wrong?
In this, statistics stands apart from other fields. Engineering, science, the
social sciences, and business models all rely on being right about how the
world works. Statistics does not. Statistics relies on only one basic
assumption: that the future is likely to resemble the past, in general. If we
accept that principle, we can use statistics to understand the world, even if we
have no model about how the world works, or no model we are confident
enough to use.
Part of making good decisions is avoiding assumptions that might be
wrong. In using statistics, we are avoiding the assumption that a particular
idea of how the world works—how customers look at advertisements, or how
vendors deliver their goods—is true. We are relying on more general, more
proven principles.
But we can’t use statistics for every business decision. And Business
Statistics Demystified will show you how to know when statistics can help
with business decisions, how to use good statistics, and how to spot and
avoid bad statistical methods and unreliable statements backed up with a lot
of good-sounding statistics. Also, parts of statistical theory, especially those
regarding the significance of statistical results, were invented for statistics in
its relationship to science. Determining what statistical results mean for
business is very different from deciding what statistical results are important
for science, and we will demystify that, as well.
Statistics helps business in two basic ways. The first is called descriptive
statistics, and it tells us some useful things about what is going on in the data
we have about the world. The second is called inferential statistics, and it
helps us know about things we can’t affordably measure and count, and
about what is likely to happen if we make a particular decision.
We open Business Statistics Demystified with three chapters that lay a
foundation for the rest of the book. Chapter 1 ‘‘Statistics for Business’’
expands on and clarifies the issues we have raised here: What is statistics, and
how does it help us make business decisions? We also explore the basis of
statistics, and explain why knowing how to do bad statistics is essential to not
being fooled by them, and also for doing good statistics.
In Chapter 2 ‘‘What Is Statistics?’’ you will learn the basic elements and
terms of statistics: Measurement, error, sampling, and analyzing. In Chapter 3
‘‘What Is Probability?’’ we briefly turn away from statistics to introduce a
related, but separate field, probability. Probability and statistics seem similar.
Both apply mathematics to the real world. Both try to tell us what we are
likely to find in the real world, or what is likely to happen if we make a
4 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
certain decision. But there is a fundamental difference. Probability is a way of
relating models to the real world and statistics is a way of finding out about
the world without models. We will then distinguish probability from statistics.
Finally, we will also show how the two work together to help us have
confidence in our methods and decisions.
When we make the right decisions, and have confidence in them, it is easier
to follow through on them. And when we make the right decision and follow
through, we solve problems and succeed.
PART ONE What Is Business Statistics? 5
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER
1
Statistics for
Business
Statistics is the use of numbers to provide general descriptions of the world.
And business is, well, business. In business, knowing about the world can be
very useful, particularly when it comes to making decisions. Statistics is an
excellent way to get information about the world. Here, we define business
statistics as the use of statistics to help make business decisions.
In this chapter, we will learn what statistics is for and how it ties into
business. We will discuss generally what statistics can and cannot do. There
will be no math and almost no technical terminology in this chapter (there will
be plenty of time for that later). For now, we need to understand the basics.
Doing Without Statistics
Statistics is like anything else in business. It should be used only if it is
worthwhile. Using statistics takes time, effort, and resources. Statistics for its
own sake just lowers profits by increasing expenses. It is extremely important
to recognize when and where statistics will aid in a business decision.
7
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.
Business decisions, big and small, get made every day without statistics.
The very smallest decisions will almost never benefit from statistics. What
restaurant to take our client to for lunch is probably a decision best made
without statistical assistance. There are many reasons not to use statistics for
bigger decisions as well. Statistics is one of the most effective ways to convert
specific facts about the world into useful information, but statistics cannot
improve the quality of the original facts. If we can’t get the right facts,
statistics will just make the wrong facts look snazzy and mathematical and
trustworthy. In that case, statistics may make us even worse-off than if we
hadn’t used them at all. It is vital to understand what facts are needed in
order to make a good decision before we use statistics, and even before we
decide what statistics to use.
KEY POINT
Facts First!
For example, if you are planning to take a foreign business guest to an excellent
restaurant, you might think it’s a good idea to pick the best restaurant in Chicago.
Looking at customer surveys, that’s likely to be a steak house.
But the more relevant information might be the fact that your guest is a
vegetarian.
The lesson: Decide what’s important, get the right facts, and then do statistics if
they help.
Even if the facts are right, there may not be enough of them to help us
make our decision. If so, the general information we get from statistics will
not be precise or accurate enough for our needs. In statistics, imprecision and
inaccuracy are called error. Error is one of the most important aspects of
statistics. One of the most remarkable things about statistics is that we can
use statistics to tell us how much error our statistics have. This means that
sometimes we can use statistics to find out when not to use statistics.
Statistics are Cheap
Is statistics overused or underused in business? It is hard to say. Some
business decisions are not made using statistics and some business decisions
should not be. But deciding when to use statistics is often not easy. Many
business decisions that could use statistical information are made without
statistics and many business decisions that shouldn’t use statistics are made
using statistics. It is probably fair to say that there are types of decisions and
8 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
areas of business where statistics are underused and others where they are
overused.
Things that lead to the underuse of statistics are:
. lack of statistical knowledge on the part of the business people
. mistaken assumptions about how complicated or difficult to use or
costly statistics can be
. the time pressure to make business decisions
. a failure to set up statistical systems in advance of decision making
Your decision to learn about statistics will help you avoid the underuse of
statistics and Business Statistics Demystified will help you do that.
Things that lead to the overuse of statistics are:
. requirements made by bosses, standards, organizations, and legal
authorities that fail to recognize the limitations of statistics
. failures by decision makers to determine the value of statistics as part
of their analysis
. a poor understanding of the limits of the available facts or the statistical
techniques useful for converting those facts into information
. a desire to justify a decision with the appearance of a statistical analysis
Learning about statistics means more than learning what statistics is and
what it can do. It means learning about how numbers link up to the world
and about the limits of what information can be extracted. This is what it
means to think statistically. Far more important than learning about the
specific techniques of statistics is learning how to think statistically about real
business problems. This book will help you do both.
Lying with Statistics
There is a wonderful book by Huff and Geis (1954) called How to Lie with
Statistics. In clear and simple terms, it shows how statistics can be used to
misinform, rather than inform. It also provides wonderful examples about
how to think statistically about problems and about how to read statistical
information critically. (If How to Lie with Statistics covered all of basic
statistics and was focused on business, there might be no need for this book!)
The real importance of knowing how to lie with statistics is that it is the best
way to learn that careful, sound judgment is vital in making statistics work
for us while making business decisions. Identifying a problem and applying
the formulas without understanding the subtleties of how to apply statistics
to business situations is as likely to hurt our decision making as it is to help it.
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 9
KEY POINT
97% Fat-Free
The term fat-free on food labels is an excellent example of what we mean by lying
with statistics. It would be easy to think that 97% fat-free meant that 97% of the
original fat had been removed. Not at all. It means that 3% of the milk is fat. So
97% fat-free just means ‘‘3% fat.’’ But how well would that sell?
There are two lessons here: First, we can only build good statistics if we gather
and understand all the relevant numbers. Second, when we read statistical reports—
on our job or in the newspaper—we should be cautious about incomplete
measurements and undefined terms.
Each and every statistical measure and statistical technique have their own
strengths and limitations. The key to making statistics work for us is to learn
those strengths and limitations and to choose the right statistics for the
situation (or to choose not to use statistics at all when statistics cannot help).
Throughout this book, we will learn about each statistical measure and
technique in terms of what it can and cannot do in different business
situations, with respect to different business problems, for making different
business decisions. (We will also slip in the occasional fun example of how
statistics get misused in business.)
So Many Choices, So Little Time
One feature of statistics is the enormous number of widely different techniques
available. It is impossible to list them all, because as we write the
list, statisticians are inventing new ones. In introducing statistics, we focus
our attention on the most common and useful statistical methods. However,
as consumers of statistics and statistical information, we need to know
that there are lots more out there. Most often, when we need more
complicated and sophisticated statistics, we will have to go to an expert to get
them, but we will still have to use our best statistical judgment to make sure
that they are being used correctly.
Even when we are choosing from basic statistical methods to help with our
business decisions, we will need to understand how they work in order to
make good use of them. Instead of just memorizing the fact that medians
should be used in measuring salaries and means should be used in measuring
monthly sales, we need to know what information the median gives us that
10 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
the mean does not, and vice versa. That way, when a new problem shows up
in our business, we will know what statistic to use, even if it wasn’t on a list
in our statistics book.
When we get past basic statistical measures and onto basic statistical
techniques, we will learn about statistical assumptions. Each statistical
technique has situations in which it is guaranteed to work (more or less).
These situations are described in terms of assumptions about how the
numbers look. When the situation we face is different than that described by
the assumptions, we say that the assumptions do not hold. It may still work to
use the statistical technique when some of the assumptions do not hold, but
we have lost our guarantee. If there is another statistical technique that we
can use, which has assumptions closer to the situation we are actually in, then
we should consider using that technique instead.
CRITICAL CAUTION
Whenever a statistical technique is taught, the assumptions of that technique are
presented. Because the assumptions are key to knowing when to apply one technique
instead of another, it is vitally important to learn the assumptions along with the
technique.
One very nice thing about statistical assumptions is that, because they are
written in terms of how the numbers look, we can use statistics to decide
whether the statistical assumptions hold. Not only will statistics help us with
our business decisions, but we will find that statistics can often help us with
the statistical decisions that we need to make on the way to making our
business decisions.
In the end, it is just as important to know how to match the type of
statistics we use to the business decision at hand as it is to know how to use
each type of statistic. This is why every statistics book spends so much time
on assumptions, as will we.
Math and Mystery
Now comes the scary part: math. As we all have heard over and over again,
mathematics has become part of our everyday life. (When I was a kid,
computers were big things in far-off places, so we didn’t believe it much. Now
that computers are everywhere, most people see how math has taken over our
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 11
world.) Up to a certain point, the more you understand math, the better off
you are. And this is true in business as well.
But math is only a part of our world when it does something useful. Most
of the mathematics that a mathematician worries about won’t bother us in
our world, even in the world of business. Even understanding all the math
won’t be especially helpful if we don’t know how to apply it. Statistics is a
very odd subject, in a way, because it works with both abstract things like
math, and with the very real things in the world that we want to know about.
The key to understanding statistics is not in understanding the mathematics,
but in understanding how the mathematics is tied to the world. The equations
are things you can look up in a book (unless you are taking an exam!) or
select off a menu in a spreadsheet. Once you understand how statistics links
up numbers to the world, the equations will be easy to use.
Of course, this does not mean that you can get by without the algebra
required for this book (and probably for your statistics class). You need to
understand what a constant is, what a variable is, what an equation is, etc. If
you are unsure of these things, we have provided Appendix A with some of
the basic definitions from algebra.
Where Is Statistics Used?
At the start of this chapter, we defined business statistics as statistics used to
help with business decisions. In business, decisions are everywhere, little ones,
big ones, trivial ones, important ones, and critical ones. As the quotation by
Abraham Lincoln suggests, the more we know about what is going on, the
more likely we are to make the right decision. In the ideal, if we knew
specifics about the future outcome of our decision, we would never make a
mistake. Until our boss buys us a crystal ball so that we can see into the
future, we will have to rely on using information about the present.
QUICK QUOTE
If we could first know where we are, and whither we are tending, we could better
judge what to do, and how to do it.
Abraham Lincoln
But what sort of information about the present will help us make our
decision? Even if we know everything about what is going on right now, how
do we apply that information to making our decision? The simple answer is
12 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
that we need to look at the outcomes of similar decisions made previously in
similar circumstances. We cannot know the outcome of our present decision,
but we can hope that the outcomes of similar decisions will be similar.
The central notion of all statistics is that similar past events can be used to
predict future events. First and foremost, this assumption explains why we
have defined statistics as the use of numbers to describe general features of
the world. No specific fact will help us, except for the specific future outcome
of our decision, and that is what we can’t know. In general, the more we
know about similar decisions in the past and their results, the better we can
predict the outcome of the present decision. The better we can predict the
outcome of the present decision, the better we can choose among the
alternative courses of action.
FUN FACTS
The statistical notion that past events can be used to predict future ones is derived
from a deeper philosophical notion that the future will be like the past. This is a
central notion to all of Western science. It gives rise to the very famous ‘‘Humean
dilemma’’ named after the philosopher, David Hume, who was the first person to
point out that we cannot have any evidence that the future will be like the past,
except to note that the future has been like the past in the past. And that kind of
logic is what philosophers call a vicious circle.
We discuss this problem more deeply in Chapter 16 ‘‘Forecasting.’’
There are three things we need to know before statistics can be useful for
a business decision. First, we need to be able to characterize the current
decision we face precisely. If the decision is to go with an ad campaign that is
either ‘‘edgy’’ or ‘‘dynamic,’’ we will need to know a lot about what is and
is not an edgy or a dynamic ad campaign before we can determine what
information about past decisions will be useful. If not, our intuition,
unassisted by statistics, may be our best bet. It is also important to be able to
determine what general features of the world will help us make our decision.
Usually, in statistics, we specify what we need to know about the world, by
framing a question about general characteristics of the world as precisely as
possible. And, of course, we don’t need to describe the whole world. In fact,
defining which part of the world we really need to know about is a key step in
deciding how to use statistics to help with our decisions. For example, if we
are predicting future sales, it is more valuable to know if our company’s
specific market is growing than to know if the general economy is improving.
We’ll look at these issues further in Part Four, when we discuss forecasting.
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 13
Second, there needs to be a history of similar situations that we can rely
upon for guidance. Happily, here we are assisted by nature. Wildly
different situations have important features in common that we can make
use of in statistics. The important common elements can be found and
described by abstracting away from the details of the situation, using
numbers. This most important concept of abstraction is very simple and we
have a lot of experience with it. We all learned very early on that, once we
learned to count marbles and pencils we could also count sheep, cars, and
dollars.
When we think about what we’ve done, we realize that we’ve defined a new
practice, counting, and created a new tool for understanding the world, the
count. The number of pennies in a jar or the number of sheep in a flock is not
a specific fact about one specific penny or sheep. It is a general fact about the
contents of the jar or the size of the flock. A count is a statistical measure that
we use to tell us the quantity we have of an item. It is the first and simplest of
what are called descriptive statistics, since it is a statistical measure used to
describe things.
If our general question about the world merely requires a description of
the current situation or of previous similar situations as an answer,
descriptive statistics may be enough. Examples of questions that call for
descriptive statistics are:
. How many married women between 18 and 34 have purchased our
product in the past year?
. How many of our employees rate their work experience as very good
or excellent?
. Which vendor gave us the best price on our key component last
quarter?
. How many units failed quality checks today?
. How many consumers have enough disposable income to purchase our
premier product?
Third, there needs to be a history of similar decisions that we can rely
upon for guidance. While descriptive statistics have been around in some
form since the beginning of civilization and the serious study of statistics
has been around for almost a thousand years, it has been less than a hundred
years since statisticians figured out how to describe entire decisions with
numbers so that techniques useful in making one decision can be applied
to other, similar decisions. The techniques used are at the heart of what is
called inferential statistics, since they help us reason about, or make inferences
from, the data in a way that provides answers, called conclusions, to our
14 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
precisely phrased questions. In general, inferential statistics answers questions
about relations between general facts about the world. The answers are based
not only on relationships in the data, but also on how relationships of that
same character can have an important effect on the consequences of our
decisions.
If our question about the world requires a conclusion about a relationship
as an answer, inferential statistics may be able to tell us, not only if the
relationship is present in the data, but if that relationship is strong enough to
give us confidence that our decision will work out. Examples of questions
that call for inferential statistics are:
. Have men or women purchased more of our product in the past year?
. Do our employees rate their work experience more highly than do our
competitors’ employees?
. Did our lowest priced vendor give us enough of a price break on our
key component last quarter to impact profits?
. Did enough units fail quality checks today to justify a maintenance
call?
. How many consumers have enough disposable income to purchase our
premier product if we lower the price by a specific amount?
TIPS ON TERMS
Descriptive statistics. Statistical methods, measures, or techniques used to summarize
groups of numbers.
Inferential statistics. Statistical methods, measures, or techniques used to make
decisions based groups of numbers by providing answers to specific types of
questions about them.
Using statistics to make decisions in business is both easier and harder
than using statistics in the rest of life. It is easier because so much of a
business situation is already described with numbers. Inventories, accounts,
sales, taxes, and a multitude of other business facts have been described using
numbers since ancient Sumeria, over 4000 years ago. It is harder because, in
business, it is not always easy to say what makes the best decision best. We
may want to increase profits, or market share, or saturation, or stock price,
etc. As we will see in Part Four, it is much easier to use statistics to predict the
immediate outcome of our decision than it is to know if, in the end, it will be
good for business.
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 15
CASE STUDY
Selling to Men and Women
For example, say that we know that more women than men bought our product
during the Christmas season. And we know that, statistically, more women between
18 and 34 bought our product than the competitors’. Does that tell us whether we
should focus our advertising on men or women in the spring? Not necessarily. It
depends on whether we are selling a women’s perfume or a power tool.
If perfume, maybe we should focus on men to buy Valentine’s Day gifts. Or maybe
on women, so they’ll ask their husbands and boyfriends for our perfume by name.
If a power tool, then the Christmas season sales might be gifts. And a spring
advertisement might be better focused on men who will be getting ready for summer
do-it-yourself projects.
The lesson: Statistics may or may not be valuable to business. Common sense
always is. If we use statistics, be sure to use them with some common sense thrown in.
CRITICAL CAUTION
Good statistics is not just a matter of knowing how to pick the techniques and apply
them. Good statistics means knowing what makes for the best outcome and what the
problems are in measuring the situation. Good business statistics demands a good
understanding of business.
The Statistical Study
While statistics can be used on a one-time-only basis to help make a single
business decision, most commonly we find that a statistical study, containing
many statistics, either descriptive, or both descriptive and inferential, is
conducted. The reason for this is that, when many decisions have to be made
for one company, or for one department, or one project, and so forth, the
situations that must be studied to make good choices for each decision may
have a lot in common. A single statistical study can collect and describe a
large amount of information that can be used to help make an even larger
number of decisions. Like anything else, the economies of scale apply to
statistics. It is much cheaper to collect a lot of statistics all at once that may
help with lots of decisions later on than to collect statistics one by one as they
are needed. In fact, as we will see later, both governmental agencies and
16 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
private firms conduct statistical studies containing thousands of statistics
they have no use for, but will be of use (and value) to their customers. We will
have much to say about statistical studies in Part Two.
TIPS ON TERMS
Statistical study. A project using statistics to describe a particular set of circumstances,
to answer a collection of related questions, or to make a collection of
related decisions.
Statistical report. The document presenting the results of a statistical study.
The Statistical Report
No less important than the statistical study is the reporting of the results. Too
often we think of statistics as the collection of the information and the
calculation of the statistical measures. No amount of careful data collection
or clever mathematics will make up for a statistical report that does not make
the circumstances, assumptions, and results of the study clear to the
audience. Statistics that cannot be understood cannot be used. One of the
most important goals of this book is to explain how to read and understand a
statistical report. Another equally important goal is to show how to create a
report that communicates statistics effectively.
The rules for effective communication of statistics include all the rules for
effective communication in general. Presenting numbers clearly is difficult to
begin with, because much of our audience is not going to be comfortable with
them. One solution is to present the numbers pictorially, and different kinds
of numbers require different kinds of pictures, charts, and graphs. In
addition, the numbers that result from statistical calculations are meaningful
only as they relate to the business decisions they are intended to help.
Whether we present them as numbers or as pictures, we need to be able to
present them so that they are effective in serving their specific purpose.
Quiz
1. What do we call the use of numbers to provide general descriptions of the
world to help make business decisions?
(a) Common sense
(b) Statistics
(c) Business statistics
(d) Mathematics
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 17
2. Which of the following does not lead to the underuse of statistics in business?
(a) A failure to set up statistical systems in advance of decision making
(b) A poor understanding of the limits of the available facts or
the statistical techniques useful for converting those facts into information
(c) Lack of statistical knowledge on the part of business persons
(d) The time pressure to make business decisions
3. Which of the following does not lead to the overuse of statistics in business?
(a) Mistaken assumptions about how complicated or difficult to use or
costly statistics can be
(b) Requirements made by bosses and standards organizations and legal
authorities that fail to recognize limitations of statistics
(c) A desire to justify a decision with the appearance of a statistical analysis
(d) Failures by decision makers to determine the value of statistics as a
part of their analysis
4. The key to knowing when to apply one statistical technique instead of
another is to understand the _______ of the techniques.
(a) Error
(b) Statistical assumptions
(c) Mathematics
(d) History
5. Which of the following is not one of the three things that we need to know,
and can know, before statistics can be useful for a business decision?
(a) We need to be able to characterize the current decision we face precisely
(b) There needs to be a history of similar situations that we can rely upon
for guidance
(c) We need to know specific facts about the future outcome of our
decision
(d) There needs to be a history of similar decisions that we can rely upon
for guidance
6. Which of the following is a question that can adequately be answered by
descriptive statistics?
(a) How many units failed quality checks today?
(b) Did our lowest priced vendor give us enough of a price break on our
key component last quarter to impact profits?
(c) Have men or women purchased more of our product in the past year?
(d) Do our employees rate their work experience more highly than do our
competitors’ employees?
18 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
7. Which of the following is a question that can adequately be answered by
inferential statistics?
(a) How many of our employees rate their work experience as very good
or excellent?
(b) How many women between 18 and 34 have purchased our product in
the past year?
(c) Which vendor gave us the best price on our key component last
quarter?
(d) Did enough units fail quality checks today to justify a maintenance
call?
8. What are the advantages of conducting a statistical study over using a statistical
technique on a one-time only basis?
(a) It is cheaper to collect a lot of statistics at once that may help with a
lot of decisions later on than to collect statistics one by one as they are
needed
(b) A single statistical study can collect and describe a large amount of
information that can be used to help make an even larger number
of decisions
(c) Both (a) and (b) are advantages
(d) Neither (a) nor (b) are advantages
9. Which of the following components of a statistical study is not necessary to
present in a statistical report?
(a) The calculations of the statistical techniques used in the statistical
study
(b) The circumstances of the statistical study
(c) The assumptions of the statistical study
(d) The results of the statistical study
10. Which of the following is not an advantage of understanding how to lie with
statistics?
(a) It is the best way to learn that sound judgment is vital to making statistics
work for us
(b) It allows us to create convincing advertising campaigns
(c) It helps us to learn the strengths and limitations of statistical measures
and techniques
(d) It helps us to be cautious about incomplete measurements and undefined
terms in statistical reports
CHAPTER 1 Statistics for Business 19
CHAPTER
2
What Is Statistics?
We have learned what it is that statistics does, now we need to find out a bit
about how it works. How do statistical measures describe general facts about
the world? How do they help us make inferences and decisions? There is a
general logic to how statistics works and that is what we will learn about
here. There will be no equations in this chapter, but we will introduce and
define important technical terms.
SURVIVAL STRATEGIES
Use the definition sidebars and the quizzes to memorize the meaning of the technical
terms in this chapter. The more familiar and comfortable you are with the
terminology, the easier it will be to learn statistics.
This chapter will cover four very important topics: measurement, error,
sampling, and analysis. Sampling, measurement, and analysis are the first
three steps in doing statistics. First, we pick what we are going to measure,
then we measure it, then we calculate the statistics.
20
Copyright © 2004 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.
We have organized the chapter so that the basic concepts are presented
first and the more complicated concepts that require an understanding of the
more basic concepts are presented afterwards. This will allow us to introduce
most of the basic statistical terminology used in the rest of the book. But it
will mean presenting these topics out of order compared to the order they are
done in a statistical study.
These four topics relate to one another as follows: We need to measure the
world to get numbers that tell us the details and then do statistical analysis to
convert those details into general descriptions. In doing both measurement
and analysis, we inevitably encounter error. The practice of statistics involves
both the acknowledgment that error is unavoidable and the use of techniques
to deal with error. Sampling is a key theoretical notion in understanding how
measurements relate to the world and why error is inevitable.
Measurement
Statistics is not a form of mathematics. The most important difference is that
statistics is explicitly tied to the world. That tie is the process of measurement.
WHAT IS MEASUREMENT?
The first and most fundamental concept in statistics is the concept of
measurement. Measurement is the process by which we examine the world
and end up with a description (usually a number) of some aspect of the
world. The results of measurement are specific descriptions of the world.
They are the first step in doing statistics, which results in general descriptions
of the world.
Measurement is a formalized version of observation, which is how we all
find out about the world every day. Measurement is different from ordinary
day-to-day observation because the procedures we use to observe and record
the results are specified so that the observation can be repeated the same way
over and over again.
When we measure someone’s height, we take a look at a person; apply a
specific procedure involving (perhaps) a measuring tape, a pencil, and a part
of the wall; and record the number that results. Let’s suppose that we
measure Judy’s height and that Judy is ‘‘five foot two.’’ We record the
number 62, measured in inches. That number does not tell us a lot about
Judy. It just tells us about one aspect of Judy, her height. In fact, it just tells
us about her height on that one occasion. (A few years earlier, she might have
been shorter.)
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 21
Statistics uses the algebraic devices of variables and values to deal with
measurements mathematically. In statistics, a variable matches up to some
aspect of the thing being measured. In the example above, the variable is
height. The value is the particular number resulting from the measurement on
this occasion. In this case, the value is 62. The person who is the subject of the
measurement has many attributes we could measure and many others we
cannot. Statisticians like to think of subjects (whether they are persons or
companies or business transactions) as being composed of many variables, but
we need to remember that there is always more to the thing being measured
than the measurements taken. A person is more than her height, weight,
intelligence, education level, occupation, hair color, salary, and so forth. Most
importantly, not every variable is important to every purpose on every
occasion. There are always more attributes than there are measurable
variables, and there are always lots more variables that can be measured than
we will measure.
KEY POINT
Vital to any statistical analysis will be determining which variables are relevant to the
business decision at hand. The easiest things to measure are often not the most
useful, and the most important things to know about are often the hardest to
measure. The hardest part of all is to determine what variables will make a difference
in making our business decision.
TIPS ON TERMS
Subject. The individual thing (object or event) being measured. Ordinarily, the subject
has many attributes, some of which are measurable features. A subject may be a single
person, object, or event, or some unified group or institution. So long as a single act of
measuring can be applied to it, it can be considered a single subject. Also called the
‘‘unit of analysis’’ (not to be confused with the unit of measurement, below).
Occasion. The particular occurrence of the particular act of measurement, usually
identified by the combination of the subject and the time the measurement is taken.
Situation. The circumstances surrounding the subject at the time the measurement is
taken. Very often, when multiple measurements of a subject are taken on a single
occasion, measurements characterizing the situation are also taken.
Value. The result of the particular act of measurement. Ordinarily, values
are numbers, but they can also be names or other types of identifiers. Each value
usually describes one aspect or feature of the subject on the occasion of the
measurement.
22 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
Variable. A mathematical abstraction that can take on multiple values. In statistics,
each variable usually corresponds to some measurable feature of the subject. Each
measurement usually results in one value of that variable.
Unit. (Short for unit of measurement. Not to be confused with unit of analysis in the
definition of Subject, above.) For some types of measurement, the particular
standard measure used to define the meaning of the number, one. For instance,
inches, grams, dollars, minutes, etc., are all units of measurement. When we say
something weighs two and a half pounds, we mean that it weighs two and a half
times as much as a standard pound measure.
Data. The collection of values resulting from a group of measurements. Usually,
each value is labeled by variable and subject, with a timestamp to identify the
occasion.
Values that aren’t numbers
In statistics, measurement doesn’t always result in numbers, at least not
numbers in the usual sense. Suppose we are doing an inventory of cars in a car
lot. We want to make a record of the important features of each car: make,
model, year, and color. (Afterwards, we may want to do some statistics, but
that can wait for a later chapter.) Statisticians would refer to the process of
collecting and recording the make, model, year, and color of each car in the lot
as measurement, even though it’s not much like using a tape measure or a
scale, and only in the case of the year does it result in a number. The reason for
this is that, just like measuring height or weight, recording the color of an
automobile results in a description of one feature of that particular car on that
particular occasion. From a statistical point of view, the important thing is not
whether the result is a number, but whether the results, each of which is a
specific description of the world, can be combined to create general
descriptions of the world. In the next section, Levels of Measurement, we
will see how statisticians deal with non-numerical values.
TIPS ON TERMS
Categorical data. Data recorded in non-numerical terms. It is called categorical
because each different value (such as car model or job title) places the subject in a
different category.
Numerical data. Data recorded in numerical terms. There are different types of
numerical data depending upon what numbers the values can be. (See Levels of
Measurement below.)
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 23
What is data?
In Chapter 1 ‘‘Statistics for Business,’’ we didn’t bother too much about
specific definitions. Now, in Chapter 2 ‘‘What is Statistics?’’we are starting to
concern ourselves with more exact terminology. Throughout the remainder
of the book, we will try to be as consistent as possible with our wording,
in order to keep things clear. This does not mean that statisticians and
others who use statistics are always as precise in their wording as we should
be. There is a great deal of confusion about certain terms. Among these are
the notorious terms, data and information.
The values recorded as the result of measurement are data. In order to
distinguish them from other sorts of values, we will use the term data values.
Data are not the facts of the world that were measured. Data are
descriptions, not the things described. Data are not the statistical measures
calculated from the data values, no matter how simple. Often, statisticians
will distinguish between ‘‘raw’’ data and ‘‘cleaned’’ data. The raw data are
the values as originally recorded, before they are examined and edited. As we
will see later on, cleaning data may involve changing it, but does not involve
summarizing it or making inferences from it.
QUICK QUOTE
The map is not the territory. Alfred Korzybski
KEY POINT
Data are specific descriptions. Statistics are general descriptions.
A lot of data is used only indirectly, in support of various statistical
techniques. And data are always subject to error. To the degree that data
contain error, they cannot inform. So data, even though they are information
in the informal computer science sense, contain both information and error in
the more technical, theoretical sense. In statistics, as in information theory, it
is this latter, more technical sense that is most important. Because we will be
using data to make business decisions, we must not forget that data contain
error and that can result in bad decisions. We will have to work hard to control
the error in order to allow the data to inform us and help us make our
decisions.
24 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
FUN FACTS
Facts. You may have noticed that we haven’t defined the term, fact. This is not an
accident. Statisticians rarely use the term in any technical sense. They consider it a
philosopher’s term.
You may have heard the expression, ‘‘It’s a statistical fact!’’ but you probably
didn’t hear that from a statistician. The meaning of this expression is unclear. It
could mean that a statistical description is free from error, which is never the
case. It could mean that the results of a statistical inference are certain, which
is never the case. It probably means that a statistical conclusion is good enough
to base our decisions on, but statisticians prefer to state things more cautiously.
As we mentioned earlier, statistics allows us to say how good our statistical
conclusions are. Statisticians prefer to say how good, rather than just to say,
‘‘good enough.’’
Some philosophers say that facts are the things we can measure, even if we don’t
measure them. Judy is some height or other, even if we don’t know what that height
is. Other (smarter) philosophers say that facts are the results we would get if our
measurements could be free of error, which they can never be. This sort of dispute
seems to be an excellent reason to leave facts to the philosophers.
LEVELS OF MEASUREMENT
You may have noticed that we have cheated a bit. In Chapter 1 ‘‘Statistics for
Business,’’ we defined statistics as the use of numbers to describe general facts
about the world. Now, we have shown how some measurements used in
statistics are not really numbers at all, at least not in the ordinary sense that
we learned about numbers in high school. Statistics uses an expanded notion
of number that includes other sorts of symbol systems. The statistical notion
of number does have its limits. First of all, the non-numeric values used in
statistics must be part of a formal system that can be treated mathematically.
In this section, we will learn about the most common systems used in
statistics. Also, for most statistical techniques used in inferential statistics, the
values will need to be converted into numbers, because inferential statistical
techniques use algebra, which requires numbers.
Let’s start with our example of measuring Judy’s height. We say that that
measurement results in a number, 62. You may remember from high school
algebra (or else from Appendix A) that there is more than just one kind
of number. There are counting numbers, integers, rational numbers, real
numbers, and so forth. We will see that it matters a lot what kind of number
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 25
we use for different kinds of measurements. Height is measured with positive
real numbers. A person can be 5 foot 10 1
2 inches tall, but they can’t be minus
six feet tall, or zero inches tall.
We can see that the type of number used for different kinds of
measurement depends on what different values are possible outcomes of
that type of measurement. The number of items on a receipt is measured as a
positive integer, also known as a counting number. Counting numbers are
non-negative integers because counts don’t include fractions (ordinarily) or
negative values. The number of children in a family could be zero
(technically, a non-negative integer). A bank balance, whether measured in
dollars or in cents, is an integer, because it can be negative as well as positive
(negative if there is an overdraft), but we can’t have fractions of pennies.
Height and weight are positive real numbers. The amount of oil in an oil
tanker could be zero as well as a positive value. So it is measured as a nonnegative
real number. The temperature inside a refrigerated container
could be negative or positive or zero, at least in the Celsius or Fahrenheit
scales.
KEY POINT
In algebra, different types of numbers are defined in terms of the different possible
values included. We choose the type of number for measuring a particular type of
variable when the different possible numeric values match up to the different
measurement outcomes.
But what about measurements that don’t result in numbers? Let’s go
back to our example of making an inventory of cars in a car lot. Suppose
that each parking spot in the car lot is labeled from A to Z. Each car is
either a sedan, convertible, or minivan. Our inventory sheet, shown in
Table 2-1, has one line for each parking spot on the lot. We go through the
lot and write down the model of the car in the line corresponding to its
parking spot.
Car models, like height, or weight, or dollars in a bank account, have
different values for different subjects, but the different values don’t really
correspond well to the different values for different types of numbers. The
closest match is positive integers, by assigning different numbers to different
models, like 1 for sedan, 2 for convertible, and 3 for minivan, but there is a
problem with this as well.
26 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
Integers are different from car models in two ways. The first problem is
minor. There are an infinite number of integers, but only a finite number of
car models. Every bank account may have a finite amount of money in it, but
in principle, there is no limit to how much money can be in our bank account.
That is a good reason to use integers to measure money. Similarly, new car
models, like the minivan, occasionally get invented, so the infinite number of
integers available may be handy.
The other problem is not so minor. The integers possess a very important
property that car models do not: the property of order. Three is bigger than
two, which is bigger than one. There is no relation like ‘‘bigger than’’ that
applies to car models. The best way to see this is to realize that there is no
reason to choose any particular number for any particular car model. Instead
of choosing 1 for sedan, 2 for convertible, and 3 for minivan, we could just
as easily have chosen 1 for convertible, 2 for minivan, and 3 for sedan. Our
choice of which number to use is arbitrary. And arbitrary is not a good thing
when it comes to mathematics.
Statisticians do not classify different types of measurement in terms of
what types of numbers (or non-numerical symbols) are used to record the
results. While it may make a difference to certain types of calculations used
in statistics as to whether the original measurements are integers or real
numbers, this difference does not figure into the classification of measurement.
Instead, they group the different types of numbers in terms of what
Table 2-1 Automobile inventory.
Parking spot Type of car
A sedan
B sedan
C convertible
D sedan
E minivan
F minivan
. . . . . .
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 27
makes a difference in using different statistical techniques. Just as with
statistical assumptions, the different types of measurement, called levels of
measurement, are grounded in the very important issue of how to pick the
right sort of statistical analysis for the problem at hand. The different levels
of measurement are:
. Nominal scale. When the values have no relation of order, the variable
is said to be on a nominal scale. This corresponds to categorical data.
Example: Methods of drug administration: oral, intravenous, intramuscular,
subcutaneous, inhalant, topical, etc.
. Ordinal scale. When the values have a relation of order, but intervals
between adjacent values are not equal, the variable is said to be on an
ordinal scale. This is one type of numerical data. Example: Coin
grades: Poor, Fair, Good, Very Good, Fine, Very Fine, Extra Fine,
Mint, etc.
. Interval scale. When the values have a relation of order, and intervals
between adjacent values are equal, but a value of zero is arbitrary, the
variable is said to be on an interval scale. This is another type of
numerical data. Example: Fahrenheit temperature.
. Ratio scale. When the values have a relation of order, the intervals
between adjacent values are equal, and a value of zero is meaningful,
the variable is said to be on a ratio scale. (A meaningful value of zero
is called a true zero point or origin.) This is the last type of numerical
data. Example: Money, with debt measured as negative numbers.
HANDY HINTS
Some textbooks define ordinal data as a form of categorical data and others as a
form of numerical data. This is because ordinal data has characteristics of each and,
depending on what we do with it, it may be treated as either. An ordinal variable
does classify each individual subject item into one and only one category and, by that
standard, is definitely a type of categorical variable, where the categories have a
specific order. When graphing, ordinal variables are treated as categorical. Because
the positive integers are a very convenient way of showing order (after all, we are
all pretty familiar with the counting order), ordinal variables are very often coded
numerically as positive integers, which is one reason why some textbooks classify
ordinal variables as numerical.
Finally, many statistical inference techniques that require an interval level of
measurement can be and are used effectively with ordinal variables coded as integers.
(This is a good example of using a statistical technique even though one of
its assumptions is violated.) When it comes to inferential statistics, ordinal variables
28 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
are treated as categorical or numerical depending on the technique used. Using a
technique (called a nonparametric technique) designed for categorical variables will
be more accurate, but may be less powerful. (That is, the technique is more likely to fail
to give a definitive answer to our question.) Using a technique (called a parametric
technique) designed for numerical variables is more powerful, but less accurate,
because the fact that the adjacent categories of an ordinal variable are not guaranteed
to be equally far apart violates one of the assumptions of the technique.
There is also a special case of a nominal variable that can be treated as interval.
When a variable can take on only two values, like true and false, or male and female,
or is-a-current-customer and is-not-a-current-customer, the data are nominal because
there is no order to the values. When used in inferential statistics, these variables
can be treated as interval, because, having only two possible values, they only have
one interval between the values. And one interval is always equal to itself. Variables
that can take on only two values are sometimes called binary variables, most often
called dichotomous variables, and when used in the inferential technique known as
regression (see Chapter 12 ‘‘Correlation and Regression’’), as dummy variables.
We will learn more about all of this in Part Three, where we learn about
inferential statistical techniques.
Note that this classification system ignores the differences between
integers, rational numbers, and real numbers. This is because measurements
are always made up to some level of precision. There is always the possibility
that two values are so close that they cannot be distinguished. Two people,
where one is six feet tall and the other is six feet and one millionth of an inch
tall, will both be classified as six feet tall. For the purpose of the analysis,
there is no difference between them. There are no truly continuous numbers
in measurement. Since statistics always begins with measurement, the issue
of continuity is irrelevant in applied statistics.
The only exception to this rule is for measurements that don’t ever come in
fractions. For example, sometimes the general fact of the world we care about
is discovered by counting, as in the number of widgets we produced last
week. The number of widgets is always a whole number. It wouldn’t make
much sense to say we have 45 1
2 widgets on hand. As we will see in later
chapters, statistics handles this problem in two different ways. If the number
of items is large enough, many of our questions can be answered statistically
by pretending that fractional values are possible. For example, if we are
producing between 40 and 50 thousand widgets a month, the fact that the
detailed calculations use fictitious values like 42,893.087 instead of genuinely
possible values like 42,893, doesn’t matter much. If the number of items is
small (usually less than 20), and it is the count that we really care about, there
are separate statistics, called count statistics that are used to answer our
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 29
questions. In order to keep this difference straight, we will have two separate
examples running through the book: one about counting sheep, and one
about measuring people.
As we will see later on in Part Two and Part Three, the issues of possessing
order, equal intervals, and a true zero point are used to classify variables
because they make a difference as to whether different statistical measures
and techniques can be used effectively.
Error
In order to help make decisions, we need to know the true value of the
information that statistics provides. Statistics not only provides information,
but also specific measures of the degree of confidence with which that
information can be trusted. This ability to measure the quality of statistical
information is based on the concept of error.
TIPS ON TERMS
Error. The degree to which a description does not match whatever is being described.
All aspects of statistics are prone to error. No individual measurement is
free from error. Measurement is a human process, limited by our tools and our
senses and our other fallible human capacities. We need to understand
measurement error in order to have the right amount of confidence in our
data. Statistical measures and statistical techniques are also prone to error
of another type. Even when calculated mechanically and exactly from the
data, the information statistics gives us is never an exact description of the
true state of the world. (We will see more of why this is so later on in
this chapter and also in Chapter 3 ‘‘What Is Probability?’’) The statistical
theory of error helps us gauge the right amount of confidence to have in both
our data and our statistics.
CLEANING YOUR DATA
Computers have made statistics much easier to do, but they also make it
much easier to do statistics badly. A very common and very bad mistake is to
collect our data, get it onto the computer, and immediately begin to calculate
statistics. Both during and immediately after collecting data, we must check
our data thoroughly for errors. We will not be able to find every error. There
30 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
are many types of errors we can’t even find in principle. But when a value
is clearly wrong, we need to fix it, or throw it out.
Throwing out a value leaves what is called missing data. Missing data can
be a real problem in statistics, but missing data is better than wrong data.
CRITICAL CAUTION
Missing Data
When there are multiple variables for each subject and one or more values for a
subject are missing, various serious problems can occur with different statistical
measures and techniques. Most computer programs that do statistics will handle
missing data automatically in the simplest way possible, which is usually good
enough. However, when there is lots of missing data, an expert should be consulted
to determine the best way to treat it.
QUICK QUOTE
There is only one good way to deal with missing data. Don’t have any!
Gertrude Cox
How do we know when the data are bad? Often, it’s quite simple. If the
variable is age, then values like ‘‘handle,’’ ‘‘3,’’ and ‘‘123’’ are most likely
errors. Before data are collected, it is important to determine what the
acceptable values will be. These acceptable values are called legal values.
When the variable is non-numerical, it is a good idea to set up specific values
called codes for each legal category. Returning to our example of car models,
we might decide to save time and trouble by just coding the model of each car
using the first letter: C for convertible, S for sedan, and M for minivan. This
is fine, unless we find a coupe on the lot! Always plan for your possible values
before you start collecting data. If you are not sure of all possible values,
have a system ready to add more legal values and validate them.
BIO BITES
Always Almost Always
There are also more indirect ways of finding bad data. The first author used a
multiple-choice questionnaire for his Master’s research. All of the items had answers
rated from ‘‘1’’ to ‘‘5,’’ ranging from ‘‘never,’’ through ‘‘sometimes’’ to ‘‘always.’’
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 31
The answers for one subject were all ‘‘4.’’ Either the computer was broken that day,
or that student was in a hurry and didn’t want to read the questions.
You should also consider how the data will be collected. For instance, if
we are collecting information about cars in the lot on handwritten sheets,
different sorts of errors are likely to occur than if we are collecting that same
information with a hand-held computer. We should plan our codes
accordingly. If we are using the computer, we may want to use the full
names of the colors of the cars in the lot. If we know all the colors in advance,
we could put them on a menu. If we are writing things down by hand, names
can be a problem. The word ‘‘gray’’ can look an awful like the word, ‘‘green.’’
It might be better to assign numbers for each color and list those numbers at
the top of the sheet.
The important lesson is that dealing with error starts even before data
is collected. Careful planning and design is needed to prevent errors from
happening to begin with, and to make errors easier to detect if they do
happen. We cannot prevent errors entirely, but we need to work carefully to
minimize them.
TWO WAYS OF BEING WRONG: VALIDITY AND
RELIABILITY
In later chapters, we will have a great deal more to say about error. For
now, it is important to understand that there are two sorts of error. In
statistics, these two kinds of error are talked about in terms of reliability
and validity. The distinction is related to the difference between precision
and accuracy in physics and engineering, or between precision and clarity
in philosophy.
Suppose I am shooting at a target with a bow and arrow. Over time, I find
that I am hitting the target about 30% of the time, but that almost all of my
misses are falling short of the target. In addition, my arrows are scattered up
and down, right and left. The first step is to realize that I am making two
errors. My precision is low—the arrows are going all over the map. And my
accuracy is low—I am hitting consistently short of the target.
Being a statistician—and perhaps not a good student of archery—I choose
to work on my precision first. I give up on trying to hit the target, and I just
try to get all of my arrows to land in a small area, well short of the target.
Once I have accomplished this, I am making just about the same error with
every shot—I am always in line to the target, and I am always falling short.
32 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
My precision is high—I hit almost the same spot every time. My accuracy is
low—I never hit the target.
At this point, I go to an archery instructor. I say, ‘‘I’ve gotten very good at
getting all the arrows to land in the same spot. But I’m pulling the bow as
hard as I can, and they don’t go far enough.’’ He says, ‘‘Let me watch.’’ I
shoot ten arrows. They all land in the dirt short of the target, in a circle
smaller than the bull’s eye of the target. He laughs, ‘‘You don’t need to pull
any harder. A bow should always be pulled with just enough strength for the
arrowhead to be just past the bow. If you want to hit the target, you have to
shoot farther. To shoot farther, just aim higher.’’ I give it a try, and, with a
little practice, I am hitting the target dead center every time. I’ve corrected
my second error. I’m shooting accurately.
When we are both precise and accurate, we hit the target. In statistics, we
would say that when our measurements are both reliable and valid, we have
reduced both types of error.
HANDY HINTS
Reliability is like precision and validity is like accuracy.
A similar situation happens in golf. If my shots consistently go left, the
golf pro coaches me to improve parts of my swing to reduce hooking.
Likewise for going right and slicing. The coach is working to reduce the bias
in my form and my golf swing. None of the coaching will have anything to do
with aiming at the target. It will all have to do with my form. On the other
hand, if I am missing both left and right, the golf pro will assist me with my
aim, that is, keeping my shots on target, keeping the spread down. The golf
pro is working first to reduce bias, that is, to increase accuracy, so that my
shots are centered around the hole. Secondly, the pro will help me increase
the precision of my golf shot, so I’m not just getting somewhere near the hole,
I’m landing on the green, very near the hole.
For reasons we will see in a moment, in statistics, we have to do things in
the reverse order from what our golf pro did and from what is done in sports
in general. First, we need to get the spread down, increasing the reliability of
our measurements, and then we need to make sure we are pointed in the right
direction, increasing their validity. (This is how our statistician tried to teach
himself archery, and why the archery instructor found it so amusing.)
Reliability is how statisticians talk about minimizing unbiased error,
reducing spread. The value of knowing the reliability of our measurement is
that we don’t have to measure again and again to get it right. If our technique
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 33
for measuring Judy’s height is reliable, whatever height we get the first time
won’t be too far from the height we get the second time or the fifth time or
the fiftieth time (presuming Judy’s real height isn’t changing between
measurements). We can rely on the number we get being independent of
when we measure it. Measuring a person’s height with a tape measure is
pretty reliable; that is, if we measure several times in a row, we’ll probably get
almost the same answer.
Validity is how statisticians talk about minimizing biased error, making
sure things are centered at what they are pointed at. The value of knowing
the validity of our measurement is that we have a good estimate of how faroff
from the truth our measurement can be. If our technique for measuring
Judy’s height is valid, we know that her real height won’t be far from what we
get by measuring. If our measuring technique is not valid, we will need to find
and correct the source of bias if we can, or take it into account and adjust for
it. For example, if our tape measure is cut off at the front end, and starts at
two inches, instead of at zero, every time we measure Judy’s height, our result
is two inches taller than her actual height. Getting a good tape measure
would eliminate the bias.
There is an interesting relationship between reliability and validity. Our
measurements can’t be any more valid than they are reliable. The amount of
reliability is a ceiling on the amount of validity. This is true with precision
and accuracy as well. We can be perfectly precise and very inaccurate. In golf,
if I hook badly, it doesn’t matter if my spread is perfect. If it was, I might find
myself always missing the hole to the left by exactly ten and a half feet.
Strange, but possible. A statistician would say that my shot was biased and
invalid, but highly reliable. A physicist would say that my golf shot was
inaccurate, but precise. And my golf coach would tell me to pretend that the
hole was ten and a half feet further to the right.
On the other hand, we can’t be perfectly accurate and very imprecise. If my
every shot is a hole in one, then the spread of all my shots can’t be wider than
the hole. To have a high degree of accuracy, we need to have both validity
and reliability; we need to be both free of bias and consistently close to the
target. And, if our reliability is low, then we can’t know for sure whether our
validity is good. If we may always be missing by ten feet or so, we can’t find a
bias of less than ten feet with any certainty.
Another way to think about this is in terms of a clock. If our clock runs
with perfect precision and we set it five minutes fast, it will never give us the
correct time, but it will always be exact. It will be exactly five minutes off. On
the other hand, if the clock has poor precision, running faster and slower
from time to time due to a broken regulator, it will only give the correct time
now and then, and we won’t have any way of knowing when it is right. We
34 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
will also have no way to set it to the correct time and keep it there, because it
does not keep time reliably.
In statistics, there is an important difference between reliability and
validity. We can calculate the reliability without even knowing the right
answer! Let’s go back to the golf example. Suppose I take a bunch of shots at
a hole from a place where I can reach the green easily. Now, we go up in the
blimp and take a picture of all of the golf balls from straight overhead.
Suppose we can see the golf balls in the picture, but we can’t see the hole,
because someone removed the flag. If all of the golf balls are close together,
we will know that my shooting was very precise, very reliable, but we won’t
know if I was hooking or slicing or very accurate. Now, someone goes and
puts the flag back in the hole, and the cameraman takes another photo. If the
hole is near the center of the area where the balls were found, then my golf
shot was accurate, free of bias, or, in statistical terms, valid. We need to see
the target to determine accuracy. In assessing validity, like accuracy, we need
to know what the true value is.
When it comes to statistics, obviously, validity is the most important thing.
We want our numbers to be right, or at least clustered around the right
answer. But validity is much harder to measure than reliability. The reason
for this is that we don’t know the world directly; we only find out about the
world by observing it. Recall that measurement is just formalized, repeatable
observation. As a result, we are always comparing one observation to other
observations, one measurement to other measurements. Statistics is like
playing golf, only nobody knows exactly where the hole is. Suppose we
measure Judy’s height over and over again and record the numbers. If all of
the numbers are close together, we know that our technique for measuring
Judy’s height is reliable, but how do we know if it is valid? Maybe, like the
case with the cut-off tape measure, every measurement is almost exactly two
inches off. Unlike the golf balls on the golf course, there is no way of knowing
where the target is. What is Judy’s ‘‘true height’’? The only way we know
Judy’s height at all is to measure it, yet we don’t know if our measuring
technique is giving us the right answer.
BIO BITES
Counting Blood Cells
The co-author of this book worked at a hospital blood lab when he was in high
school. A new machine for counting red blood cells had just been invented. It gave
different results than the old machine. Was it broken? Possibly not. Maybe it was
better than the old machine. If the old machine had a bias, and the new one didn’t,
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 35
then the more accurate results would simply look different—they would look wrong
from the perspective of the old way of doing things.
This is the difficulty of determining validity. Only if we know what is really out
there can we say which method of measurement is more valid. But the only way to
know what is out there is to measure it, one way or another.
The hospital tested the new machine by comparing it against two or three other
methods, and determined it was a better device than the one it was replacing.
The best way to determine validity is to compare the measurements we get
to other measurements taken using an entirely different measurement technique.
We could compare our results measuring Judy’s height with other
measurements taken with a doctor’s scale. When there is only one way to
measure something, the problems of assessing validity become much more
difficult.
Because of these two facts about the relationship between reliability and
validity, in statistics, we always consider reliability first. First of all, reliability
is easier to measure, because we don’t have to know where the target is. This
is the opposite of archery and golf, where we can see the target, and so the
easiest thing is to evaluate each shot with respect to the target. Even more
importantly, because our measurements can be no more valid than they are
reliable, it makes no sense to attempt to check our validity if our measurements
are all over the place. As we said above, low reliability means
we can’t even measure validity very closely. If all our golf shots are flying
into the crowd, it really doesn’t matter if more of them are going to the right
than to the left.
Sampling
We said earlier that, even if our measurements were perfectly free from error,
statistics would still not give us perfectly correct answers. Over and above
measurement error, there is also statistical error. Key to understanding
statistical error is the concept of sampling. Sampling is the process by which
we choose the individuals we will measure. The statistical errors due to
limitations of sampling are known as sampling error.
Statistical conclusions, whether the results of measurements or the results
of an analysis, usually take the form of a single number (the statistic, which is
a general description) that characterizes a group of numbers (the data, which
are specific descriptions). But we may want to know a general fact about
subjects we cannot measure. A good example of this is political polls for
36 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
predicting election results. Before the election, the pollsters call people up and
ask who they are going to vote for. Even if we supposed that everyone knows
who they will vote for, that everyone answers, and that everyone tells the
truth (all of which means that there is no measurement error), the pollsters
could make the wrong prediction. Why? Because there is no way the pollsters
can call every voter. We all see polls on TV when no one called us the night
before. They must have been calling someone else. Suppose the pollsters only
called Republicans that night? Their prediction might be way off.
WHAT IS A POPULATION?
Ideally, if the pollster could call every person who was going to vote (and
there was no measurement error), they could get an exact prediction of the
election results. The group of people who are actually going to vote in the
election is what statisticians call the population. Practically speaking, limits
on time and money usually prevent measuring values from the entire
population, in polls or elsewhere. However, there are problems measuring the
entire population, even in principle. Even the night before the election, some
people might not be sure if they are going to vote. Maybe they are running
late the next morning and decide to skip it. Then, at lunch, a few co-workers
decide to go to vote together and the person who missed voting that morning
gets dragged along. Even someone who is 1000% sure they are going to vote
tomorrow may have an emergency and just not be able to make it. And we
also have to consider someone who plans to vote, does vote, and whose ballot
gets eliminated later on due to damage from a broken voting machine.
CRITICAL CAUTION
A population is a theoretical concept. We can envision it, but, when we get down to
the nitty-gritty details, we can almost never actually measure it exactly.
It is easy, but wrong, to think of a population as something real, that we
can’t measure because of the expense, but there are always limitations. Some
of these limitations might be classified as measurement error, and others
might not, but the result is the same. Suppose we want to evaluate yesterday’s
sales. Then yesterday’s sales are our population. Yesterday’s sales receipts are
how we can measure them. It may look like we have access to the entire
population at low cost, but that is not the case. Yesterday’s sales are past
events. Absent a time machine, we will never see them again directly. The
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 37
sales receipts are just records, measurements of those events. Some may be
lost or have errors. Or a sales receipt from some other day may be marked
with yesterday’s date by mistake.
KEY POINT
The most important thing to understand about populations is the need to specify
them clearly and precisely. As we will see later on, every statistical study begins with
a question about some population. To make that question clear means being clear
about what the population is, who or what is or is not subject of the study, what is
the study question about. A good statistical study begins with a clearly specified
question. The easiest way to turn a good study bad is not to specify the population of
interest clearly and precisely.
In fact, one of the key reasons that different pollsters and pundits had different
predictions for the results of the Iowa Democratic Caucus is that they had different
expectations about who would participate in the caucus, that is, who would be in the
population.
The example of yesterday’s sales receipts is the ideal situation. Absent
measurement error, we have every reason to believe that we have access to
the entire population. Our collection of receipts is what statisticians call a
comprehensive sample. This is one of the best types of sample to have, but, in
practice, it is usually impossible to get. And, when we have it, it may be too
costly to measure every individual in the sample.
TIPS ON TERMS
Population. All of the subjects of interest. The population can be a group of business
transactions, companies, customers, anything we can measure and want to know
about. The details of which subjects are and are not part of our population should be
carefully specified.
Sample. The subjects in the population we actually measure. There are many ways of
picking a sample from a population. Each way has its limitations and difficulties.
It is important to know what kind of sample we are using.
Sampling. The process of selecting the individuals from the population that makes up
our sample. The details of the sampling procedure are what make for different kinds
of sample.
38 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
WHAT IS A SAMPLE?
This brings us to the critical notion of a sample. A sample is the part of the
population we actually measure. Sampling is the process of selecting those
members of the population we will measure. Different ways of sampling lead
to different types of samples. The types of statistical error we can encounter
in our study depend on how our sample differs from the population we are
interested in. Understanding the limits of how confident we can be about the
results of our study is critically tied to the types of statistical error created.
Choosing the right sampling procedure and knowing the errors it creates is
critical to the design and execution of any statistical study.
KEY POINT
Choosing the right sampling procedure and knowing the errors it creates is critical to
the design and execution of any statistical study.
The relationship between sampling and error is not as hard as it seems. We
begin by wanting to know general facts about a situation: What were last
year’s sales like? How will our current customers react to a price increase?
Which job applicants will make the best employees? How many rejects will
result from a new manufacturing process? If we can measure all of last year’s
sales, all of our current customers, all of our future job applicants, etc., we
will have a comprehensive sample and we will only have to worry about
measurement error. But to the degree that our sample does not include
someone or something in the population, any statistics we calculate will have
errors. General descriptions of some of last year’s sales, some of our current
customers, or just the current crop of job applicants will be different from
general descriptions of all of the sales, customers, or applicants, respectively.
Which members of the population get left out of our measurements
determine what the error will be.
HANDY HINTS
Note that sampling error is a question of validity, not reliability. That is, sampling
error introduces bias. Differences between the sample and the population will create
statistical results that are different from what the results would have been for the
entire population, which is what we started out wanting to know. On the other hand,
our choice of sample size affects reliability. The larger the sample size in proportion
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 39
to the population, the more reliable the statistics will be, whether they are biased
or not.
Here are some of the most common types of samples:
. Comprehensive sample. This is when the sample consists of the entire
population, at least in principle. Most often, this kind of sample is not
possible and when it is possible, it is rarely practical.
. Random sample. This is when the sample is selected randomly from the
population. In this context, randomly means that every member of the
population has an equal chance of being selected as part of the sample.
In most situations, this is the best kind of sample to use.
. Convenience sample. This is usually the worst kind of sample to use,
but, as its name implies, it is also the easiest. Convenience sampling
means selecting the sample by the easiest and/or least costly method
available. Whatever kinds of sampling error happen, happen.
Convenience sampling is used very often, especially in small studies.
The most important thing to understand about using a convenience
sample is to understand the types of errors most likely to happen, given
the particular sampling procedure used and the particular population
being sampled. Each convenience sampling process is unique and the
types of sampling error created need to be understood and stated
clearly in the statistical report.
. Systematic sample. This is when the sample is selected by a nonrandom
procedure, such as picking every tenth product unit off of the
assembly line for testing or every 50th customer off of a mailing list.
The trick to systematic sampling is that, if the list of items is ordered
in a way that is unrelated to the statistical questions of interest, a systematic
sample can be just as good as, or even better than, a random
sample. For example, if the customers are listed alphabetically by last
name, it may be that every customer of a particular type will have an
equal chance of being selected, even if not every customer has a chance
of being selected. The problem is that it is not often easy to determine
whether the order really is unrelated to what we want to know. If the
stamping machine produces product molds in batches of ten,
choosing every tenth item may miss defects in some part of the stamping
mold.
. Stratified sample. Also called a stratified random sample. This is a
sophisticated technique used when there are possible problems with
ordinary random sampling, most often due to small sample size.
40 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
It uses known facts about the population to systematically select
subpopulations and then random sampling is used within each subpopulation.
Stratified sampling requires an expert to plan and
execute it.
. Quota sample. This is a variant on the convenience sample common in
surveys. Each person responsible for data collection is assigned a quota
and then uses convenience sampling, sometimes with restrictions. An
advantage of quota sampling is that different data collectors may find
different collection methods convenient. This can prevent the bias
created by using just one convenient sampling method. The biggest
problem with a quota sample is that a lot of folks find the same
things convenient. In general, the problems of convenience samples
apply to quota samples.
. Self-selected sample. This is a form of convenience sample where the
subjects determine whether or not to be part of the sample. There are
degrees of self-selection and, in general, the more self-selection the
more problems and potential bias. Any sampling procedure that is
voluntary for the subjects is contaminated with some degree of selfselection.
(Sampling invoices from a file or products from an assembly
line involves no self-selection because invoices and products lack the
ability to refuse to be measured.) One of the most drastic forms of selfselection
is used in the Internet polls common to TV news shows.
Everyone is invited to log onto the Web and vote for this or that.
But the choice to view the show is self-selection, and others do not
get the invitation. Not everyone who gets the invitation has Internet
access. Since having Internet access is a personal choice, there is selfselection
there, as well. And lots and lots of folks with Internet access
don’t vote on that particular question. The people who make choices
that lead to hearing the invitation, being able to vote, and voting, are
self-selected in at least these three different ways. On TV, we are told
these polls are ‘‘not scientific.’’ That is polite. Self-selection tends to
create very dangerous and misleading bias and should be minimized
whenever possible.
We will have much more to say about exactly what kinds of errors result
from sampling in Chapters 3, 8, and 11. There is always more to learn about
sampling. Note that, although we discussed measurement first, the practical
order is: Define the population; Select the sample; Take the measurements.
When we have that, we have our data. Once we clean up our data—see
Chapter 6 ‘‘Getting the Data’’ about that—we are ready to analyze the data.
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 41
Analysis
Analysis is the process that follows measurement. In Chapter 1 ‘‘Statistics for
Business,’’ we discussed the difference between descriptive and inferential
statistics. Both of these are types of statistical analysis. Here, we will explain
those differences in more detail.
Our data consist of a number of measurements of one or more different
features for each one of all of the individual subjects in our sample. Each
measurement value gives us specific information about the world. We use
mathematics to calculate statistical measures from those measurement values.
Each statistical measure gives us general information about the world
because it is calculated from multiple data values containing specific
information. The process of calculating general information from data is
called statistical analysis.
SUMMARIZING DATA: WHEN IS A NUMBER A
STATISTIC?
Within the field of statistics, the word, ‘‘statistic’’ has another, more specific
meaning. A statistic, also called a statistical measure, is a value calculated
from more than one data value, using a specific calculation procedure,
called a statistical technique or statistical method. We have mentioned one
statistic, the count, in Chapter 1. We will learn about a number of other
statistical measures in Chapter 8 ‘‘Common Statistical Measures.’’ Examples
of statistical measures are: ratio, mean, median, mode, range, variance,
standard deviation, and many others.
STUDY REVIEW
In statistics, a statistical measure, is a variable calculated from the data. We discuss the
most basic of these in Parts One and Two, especially in Chapter 8. Each variable
is calculated using a specific method, described by a mathematical equation.
A statistical procedure, some of which are called statistical significance tests, are
more complex methods that give you more advanced statistical measures. We discuss
these in Part Three. Statistical procedures often involve a number of equations and
provide more subtle and intricate information about the data. However, there is no
hard and fast rule dividing the measures from the procedures. In all cases, a number
is calculated from the data that informs us about the data.
42 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
The procedures used for calculating a statistical measure starts with
multiple values and summarizes them, producing a single number that
characterizes all of the values used in the calculation. It is this process of
summarization that generates general descriptions from specific ones.
As we discussed in Chapter 1, there are two basic kinds of statistical
measures, descriptive and inferential. As you might imagine, a descriptive
statistic is one that describes a general feature of the data. An inferential
statistic describes the strength of a relationship within the data, but its most
common use is to say whether a relationship in the data is strong enough
to affect the outcome of a particular sort of decision. The calculated value of
the inferential statistic determines the conclusion of the statistical inference.
For example, in one of the most basic inferential procedures, the t test, the end
result is the calculation of an inferential statistical measure called the t statistic.
The t statistic is higher whenever the value of the particular variable being
analyzed is higher for one group of subject units than for another.
KEY POINT
Both descriptive and inferential statistics tell us about the world. An inferential
statistic also answers a specific type of question within the framework of a statistical
technique designed to perform a statistical inference. (For more on statistical
inference, see the sidebar on inductive inference.) All of the guarantees for that
statistical technique come with the proper use of the inferential statistic.
In the end, the distinction between a descriptive and an inferential statistic
is not a hard and fast one. It is a common error in statistics to use a
descriptive measure as if it could provide a conclusion to a statistical
inference. It is a common oversight in statistics to forget that any inferential
statistic does describe the data in some way. Simply put, every inferential
statistic is descriptive, but most descriptive statistics are not inferential.
WHAT IS A STATISTICAL TECHNIQUE?
Throughout these first two chapters, we have talked about statistical
techniques and differentiated them from statistical measures, but we haven’t
yet defined the difference. A statistical measure is a number that results from
making calculations according to a specified procedure. For every statistical
measure, there are one or more (usually more) procedures that produce the
right number as a result. Take the example of the simplest statistical measure,
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 43
the count. The procedure used to produce counts is counting, which we all
know how to do.
When we get to more sophisticated statistical measures, particularly
inferential statistical measures, the procedures for calculating the measure get
a lot more complex. We call these much more complex procedures statistical
techniques or statistical methods. As a result, the distinction between a simple
calculation procedure and a complex statistical technique is also not a hard
and fast one.
One way of teaching basic, descriptive statistical measures is to present
step-by-step procedures for calculating them. On the other hand, this method
is almost never used for the more complex inferential measures, except in the
most advanced texts. Knowing how to do these calculations may be a good
teaching device, but, on the job, no one does these calculations, even the
simplest ones, by hand anymore. Computers are used instead. In this book,
we will not walk through the details for calculating most statistical measures,
because those can be found in other excellent texts, which we list for you at
www.qualitytechnology.com/books/bsd.htm. We will, however, provide
detailed procedures for some special types of calculations that you may
find useful in business when there is no computer around. (Recall the
quotation from John Tukey in the introduction to Part One about the stick
in the sand on the beach. Even without a computer, we can learn important
facts about data right on the spot.)
FUN FACTS
Brewing Up Inferential Statistics
Until the early part of the last century, statistics was about description. Then, in
1920, a statistician named Gossett, working in the business of brewing beer for
Guinness, came up with a trick called the t test. A famous statistician and scientist
named Sir Ronald A. Fisher immediately recognized the enormous importance of
the t test, and began the development of a second kind of statistics, inferential
statistics.
Statistical methods are formal, which means that once we abstract away from the
topic of interest by measuring things, we can do statistics on almost anything:
employees, receipts, competitors, transactions, etc. But the guarantee that statistical
techniques provide is not apodictic, because of the possibility of statistical error. As
we discussed before, even if all our measurements are perfect, our conclusions are
not guaranteed to be true.
What Fisher recognized was that the t test (also called Student’s t test, because
Gossett had to publish under the pseudonym ‘‘Student,’’ because, at the time,
Guinness Breweries prohibited its employees from publishing their work in scholarly
44 PART ONE What Is Business Statistics?
journals) provided a weaker sort of guarantee, based on the concept of probability.
If all of our measurements are perfect (that is, all of our premises are true), we have a
guarantee that the statistical values we calculate are probably close to the right
values. (We will learn more details about this guarantee in later chapters.)
The three most important things to understand about statistical inference are that
it uses a specifiable procedure, that procedure is formal, and that it uses probability
to describe how confident we have a right to be about the results. Today, formal
procedures can be performed by computer, which is what makes the very powerful
and very complex statistical analyses so popular and useful in business (and
elsewhere) possible.
Quiz
1. What is the correct order of the first three steps in performing statistics?
(a) Analysis, sampling, and measurement
(b) Sampling, measurement, and analysis
(c) Analysis, measurement, and sampling
(d) Measurement, sampling, and analysis
2. Which of the following statements about measurement is not true?
(a) Measurement is a formalized version of observation
(b) Measurement is different from ordinary observation
(c) Measurement provides a specific description of the world
(d) Measurement provides a general description of the world
3. How is a variable used in statistics?
(a) A variable usually corresponds to some measurable feature of the subject
(b) A variable is a person, object, or event to which a measurement can be
applied
(c) A variable is the result of a particular measurement
(d) A variable is the collection of values resulting from a group of measurements
4. The series ‘‘President, Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer, Board Member’’
is on which type of scale?
(a) Nominal
(b) Ordinal
(c) Interval
(d) Ratio
CHAPTER 2 What Is Statistics? 45
5. Which of the following components of statistics contain error?
(a) Measurement
(b) Statistical analysis
(c) Sampling
(d) All of the above
6. If we have a set of measurements that are valid, but not very reliable, they
will . . .
(a) Be clustered around the right value, but in a wide cluster
(b) Be clustered very closely together, but around the wrong answer
(c) Be in a wide cluster around the wrong value
(d) Include at least one measurement that is exactly the right value
7. Validity is how statisticians talk about minimizing _______ error;
Reliability is how statisticians talk about minimizing _______ error.
(a) Biased; biased
(b) Biased; unbiased
(c) Unbiased; biased
(d) Unbiased; unbiased
8. When a comprehensive sample is not possible, what is the best sampling
technique to use in order to avoid introducing additional bias?
(a) Convenience sample
(b) Stratified sample
(c) Random sample
(d) Systematic sample
9. Which of the following is the end product of the procedures used for calculating
a statistical measure?
(a) A single summary number that characterizes all of the values used in
the calculation
(b) A statistical technique
(c) A range of numbers that characterize the population of interest
(d) A valid and reliable measure
10. Every inferential statistic is _______, but most descriptive statistics are not
_______.
(a) Inferential; inferential
(b) Inferential; descriptive
(c) Descriptive; inferential
(d) Descriptive; descriptive