122
Science Communication
Volume 28 Number 1
September 2006 122-143
© 2006 Sage Publications
10.1177/1075547006291990
http://scx.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
Authors’ Note: This research was supported by The Greenwall Foundation, National Institutes of
Health/National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke grant R01 #NS045831, and Fonds
Québécois de la Recherche sur la Société et la Culture and Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council. We extend our thanks to Dr. Charles Jennings for inspiring this project and to
Dr. Scott W. Atlas, Dr. Thomas A. Raffin, Dr. Pamela Schraedley-Desmond, Marisa Gallo, and
Sarah Waldman. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Judy Illes,
Program in Neuroethics, Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics and Department of Radiology,
Stanford University, 701 Welch Road, Suite A1105, Palo Alto, CA 94304-5748; phone: (650) 724-
6393; fax: (650) 725-6131; e-mail: illes@stanford.edu.
Brain Imaging
A Decade of Coverage in
the Print Media
Eric Racine
Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal
Québec, Canada
Ofek Bar-Ilan
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California
Dominican University of California, San Rafael
Judy Illes
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California
Advances in neuroscience are increasingly intersecting with issues of ethical,
legal, and social interest. This study is an analysis of press coverage of an
advanced technology for brain imaging, functional magnetic resonance imaging,
that has gained significant public visibility over the past ten years.
Discussion of issues of scientific validity and interpretation dominated over
ethical content in both the popular and specialized press. Coverage of research
on higher order cognitive phenomena specifically attributed broad personal
and societal meaning to neuroimages. The authors conclude that neuroscience
provides an ideal model for exploring science communication and ethics in a
multicultural context.
Keywords: neuroethics; functional magnetic resonance imaging; press;
neuroscience; content analysis; bioethics
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 123
Advances in neuroscience are intersecting with ethical, legal, and social
issues. Some issues concern clinical applications such as the early
diagnosis of disease, while others relate to the growing number of studies
using frontier neurotechnologies such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) of social behaviors. Here, we present a study on how
fMRI, one model of neurotechnology that has diffused rapidly in the
research environment and gained substantial visibility, has been covered in
the print media. Drawing on lessons learned from press coverage of other
scientific domains, we examined the complexity of communication of brain
findings and the need for their consideration in a multicultural context.
In the past, press coverage of genetics and genomics has brought ethical,
social, and legal issues to the forefront. Scholars of bioethics, social sciences,
and law, for example, have investigated informed consent, risks of “geneticization,”
and breaches of confidentiality extensively. Vast interdisciplinary
programs in numerous countries have addressed these issues and others.
Scholars of science communication and other social scientists have played an
important role in disseminating the information resulting from this research.
For more than two decades, they have attended to the issues of the new genetics,
and their contributions have been instrumental in broadening the debate
and in bringing attention to marginal points of views (Conrad and Gabe
1999). The outcome is that the genomics community has a solid base of
knowledge and discussion for informed and responsible science communication
(Cardinal et al. 2003; Condit 2001; Condit, Parrott, and O’Grady 2000;
Racine 2003).
Stem-cell research and embryo research have also been a focus of communication
research, albeit on a smaller scale (Mulkay 1994; Williams,
Kitzinger, and Henderson 2003). The academic community and the larger
public are probably less aware, however, that similar issues are pending in
contemporary neuroscience research. In fact, some argue that far more than
our genome, the brain constitutes an integral part of our concept of the self
(Greely 2002; Kennedy 2003; Mauron 2003). Consequently, we may speak
of a “neuroscience revolution” (Wolpe 2002). In this article, we provide background
to support these claims and explore them through the lens of press
coverage of functional neuroimaging studies.
Contemporary Neuroscience
The study of the nervous system has been an enduring medical research
tradition led by preeminent physicians and researchers. Contemporary neuroscience
feeds on this tradition and draws on a vast and interdisciplinary
history to study the nervous system. Subspecialties of neuroscience include
neurophysiology, which studies the detailed electrical activity of neurons
and other neuronal structure; neurobiology, which focuses on the molecular
and cellular understanding of the nervous system; and cognitive neuroscience,
which tries to understand correlations between cognitive
phenomena and biological patterns. These may be measured as electrical
signals using electroencephalography, for example, as blood flow using
positron emission tomography or single photon emission tomography or as
changing blood oxygenation levels in stimulus-response paradigms using
fMRI, our focus here. Resulting information from these different imaging
modalities is sometimes complementary; at other times, it may provide
competing explanations of similar phenomena. Nevertheless, the integration
of knowledge stemming from multiple levels of inquiry has yielded
new insights into neurological and psychiatric diseases.
The study of human brain function has been greatly facilitated by neuroimaging
techniques that have made possible research on increasingly
complex cognitive phenomena, including emotions, personality traits, and
real-world behaviors. fMRI is of particular interest because of its noninvasiveness
(therefore allowing a greater degree of repeatability than before)
and widespread use by the research community. Between 1991, when the
results of the technique were first reported, and 2004, tens of thousands of
studies were cited in PubMed (Raichle 2004). There has also been a steady
expansion of studies with social and policy implications (Illes, Kirschen,
and Gabrieli 2003). Among this research are studies specifically of thought
processes, emotions, racial attitudes, personality traits, religious experience,
deception, and moral reasoning (Illes, Racine, and Kirschen 2005).
Research results are already permeating the public sphere. Neuroimaging
data have been admitted in courts,1 and in one case, a homicide conviction
was reversed because the state failed to provide brain scans (People v.
Weinstein 1992). Studies of consumer preferences using fMRI to inform
marketing strategies—“neuromarketing”—have been discussed by the neuroscience
community and the wider public (“Brain Scam?” 2004; “Open
Your Mind” 2002). As the power of imaging technologies increases, novel
studies may yield novel applications such as mind reading (Ross 2003).
Some new imaging technologies, such as functional near-infrared imaging
of the brain, promise to deliver inexpensive, reliable, and portable imaging
neurotechnologies that are as accurate as the current costly and equipmentcumbersome
functional imaging based on magnetic resonance technology.
For example, a wearable headband functional near-infrared tool is being
developed to investigate real-world behaviors, with possible uses such as lie
124 Science Communication
detection (Izzetoglu et al. 2004). Hence, as the power of brain imaging technologies
increases, so will the magnitude of the issues it raises.
A Convergence of the New Field of
Neuroethics and Science Communication
Debate on these studies and their projected applications is starting, mainly
under the impetus of a new interdisciplinary field, neuroethics, that specifically
focuses on the ethical implications of contemporary neuroscience (Illes
and Raffin 2002; Moreno 2003). Neuroethics includes both the “ethics of
neuroscience” (i.e., ethical issues raised by emerging neurotechnology such
as neuropharmaceutical enhancement) and the “neuroscience of ethics” (i.e.,
understanding moral reasoning with the help of neuroscience methods;
Roskies 2002). Given its expanding use and related challenges, fMRI represents
a model for discussing implications of modern neurotechnologies. In
this context, media coverage constitutes one important pathway to assess
what the issues surrounding fMRI are and how the technology is portrayed
outside the peer-reviewed literature. At this point in the neuroethics debate,
press analysis constitutes an invaluable source of information for neuroscientists,
social scientists, policy makers, and bioethicists. To our knowledge,
apart from a theoretical article on this topic that we published (Racine, Bar-
Ilan, and Illes 2005), this exploratory study was the first study of how fMRI
has been featured in the print media. It was a detailed examination of the
characteristics of the coverage to date and an outlook on ethical and social
challenges associated with brain imaging introduced by the press.
Methods
Sample
We generated the sample for this work using LexisNexis Academic, a database
consisting of full-text news, business, and law resources. We searched for
English-language articles from January 1, 1991 (Illes, Kirschen, and Gabrieli
2003), to June 1, 2004, using the “Guided News Search” with the keywords
“neuro* AND imaging” and “functional magnetic resonance imaging” or
“fMRI.” The following news categories as defined by the LexisNexis
Academic database were searched in headlines, lead paragraphs, and terms:
general news (major newspapers), general news (magazines and journals),
medical news (medical and health news), university news (The Chronicle of
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 125
Higher Education, University Wire), and legal news. After all the articles
(N = 442) were gathered, we examined them for relevance and removed the
many duplicates arising from the frequent republication of articles. Individual
articles were the sampling units, sorted according to whether they originated
in general newspapers such as the New York Times and news magazines such
as Newsweek or in specialized medical and science magazines such as Biotech
Week and Medical Imaging Week.
Coding
Two independent coders (Racine and Bar-Ilan) analyzed all articles according
to a detailed coding sheet. The units of analysis were the individual codes.
Key codes were derived through an inductive process (Neuendorf 2002) in
which previously used coding categories for content analysis of genomics
research (Racine et al. 2006) were refined and adjusted to the context of neuroimaging
research. Modifications included the addition of epistemological
challenges and a refinement of the ethical issues section to take into account
the specifics of fMRI. In addition, some new codes, such as target cohort and
levels of explanation (simple or detailed), were added to the genomic coding
scheme. This process culminated in the creation of a complete coding guide in
which definitions for codes as well as instructions and examples were featured.
Coders were trained to apply this coding system through a series of
practice runs. A reliability pretest was conducted to ensure consistency and
reliability as well as training adequacy. Table 1 presents details on the codes
used for this study.
We also performed independent intercoder reliability tests on a randomly
selected subsample of twenty-five articles. Results for reliability were calculated
in terms of percentage agreement for the twenty-two codes2 (Table 1).
A single code, “diffusion of technology,” had a percentage agreement below
.70 and was dropped out to ensure sufficient data reliability and reproducibility
for this exploratory study.
Data Analysis
We used descriptive statistics to characterize the composition and properties
of the sample and the chi-square statistic to test for main effects (p < .05)
between general and specialized sources and between health research and
non-health-related research. In the comparison between general and specialized
sources, codes for balanced and critical tone were combined because
figures were individually too small for meaningful statistical comparison.
126 Science Communication
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 127
Table 1
Coding Structure and Reliability
Code
Target
cohort
Explanation
of fMRI
Research
Prospects
Tone
Issues
Subcode
Infants
School aged or
adolescents
Adults
Aging
Animals
Simplifiedb
Detailedb
Health-relatedc
Non-health-relatedc
Health-relatedc
Non-health-relatedc
Uncriticalb
Balancedb
Criticalb
Scientificd
Ethicald
Definition
Stated or individuals aged under three
Stated or individuals aged between three
and seventeen
Stated or individuals aged between
eighteen and sixty-five
Stated or individuals aged over sixty-five
Research done on animals
Article includes some technical details
about fMRI (less than two sentences)
Article includes extensive technical details
about the mechanics of fMRI (more than
two sentences)
Research is performed on disease
mechanisms or treatments
Research is performed without the aim of
obtaining insights on disease mechanisms
or treatments (e.g., fundamental
brain processes and systems)
Prospects of study and benefits of study to
improve health either in preventing disease
or improving treatments or cures
Prospects of study and benefits of study
are not related to health improvement
Article presents no risks
Article presents as many benefits
concerning fMRI as it does risks; pros
and cons of fMRI are presented
Article presents more risks associated with
fMRI than benefits
Potential harms and risks of
neurotechnology from scientific and
medical standpoints
Potential harms and risks of fMRI from
ethical, social, and legal standpoints
Reliabilitya
100
92
100
100
88
84
96
84
88
76
88
100
100
100
100e
100f
Note: fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging.
a. Percentage agreement. One code identifying the diffusion of fMRI technology was discarded
because of low reliability.
b. Mutually exclusive subcodes.
c. Further analyzed to identify specific areas of research or application.
d. Code further analyzed for qualitative features. See Table 4 for definitions.
e. Includes the following subcodes, each with 100 percent agreement: limitations, interpretation,
and validity. See Table 4 for definitions.
f. Includes the following subcodes, each with 100 percent agreement: human nature, confidentiality,
troubling findings, and recruitment. See Table 4 for definitions.
128 Science Communication
This exception was justified inasmuch as it provided results for uncritical articles
featuring no scientific or ethical concerns, on the one hand, and articles
presenting at least one scientific or ethical issue, on the other hand. We used
the qualitative features of the data to elaborate on scientific and ethical issues
and to illustrate salient points.
Results
General Sample Characteristics
Our search returned 132 unique articles appearing in the press between
1994 and 2004, none having been found prior to 1994. Seventy-nine articles
(60 percent) represented general source articles, and 53 articles (40
percent) represented specialized sources. When applicable, results for both
types of press are presented to provide further analytic insight.
Quantitative Analyses
Focus of the research and level of technical detail. The majority of articles
featured research on adults (n = 111, 84 percent). The minority presented
research on school-aged children and adolescents (n = 19, 14 percent), on the
aging (n = 4, 3 percent), and on infants (n = 3, 2 percent). Nine articles (7 percent)
discussed animal studies.
We found no explanation of the technical details of fMRI in the majority
of articles (n = 89, 67 percent), simplified explanations in twenty-two
articles (17 percent), and more detailed information in twenty-one articles
(16 percent). An example of a simple explanation is as follows:
Ogawa’s research focused on certain magnetic changes that occur in blood
hemoglobin when it binds to oxygen. This use of a physiologically dependent
signal has contributed greatly to the development of technology for creating
images of the functioning of the human body, particularly the brain. (“2003
Japan Prizes” 2003, 10)
Health-related and non-health-related research. Health-related research
was featured in roughly a third of the articles (n = 46, 35 percent) and nonhealth-
related research in 58 articles (44 percent).3 One-fifth of the articles
(n = 27, 20 percent) presented both types of research.
Coverage of health-related research featured neurodegenerative diseases
such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases (n = 15, 11 percent) and psychiatric
conditions such as depression and schizophrenia (n = 15, 11 percent).
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 129
Coverage of non-health-related research focused principally on higher order
cognitive systems such as decision making and motivation (n = 42, 32 percent),
other cognitive behaviors that have emotional and potential social impacts
(n = 33, 25 percent), and basic cognitive systems such as attention and
memory. Integrative sensory systems (e.g., visual perception), basic sensory
systems (e.g., vision), and motor systems were of a lesser focus.
Practical prospects and benefits of research. Prospective health-related
benefits of fMRI were featured in half of the articles (n = 65, 49 percent)
and non-health-related prospects in many fewer (n = 17, 13 percent).
Health-related prospects were principally linked to hopes of better treatment
(n = 39, 30 percent) or diagnosis (n = 28, 21 percent). Health intervention
monitoring was also featured in a small number of articles (n = 12,
9 percent). With respect to non-health-related benefits, a small number of
articles (n = 5, 4 percent) featured early childhood intervention learning and
teaching improvements. Other equally infrequent benefits (2 percent each)
were neuromarketing, lie detection, and technical improvements to fMRI.
Benefits were often highlighted in news headlines or lead paragraphs, even
if findings suggesting them were tentative.
Tone of articles. The vast majority of the articles (n = 104, 79 percent)
were uncritical in tone, whereas twenty-eight (21 percent) were balanced or
critical (Table 2; ?2 = 5.184, p = .023). The uncritical articles ranged from
optimistic to neutral reporting of fMRI.
Articles that featured health-related research, non-health-related
research, or both yielded significant differences in terms of tone. Of articles
Table 2
Tone and Concerns Identified in General and
Specialized News Sources (in percentages)
Code Sample General Sources Specialized Sources
Tone
Uncritical 79 72 89
Balanced 16 22 8
Critical 5 6 4
Issues
At least one issue 23 32 9
Scientific issue 18 23 9
Ethical issue 9 11 0
130 Science Communication
presenting health-related research, four (9 percent) contained references to
an ethical risk; this increased to fourteen of fifty-eight articles (24 percent)
for non-health-related research and to eleven of twenty-seven articles (41
percent) presenting both (?2 = 10.378, p = .006). Health-related research
articles were less critical than articles featuring non-health-related research,
but articles containing both types of research were more critical ( ?2 =
10.635, p = .031) (Table 3).
Scientific and ethical concerns. Overall, a quarter of the sample (n = 30,
23 percent) contained at least one of the seven identified concerns related
to science or ethics. We found significant differences between general
sources and science and health sources in the frequency of ethical issues.
Of the general sources, a third (n = 25, 32 percent) presented at least one
issue; this was the case, however, in only a few (n = 5, 9 percent) of the specialized
science and health sources (?2 = 8.911, p = .003; Table 2). Even
though the small number does not permit statistical comparison on this
aspect of press coverage, we found that six of the issues were more frequently
found in general sources. Only the issue of validity occurred with
common frequency (see Table 4). When we grouped limitations, interpretation,
and validity to analyze scientific issues broadly, this cluster occurred
in twenty-four articles (18 percent).
The other concerns that are ethical in nature (human nature, confidentiality,
troubling findings, and recruitment) appeared in nine articles (7 percent).
Table 3
Tone and Concerns Identified in Press Coverage of Health
and Non-Health-Related Research (in percentages)
Code Health-Related Research Non-Health-Related Research Both
Tone
Uncritical 91 78 63
Balanced 9 14 30
Critical 0 9 7
Issues
At least one issue 9 24 41
Scientific issue 9 21 30
Ethical issue 0 5 19
Benefits
Health benefit 63 29 70
Non-health-related benefit 2 19 19
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 131
We found scientific issues featured in eighteen of the general sources
(23 percent) but only in five of the science and health literature (9 percent;
?2 = 3.930, p = .047). Ethical issues were present in only nine articles
(11 percent) of the general sources and absent in the science and health
literature (?2 = 6.480, p = .011; Table 2).
We also examined ethical and social concerns according to the type of
research featured. We found that ethical issues were most frequent in articles
that presented both health-related and non-health-related research (five of
twenty-seven, 19 percent). Ethical concerns were featured in three of fiftyeight
non-health-related articles (5 percent), and none were found in articles
presenting only health-related research (?2 = 10.334, p = .006). Health-related
benefits were found more often in articles that presented both types of research
(nineteen of twenty-seven, 70 percent) than in articles presenting health-related
Table 4
Qualitative Features of the Press Coverage Sample (in percentages)
General Specialized
Issue Description Sample Sources Sources
Limitations Risks and concerns related to the 14 19 8
limitations of knowledge
gained by fMRI
Interpretation Risks and concerns related to 8 10 4
interpretation/meaning of
findings by the public and
researchers
Validity Risks and concerns related to 6 6 6
scientific research design
Human nature Risks and concerns related to 5 8 0
transformation of human nature
conducing to see humans as
mere means, misuses
Confidentiality Risks and concerns related to 2 4 0
potential harms due to sharing
of confidential information
Troubling findings Risks and concerns related to 2 4 0
potential individual or social
harms of findings
Recruitment Risks and concerns related to 1 1 0
recruitment of research subjects,
protection of subjects enrolled
in protocols
Note: fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging.
research (n = 29, 63 percent) or non-health-related research (n = 17, 29 percent;
?2 = 17.536, p < .001). Non-health-related benefits were found significantly less
often in health-related research (n = 1, 2 percent) than in non-health-related
research (n = 11, 19 percent) or articles presenting both types (n = 5, 19 percent;
?2 = 7.330, p = .026; Table 3).
Qualitative Analyses
To enrich our understanding of the distribution and other quantitative
characteristics of the data, we turn our attention now to qualitative features
of the sample (see Table 4).
Limitations of the technology. We found references to the expression or
appreciation of the limitations of the technology in nineteen of the articles
(14 percent) in the sample. Three classes of limitations emerged:
1. Emphasis on the preliminary nature of findings or their limited generalizability
by neuroimagers themselves (e.g., “It is far too early to take
these findings as gospel” [Hall 1998, 22] and “Gabrieli warns to wait for
further studies before putting too much faith in this one test” [“Study
May Have Found Test” 1999])
2. Challenges to the basic assumption that levels of blood oxygenation are
indicators of neuronal activity (e.g., “Increased blood flow, as shown in
splotches of light, may not be an accurate surrogate for brain cell function”
[Blakeslee 2000, 6])
3. Worries associated with the wider social usefulness of fMRI research and
findings (e.g., “The results of experiments, undeniably exciting but
nonetheless limited and preliminary, are being used by nonexperts to
inform everything from the style of a mother’s nurturing to the organization
of day-care centers to public policy on child rearing, with precious
little scientific data to support ambitious, even aggressive leaps into
future education policy” [Hall 1998, 22])
Interpretation. We identified interpretation issues in ten of the articles
(8 percent). Interpretation issues are reminiscent of limitations, but focus on
the nature of the scientific and social conclusions drawn from the findings.
We could further break down interpretation issues into two classes:
1. Technical and scientific issues, including the overinterpretation of results
and concerns about statistical methods, many of which related specifically
to the possibility of correlating brain activation to neurocognitive function
(e.g., “Just because an area of a patient’s brain ‘lights up’ during an fMRI
132 Science Communication
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 133
scan doesn’t mean it’s the seat of the behaviour being studied” [Spinney
2002, 38])
2. Social interpretation issues, including the wider meaning of fMRI findings
in the public arena (e.g., “When the results . . . come out, they are
bound to cause a stir—and they are also bound to be misinterpreted”
[Hall 1998, 22])
Validity. Like limitations and interpretation issues, validity issues are also
tightly interwoven in the technical and scientific aspects of fMRI. Validity
issues, highlighted in eight of the articles (6 percent) in the sample, focused
on the risks of and concerns about poor scientific research design or lack of
standardized practice. For example, “That is an example of a bad imaging
experiment. . . . scientifically, it tells you nothing. The study suffers from a
lack of theoretical context . . . we don’t have a theory of what it takes to make
a moral judgment” (Monasterky 2001, 20). Some questioned the validity of
fMRI research itself more broadly: “There is nothing particularly interesting
coming out of imaging” and “imaging studies that purport to find localization
of mental abilities in the brain suffer from a number of flaws that invalidate
such discoveries” (Monasterky 2001, 20).
Human nature. We found references to issues bearing on human nature in
six of the articles (5 percent) in the sample. Most of these related to neuromarketing
(i.e., possible misuses in the study of consumer preferences and its
corollary implications of reducing persons to means): “It raises serious philosophical
questions, because it reduces us to a machine” (Sample and Adam
2003, 4) and “it’s wrong to use a medical technology for marketing, not healing”
(Hamilton 2004, 78). Other examples related to misuses of fMRI as a
surveillance technique:
Like a fingerprint . . . the brain is always there, storing a record of the actions
and even the thoughts involved in our actions. No matter how cleverly we
might try to deceive, in the future, our brains could be used as evidence
against us. (Persaud 2001, 21)
Other ethical issues. We also infrequently found other ethical issues,
such as confidentiality and privacy issues, troubling findings, and the protection
of human subjects enrolled in research. Thought privacy was a significant
theme, because the nature of fMRI findings may reveal private and
personal information on neurocognitive processes. For example,
The suggestion that brain scans could reveal not just our future health, but the
intricacies of our personalities and how we might behave in a given situation
134 Science Communication
is unsettling enough to some scientists that they want legislation to stop
brain-scan records falling into the wrong hands. (Sample and Adam 2003, 4)
Troubling findings involved clinical findings detected unexpectedly in the
research setting. For example,
Very occasionally, the structural scans of volunteers in research projects do
reveal tumours. And as a researcher, rather than clinician, [name of investigator]
is not allowed to break bad news. ‘I tell them the scan hasn’t worked
properly and I can’t show them it,’ he says. ‘And then I contact their GP [general
practitioner] and tell them to arrange a medical scan.’” (Adam 2003, 5)
Discussion
Our analysis of coverage of fMRI in the print media suggests an overall
optimism for this frontier neurotechnology that is especially marked in
reports originating from specialized news sources. Overall, clinical
research is presented more optimistically than nonclinical research, and scientific
concerns are featured more often than ethical ones. The qualitative
data further show that scientific issues include both technical and social
concerns and outweigh ethical issues in sheer numbers.
No doubt, limitations are inherent to our search strategies and the
LexisNexis Academic database itself, and small numbers in certain areas
limit the depth of the present analysis. Certainly, more research is needed to
fully understand how the ethical issues of emerging neurotechnologies are
discussed in the press. Nonetheless, this exploratory study yielded powerful
insights into the portrayal of this technology by the press.
Improving Health or Unraveling Mysteries of the Mind?
The results of our study suggest that press coverage is greater for studies
of non-health-related phenomena, in particular higher order cognition,
emotion, and social behaviors studies. However, even if such research is
more frequent in number, health benefits are emphasized most. This suggests
that the depiction of fMRI as a health technology is unrelenting, even
if non-health-related research is the prevailing focus. The interpretation of
this disequilibrium is open. Because structural magnetic resonance imaging,
as the precursor to fMRI, was realized initially as a clinical tool, the
portrayal of the health benefits of the technology could simply be a natural
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 135
segue from the known historical uses of imaging methods (Lentle and
Aldrich 1997). We noted, however, that the treatment of disease is the most
frequently featured benefit, even though diagnosis and monitoring more
appropriately define the likely contributions of fMRI to health care
(Desmond and Chen 2002; Mazziotta 2000).
A competing interpretation is that health content may be used to facilitate
social acceptance of fMRI. Conrad (2001) suggested that researchers
have an interest in promoting the benefits from their research to gather support,
and health benefits are undoubtedly one of the most appreciated outcomes
of scientific research and biotechnology. In keeping with this
alternative explanation, we note that reporting of health-related research is
less critical than reporting of its non-health-related counterpart. Even if our
study does not provide data that informs us about motivations, we also note
corresponding differences in terms of tone and presence of ethical issues.
A third possible interpretation of the disequilibrium is that while the
reporting of health research tends to promote optimism on the part of readers,
the reporting of non-health-related research can elicit skepticism. For
example, neuromarketing studies or possible truth-technology improvements
received a fair deal of critical attention in our sample of print media. This tendency
corresponds to debates taking place in highly visible peer-reviewed
journals in the neuroscience literature (“Brain Scam?” 2004; “Does
Neuroscience Threaten Human Values?” 1998; Hoag 2003; Jaffe 2004;
“Silence of the Neuroengineers” 2003). In fact, the journey of fMRI to the
social domain appears to be in large part fueling ethical discussions in the
media. We have suggested, in fact, that senses of neurorealism, neuroessentialism,
and neuropolicy are commonly conveyed in media coverage of fMRI
(Racine, Bar-Ilan, and Illes 2005). More precisely, fMRI seems to imply
visual proof of the fundamental nature of reality and subjectivity, which propels
the use of fMRI findings in policy making. Such powerful representations
are bound to bring reactions from the public and the scientific
community, especially when the applications are provocative.
In addition to this evidence, previous press studies of genomics have
reported that the media preferentially cover high-profile examples of scientific
attempts or progress, such as human cloning, rather than potentially
more mundane ethical issues, such as those associated with clinical applications
of genetic testing and screening (Geller, Bernhardt, and Holtzman
2002). Another study has shown that more than one-third of articles dealing
with genomics present ethical issues. This proportion increases when
other biotechnological sectors, especially controversial ones such as stemcell
research, reproductive cloning, or new reproductive technologies,
136 Science Communication
figure in the articles (Racine et al. 2006). This may be consistent with
increased pressures for fast journalism and highly visible stories (Gardner,
Csikszentmihalyi, and Damon 2001; Nelkin 1995). Unfortunately, the
downside of this dynamic is that it can overshadow relevant ethical issues
related to less spectacular health care applications of fMRI. Consequently,
many important and pressing neuroethical issues, such as the use of fMRI
for the early diagnosis of late-onset diseases (Rosen et al. 2002), are left
unattended. Even if they are of great public interest and may affect people’s
lives directly, these go practically unnoticed in our sample.
Unattended Ethical Controversies
We observed that the majority of articles were uncritical of fMRI. Other
press studies of research such as genomics and genetics and biotechnologies
have frequently observed similar optimistic reporting (Conrad 2001; Kohring
and Matthes 2002; Moreno, Lujan, and Moreno 1996; Mulkay 1994; Priest and
Talbert 1994; Racine et al. 2006). A small number of media reports are highly
critical (Conrad 2001; Moreno, Lujan, and Moreno 1996; Racine et al. 2006).
Reporting of fMRI conforms to the majority of these patterns and further illustrates
how the expectation of balanced scientific reporting (Rose 2003;
Thompson and Nelson 2001) can collide with the social demand for research.
In contrast to the optimism for fMRI research, we did find substantial content
related to specific scientific and ethical concerns. The presence of ethical
issues in fMRI reporting is still lower, however, than media coverage of
genomics and genetics, for which figures around 40 percent have been identified
in the general press (Conrad 2001; Craig 2000; Petersen 2001; Racine
et al. 2006). Although there are differences in the samples, this comparison
sustains the point of view that the issues of neuroscience have not yet been
brought to the public eye as frequently as issues of genomics (Illes and Racine
2005; Wolpe 2002). One explanation for this phenomenon may lie in the
legacy of eugenics and discrimination in genetics, which still has a significant
impact on public understanding of genetics (Geller, Bernhardt, and Holtzman
2002). A second explanation bears on the vast interdisciplinary research networks
that have been supported by funding agencies to investigate the ethical,
legal, and social issues of genomics. These scholarly activities contribute to
the sustained attention to risks and concerns related to genomics. Equivalent
institutional support of this nature does not yet exist for the ethics of contemporary
neuroscience. Nonetheless, the overall lesser attention to these
issues in fMRI research and maybe more broadly to neuroscience remains an
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 137
interesting puzzle in the communication of the ethical dimensions of science.
Why have the issues of neuroscience gone largely unnoticed in comparison
with genomics?
Communicating with Specialized and Lay Audiences
Our data indicate that specialized sources are less critical of fMRI than
general sources. This suggests that ethical discussion is taking place in the
public domain and that scientists are brought to discuss these issues in wider
forums rather than in specialized ones. The same observation applies to scientific
issues. The reasons for the differences, however, are unclear. One possible
explanation is that specialized science and medical magazines are
geared to showcase technology. To be fair, there has also been some ethical
discussion within the neuroscience community concerning, for example, the
use of functional neuroimaging markers as a diagnostic tool (Desmond and
Chen 2002; Rosen et al. 2002) or the extension of neuroimaging to social
behavior (“Brain Scam?” 2004; Jaffe 2004). However, the increasing advances
in neuroscience merit broader discussion.
Researcher responsibility is also called on by the fact that two-thirds
of articles presented no explanation of what fMRI achieves technically.
A Brazilian survey of “neuroscience literacy” showed that the public is uninformed
about major research methodologies such as electroencephalography,
positron emission tomography, and fMRI (Herculano-Houzel 2002). Many
researchers and scholars have voiced concerns that simplistic understanding
of such neuroimaging modalities may increase the risk for misuse and
the possibility of the abuse of consumers who are lured by the high-tech
profile of the technology (Farah and Wolpe 2004; Gura 2005; Hinton 2002;
Kulynych 2002; Stufflebaum and Bechtel 1997). Our study, therefore, further
grounds repeated calls for increased neuroscientist involvement in the
popularization of research findings (Bruer 1998; DiPietro 2000; Hall,
Carter, and Morley 2004; Hinton 2002; Kulynych 2002; Racine, Bar-Ilan,
and Illes 2005; Rose 2003), as well as particular attention to the epistemological
issues of neuroimaging in public communication (Illes and Racine
2005; Illes, Racine, and Kirschen 2005).
Scientific and Manifest Images: A Philosophical Dilemma
We noticed that scientific issues such as limitations, interpretation, and
validity are double-headed, because they include both technical and social
138 Science Communication
concerns. Technical concerns are mostly reported with the aim of presenting
qualified results. However, we observed deeper debate within the scientific
community, especially when researchers question the assumptions underlying
fMRI or criticize colleagues for not taking into account the limits of their findings.
Social concerns occur when results are invested with broader cultural
meaning that can lead to social tensions (Racine, Bar-Ilan, and Illes 2005).
We may analyze the interaction between scientific dimensions of these
issues and their wider social depiction following philosopher Wilfred
Sellars (1963), who distinguished the “manifest” and the “scientific” views
of the world. The manifest image of the world is the common view of
humans. It is the way we see ourselves in ordinary life on the basis of free
will and other cultural assumptions. Exploring the structure of the manifest
image is largely the concern of the humanities, even though this is changing
with the advent of social neuroscience (Cacioppo et al. 2000). The scientific
image of the world is the scientific view of ourselves. This scientific
image can put in question the manifest image and beliefs underlying it,
such as free will and responsibility. While neuroscience studies of moral
emotions and cooperation, for example, are in many ways enriching our
scientific view of the world, some may interpret this trend as an impoverishment
or a threat (“Does Neuroscience Threaten Human Values?” 1998)
to our manifest image of the world (i.e., our common view of human phenomena
on the basis of existing human cultures).
A parallel can be drawn here with the concept of geneticization, which
was used to criticize the uncritical acceptance of health framed predominantly
in the language of genetics (Lippman 1991, 1992). Our data suggest
that a similar phenomenon of biologization could occur in neuroscience.
Researchers engaged in affective neuroscience (Dalgleish 2004), social
neuroscience, and neurophilosophy (Churchland 2002) are exploring new
interactions between neuroscience and the social sciences and the humanities.
Hence, concerns over biologization could easily increase if the manifest
image is depicted in media as being jeopardized by the new
neuroscientific image. We predict that this turn in the potential impact of
neuroscience will surface as a key challenge in science communication.
Conclusion
The results of this study indicate that fMRI reporting follows general
patterns observed in past reporting of genomics and biotechnologies.
Disequilibrium between coverage of non-health-related research and clinical
benefits suggests that non-health-related research is galvanizing the ethical
debates surrounding neuroimaging. Analysis of the scientific issues indicates
that neuroscience may bring concerns of biologization of thought and culture
to the public foreground.
Given that the scientific complexity of the brain is overwhelming and, as
we suggest, that its social meaning is part of a wider debate, approaches to
science communication will need to be informed accordingly. In this
respect, neuroscience can be a model for further exploring principles of
multicultural communication (van Dijck 2003) and mechanisms that foster
open science communication. From the public’s point of view, when
research results are publicized and concern personality and concepts related
to self-identity, they are bound to interact with the various cultural, religious,
and secular sources of our self-identity (Taylor 1989). Broad interdisciplinary
and public dialogue is an essential element, therefore, in
ensuring the responsible communication and social impact of neuroscience.
Notes
1. Some studies have investigated neuronal differences between false and truthful memory
(Schacter, Buckner, and Koutstaal 1998) or deception (Langleben et al. 2002), while others
focus on neural mechanisms involved in the active suppression of memory (Anderson et al.
2004). Electroencephalographically derived “brain fingerprinting” has been recently promoted
as a tool for determining whether an individual is in possession of certain knowledge of a
crime (Farwell and Smith 2001). The brain exhibits specific responses when a person recognizes
significant information, such as crime scene details (Farwell and Smith 2001).
2. The use of a reliability measure that takes into account chance agreements, such as
Cohen’s ? or Krippendorff’s ?, was considered. Unfortunately, the application of these measures
to our reliability scores transformed high agreement into low ?. This is caused by the fact
that these measures imply that expected values for agreement should depend on marginal totals.
In this study, because we used mostly nonexclusive coding categories with individually low
occurrence, we were subject to the disadvantage of the assumptions built into chance correction
measures. Feinstein and Cicchetti (1990) previously demonstrated the effect of highly symmetrical
imbalances (i.e., when f1 > f2). The implications of this demonstration are sometimes
underappreciated in the literature on press content analysis. In the case in which prevalence is
unknown (such as in our case), there is no effective way to correct for the discrepancy between
the symmetrical imbalance between (0, 0) scores and (1, 1) scores. We therefore believe that
percentage agreement, with its shortcomings that we acknowledge, better reflects the reliability
of the coding for this study given the assumptions of current chance correction reliability
measures.
3. One article out of 132 described research participation and recruitment without revealing
the type of research involved.
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 139
140 Science Communication
References
Adam, D. 2003. I feel as if I’ve been entombed: Getting your head examined. The Guardian
November 20:5.
Anderson, M. C., K. N. Ochsner, B. Kuhl, J. Cooper, E. Robertson, S. W. Gabrieli, G. H. Glover,
and J. D. E. Gabrieli. 2004. Neural systems underlying the suppression of unwanted memories.
Science 303 (5655): 232-35.
Blakeslee, S. 2000. Just what’s going on inside that head of yours? The New York Times March
14:6.
Brain scam? 2004. Nature Neuroscience 7 (7): 683.
Bruer, J. T. 1998. The brain and child development: Time for some critical thinking. Public
Health Reports 113 (5): 388-98.
Cacioppo, J. T., G. G. Berntson, J. F. Sheridan, and M. K. McClintock. 2000. Multi-level integrative
analyses of human behavior: Social neuroscience and the complementing nature of
social and biological approaches. Psychological Bulletin 126 (6): 829-43.
Cardinal, G., M. Deschênes, B. M. Knoppers, T. Hudson, D. Labuda, G. Bouchard, E. Racine,
C. Fecteau, S. Truong, and C. Laberge. 2003. Statement of principles on the ethical conduct of
human genetic research involving populations. http://www.rmga.qc.ca/doc/pop/statement_
ANG_.pdf.
Churchland, P. S. 2002. Brain-wise: Studies in neurophilosophy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Condit, C. M. 2001. What is “public opinion” about genetics? Nature Reviews Genetics 2:811-15.
Condit, C. M., R. L. Parrott, and B. O’Grady. 2000. Principles and practices of communication
processes for genetics in public health. In Genetics and public health in the 21st
century: Using genetic information to improve health and prevent disease, edited by M. J.
Koury, W. Burke, and E. J. Thomson. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Conrad, P. 2001. Genetic optimism: Framing genes and mental illness in the news. Culture,
Medicine, and Psychiatry 25 (2): 225-47.
Conrad, P., and J. Gabe. 1999. Introduction: Sociological perspectives on the new genetics: An
overview. Sociology of Health & Illness 21 (5): 505-16.
Craig, D. A. 2000. Ethical language and themes in news coverage of genetic testing.
Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly 77 (1): 160-74.
Dalgleish, T. 2004. The emotional brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5 (7): 582-89.
Desmond, J. E., and S.H.A. Chen. 2002. Ethical issues in the clinical application of fMRI:
Factors affecting the validity and interpretation of activations. Brain and Cognition 50 (3):
482-97.
DiPietro, J. A. 2000. Baby and the brain: Advances in child development. Annual Review of
Public Health 21:455-71.
Does neuroscience threaten human values? 1998. Nature Neuroscience 1 (7): 535-36.
Farah, M. J., and P. R. Wolpe. 2004. Monitoring and manipulating brain function: New neuroscience
technologies and their ethical implications. Hastings Center Report 34 (3): 35-45.
Farwell, L. A., and S. S. Smith. 2001. Using brain MERMER testing to detect concealed
knowledge despite efforts to conceal. Journal of Forensic Sciences 46 (1): 1-9.
Feinstein, A. R., and D. Cicchetti. 1990. High agreement but low kappa: I. The problems of
two paradoxes. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 43 (6): 543-49.
Gardner, H., M. Csikszentmihalyi, and W. Damon. 2001. Good work: When excellence and
ethics meet. New York: Basic Books.
Geller, G., B. A. Bernhardt, and N. A. Holtzman. 2002. The media and the public reaction to
genetic research. JAMA 287:773.
Greely, H. T. 2002. Neuroethics and ELSI: Some comparisons and considerations. Presented
at Neuroethics: Mapping the Field, San Francisco, CA.
Gura, T. 2005. Big plans for little brains. Nature 435 (7046): 1156-58.
Hall, S. S. 1998. The scientific method: Test-tube moms. The New York Times April 5:22.
Hall, W., L. Carter, and K. I. Morley. 2004. Neuroscience research on the addictions:
A prospectus for future ethical and policy analysis. Addictive Behaviors 29 (7): 1481-95.
Hamilton, J. O. 2004. Journey to the center of the mind. BusinessWeek April 19:78.
Herculano-Houzel, S. 2002. Do you know your brain? A survey on public neuroscience literacy
at the closing of the decade of the brain. Neuroscientist 8 (2): 98-110.
Hinton, V. J. 2002. Ethics of neuroimaging in pediatric development. Brain and Cognition
50 (3): 455-68.
Hoag, H. 2003. Neuroengineering: Remote control. Nature 423 (6942): 796-98.
Illes, J., M. P. Kirschen, and J. D. Gabrieli. 2003. From neuroimaging to neuroethics. Nature
Neuroscience 6 (3): 205.
Illes, J., and E. Racine. 2005. Imaging or imagining? A neuroethics challenge informed by
genetics. American Journal of Bioethics 5 (2): 5-18.
Illes, J., E. Racine, and M. Kirschen. 2005. A picture is worth 1000 words, but which 1000?
In Neuroethics: Defining the issues in theory, practice and policy, edited by J. Illes.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Illes, J., and T. A. Raffin. 2002. Neuroethics: An emerging new discipline in the study of brain
and cognition. Brain and Cognition 50 (3): 341-44.
Izzetoglu, K., S. Bunce, M. Izzetoglu, B. Onaral, and K. Pourrezaei. 2004. Functional nearinfrared
neuroimaging. Presented at the 26th annual international conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, San Francisco, CA.
Jaffe, S. 2004. Fake method for research impartiality (fMRI). The Scientist July 19:64.
Kennedy, D. 2003. Neuroethics: An uncertain future. Presented at the annual meeting of the
Society for Neuroscience, New Orleans, LA, November 10.
Kohring, M., and J. Matthes. 2002. The face(t)s of biotech in the nineties: How the German
press framed modern biotechnology. Public Understanding of Science 11 (2): 143-54.
Kulynych, J. 2002. Legal and ethical issues in neuroimaging research: Human subjects protection,
medical privacy, and the public communication of research results. Brain and
Cognition 50 (3): 345-57.
Langleben, D. D., L. Schroeder, J. A. Maldjian, R. C. Gur, S. McDonald, J. D. Ragland, C. P.
O’Brien, and A. R. Childress. 2002. Brain activity during simulated deception: An eventrelated
functional magnetic resonance study. NeuroImage 15 (3): 727-32.
Lentle, B., and J. Aldrich. 1997. Radiological sciences, past and present. The Lancet 350
(9073): 280-85.
Lippman, A. 1991. Prenatal genetic testing and screening: Constructing needs and reinforcing
inequalities. American Journal of Law and Medicine 17 (1/2): 15-50.
———. 1992. Led (astray) by genetic maps: The cartography of the human genome and health
care. Social Science and Medicine 35 (12): 1469-76.
Mauron, A. 2003. Renovating the house of being. Annals of the New York Academy of Science
1001:240-52.
Mazziotta, J. C. 2000. Window on the brain. Archives of Neurology 57 (10): 1413-21.
Monasterky, R. 2001. Land mines in the world of mental maps. Chronicle of Higher Education
November 2:20.
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 141
Moreno, C., J. Lujan, and L. Moreno. 1996. La ingeniera genética humana en la prensa:
Analísis de contenido de ABC, El Pais y La Vanguardia (1988-1993). Madrid, Spain:
Instituto de Estudios Avanzados (CSIC).
Moreno, J. D. 2003. Neuroethics: An agenda for neuroscience and society. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 4 (2): 149-53.
Mulkay, M. 1994. Embryos in the news. Public Understanding of Science 3 (1): 33-51.
Nelkin, D. 1995. Selling science: How the press covers science and technology. Rev. ed. New
York: W. H. Freeman.
Neuendorf, K. A. 2002. The content analysis guidebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Open your mind. 2002. The Economist May 25.
People v. Weinstein (591 NYS 2d 715) (Sup. Ct. 1992).
Persaud, R. 2001. Who’s telling porkies about racism? Refinements in brain-scanning could
soon make the thought police a reality. The Daily Telegraph April 25:21.
Petersen, A. 2001. Biofantasies: Genetics and medicine in the print news media. Social
Science and Medicine 52 (8): 1255-68.
Priest, S. H., and J. Talbert. 1994. Mass media and the ultimate technological fix: Newspaper
coverage of biotechnology. Southwestern Mass Communication Journal 10 (1): 76-85.
Racine, E. 2003. Discourse ethics as an ethics of responsibility: Comparison and evaluation of citizen
involvement in population genomics. Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 31 (3): 390-97.
Racine, E., O. Bar-Ilan, and J. Illes. 2005. fMRI in the public eye. Nature Reviews Neuroscience
6 (2): 159-64.
Racine, E., I. Gareau, H. Doucet, G. Jobin, D. Laudy, G. Jobin, and P. Schraedley-Desmond.
2006. Hyped biomedical science or uncritical reporting? Press coverage of genomics
(1992-2001) in Québec. Social Science & Medicine 62 (5): 1278-90.
Raichle, M. 2004. Neuroethics: Emerging ethical issues in neuroscience. Presented at the
annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, San Diego, CA, October 27.
Rose, S. P. R. 2003. How to (or not to) communicate science. Biochemical Society
Transactions 31 (2): 307-12.
Rosen, A. C., A.L.W. Bodke, A. Pearl, and J. A. Yesavage. 2002. Ethical and practical issues
in applying functional imaging to the clinical management of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain
and Cognition 50 (3): 498-519.
Roskies, A. 2002. Neuroethics for the new millennium. Neuron 35 (1): 21-23.
Ross, P. 2003. Mind readers. Scientific American September:74-77.
Sample, I., and D. Adam. 2003. The brain can’t lie: Brain scans reveal how you think and feel
and even how you might behave. The Guardian November 20:4.
Schacter D. L., R. L. Buckner, and W. Koutstaal. 1998. Memory, consciousness and neuroimaging.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 353:1861-1978.
Sellars, W. 1963. Science, perception, and reality. New York: Humanities Press.
Silence of the neuroengineers. 2003. Nature 423:787.
Spinney, L. 2002. The mind readers. New Scientist September 21:38.
Study may have found test to scientifically diagnose ADHD. 1999. LRP Publications,
February.
Stufflebaum, R. S., and W. Bechtel. 1997. PET: Exploring the myth and the method.
Philosophy of Science 64 (Suppl.): S95-106.
Taylor, C. 1989. Sources of the self: The making of modern identity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Thompson, R. A., and C. A. Nelson. 2001. Developmental science and the media. American
Psychologist 56 (1): 5-15.
142 Science Communication
2003 Japan Prizes on fMRI, chaos, fractals. 2003. The Daily Yomiuri January 15:10.
van Dijck, J. 2003. After the “two cultures”: Toward a “(multi)cultural” practice of science
communication. Science Communication 25:177-90.
Williams, C., J. Kitzinger, and L. Henderson. 2003. Envisaging the embryo in stem cell
research: Rhetorical strategies and media reporting of the ethical debates. Sociology of
Health & Illness 25 (7): 793-814.
Wolpe, P. R. 2002. The neuroscience revolution. The Hastings Center Report 32 (4): 8.
Eric Racine is director of the Neuroethics Research Unit at the Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal. Previously, he was a postdoctoral fellow in the Program in Neuroethics
at the Center for Biomedical Ethics, Stanford University.
Ofek Bar-Ilan holds a bachelor of science degree in biology from the Dominican University
of California. Previously, she was a research assistant in the Program in Neuroethics at the
Center for Biomedical Ethics, Stanford University.
Judy Illes is the director of the Program in Neuroethics and a senior research scholar at Stanford
University, where she holds a joint appointment in the Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics and
the Department of Radiology.
Racine et al. / Brain Imaging 143