Charles Dickens (1812-1870), English Victorian era author wrote numerous highly acclaimed novels including his most autobiographical David Copperfield (1848-1850);

 

“Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether that station will be held by anybody else, these pages must show. To begin my life with the beginning of my life, I record that I was born (as I have been informed and believe) on a Friday, at twelve o'clock at night. It was remarked that the clock began to strike, and I began to cry, simultaneously.”

As a prolific 19th Century author of short stories, plays, novellas, novels, fiction and non, during his lifetime Dickens became known the world over for his remarkable characters, his mastery of prose in the telling of their lives, and his depictions of the social classes, mores and values of his times. Some considered him the spokesman for the poor, for he definitely brought much awareness to their plight, the downtrodden and the have-nots. He had his share of critics like Virginia Woolf and Henry James, but also many admirers, even into the 21st Century.

Gilbert Keith Chesterton wrote numerous introductions to his works, collected in his Appreciations and Criticisms of the works of Charles Dickens (1911) and in his highly acclaimed biography Charles Dickens (1906) he writes: He was the voice in England of this humane intoxication and expansion, this encouraging of anybody to be anything. Critic John Forster (1812-1876) became his best friend, editor of many of his serialisations, and official biographer after his death, publishing The Life of Charles Dickens in 1874. Scottish poet and author Andrew Lang (1844-1912) included a letter to Dickens in his Letters to Dead Authors (1886). Elbert Hubbard (1856-1915) in his Little Journeys (1916) series follows in the footsteps of Dickens through his old haunts in London. George Gissing (1857-1903) also respected his works and wrote several introductions for them, as well as his Charles Dickens: A Critical Study (1898) in which he writes: Humour is the soul of his work. Like the soul of man, it permeates a living fabric which, but for its creative breath, could never have existed. While George Orwell (1903-1950) was at times a critic of Dickens, in his 1939 essay Charles Dickens he, like many others before, again brought to light the author still relevant today and worthy of continued study: Nearly everyone, whatever his actual conduct may be, responds emotionally to the idea of human brotherhood. Dickens voiced a code which was and on the whole still is believed in, even by people who violate it. It is difficult otherwise to explain why he could be both read by working people (a thing that has happened to no other novelist of his stature) and buried in Westminster Abbey.

Charles John Huffman Dickens was born on 7 February, 1812 in Portsmouth, Hampshire, England (now the Dickens Birthplace Museum) the son of Elizabeth née Barrow (1789-1863) and John Dickens (c.1785-1851) a clerk in the Navy Pay Office. John was a congenial man, hospitable and generous to a fault which caused him financial difficulties throughout his life. He inspired the character Mr. Micawber in David Copperfield (1849-1850). Charles had an older brother Frances, known as Fanny, and younger siblings Alfred Allen, Letitia Mary, Harriet, Frederick William known as Fred, Alfred Lamert, and Augustus Newnham.

 


When Dickens’ father was transferred to Chatham in Kent County, the family settled into the genteel surroundings of a larger home with two live-in servants—one being Mary Weller who was young Charles’ nursemaid. Dickens was a voracious reader of such authors as Henry Fielding, Daniel Defoe, and Oliver Goldsmith. When he was not attending the school of William Giles where he was an apt pupil, he and his siblings played games of make-believe, gave recitations of poetry, sang songs, and created theatrical productions that would spark a lifelong love of the theatre in Dickens. But household expenses were rising and in 1824, John Dickens was imprisoned for debt in the Marshalsea Prison. All of the family went with him except for Charles who, at the age of twelve, was sent off to work at Warren’s Shoe Blacking Factory to help support the family, pasting labels on boxes. He lived in a boarding house in Camden Town and walked to work everyday and visited his father on Sundays.

It was one of the pivotal points in Dickens’ education from the University of Hard Knocks and would stay with him forever. The idyllic days of his childhood were over and he was rudely introduced to the world of the working poor, where child labour was rampant and few if any adults spared a kind word for many abandoned or orphaned children. Many of his future characters like Oliver Twist, David Copperfield, and Philip Pirrip would be based on his own experiences. The appalling working conditions, long hours and poor pay typical of the time were harsh, but the worst part of the experience was that when his father was released his mother insisted he continue to work there. While he felt betrayed by and resented her for many years to come, his father arranged for him to attend the Wellington House Academy in London as a day pupil from 1824-1827, perhaps saving him from a life of factory work and setting him on the road to becoming a writer.

In 1827 the Dickens were evicted from their home in Somers Town for unpaid rent dues and Charles had to leave school. He obtained a job as a clerk in the law firm of Ellis and Blackmore. He soon learned shorthand and became a court reporter for the Doctors Commons. He spent much of his spare time reading in the British Museum’s library and studying acting. In 1830 he met and fell in love with Maria Beadnell, though her father sent her to finishing school in Paris a few years later. In 1833, his first story of many, “A Dinner at Poplar Walk” was published in the Monthly Magazine. He also had some sketches published in the Morning Chronicle which in 1834 he began reporting for and adopted the pseudonym ‘Boz’. At this time Dickens moved out on his own to live as a bachelor at Furnival’s Inn, Holborn. His father was arrested again for debts and Charles bailed him out, and for many years later both his parents and some of his siblings turned to him for financial assistance.

Dickens’ first book, a collection of stories titled Sketches by Boz was published in 1836, a fruitful year for him. He married Catherine Hogarth, daughter of the editor of the Evening Chronicle on 2 April, 1836, at St. Luke’s in Chelsea. A year later they moved into 48 Doughty Street, London, now a museum. The couple would have ten children: Charles Culliford Boz (b.1837), Mary (Mamie) (1838-1838), Kate Macready (b.1839), Walter Landor (b.1841), Francis (Frank) Jeffrey (b.1844), Alfred Tennyson (b.1845), Sydney Smith (b.1847), Henry Fielding (b.1849), Dora Annie (1850-1851), Edward Bulwer Lytton (b.1852). Also in the same year, 1836, Dickens became editor for Bentley’s Miscellany of which Pickwick Papers (1836-1837) was first serialised.

Thus began a prolific and commercially successful period of Dickens’ life as a writer. Most of his novels were first serialised in monthly magazines as was a common practice of the time. Oliver Twist between 1837 and 1839 was followed by Nicholas Nickleby (1838-1839), The Old Curiosity Shop (1840-1841), and Barnaby Rudge (1841). Dickens’ series of five Christmas Books were soon to follow; A Christmas Carol (1843), The Chimes (1844), The Cricket on the Hearth (1845), The Battle of Life (1846), and The Haunted Man (1848). Dickens had found a readership who eagerly anticipated his next installments.

After the death of Catherine’s sister Mary in 1837 the couple holidayed in various parts of England. After Dickens resigned from Bentley’s in 1839, they moved to 1 Devonshire Terrace, Regent’s Park. Further travels to the United States and Canada in 1842 led to his controversial American Notes (1842). Martin Chuzzlewit was first serialised in 1843. The next year the Dickens traveled through Italy and settled in Genoa for a year of which his Pictures From Italy (1846) was written.

Dombey and Son (1846) was his next publication, followed by David Copperfield (1849). In 1850 he started his own weekly journal Household Words which would be in circulation for the next nine years. From 1851 to 1860 the Dickens lived at Tavistock House where Charles became heavily involved in amateur theatre. He wrote, directed, and acted in many productions at home with his children and friends, often donating the money raised from ticket sales to those in need. He collaborated with Wilkie Collins on the drama No Thoroughfare (1867). Novels to follow were Bleak House (1852-1853), Hard Times (1854), and Little Dorrit (1855-1857). In 1856 Dickens purchased Gad’s Hill, his last place of residence near Rochester in Kent County. He continued in the theatre as well, acting in Wilkie Collins’ The Frozen Deep in 1857 with actress Ellen Ternan (1839-1914) playing opposite him. The two fell in love and Dickens would leave Catherine a year later.

By now Dickens was widely read in Europe and in 1858 he set off on a tour of public readings. A year later he founded his second weekly journal All the Year Round, the same year A Tale of Two Cities (1859) was first serialised. Great Expectations (1860-1861) was followed by Our Mutual Friend (1864-1865). In 1865, traveling back from Paris with Ellen and her mother, they were involved in the disastrous Staplehurst train crash, of which Dickens sustained minor injuries, but never fully recovered from the post-traumatic shock of it. Two years later he traveled to America for a reading tour. His ‘farewell readings’ took place in London’s St. James Hall. Charles Dickens died from a cerebral hemorrhage on 9 June 1870 at his home, Gad’s Hill. He is buried in Poet’s Corner of Westminster Abbey, London, his tomb inscribed thus: “He was a sympathiser to the poor, the suffering, and the oppressed; and by his death, one of England’s greatest writers is lost to the world.” Thomas Carlyle (1795-1881), Scottish historian and author, upon hearing of his death said: The good, the gentle, high-gifted, ever-friendly, noble Dickens—every inch of him an honest man. Unfinished at his death, The Mystery of Edwin Drood was published in 1870.

My father had left a small collection of books in a little room upstairs, to which I had access (for it adjoined my own) and which nobody else in our house ever troubled. From that blessed little room, Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, Humphrey Clinker, Tom Jones, the Vicar of Wakefield, Don Quixote, Gil Blas, and Robinson Crusoe, came out, a glorious host, to keep me company. They kept alive my fancy, and my hope of something beyond that place and time, - they, and the Arabian Nights, and the Tales of the Genii, - and did me no harm; for whatever harm was in some of them was not there for me; I knew nothing of it. It is astonishing to me now, how I found time, in the midst of my porings and blunderings over heavier themes, to read those books as I did.—Ch. 4, David Copperfield

Biography written by C.D. Merriman for Jalic Inc. Copyright Jalic Inc. 2006. All Rights Reserved.

The above biography is copyrighted. Do not republish it without permission.

Previous Dickens chronologies have focused on his life and works : this one does not attempt to
repeat their work, but to supplement them by recording where he was at any given date.
Dickens did not leave a set of appointment diaries, but fortunately he did leave a lifetime of
letters, pinpointing at the head both the date and place of composition. This chronology is based
on that information as published in the awesome Pilgrim Edition of his letters published by the
Oxford University Press. The source of each entry in the chronology is identified.
There are more than 14,000 letters in Pilgrim, giving a wealth of detail for the chronology. Many
of the letters, of course, were written from his home or office, but he was an indefatigable
traveller, and in the evening he still somehow found the energy to write one from his hotel
room. Even so, there are inevitably many dates with no letter, and some of those gaps have been
(and will be) filled from information in the letters themselves, and from other reliable sources.

Dickens's novels combine brutality with fairy-tale fantasy; sharp, realistic, concrete detail with romance, farce, and melodrama.; the ordinary with the strange. They range through the comic, tender, dramatic, sentimental, grotesque, melodramatic, horrible, eccentric, mysterious, violent, romantic, and morally earnest. Though Dickens was aware of what his readers wanted and was determined to make as much money as he could with his writing, he believed novels had a moral purpose–to arouse innate moral sentiments and to encourage virtuous behavior in readers. It was his moral purpose that led the London Times to call Dickens "the greatest instructor of the Nineteenth Century" in his obituary.
During his lifetime, Charles Dickens was the most famous writer in Europe and America. When he visited America to give a series of lectures, his admirers followed him, waited outside his hotel, peered in windows at him, and harassed him in railway cars. In their enthusiasm, Dickens's admirers behaved very much like the fans of a superstar today. 

DICKENS'S CONTEMPORARY REPUTATION
Success came early to Dickens; he was twenty-five when his first novel, Pickwick Papers, appeared and made him one of the foremost writers of his day. It is an exuberantly comic novel with almost no shadows, and readers expected all of his novels to follow this pattern. His next two novels, Oliver Twist and Nicholas Nickelby, fit readers' expectations well enough, and they overlooked the social problems he exposed. As he aged, Dickens's view of his society and human nature grew increasingly somber, a fact which disturbed many readers and critics. A Tale of Two Cities was attacked for having little, if any humor.

Always concerned to make money with his writings, Dickens took seriously  the negative response many readers had to his darker novels.  He deliberately addressed their discontent when he wrote Great Expectations, which he affirmed was written "in a most singular and comic manner." In a letter to a friend, he explained:

You will not have to complain of the want of humour as in The Tale of Two Cities. I have made the opening, I hope, in its general effect exceedingly droll. I have put a child and a good-natured foolish man, in relations that seem to me very funny. Of course I have got in the pivot on which the story will turn too–and which indeed, as you will remember, was the grotesque tragi-comic conception that first encouraged me. To be quite sure that I had fallen into no unconscious repetitions, I read David Copperfield again the other day, and was affected by it to a degree you would hardly believe. 


After his death, his literary reputation waned and his novels tended not to be taken seriously. The novelist George Meredith found them intellectually lacking:

Not much of Dickens will live, because it has so little correspondence to life. He was the incarnation of cockneydom, a caricaturist who aped the moralist; he should have kept to short stories. If his novels are read at all in the future, people will wonder what we saw in them.
DICKENS AND LATER READERS
Though Dickens's novels continued to be read by large numbers of readers, his literary reputation was in eclipse. There was a tendency to see his novels as appropriate for children and young adults. From 1880 through the early part of the twentieth century, Russian writers came into vogue and were generally regarded as superior to Dickens. This preference is ironic because the Russian novelists both admired Dickens and learned from him. Turgenev praised Dickens's work and even wrote for Dickens's magazine, Household Words, during the Crimean War. Tolstoi wrote of Dickens, "All his characters are my personal friends–I am constantly comparing them with living persons, and living persons with them, and what a spirit there was in all he wrote." Dostoevsky was so impressed that he imitated the death of Little Nell, including the sentimentality, in describing the death of Nelli Valkovsky in The Insulted and the Injured (1862). Supposedly, during his exile in Siberia, he read only Pickwick Papers and David Copperfield. Even if this story is apocryphal, Dickens' influence on Uncle's Dream and The Friend of the Family (1859), written while Dostoevsky was in Siberia, is unmistakable. In yet another irony, English critics in the 1880s were puzzled by Dostoevsky's similarities to Dickens.

Dickens' literary standing was transformed in the 1940s and 1950s because of essays written by George Orwell and Edmund Wilson, who called him "the greatest writer of his time," and a full-length study by Humphrey House, The Dickens World. Critics discovered complexity, darkness, and even bitterness in his novels, and by the 1960s some critics felt that, like Shakespeare, Dickens could not be classified into existing literary categories. This view of Dickens as incomparable continues through the twentieth century. Edgar Johnson expresses the prevailing twentieth-century view in his assessment of Dickens: "Far more than a great entertainer, a great comic writer, he looks into the abyss. He is one of the great poets of the novel, a genius of his art." This is not to say that every critic or reader accepts Johnson's view; F.R. Leavis could not take Dickens so seriously: "The adult mind doesn't as a rule find in Dickens a challenge to an unusual and sustained seriousness."

In the resurgence of Dickens's reputation, his essays, sketches, and articles have received attention and praise. K.J. Fielding believes, "If he were not so well known as a novelist, he might have been recognized as a great English essayist."

A NOTE ON DICKENS'S PORTRAIT
The large portrait (above) of Dickens was painted when he was twenty-seven years old. I chose it to counteract the image we have of writers and other famous men as middleaged or old. Dickens, by his middle age, was so care-worn with deeply etched lines in his face that he looks at least ten years older; he is only fifty in the portrait on the left. The young Dickens was very good-looking and often described as pretty or delicate; he was something of a fop with his flashy waistcoats, jewelry, and flowing long hair.

 The powerful first chapter of Charles Dickens’s 1841 novel The Old Curiosity Shop presents three kinds of curiosity. The first curiosity is the city itself. Traversed at night by an aging narrator, London and its representative characters are laid out in all their gaslight ghastliness: the beggar, the exquisite, the potential suicide on the bridge, the late reveler at Covent Garden. The second curiosity is the behavior of Nell’s grandfather. What kind of guardian would leave a child alone at night? The last, and certainly least, curiosity is the shop itself: "There were suits of mail, standing like ghosts in armour here and there; fantastic carvings brought from monkish cloisters; rusty weapons of various kinds; distorted figures in china, and wood, and iron, and ivory; tapestry and strange furniture that might have been designed in dreams." Then the description ends. In what must be Dickens’s most misnamed novel, the shop hardly figures. Its gothic curios serve as a mere backdrop to the peculiar psychology of Nell’s gambling grandfather and her own frail beauty: indeed, the whole stock of the shop is sold off by the vicious Quilp by the end of chapter 13.

However inapt the title may be as a shorthand to the novel’s plot it was evocative enough to supply the name to nearly every bric-a-brac and second-hand furniture shop in New York City for the remainder of the nineteenth century. Seventeen such "Old Curiosity Shops" existed in Manhattan and six in Brooklyn in 1880 according to Trow’s business directories. From what little is known about the shops, all shared some of the characteristics that Dickens had managed to fix fictionally by 1840: they were disorganized, overstuffed, eclectic, and fading. Indeed Dickens’s descriptive legacy seems to have hung over such premises much as it did with the Five Points after Dickens recounted his visit to New York’s notorious slum in his 1842 American Notes.

 
Fig. 1. "Rare Colonial Provincial and Revolutionary Relics Recently Exhibited in Plummer Hall, Salem, Massachusetts, by the Ladies Centennial Committee; From sketches by E.R. Morse." Source: Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, January 22, 1876. Courtesy of the American Antiquarian Society.
 
Though Old Curiosity Shops continued to multiply throughout the nineteenth century they were, I believe, a recessive cultural form. New sites appeared to satisfy the public’s appetite for the curious; the museum and library placed fine curios in a clearer interpretative light, while popular museums, such as Barnum’s, illuminated their attractions in an ever flashier manner. Yet what happened on the retail side? The weak conjunction in this essay’s title poses a question about whether our modern notion of an antique finds its origin in these stores or whether it is part of a different organization of the "curious." 

Emporia of Curios

Like the Five Points, curiosity shops shared in the general problem of the unknowable, uncategorizable, and therefore "indescribable." The Old Curiosity Shop on Broadway near Bleeker, as reported in the October 24, 1878, New York Times, contained vast quantities of material: umbrella stands (one made from an elephant’s foot), walking canes, clocks, pen and ink stands, fire screens, old firearms, some particular objects of patriotic affection (including a Washington snuff box), and "ridiculous old chinaware . . . all dubbed Japanese." Many of these emporia might strike us today simply as junk stores, and indeed there were places called that, as early as the 1880s, over on Avenue A. However, the curiosity shop seemed to aim at a higher class of object that was then handled by the French term "bric-a-brac." This import, according to the Times, meant "anything quaint and ugly." Moreover, curiosity shops, unlike their junk cousins, were located on main thoroughfares. By the 1880s there was a particular cluster of stores on Broadway between Eighth and Fourteenth Streets indicating that the trade in old furniture and chinaware has been rooted in one strip where it remains today–surely a New York rarity.

Certainly, there were gradations of curios between the shops. Over in Brooklyn Heights, William Harvey Strobridge kept an extensive collection of classical antiquities, especially coins and Egyptian scarabs, as well as some fine Americana. A friend of the great antiquarian Henry Stevens and an advisor to the celebrated bibliophile James Lenox in his book and manuscript purchases, Strobridge seems to have possessed a polymathic knowledge of the coins and classical pottery that he sold to collectors. The retail side of his trade however, conducted out the front of his house, presented much more of a Dickensian jumble with seal rings, English china, snuff boxes, and walking sticks. 

Strobridge knew more about the classical period than the typical shop proprietor; the true curiosity shop owner appeared to be unconcerned about general classification, piling in the new with the old. Marley’s, on Broadway, had always included a mix of the two and when, in 1887, it moved uptown and upmarket to Seventeenth Street and Broadway under the new ownership of Sypher & Co. it compounded the confusion by becoming a specialist in reproductions of old furniture and paintings. Curiosities, of course, need not be ancient or, for that matter, authentic.

In an obvious departure from Dickens these stores always included quanta of Americana. In Flushing, New York, John Halleran’s shop was full of Revolutionary caps and swords, buckles and epaulettes, a copy of the "Village of Flushing Trustee Reports" from the eighteenth century, and old editions of Brooklyn and New York City directories. His specialty, however, was in collecting documents relating to the disposition of Indian lands on Long Island. All of these were strewn about the floor according to a visiting journalist. Historical curiosities need neither to be beautiful in themselves or in their presentation. Henry James may have said, "[T]he ancient can never be vulgar," but a general appreciation for the past and especially a sense of patriotism does not have to wear an aesthetic face. There was nothing especially beautiful about the patriotic in these shops no matter how valuable they were in terms of national or local mythology. And, like a saint’s relic, the patriotic or historic material did not even have to retain its original form. At Sypher’s furniture store one could buy a new Andrew Jackson chair made from the hickory on his estate.

"No museum ever equaled the interior," marveled the New York Times in an 1894 report on the Old Curiosity Shop on Broadway and Bleeker. "It is piled high from floor to ceiling with a nondescript condition of everything in all stages of unrepair. There is literally only a passageway through the center of the shop. It branches off where the stairs lead to the floor above and then goes on further into some mysterious rear apartments." Mysterious, indeed. But the greatest curiosity in these shops, at least to the eyes of the press, was not the oddities of inventory but rather the character of the male proprietor. John Nicklin, for example, who ran New York’s most visible Old Curiosity Shop on Park Row, was known for his collection of old clocks, jewelry, and musical instruments, but he was also celebrated for his ragged hands deformed from employment in an iron works. John Halleran’s interest in Native American material was clearly odd, but as further generous proof that he possessed the eccentric confidence of an autodidact, reporters commented that, along with his less-curious collection of illustrations of and letters by Washington and Jefferson, he savored artifacts from the Franklin Pierce presidency!

From Curios to Antiques

Overall then it seems that the New York curiosity shop kept faith with the Dickensian model. None of the stores presented much awareness of period or style, or much concern over authenticity, that would be prerequisites to our modern interest in the art object. In other words, none of these shops dealt in antiques. 

Although the term "antique" begins to appear in the 1870s, it was seldom used in the nineteenth century and then usually as an adjective connected to furniture and not as a general category of old, rare, and aesthetically pleasing material. The earliest instance of the word’s use that I have been able to find in the New York press was in promotional material disseminated by the important Levitt Brothers’ auction house, which maintained large rooms in Clinton Hall on Astor Place in the old Opera House building. In 1874 it offered an exhibition of "antiques," namely Etruscan and Roman pottery, along with some Renaissance Italian majolica, that it advertised as "of interest to the scholar and antiquarian." Not, one should note, to the homeowner.

Levitt’s auction material could only have been intended for the Metropolitan Museum of Art and other new museums in formation or for the very wealthiest of collectors. But Levitt’s use of the term "antiques" was an anomaly: the word "antiquities" was more often used to differentiate the rarest classical item from the general run of the recently "old." A modern notion of "antique," I would argue, finds its place outside of the museum within the overall sense of taste established in the domestic interior. It was not an object distinguished by an aristocratic patina or, for that matter, a republican gloss; nor was it defined by extreme rarity or links to known historical figures. After 1900, places to purchase these aesthetic objects–that is, the familiar antiques shop–rapidly filled New York business directories. Though still sometimes designated "curiosity shops," their selectivity of objects and their display strategies differentiated them from their Dickensian namesakes that continued to exist in less fashionable locations.

How do we then account for the transition from curios to antiques? Why was the change in nomenclature and character so rapid? Cultural historians have noted important long-term changes in popular historical consciousness. The "past" was indeed unappreciated in America until the very end of the nineteenth century, at least in terms of its material preservation. In this view, Americans’ obliviousness ended with an outbreak of nostalgia at the turn of the century, fanned by general concern over the heedless pace of industrial society. However, who or what exactly carried out these changes remains obscure; moreover, these changes covered decades, not years. So, we are left asking whether the rise of the antique had anything to do with Americans’ looking towards the past for guidance at a time of rapid transition, or was it the result of something more grounded in the material world–for example, the short run changes in retail display or the fashions of home decoration?

Taking the latter course, let’s consider three possible culprits. 

Agents of Antiques

The first possible agent to clarify the new distinctions between curios and antiques may have been the male collector. To the kind of antiquaries that had been operating since the early modern period the Gilded Age added a host of new-wealth hobbyists. As the Brooklyn Daily Eagle noted on May 6, 1888, it was de rigueur for financiers to make it known they were an enthusiast of some arcana. Henry Clews collected Sevres and Worcester pottery; Jay Gould, orchids; and Austin Corbin, Japanese swords. The journalist judged this to be "an elegant divertissement and an intelligent way of getting rid of superfluous income," but did not consider it of cultural importance. He dismissed the amateur collector with the standard, unanswerable refrain: "great collectors are born, not made." What is not so certain is whether the great collectors necessarily predate the standard levels of interest among the acquiring bourgeois, whether they are in the vanguard of popular taste. Pioneering collectors of American furniture and ceramics such as Irving W. Lyon and Alice Morse Earle only got going at the turn of the century and organized collaboration between collectors even later, with the formation of the exclusive Walpole Society in 1910. It is also noticeable that women were by 1900 (and contrary to Wallace Nutting’s notable remark that "Men, because they seek prettiness less than solidity, are better collectors than women") very solid in their collecting interests: Abby Rockefeller, Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, and Electra Webb were outpacing their family members in the preservation of Americana.

A second character appears in the 1870s to adjust, as it were, the relations of the producer to the consumer. Clarence Cook, a student of A. J. Downing and Calvert Vaux, published an Eastlake-influenced series of essays on home decoration that he later collected together as The House Beautiful (1878). Together with H. Hudson Holly at Harper’s, Cook led the movement to bring an arts-and-crafts sensibility into American taste. But however one may wish to place this advocacy of vernacular simplicity within a linear development of the modern concept of "antique," it is not clear whether their advocacy of lighter lines and clearer organization in domestic furnishings made much difference to the late Victorian clutter of the parlor. A journalist in the Times (January 2, 1879) suggested that such expert advice only further clouded the issue. He argued that neither the Eastlake, Queen Anne, or Renaissance modes had done much to clarify the standard of taste: "These three great troubles," (anticipating the voice of today’s "Living Section"), "have revolutionized household art. Indeed household art has revolutionized the household. What with painting and patching, glueing and mortising, our homes are wholly given over to the demon of unrest."

What was the nature of this unrest? It was not, I suspect, a new appreciation for hand craftsmanship or the patina of the ancient piece brought on by the rush of factory made goods. Factory-made "colonial revival" furniture appeared in the mid-1880s without any corresponding rush to collect the original, and "authentic" pieces were still recarved into more modern forms. The real unrest issued surely from women’s growing notions of domestic taste and control over the shape of the household. A parody from "Dark Mahogany" contained this imaginary conversation between two women in a Brooklyn curiosity shop: "My Tom has no elevated tastes, not even in high backed chairs. But must the principles of art be sacrificed to a husband’s selfishness? No man shall call me wife who cannot climb o’nights into an Elizabethan bedstead. Think what glorious memories of a golden age of literateer, as well as furnitoor, the objects of virtoo revive."

In the path towards the modern version of the antique these two tracks, the antiquarian collector and the aesthetic tastemaker, may not have been continuous, let alone in parallel. Elizabeth Stillinger, in the only scholarly account of the early U.S. antique’s trade, imagines an innovative male collector loving his Revolutionary forebears’ chair while at the same time holding a copy of Ruskin or Eastlake in his hand. Yet there is little evidence that such a composite character ever existed.

It is perhaps to women holding their copies of Ruskin that one should look for the new placement of curios. From the Civil War onwards old curiosity shops, short-lived charitable endeavors, appeared as a regular feature of church and voluntary association fairs. Despite their name these did not originate as ways to sell objects unearthed in the parishioners’ basements, like today’s bring-and-buy stands, but rather as little tableau of interesting curios, mixing the patriotic and the exotic. The origin of the charitable curiosity shop appears to lie in the fairs organized during the Civil War by women’s relief agencies and the national voluntary United States Sanitary Commission. The 1864 Brooklyn Sanitary Fair featured a whole New England kitchen, complete with a fireplace, roasting spit, and ancient kettles, all worked by upwards of thirty ladies en costume who also engaged in quilting bees, donations, wedding preparations, and other old customs. The only thing on sale was the food; objects such as a Revolutionary-era teapot and pewter set belonging to a signer of the Declaration of Independence were "relics," a spiritual form of placing detail.

The tradition of "relic rooms" and small-scale reenactments was revived during the nation’s centennial year. Although the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition glorified the promise of an industrial and commercial future, some material from America’s past, including another New England kitchen, was on display. Moreover a range of local celebrations in 1876 paid even more attention to antiquities in part because local antiquarians were especially keen on collecting history at the county level. The centennial festivities at Salem, Massachusetts, included the first exhibition on record where old furniture was arranged by century and a progression of style noted. It even drew the attention of Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper, which judged the event to be "by far the most complete and interesting exhibition of antique furniture, we venture to say, ever held in this country." By the time of the Washington Centennial Exhibition in 1889 at the Metropolitan Opera House, New York, American materials–ceramics, furniture, and metalware–relating to the first president were organized by period and displayed with aesthetic clarity. In short, a shift from the curio to the antique emerged in the practice of the fairs and charity "curiosity shops": national sentiment remained important but old objects were gradually loosened from their relic status and resituated in a new strategy of display.

The advent of the modern antique store was announced by the New York Times on February 5, 1899, with the straightforward title "How to Start an Old Curiosity Shop." Though the article began with the usual aphorisms about the great collectors being born and not made, it immediately reversed itself with the claim that modern women's knowledge of the cycles of fashion was even more essential than capital or connoisseurship in starting an antiques business. Knowing, for example, whether Lowestoft china is "all the rage" allowed one to judge the market clearly. Thus the business of antiques was primarily about style, and thus better suited to educated middle-class women than to male collectors with large amounts of discretionary cash. A fine discrimination had to be on display; one should foreground only a few choice pieces in the shop window to suggest to browsers that a selective mind was at work within. Of course, finding the ware to sell at auctions required a certain amount of pluck and publicity–but traveling abroad also had commercial advantages: "Here and there in Europe you find a peasant with an old cupboard" (although this observation came with the warning that nowadays even peasants were aware of cash value). The final piece of advice, however, was incontestable: a location for the shop had to be obtained near "the haunts of men and women of culture and money."

Here then was a thoroughly modern antique store in which the objects were arranged in cabinets or placed on tables according to style, period, and maker. Beyond their classification and physical placement, the objects were housed in an environment informed by the "taste" of an individual proprietor that, in turn, was aligned with collective fashion. A "relic" room perhaps, but one shorn of sentiment and arranged with an eye to exchange value. Gone were the piles of undifferentiated clutter, the narrow passageways, and the mysterious back room. If Little Nell had avoided her apotheosis she might have lived long enough to have made something out of her grandfather’s inventory. 

Further Reading:

As with all particular areas of New York’s trade and commerce, other than printing, banking, and shipping, the antiques trade needs a historian. This small essay has used newspapers and business directories yet the next best point of departure would be to search the archives of R. G. Dun and Company in the Baker Library, Harvard. The only general treatment of the business remains Elizabeth Stillinger’s The Antiquers: Early Collectors of American Antiques (New York, 1980), which understandably privileges the pioneer collectors of Americana. Russell Lynes’s stalwart The Tastemakers: The Shaping of American Popular Taste (New York, 1980) remains a good resource. The transformation of the environment for the retail object is covered wonderfully in William Leach’s unmatched Land of Desire; Merchants, Power and the Rise of a New American Culture (New York, 1984). 

The passage of the charitable woman into the world of commercial arts and decoration is an exciting area of scholarly activity. Among the best treatments are Michele H. Bogart's Artists, Advertising and the Borders of Art (Chicago, 1995); Diana Korzenik, Drawn to Art: A Nineteenth-Century American Dream (Hanover & London, 1985); and Laura R. Prieto, At Home in the Studio: The Professionalization of Women Artists in America (Cambridge, 2001). Two essays are especially useful: Amelia Peck’s introduction to Metropolitan Museum’s exhibition catalog Candace Wheeler: The Art and Enterprise of American Design, 1875-1900 (New Haven, 2001) and Peter McNeil’s "Designing Women, Gender, Sexuality and the Interior Decorator, c. 1890-1940," in Art History 17(34) (1994): 631-57, which explores the Vogue 1921 quotation, "Someone once said that a woman is either happily married or an Interior Decorator." The works of Ruskin, it turns out, were seen more in the hands of women in design than in those of male collectors. See Lisa Koenigsberg, "Arbiter of taste: Mrs L. C. Tutill and a tradition of American Women Writers on Architecture, 1848-1913," Women's Studies 14 (1988): 339-66. The next stage in what was then called "antiqeering" awaited the motor car. Clues to that development may be found in Virginia Scharff, Taking the Wheel: Women and the Coming of the Motor Age (New York, 1991).
  

Dickens too was fascinated with the various configurations that destinies can assume and with how we are born into a network of signifiers that govern not only our birth into the social order, but also our exit from it. Intrigued by the ways in which we are the unconscious heirs of codes and laws that constitute human culture, Dickens realizes that the shape of our destiny, if not bestowed by the stars or fairies, is the gift of equally ambiguous or mysterious forces. This fascination is evident in Dickens's earliest writings--for example, the "Madman's Manuscript" in The Pickwick Papers--but it seems particularly true of Martin Chuzzlewit. Although the original title and epigraph for the novel were deleted by Dickens before it was published in its three-volume format in 1844, their presence within the genealogy of the text, like those buried archeological artifacts that Freud compared to the unconscious, enables us to trace the evolution of the text's form and to see how sharply it focused from its very beginning, in fact, on questions of genealogy, kinship, and family structure. The original title charted out for its readers those family dynamics that would be explored in the rest of the novel, making it clear that if they wanted to understand the House of Chuzzlewit, they had to read all of the history in front of them, for it alone provided "a Complete Key to the House of Chuzzlewit": "The Life and Adventures of Martin Chuzzlewit / His Relatives, Friends, and Enemies. / Comprising All His Wills and Ways: / With an Historical Record of What He Did, and What He Didn't: / Showing, Moreover, Who Inherited the Family Plate, Who Came in for the Silver Spoons, / The Whole Forming a Complete Key to the House of Chuzzlewit."(2)



 And while the title of Martin Chuzzlewit announced to its readers those questions of kinship and family that the rest of the novel would continue to explore, the epigraph that Dickens had intended to use--"Scene: your own house. Characters: yourselves"--apprised them of the fact that even as they read the history in front of them, they too were implicated in its narrative, since it told of matters concerning not only the House of the Chuzzlewits, but their own houses and themselves as well.(3) The first chapter develops these questions yet still further, tracing the relationship between the Chuzzlewits and what Dickens refers to as "the antiquity of the race," as it follows the lineage of the Chuzzlewit family back to Adam and Eve. Martin Chuzzlewit is in fact haunted by the ways in which violent and unconscious aggressive traits are passed on from one generation to the next. Tracing through the Chuzzlewits as Ur-family how particular characteristics of the human race, the "hereditary tastes" of each generation, are passed on "through the lives of their unconscious inheritors" (2, emphasis mine), the narrator reminds us of how such characteristics or "tastes" are phylogenetically and ontogenetically encoded in our history.(4) He reflects, for example, on how the roots of human "violence and vagabondism" (1) can be traced back to Cain and Abel and to other subsequent "divers slaughterous conspiracies and bloody frays" (1). Guy Fawkes's otherwise total inexplicable place in the Chuzzlewit family tree makes sense as an ancestral presence whose regicidal history anticipates other narratives of Oedipal desire and conflict (especially the story of attempted parricide involving Jonas and Anthony Chuzzlewit) woven into the English sections of the novel. As such, he is a mysterious ancestor not only in the Chuzzlewit family tree, but in all family trees and thus is also present in the American sections as well. For by the time young Martin and Mark Tapley arrive in America, Guy Fawkes is already there, his history anticipating those transgressions against authority and patriarchy that have been written into America's myths of its origin and destiny.

 The unconscious, Freud reminds us, is eternal and timeless, and both the English and American sections of Martin Chuzzlewit chart the return of ancient and powerful stories plotted along what Ellie Ragland-Sullivan has referred to as the "path of repetition in the here and now."(5) However, in the American episodes of the novel, these timeless stories assume their own particular paths and narrative patterns. The stormy and complex history of Dickens's relationship with America resembles that of a painful love affair, for it is a tale of love and hate, dreams nurtured and then betrayed. The editors of the third volume of the Pilgrim Edition of Dickens's letters, by far the single most important source for anyone interested in the full history of that relationship, suggest that Dickens's response to America moved from "delighted gratification at his welcome to disenchantment and even repulsion."(6) As they also point out, "English travellers naturally read each others' books" (L, viii), and Dickens too, prior to his first American visit, read the writings of those who had preceded him to America, including Harriet Martineau's three-volume work, Society in America (1837) and Retrospect of Western Travel (1838) and Marryat's A Diary in America (1839). After he returned from America, he also spoke warmly of Mrs. Trollope's Domestic Manners of the Americans (1832).

 But however many earlier travellers Dickens might have read, the representation of America that we find in Martin Chuzzlewit is distinctly its own, differing not only from those that come before it, but also from Dickens's earlier American Notes as well. In writing to Forster of his American experiences, Dickens speaks of "the sublimated essence of comicality that I could distill, from the materials I have" (L, xv, emphasis Dickens's), and given the often abrasive as well as subversive nature of Dickens's comic vision, it should not surprise us that Dickens's America is a more disturbing and compelling landscape than that charted by his predecessors. For in Martin Chuzzlewit, we find a particular tale of national identity and repressed desire.

 Questions of kinship and genealogy are at the heart of both the English and American sections of Martin Chuzzlewit, but the latter focus more on the question of human nature itself--in other words, on the relationship between human and nature, and specifically the ways in which we as human subjects cannot remain within nature, but rather must enter into those various symbolic structures that constitute culture.(7) Introduced into the novel as early as the first chapter with its references to the eighteenth-century theories of Blumenbach and Monboddo, both concerned with the origin and nature of human nature, as they respectively trace our beginnings back to the swine or the orang-outang, this particular line of inquiry also suggests the degree to which, as is often the case, Dickens's concerns reflect those central philosophical questions of his age. Rousseau's and Marx's formulations, for example, concerning the relationship between the human and the natural are in this particular case especially helpful in amplifying those issues explored by Martin Chuzzlewit.

Readers such as Magnet and Meckier have spoken of Dickens's disillusionment with America--not only of his disenchantment with the American experiment itself, but also of his loss of faith in Rousseau's vision of nature and the possibilities of human fulfillment or happiness within it. However, one could argue that it is not so much a matter of Dickens having abandoned Rousseau's visions as of his having come closer to some of the more troubling or ambiguous aspects of that vision. Like Dickens, Rousseau found the relationship between the natural and the human to be problematic, arguing that sublimation and repression, the price we must pay to enter human culture, take their toll in fire, war, and other manifestations of violence and aggression. In the ninth chapter of his On the Origin of Languages, for example, Rousseau ponders the question of what could have prompted human beings to exchange a life of nature for a life of language and culture: "the earth nourishes men," he writes, "but when their initial needs have dispersed them, other needs arise, and it is only then that they speak, and that they have any incentive to speak" (39).(8) But why, he asks, would they ever give up a life of nature, especially when the "life of language and culture" inevitably leads to misery and crime: how could they "ever be induced to give up their primitive liberty" (38) and create a society that "leads to property, government, and laws, and gradually to the misery and crime that are inseparable from the knowledge of good and evil" (37). In his commentary on this chapter, Derrida suggests that "there is something catastrophic in the movement that brings about the emergence from the state of nature and in the awakening of the imagination" (258), observing that such a movement for Rousseau is inextricably associated with the interdiction of incest, the need to prevent, as Rousseau expresses it, a man and woman from becoming "husband and wife without ceasing to be brother and sister" (45). Only after the festival, Rousseau's image of human community and ritual, did incest become a transgressive act. Before that time, Rousseau suggests, "instinct held the place of passion, habit held the place of preference" (45).

 In his Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, Marx does not raise the question of incest, but he similarly argues that human history is the story of our origins or beginnings in nature and also of our alienation from it. Marx points out, for example, that when we observe that "man's physical and spiritual life is linked to nature," we are really only saying that "nature is linked to itself, for man is a part of nature."(9) Yet, Marx also stresses the fact that human history involves our estrangement from nature: "the nature which comes to bear in human history," he writes, "the genesis of human society--is man's real nature; hence nature as it comes to be through industry, even though in an estranged form, is true anthropological nature" (90, emphasis Marx's). We can come into full realization of consciousness, Marx argues, only within a social community that enables us to realize our "natural" or human capabilities. Transcendence of alienation is brought about not through an attempt to escape or flee from the human, but rather by embracing its possibilities within a society forged through history as shaped by the activity of men and women: thus Marx defines "communism" as the "complete return of man to himself as a social (i.e., human) being--a return become conscious, and accomplished within the entire wealth of previous development." It is, he suggests, "the genuine resolution of the conflict between man and nature and man and man" (84), a state in which humanism and naturalism are no longer at odds, but rather are the equal of one another.(10)

Mrs. Aquino's Foreign Minister, Raul S. Manglapus, a long-

 time nationalist, says Manila "must slay the father image" to

 grow up.

 The New York Times, 20 October 1989

 "The unconscious is that chapter of my history," writes Lacan, "that is marked by a blank or occupied by a falsehood: it is the censored chapter" (Ecrits, 50); but, as he also points out, this censored chapter finds articulation along historical lines as well as in national archives and legends. If, as Margaret Drabble suggests, the "unthought holds us in thrall," then Dickens's America is held in thrall by what it does not know but also knows only too well.(15) Like Nadgett, the novel's English detective and its quintessential voyeur, Martin Chuzzlewit is obsessed with the secret and the censored. "We never know what's hidden in each other's breasts," observes Mrs. Gamp, adding that "if we had glass winders there, we'd need to keep the shutters up, some on us, I do assure you" (400). Nadgett, the novel's English detective, observes at one point that "nothing has an interest in it to me that's not a secret," and in this respect, America would be at once his nightmare and his wet dream, for although it is a country permeated by the hidden or concealed, no secrets, however private or repressed, seem safe within it. Young Martin suggests that American newspapers are "horribly personal" (226), and as their names--The New York Sewer, The New York Family Spy, and the New York Keyhole Reporter--indicate, Martin's assessment seems accurate. These newspapers are not only the objects of Dickens's own satiric or comic impulses, however, but they themselves also participate in those dynamics of the joke that Freud identifies when he observes how the joke "bring[s] forward something that is concealed or hidden."(16)

 And that which is hidden but also brought forward by the joke often "possesses strong elements of the excremental or infantile images of the sexual" (Jokes, 97--98). "Words have naughty company among them" (50), Dickens suggests in Martin Chuzzlewit, and the American newspapers, like Dickens's words, keep naughty company, proudly declaring their kinship with the dirty joke. Their task is to disclose, to peep and listen through keyholes and to tell of what they see. They are committed to printing the unprintable, exposing that which should remain hidden or concealed: "Here's this morning's New York Sewer.... Here's this morning's New York Stabber. Here's this morning's New York Private Listener. Here's the New York Peeper. Here's the New York Plunderer. Here's the New York Keyhole Reporter (220), cry the street vendors, promising juicy tales of the "last Alabama gouging case; and the interesting Arkansas dooel with Bowie knives ... the Sewer's own particulars of the private lives of all the ladies that was there" (220).

 However offensive such voyeurism might seem, the body politic of America can stand some scrutiny, for it is a diseased and disturbed body, as Mr. Bevan implies, drawing upon appropriate gastro-intestinal imagery in the midst of such flatulent journalism to tell of how the American newspapers enable "the bubbling passions of my country [to] find a vent" (220). Like the laughter and festivals of Bakhtin's folk-culture, these newspapers show us the backside and inside of the body as well as the body politic, voyeuristically participating in and identifying those regions of taboo or the forbidden uncovered by them.(17) For however interested Dickens may have been in the American press, he was even more fascinated by America's unconscious texts and how they find articulation in its history. The unconscious as censored chapter can be found, Lacan tells us, "in traditions ... and legends which, in a heroicized form, bear my history" (Ecrits, 50), and during young Martin's stay in America, he hears of such "heroicized" legends and traditions, as the Americans do America in many voices, but all telling the same story. Freedom in America, celebrated in both public and private voices, is identified with participation in a natural or primeval state, and thus its citizens envision themselves as the children of freedom and the offspring of nature, related to the bears, buffalo, and wolves. As one American, Elijah Pogram, observes (in a speech that was actually given by a San Francisco lawyer in defense of his client, working its way east in time for Dickens to hear about it during his visit):

 He is a true-born child of this free hemisphere! Verdant as

 the mountains of our country; bright and flowing as our min-
eral Licks; unspiled by withering conventionalities as air our

 broad and boundless Perarers! Rough he may be. So air our

 Barrs. Wild he may be. So air our Buffalers. But he is a child

 of Natur, and a child of Freedom; and his boastful answer to

 the Despot and Tyrant is, that his bright home is in the Set-

 ting Sun. (460)(18)

 Dickens's American, however, is not only a child, but a violent and angry male child. Anticipating the NRA in quasi-comic ways, Hannibal Chollop is a "child of Natur and a child of Freedom" (448), armed with a "brace of revolving pistols in his coat-pocket, with seven barrels apiece," a sword stick he refers to as the "Tickler," and a great knife, the "Ripper" that he uses as "a means of ventilating the stomach of any adversary in a close contest" (448).

 The American voices that Martin and Mark hear repeat this tale of natural origin and childlike nature, returning through myth and legend to its various scenarios and scripts because they have failed to grow beyond it. Attempting to inhabit a world represented as newly born or unfallen, the Americans reject, often violently, any suggestion that their desire for wholeness or unity cannot be realized. What they seek is newness itself, a rebirth that will allow them to be cleansed of the past and to escape the burden of time and history. The contrast between the Americans and England's Tom Pinch is in this respect particularly telling. In speaking at one point of an advertising sheet and how things "never seem to come together," Tom suggests that the advertisers probably find it comforting to confess that "I want such a thing, and I can't get it, and I don't expect I ever shall" (488). "Life on this earth," Tom observes, constantly reminds us of the gap between desire and fulfillment.

 The Americans, on the other hand, will have none of this, denying that such a gap exists. As such, America is a trope, standing for something else, identifying that which cannot be named directly. America, Dickens suggests, attempts to inhabit its own dreams or constructions about itself, creating a language and set of myths through which it perpetuates and sustains such dreams. Fascinated by the American language, Dickens is also intrigued by how the Americans seem unable to distinguish between the word as symbol and that which it signifies. Judging from their description of themselves, the Americans are all "most remarkable," most of them are either generals or colonels, and all are representative children of nature and freedom. Invoking a language that often bears only a remote relationship to the reality it attempts to represent, the Americans find their emblematic voice in that of the American Literary Ladies, the "LLs," whose transcendental chant consists of words unsullied by referentiality, existing only within their own solipsistic chambers of thought: "Mind and matter ... glide swift into the vortex of immensity. Howls the sublime, and softly sleeps the calm Ideal, in the whispering chambers of the imagination" (467).

 Language itself testifies, however, to separation and difference, and, having fallen into speech, Dickens's America, contrary to its own professions, is not Rousseau's pastoral or pre-festival landscape. Rather, in drawing upon the authority of Rousseau, Locke, and others, America denies, through its historical documents and archives, such as The Declaration of Independence, the legitimacy of England's authority. Mid-nineteenth century America is still reenacting, Dickens suggests, its earlier battles with England, battles which were themselves but repetitions of still earlier conflicts structured along kinship lines and reflecting those Oedipal antagonisms and desires identified by Dickens in the introductory chapter. Repetition, Freud tells us in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, enables us to remember or recollect what would otherwise remain repressed, and the most important narratives of America's history, Dickens suggests, are not those that are publicly celebrated, but rather those repressed narratives of desire that are plotted out along lines of repetition.

 But just as the opening chapter of Martin Chuzzlewit identifies lacunae--for example, Toby Chuzzlewit's lineage--within those ambiguous documents and legends concerning the Chuzzlewit family history, so too does this particular narrative of America's history, telling of unconscious scenarios and conflicts, find only indirect articulation. Bevan observes that America was born late enough to "escape the ages of bloodshed and cruelty through which other nations have passed" (239), but the novel suggests otherwise, arguing that America perpetuates or repeats those patterns of aggression and violence inscribed in its myths of origin and beginnings. Guilty of the parricide celebrated in such myths (like Freud, Dickens--through the Jonas and Anthony Chuzzlewit story--reminds us that guilt arises not from the act committed but from the act desired), America is caught up within patterns of repetition in which Oedipal conflicts are reenacted in the hostile disputation between "the old World and the New" (449). In its antagonism towards the "old world," and its continued resistance to external change and the forces of acculturation, America in Martin Chuzzlewit seems frozen at a particular point in its history, compelled, like the hysteric, to repeat or relive this moment through various substitutive reenactments of it. And as such, those various incantations heard within the American dialogue are all versions of the same choric refrain
