A Dialogue with oneself, August 30 1977
Brockwood Park 1st public dialogue, August 30 1977
A DIALOGUE WITH ONESELF
I realize that love cannot exist when there is jealousy; love cannot
exist when there is attachment. Now, is it possible for me to be free
of jealousy and attachment? I realize that I do not love. That is a
fact. I am not going to deceive myself; I am not going to pretend to
my wife that I love her. I do not know what love is. But I do know
that I am jealous and I do know that I am terribly attached to her
and that in attachment there is fear, there is jealousy, anxiety; there
is a sense of dependence. I do not like to depend but I depend
because I am lonely; I am shoved around in the office, in the
factory and I come home and I want to feel comfort and
companionship, to escape from myself. Now I ask myself: how am
I to be free of this attachment? I am taking that just as an example.
At first, I want to run away from the question. I do not know
how it is going to end up with my wife. When I am really detached
from her my relationship to her may change. She might be attached
to me and I might not be attached to her or to any other woman.
But I am going to investigate. So I will not run away from what I
imagine might be the consequence of being totally free of all
attachment. I do not know what love is, but I see very clearly,
definitely, without any doubt, that attachment to my wife means
jealousy, possession, fear, anxiety and I want freedom from all
that. So I begin to enquire; I look for a method and I get caught in a
system. Some guru says: "I will help you to be detached, do this
and this; practise this and this." I accept what he says because I see
the importance of being free and he promises me that if I do what
he says I will have reward. But I see that way that I am looking for
reward. I see how silly I am; wanting to be free and getting
attached to a reward.
I do not want to be attached and yet I find myself getting
attached to the idea that somebody, or some book, or some method,
will reward me with freedom from attachment. So, the reward
becomes an attachment. So I say: "Look what I have done; be
careful, do not get caught in that trap." Whether it is a woman, a
method, or an idea, it is still attachment. I am very watchful now
for I have learned something; that is, not to exchange attachment
for something else that is still attachment.
I ask myself: "What am I to do to be free of attachment?" What
is my motive in wanting to be free of attachment? Is it not that I
want to achieve a state where there is no attachment, no fear and so
on? And I suddenly realize that motive gives direction and that
direction will dictate my freedom. Why have a motive? What is
motive? A motive is a hope, or a desire, to achieve something. I see
that I am attached to a motive. Not only my wife, not only my idea,
the method, but my motive has become my attachment! So I am all
the time functioning within the field of attachment - the wife, the
method and the motive to achieve something in the future. To all
this I am attached. I see that it is a tremendously complex thing; I
did not realize that to be free of attachment implied all this. Now, I
see this as clearly as I see on a map the main roads, the side roads
and the villages; I see it very clearly. Then I say to myself: "Now,
is it possible for me to be free of the great attachment I have for my
wife and also of the reward which I think I am going to get and of
my motive?" To all this I am attached. Why? Is it that I am
insufficient in myself? Is it that I am very very lonely and therefore
seek to escape from that feeling of isolation by turning to a woman,
an idea, a motive; as if I must hold onto something? I see that it is
so, I am lonely and escaping through attachment to something from
that feeling of extraordinary isolation.
So I am interested in understanding why I am lonely, for I see it
is that which makes me attached. That loneliness has forced me to
escape through attachment to this or to that and I see that as long as
I am lonely the sequence will always be this. What does it mean to
be lonely? How does it come about? Is it instinctual, inherited, or is
it brought about by my daily activity? If it is an instinct, if it is
inherited, it is part of my lot; I am not to blame. But as I do not
accept this, I question it and remain with the question. I am
watching and I am not trying to find an intellectual answer. I am
not trying to tell the loneliness what it should do, or what it is; I am
watching for it to tell me. There is a watchfulness for the loneliness
to reveal itself. It will not reveal itself if I run away; if I am
frightened; if I resist it. So I watch it. I watch it so that no thought
interferes. Watching is much more important than thought coming
in. And because my whole energy is concerned with the
observation of that loneliness thought does not come in at all. The
mind is being challenged and it must answer. Being challenged it is
in a crisis. In a crisis you have great energy and that energy
remains without being interfered with by thought. This is a
challenge which must be answered.
I started out having a dialogue with myself. I asked myself what
is this strange thing called love; everybody talks about it, writes
about it - all the romantic poems, pictures, sex and all other areas
of it? I ask: is there such a thing as love? I see it does not exist
when there is jealousy, hatred, fear. So I am not concerned with
love anymore; I am concerned with `what is', my fear, my
attachment. Why am I attached? I see that one of the reasons - I do
not say it is the whole reason - is that I am desperately lonely,
isolated. The older I grow the more isolated I become. So I watch
it. This is a challenge to find out, and because it is a challenge all
energy is there to respond. That is simple. If there is some
catastrophe, an accident or whatever it is, it is a challenge and I
have the energy to meet it. I do not have to ask: "How do I get this
energy?" When the house is on fire I have the energy to move;
extraordinary energy. I do not sit back and say: "Well, I must get
this energy" and then wait; the whole house will be burned by then.
So there is this tremendous energy to answer the question: why
is there this loneliness? I have rejected ideas, suppositions and
theories that it is inherited, that it is instinctual. All that means
nothing to me. Loneliness is `what is'. Why is there this loneliness
which every human being, if he is at all aware, goes through,
superficially or most profoundly? Why does it come into being? Is
it that the mind is doing something which is bringing it about? I
have rejected theories as to instinct and inheritance and I am
asking: is the mind, the brain itself, bringing about this loneliness,
this total isolation? Is the movement of thought doing this? Is the
thought in my daily life creating this sense of isolation? In the
office I am isolating myself because I want to become the top
executive, therefore thought is working all the time isolating itself.
I see that thought is aIl the time operating to make itself superior,
the mind is working itself towards this isolation.
So the problem then is: why does thought do this? Is it the
nature of thought to work for itself? Is it the nature of thought to
create this isolation? Education brings about this isolation; it gives
me a certain career, a certain specialization and so, isolation.
Thought, being fragmentary, being limited and time binding, is
creating this isolation. In that limitation, it has found security
saying: "I have a special career in my life; I am a professor; I am
perfectly safe." So my concern is then: why does thought do it? Is
it in its very nature to do this? Whatever thought does must be
limited. Now the problem is: can thought realize that whatever it
does is limited, fragmented and therefore isolating and that
whatever it does will be thus? This is a very important point: can
thought itself realize its own limitations? Or am I telling it that it is
limited? This, I see, is very important to understand; this is the real
essence of the matter. If thought realizes itself that it is limited then
there is no resistance, no conflict; it says, "I am that". But if I am
telling it that it is limited then I become separate from the
limitation. Then I struggle to overcome the limitation, therefore
there is conflict and violence, not love.
So does thought realize of itself that it is limited? I have to find
out. I am being challenged. Because I am challenged I have great
energy. Put it differently: does consciousness realize its content is
itself? Or is it that I have heard another say: "Consciousness is its
content; its content makes up consciousness"? Therefore I say,
"Yes, it is so". Do you see the difference between the two? The
latter, created by thought, is imposed by the `me'. If I impose
something on thought then there is conflict. It is like a tyrannical
government imposing on someone, but here that government is
what I have created.
So I am asking myself: has thought realized its own limitations?
Or is it pretending to be something extraordinary, noble, divine? -
which is nonsense because thought is based on memory. I see that
there must be clarity about this point: that there is no outside
influence imposing on thought saying it is limited. Then, because
there is no imposition there is no conflict; it simply realizes it is
limited; it realizes that whatever it does - its worship of god and so
on - is limited, shoddy, petty - even though it has created
marvellous cathedrals throughout Europe in which to worship.
So there has been in my conversation with myself the discovery
that loneliness is created by thought. Thought has now realized of
itself that it is limited and so cannot solve the problem of
loneliness. As it cannot solve the problem of loneliness, does
loneliness exist? Thought has created this sense of loneliness, this
emptiness, because it is limited, fragmentary, divided and when it
realizes this, loneliness is not, therefore there is freedom from
attachment. I have done nothing; I have watched the attachment,
what is implied in it, greed, fear, loneliness, all that and by tracing
it, observing it, not analysing it, but just looking, looking and
looking, there is the discovery that thought has done all this.
Thought, because it is fragmentary, has created this attachment.
When it realizes this, attachment ceases. There is no effort made at
all. For the moment there is effort - conflict is back again.
In love there is no attachment; if there is attachment there is no
love. There has been the removal of the major factor through
negation of what it is not, through the negation of attachment. I
know what it means in my daily life: no remembrance of anything
my wife, my girl friend, or my neighbour did to hurt me; no
attachment to any image thought has created about her; how she
has bullied me, how she has given me comfort, how I have had
pleasure sexually, all the different things of which the movement
of thought has created images; attachment to those images has
gone.
And there are other factors: must I go through all those step by
step, one by one? Or is it all over? Must I go through, must I
investigate - as I have investigated attachment - fear, pleasure and
the desire for comfort? I see that I do not have to go through all the
investigation of all these various factors; I see it at one glance, I
have captured it.
So, through negation of what is not love, love is. I do not have
to ask what love is. I do not have to run after it. If I run after it, it is
not love, it is a reward. So I have negated, I have ended, in that
enquiry, slowly, carefully, without distortion, without illusion,
everything that it is not - the other is.
BROCKWOOD PARK 1ST PUBLIC DIALOGUE
30TH AUGUST 1977
I believe we are going to have a discussion but I am afraid that
word implies that we are trying to find truth through argument,
debate. And with so many people I am afraid discussion is not
possible. Nor is dialogue - dialogue being a conversion between
two people, people who are friendly. And that is also not possible
with so many people. And also we thought of having about ten or
twelve people in front here, have a dialogue with them and those
who want to join in come in also. But that also is not possible. So
what shall we do? Shall we have a question and answer meeting; or
a dialogue with two or three people who are seriously enough
concerned with their life, with their surroundings and their
environment, with politics and so on to have a dialogue with those
few people, and those who wish to join in can, so that they are not
chosen specially or that anyone is excluded? So what shall we do?
Q: The latter.
K: Which is, question and answer?
Q: No dialogue.
Q: A few people talking.
K: You want a few people talking? Now, who is going to
choose the few people? If I choose, or if somebody else chooses,
you will consider there are our favourites.
Q: Let those who wish come forward and be part of the
dialogue.
Q: Questions and answers are the simplest.
K: Question and answer: would you like that?
So would you like a question and answer meeting? Or a
dialogue between two or three people? And you choose those two
or three people - not the speaker but somebody.
Q: Play it by ear.
K: How do you do that?
Can we start off, if I may suggest, with a question and answer
meeting, and then see how that works out. And then out of the
questions and answers we will find who can really have a dialogue,
who can exchange, who can say, look, I don't understand, what do
you mean by that? Let us talk about it much more so that there is a
conversation between the speaker and yourself. Can we try that?
Question and answer first, then a dialogue - that is, a conversation
between two or three people. We will see how this works out.
Just a minute: before you put questions please, we are asking
questions affecting our life, our daily life. How to bring about, or
rather, is it possible to bring about a radical transformation in our
daily existence, in our consciousness, a radical change in our whole
way of thinking, looking, observing, acting? That is what we are
concerned with. And if you ask questions, hypothetical questions,
or theoretical questions I am afraid I won't answer. That is fairly
simple and clear. Please ask questions directly concerning yourself
because you are the rest of the humanity, and if you want to find
out how to resolve your problems, how to look at life as a totally
different thing, from that ask questions, then it is worthwhile. But
if you discuss, ask questions which are not actual, factual but
theoretical then I am afraid, at least I won't be able to answer them.
Q: I see that there is a common thing amongst us all the time.
And I can't see it, I can't hear it, but I think there is something. Can
you tell us what it is about?
K: What is the problem, sir?
Q: That there is something common amongst all human beings,
what is that?
K: We have explained very carefully during these talks, and in
the past, that wherever you go in the world human beings are
caught in a trap of sorrow, misery, confusion, uncertainty, disorder
and so on and so on. That is the common factor of all human
beings living on this unfortunate earth.
Q: Do you see that the psychological fear, greed and violence in
each one of us is a direct transformation of the physical violence
through the other senses for profit and food? Or in other words,
killing animals is a prime cause of our misery?
K: I haven't understood. Killing animals...
Q: ...for the food and profit.
K: What is the question sir.
Q: Do you think that the psychological fear, greed and violence
in each one of us is a direct transformation of physical violence
over the centuries?
K: Oh, I see. Biologists and others have said that in the process
of evolution we are the result of the animal and so on. The animals
are violent, therefore we have inherited that violence. Now what is
the question? The question is, whether human beings can be free of
that violence.
Q: That's right.
K: Are we really concerned about it? And that is a matter of
daily occupation that you really deeply, profoundly seriously -
there is an urge to be free of that? Just a minute sir. That is the
question I am asking. If it is, then let's talk about it. Otherwise if
you say, "Well theoretically I would like to be free but I am going
to kill animals all the same", then it has no meaning.
So what is violence? How does violence arise? And there is not
only physical violence, hitting each other, throwing bombs at each
other, killing each other, but also there are various forms of
violence. It is violence when human beings are in conflict
psychologically. That is a form of violence, surely? It is another
form of violence when we imitate, when we conform, when we
follow - all those are indications, like being angry and so on, are a
form of violence. Right? So when we talk about violence we are
not only talking about psychological factors of violence but also
the physical actions of violence - hitting each other, throwing
bombs at each other and so on and so on. The terrorists, the
totalitarian states which suppress people - all that is a form of
violence. Right?
Now is it possible to be free of that violence, psychologically?
Let's begin psychologically, not physically. We are saying is it
possible? It is only possible, isn't it, when you can come face to
face with it and deal with it - not have theories, ideals of nonviolence
and all the rest of it. Right? That is an escape from the
fact. I want to be free from violence, therefore there must be an
awareness of all the factors of violence, and observe them, not run
away from them, not say, "I must change them", "I must become
non-violent". In becoming non-violent you are in conflict. Right?
Because you are violent and you want to become non-violent and
therefore you make an effort and that very effort is a form of
violence. Can we go on from there?
So is it possible to be free of violence and look at the whole
issue, the complex problem of violence, psychologically? Which
means, are we imitating, conforming, adjusting ourselves to a
pattern which we or others have established for us? All those are
symptoms of violence, like anger, hatred, jealousy. Now can we
remain with that factor of violence and be aware choicelessly of
the whole structure of violence? Will you do it? Are you doing it
now? Are you doing it, sir, the questioner? Is the questioner, who
put that question, is he doing it? Or is it just a theory about
violence? Where there is division between man and man, woman
and man, and so on there must be conflict, which is a form of
violence. Nationalism and so on are a form of violence. Obviously.
When there are two dogmatic beliefs, each trying to convert each
other, oppose each other, it is a form of violence. So are we aware
of this factor in our life? And when you become aware of it what
are you going to do? Do you say, "Yes, I am aware of it" but carry
on with violence? Therefore it becomes a very serious matter. If
one is really to be free of violence, to look at it, to live with it, to
understand it, to go into it and see all the multiple forms of
violence, totally to be acquainted with it - and when you are
acquainted with something it flowers and then it withers away, you
don't have to fight it. Will you do it?
Q: Are you saying that we become violent to understand it?
K: We are not saying we become violent - we are violent!
Q: What do you mean by flowering?
K: Sir, look: I am violent. I observe it. Because I don't run away
from it, I don't suppress it, I don't transform it into something else
as non-violence, which is absurd - the transformation of violence in
to non-violence is stupidity, it has no meaning. So as I am violent, I
let it come out - not in action. Let it flower, let it grow, as you
watch it, it grows and dies. Haven't you done all this? That is sir,
when you are angry, at that moment of anger you are not aware,
you are full out. Then a second later you say, "I have been angry".
Right? So you have divided yourself as not being angry and that
you have been angry. So there is a division between the observer
who says, "I have been angry, and I must not be angry". Right? So
the division brings about conflict, saying "I mustn't be angry, how
am I to get rid of my anger" - and so on and so on. Whereas if you
are aware of anger as it arises and let it come out non-verbally, nonactively,
not say, "I am going to hit you" - let it flower, let it come
out, and you will see it disappears very quickly and withers away.
And if you do it properly you are never angry again, finished.
Q: Can you do the same thing with fear?
K: Same thing with fear.
Q: Sir, when you say you should observe the totality of
yourself, I find that very hard to do because I can only see what is
coming up in the present moment. Now is that the totality of
myself? Or is it the whole feelings, the whole of the mental
consciousness?
K: Sir, now let's go into that, shall we? Is it possible to be
totally aware of the whole content of one's consciousness? That is
the question, isn't it? Have I misunderstood the question?
Q: In one moment.
K: I am coming to that. First I am asking if I am telling you
what the questioner is saying accurately? The questioner is asking
whether it is possible to see the whole of the content of
consciousness at one perception and to be totally aware of the
whole thing? Is it possible when you have lived a partial life all the
time? Right? You look at life partially, don't you? You are a
business man, you are a doctor, you are a politician, you are a
scientist, you are an artist, you are a writer, you are a labourer, a
woman and so on. Those are all divided parts, aren't they? And our
whole conditioning is to look at life in parts. Right? Are you
following this? In parts. Therefore our conditioning is going to
prevent seeing the totality, the whole of consciousness at one
instant. So our concern then is not how to observe the totality of
consciousness, but why does the mind, or the brain observe
partially? Why is the brain not capable of observing the total
affair? The brain has been conditioned through millenia to look at
life partially. Right? That is clear, isn't it? You are all looking at
life in fragments. Then my concern is - if I have a concern about it
- our concern then is why does the mind or the brain observe in
fragments? Right? Why?
Q: What do you mean by observing in fragments?
K: Don't we live that way? In the office I am brutal, ambitious, I
want success, I am ruthless. At home - I come home and say,
"Darling, how are you?"
Q: Sir that seems almost optional. Whereas society seems to
demand that we become more specialized.
K: Yes. Society demands that we become more specialized,
which is fragmentation. Society demands it because they need
more engineers and so on and so on. But psychologically we are
asking why does the brain function in fragments? As we were
saying, it has been conditioned that way for millenia. Now is it
possible to be free of that conditioning? Not how to look at the
totality, but to be free of the conditioning as a nationalist, Arab,
Jew, specialist, doctor and so on? To take life as a whole. Because
there is security in fragments - in fragmentation both
physiologically as well as psychologically, that is obvious, isn't it?
No? I specialize in becoming a guru - and I find in that
specialization a great deal of security - both physical as well as
psychologically. I specialize as a doctor, as an engineer, as a
businessman, as a priest, as a salesman, whatever you like, in that
fragmentation of life, in the fragments there is a great deal of
security. And the brain and all the structure of the brain demands
security. So it has found security in a fragment. Now is there
security in a fragment? Follow it up please. Is there security in
division - as a Hindu, as a Muslim, as a Christian, as an Arab, as a
Jew, or in a specialized career? Is there security? That is for you to
answer. I can't answer. If there is no security, and to find out that
there is no security is the beginning of intelligence, isn't it? To say
there is security in being a Communist or a Catholic - I am taking
those two as an example - if I am a Catholic, in a Catholic country
I feel very safe. Psychologically I believe and all the rest of it. In
that belief, in that conditioning there is security. And in the same
way if I am a Communist, theoretically I believe in certain
concepts of society, in the power of the State and so on and so on,
control, and in believing that there is a great deal of security.
So one has to find out if there is security in division. Right?
However profitable, however pleasurable, however comforting, is
there security in division, which is fragmentation? Obviously not.
Now to find out that, to find out that there is no security in
fragmentation is the beginning of intelligence. It is only the
unintelligent who accept division and live in that division. Right?
Q: Sir, if we are serious people, can the skill you spoke of...
K: Ah, wait. We haven't finished this question? This is a very
complex question, it is not just a couple of minutes. We live a
fragmentary life. The essence of fragmentation is the 'me'. Right?
The 'me' and the 'you', 'we' and 'they'. That is the essence of
fragmentation. And we have lived that way, we are educated that
way, we are conditioned to that, because in that there is
tremendous idea or illusion that there is security. Now to be free of
that requires a great deal of observation, living with the idea that I
am really functioning in fragmentation and where there is
fragmentation there must be conflict, and therefore the importance
given to the 'me'. That is all.
So can you, can one be free of the fragmentary way of living
daily?
Q: Sir, there seems to be no security in fragmentation, the
fragmentation seems to continue as habit.
K: But it is habit. Now, all right sir. It doesn't matter if it is
habit. All right if it is habit can you be free of that habit - habit
being conditioning? Otherwise we live in constant battle with each
other, however intimate we are with each other, husband and wife
and so on, there must be constant conflict and that is why so many
families break up - you know all the rest of it.
So we are asking: to observe the totality of consciousness is
only possible when there is no fragmentary existence, then you see
the whole thing at once. We are all so used to analysis, which is the
continuation of fragmentation.
Q: Sir, doesn't that mean the whole of the consciousness is
nothing?
K: The whole of consciousness first of all is its content, isn't it?
Its content makes up consciousness - anger, jealousy, hatred, the
innumerable hurts we have, nationalities, beliefs, conclusions,
hopes, all that is our consciousness. Is it possible to be aware of all
this, not bit by bit, but totally? And then to go beyond it, which
means to be free of the content and see what happens. But nobody
wants to try that!
Q: It seems impossible.
Q: Would you say to try that without compassion would have
no real meaning in the transformation of mankind?
K: I don't quite follow.
Q: Well I will try and make it clearer if I can. You spoke on
Saturday of three things: compassion, clarity and skill. You have
shown us very clearly how skill comes into operation from clarity
and compassion comes in from...
K: Yes, yes sir.
Q: Now how do we bring in compassion if we haven't got
compassion? If compassion has not brought us to this tent today
then what is the point of being here? My question to you was this:
if we get this consciousness that you have talked about, if there is
no compassion what is the point?
K: If there is no compassion?
Q: If man has no compassion.
K: Quite right sir. There is no point.
Q: It is fundamental that man hasn't got compassion.
K: Quite right. Man has not got compassion. Why?
Q: That is the question.
K: No, go into it sir. Why as a human being, you or I or another,
who is the essence of all humanity - right sir? - psychologically he
is the essence of all humanity, therefore when you are aware of
yourself you are representing the whole of mankind. And you or
another has no compassion - why?
Q: One of the problems is the feeling that our problems are our
personal problems.
K: Our problems are not personal, it is universal.
Q: One of the factors that prevents compassion is this feeling
that it is my problem.
K: No, we are trying to find out sir why have human beings
who are so evolved technologically to such enormous extent, why
have they not got this simple factor which is so intelligent, why
have they not got compassion - why?
Q: Perhaps they are too busy.
K: No, don't answer it. Find out why you as a human being,
living on this earth, which is meant for all human beings to live
happily, why haven't you compassion? You - not somebody else.
Q: Sir I am too frightened.
K: Madam, that is too quick an answer, you haven't gone into it.
Q: Because I am greedy, because I want too much.
Q: You will have compassion when you see yourself...
K: You haven't even investigated, you haven't even looked for a
couple of seconds at yourself and asked yourself why you haven't
got compassion. You are already answering, throwing out words.
That may be your defence. Why have you, with all your
experiences, with all your knowledge, with all the civilization that
you have behind you of which you are the result, why doesn't this
thing exist in your daily life?
Q: Because of self preservation?
K: Is it a question of self preservation? To find out why you
haven't got it, why it doesn't exist in the human heart and mind and
outlook, don't you ask also the question: do you love anybody?
Q: That is a mean question, I mean for me. I wonder sir what
love is all about.
K: I am asking you sir, please sir. I am asking you most
respectfully, whether you love anybody at all? You may love your
dog but the dog is your slave. Apart from animals and buildings
and books and poetry and the love of the land, do you love
anybody - which means not asking anything in return? Right?
Q: (Inaudible)
K: Just listen sir. Find out! Not asking anything from that
person you love, not dependent on that person at all. Because if
you are dependent then fear begins, jealousy, anxiety, hatred,
anger. And if you are attached to somebody is that love? Find out!
And if all that is not love - I am just asking, I don't say it is, or it is
not - if all that is not love then how can you have compassion? We
are asking for something much more than love. And even love we
haven't got - just the ordinary love for another human being.
So what shall we do? We can go on discussing, answering this
question, umpteen times, but if you, the listener, don't listen, take it
in, find out, then it becomes utterly meaningless to have a dialogue,
or a discussion, or a question and answer meeting when you are not
actively participating in the enquiry.
Q: How do you find that love?
K: I don't want to find that love. All that I want to do is to
remove that which is not love, to be free of jealousy, attachment.
Q: That means we should have no fragmentation.
K: Sir that is just theory. You see you are going back again to
theory. Find out if you love somebody.
Q: (Inaudible)
K: You haven't listened madam, you haven't listened to what the
speaker has been saying. How can you love when you are
concerned about yourself? Right? Your problems, your ambitions,
your desire for success, your desire for all the rest of it. You first
and the other second; or the other first and you second. It is the
same thing.
Q: I would like to know whether it is possible to look at a
feeling without bringing in thought.
K: We haven't finished this question madam.
Now you see we have asked so many questions, now how can
we have a dialogue about this, two people - you understand? Two
or three people, sitting round here, all of you can sit on this
platform with me, if you want to discuss, have a dialogue. Can we
do that now? Two of you, or half a dozen of you sit here together
and say, "Look, let's go into this. Why am I, I understand this
verbally, that love cannot exist when there is jealousy, love cannot
exist when there is attachment, now is it possible for me to be free
of attachment?" That is a dialogue - then I will have a dialogue
with myself, shall I, and you listen?
Q: From the moment of conception up to the moment of being
brought up, trained, people are selfish and they never learn to give.
From the mother's womb up to being thrown into the world...
K: We are saying that sir. I will have a conversation with
myself, a dialogue with myself.
I realize by listening to this that I don't love. That is a fact. I am
not going to deceive myself. I am not going to pretend to my wife
that I love her, or to the woman or the girl, or boy. Now first of all
I don't know what love is. But I do know that I am jealous, I do
know that I am terribly attached to her. And in that attachment
there is fear, there is jealousy, there is anxiety, there is a sense of
dependency, I don't like to depend but I depend because I am
lonely and I'm shoved around by society, in the office, in the
factory and I come home and I want to feel comfort,
companionship, escape from myself. So I am dependent, attached
to that person. Now how am I - I am asking myself - how am I to
be free of this attachment, not knowing what love is, I won't
pretend - love of god, love of Jesus, love of Krishna, all that
nonsense, throw it all out - if I have thrown it all out. So I am
saying: how am I to be free of this attachment? I am taking that just
as an example.
First of all I won't run away from it. Right? I don't know how it
is going to end up with my wife. You understand? When I am
really detached from her my relationship may change to her. She
might be attached to me and I might not be attached to her or to
any other woman. Please, you understand? It isn't that I want to be
detached from her and join another woman. That is silly. I am
having a dialogue with myself. So what shall I do? I won't run
away from the consequence of being totally free of all attachment.
I am going to investigate. I don't know what love is, but I see very
clearly, definitely, without any doubt, that attachment to that
person means fear, anxiety, jealousy, possession, all the rest of it.
So I ask myself, how am I to be free of attachment? Not the
method, I want the freedom from it. I don't know. I really don't
know.
So I begin to enquire. Then I get caught in a system. You
understand? You are following this? I get caught in some guru who
says, "I will help you to be detached, do this, this, this. Practise
this, this". And I want to be free from it and I accept what the silly
man says because I see the importance of being free, and he
promises me that if I do this I will have a reward. So I want to be
free in order to have a reward. You understand? I am looking for a
reward. So I say, how silly I am. I want to be free and I get
attached to the reward. You are following all this? Good! At last! I
think I had better have a dialogue all the time with myself!
So I represent the rest of humanity - and I really mean it -
therefore if I am having a dialogue with myself I am in tears - you
understand? Not like you, smiling. It is a passion for me.
So I don't want to be attached and yet I find myself getting
attached to an idea. You understand? That is, I must be free and
somebody, or some book, or some idea, something says "Do this
and you will have that." So the reward becomes my attachment -
you follow? So I say, "Look what I have done. Be careful, don't get
caught in that trap." Whether it is a woman or an idea it is still
attachment. So I am very watchful now. I have learned something.
That is, exchange for something else is still attachment - right? So I
am very watchful. Then I say to myself, is there a way, or what am
I to do to be free of attachment? What is my motive? Why do I
want to be free from attachment? Because it is painful? Because I
want to achieve a state where there is no attachment, no fear, no etc.
etc? What is my motive? Please follow me because I am
representing you. What is my motive in wanting to be free? And I
suddenly realize a motive gives a direction. Right? And that
direction will dictate my freedom. Are you following this? So why
do I have a motive? What is motive? A motive is a movement, a
hope, or to achieve something. So the motive is my attachment. I
wonder if you are following all this. Do it sir as we are talking. The
motive has become my attachment, not only the woman, the idea
of a goal, but my motive; I must have that. So I am all the time
functioning within the field of attachment. Right? The woman, the
future and the motive - to all this I am attached. So I say "Oh, my
god, it is a tremendously complex thing. I didn't realize that to be
free of attachment implies all this." Right?
Now, I see this as clearly as I see on a map the roads, the
villages, the side roads, the main roads, very clearly. Then I say to
myself: "Now, is it possible for me to be free of my motive, to
which I am attached, to be free of the woman for whom I have
great attachment, and also the reward which I am going to get
when I am free?" To all this I am attached. Why? Is it that I am
insufficient in myself? Is it that I am very, very lonely, therefore
escape from that feeling of that extraordinary sense of isolation and
therefore cling to something, man, woman, idea, motive? Hold on
to something. Now is it I am lonely? I am taking that. Is it I am
lonely? Therefore I am escaping from that feeling of extraordinary
isolation, through attachment of another. Right? So I am not
interested in attachment at all. I am interested in understanding
why I am lonely, which makes me attached. You have understood?
You are following me - my dialogue with myself? Which is: I am
lonely, and that loneliness has forced me to escape through
attachment to this or to that. Now I say as long as I am lonely, all
the sequence is this. So I must investigate why I am lonely. What
does it mean? Right? What does it mean to be lonely? How does it
come about? Is it instinctual, inbred, heredity, or is it my daily
activity that is bringing about this loneliness? You understand? I
am going into it. I am having a dialogue with myself.
If it is inherited, if it is an instinct, which I question because I
accept nothing - you understand? - I accept nothing because I don't
accept it is instinct and say "I can't help it". If it is heredity, I am
not to blame. As I don't accept any of these things I say, "Why is
there this loneliness?" Now I question it and remain with the
question, not try to find an answer. I wonder if you understand
this? Is somebody following all this? I have asked myself what is
the root of this loneliness; and I am watching, I am not trying to
find an intellectual answer; I am not trying to tell the loneliness
what it should do, or what it is. I am watching it for it to tell me. I
wonder if you understand this? Are we going along together
somewhat?
So there is a watchfulness for the loneliness to reveal itself. It
won't reveal if I run away, if I am frightened, if I resist it. So I
watch it. I watch it so that no thought interferes because this is
much more important than thought coming in, because my whole
energy is concerned with the observation of that loneliness
therefore thought doesn't come in at all. Are you following this?
Because the mind is being challenged and it must answer. And
when you are challenged it is a crisis. And in a crisis you have got
all the energy, and that energy remains without being interfered
with. I wonder if you follow all this? Because this is a challenge
which must be answered.
Q: How can we hang on to that energy? How can we do
something about this energy?
K: It has come. You have lost the whole thing.
Look: I have started out having a dialogue with myself. I said
what is this strange thing called love. Everybody talks about it,
writes about it: romantic poems, pictures and all the rest of it, sex
and whole areas of it. And I say have I got this thing called love? Is
there such a thing as love? I see love doesn't exist when there is
jealousy, hatred, fear. So I am not concerned with love any more; I
am concerned with 'what is', which is: my fear, attachment. And
why am I attached? I say maybe one of the reasons is - one of the
reason, I don't say that is the whole reason - one of the reasons is
that I am lonely, desperately isolated. The older I grow the more
isolation. So I watch it. This is a challenge to find out, because it is
a challenge all energy is there to respond. That is simple, isn't it?
When there is death in the family, it is a challenge. If there is some
catastrophe, an accident or whatever it is, it is a challenge and you
have the energy to meet it. You don't say, "Where do you get this
energy?" When your house is on fire you have the energy to move.
You have extraordinary energy. You don't sit back and say, "Well I
must get this energy" and then wait. And the whole house will be
burnt then.
So there is this tremendous energy to answer this question: why
is there this loneliness? Because I have rejected other ideas - you
follow? - suppositions, theories, that I have inherited it, it is
instinct. All that means nothing to me. It is 'what is'. So why am I
lonely - not I - why is there this loneliness which every human
being, if he is at all aware, goes through, superficially or most
profoundly? And why? Why does this come into being? Is it the
mind is doing something which is bringing it? You understand? If I
have rejected theories, instinct, inheritance, I have rejected all that;
therefore I am asking does the mind bring this about? You
understand my question sir, or are you getting tired?
Is the mind doing this? Loneliness means total isolation. Right?
So I say, is the mind, the brain doing this? The mind which is
partly the movement of thought, is thought doing this? You are
following all this? Thought in daily life, is it creating, bringing
about this sense of isolation? You understand? Which is, in the
office I am isolating myself because I want to become bigger,
become the executive, or the pope or the bishop - you know.
Therefore it is working all the time isolating itself. Are you
watching this? You understand sir?
Q: I think it isolates itself in relation to how crowded it is.
K: Yes.
Q: As a reaction.
K: Yes, that is right, sir, that is right. I want to go into this. So I
see thought, the mind, is all the time operating to make itself
superior, more, working itself to this isolation, towards this
isolation. Right? Clear?
So the problem then is: why does thought do this? Is it the
nature of thought to work for itself? You understand what I mean?
Is it the nature of thought to create this isolation? Does society
create this isolation? Does education create this isolation? Right?
Education does bring about this isolation - it gives me a certain
career, a certain specialization, so it is isolation. You follow? So
thought, being fragmentary, because I have found that - I have
found that thought, which is the response of the past as knowledge,
experience and memory, so thought is limited. Right? Thought is
time-binding. So thought is doing this. So my concern then is why
does thought do it? Is it in its very nature to do this?
I came here for a discussion - wait sir - I came here for a
discussion, dialogue. Now I am having a dialogue by myself. Too
bad! I'll go on because look what it is leading me up to - leading.
Q: This is the fourth time I have stood up to say something and
you are saying that you are having a dialogue by yourself. This is
silly!
K: But sir are you telling me - please sir, are you having a
dialogue with me?
Q: Well I have something to say which I thought related to what
you were saying.
K: Are you having a dialogue with me?
Q: I don't know.
K: We said sir, please, we said that a dialogue implies
conversation between two people. Are you and I conversing
together about the same thing?
Q: Well we can't be because every time I have something to
say...
K: I am asking you sir, not the others, I am asking you are we
having a dialogue between you and me about this thing? Which is:
why does thought create this isolation, if it does?
Q: I want to do that. Because I thought that it came back to the
beginning when you were talking about what is love. If there is a
moral obligation to love a person at all costs, as there is in my
family, it is an affectation. And affectation as love is nobody
showing their true feelings, people are masking their violence by
politeness which they call love. Therefore what is really inside is
being hidden all the time and therefore thought must be deceptive,
must lead to isolation because nobody knows what anybody else is
feeling because of all the pretence.
K: We have been through that sir. We are coming to the point
when we are not pretending. I don't know what love is. We said in
the dialogue that we don't know what love is. I know when we use
that word 'love' there is a certain pretence, a certain hypocrisy,
putting on a certain type of mask. We have been through all that.
At the beginning of this dialogue we went into all that. So we come
to the point now: why does thought, being a fragment, why does it
bring about this isolation, if it does? I have found it does in my
conversation with myself because thought is limited, thought is
time-binding, therefore whatever it does must be limited. And in
that limitation it has found security. It has found security in saying,
"I have a special career in my life". It has found security in saying,
"I am a professor. There I am perfectly safe. After seven years." -
and there you are stuck for the rest of your life. And there is great
security both psychologically as well as factual.
So thought is doing this. Now the problem then is: can thought
realize - please listen to this - can thought realize that it is limited
and therefore the moment it understands that whatever it does is
limited and therefore fragmentary and therefore isolating, whatever
it does will be this. Therefore can thought - please I am having a
dialogue, this is a very important point - can thought realize its
own limitations? Or does thought say to itself, I am limited. You
understand the difference? Are you all asleep? Thought being me -
do I say, thought is limited and therefore it says, "I am limited". Or
thought itself realizes I am limited. The two things are entirely
different. One is an imposition, and therefore conflict, whereas
when thought itself says "I am limited" it won't move away from
that limitation. Please this is very important to understand because
this is the real essence of this thing. We are imposing on thought
what it should do. Thought has created the 'we', the 'me', and
thought and the 'me' have separated itself from thought and says, I
will dictate, tell what thought should do. But if thought realizes
itself that it is limited then there is no resistance, no conflict, it says
"I am that. I am blue".
So does thought - in my dialogue with myself, I am asking -
does thought realize this itself? Or am I telling it that it is limited?
If I am telling it that it is limited then I become separate from the
limitations. Then I struggle to overcome the limitation, therefore
there is conflict, which is violence, which is not love. Are you
following?
So does thought realize itself that it is limited? I have to find
out. I am being challenged. I have got energy now, because I am
challenged I have got all energy. Does consciousness - put it
differently - does consciousness realize its content? Does
consciousness realize its content is itself? Or I have heard another
say, "Consciousness is its content, its content makes up
consciousness"? Therefore you say, "Yes it is so" - you follow? Or
does consciousness, my consciousness, this consciousness realize
its content and therefore its very content is the totality of my
consciousness? Right? Do you see the difference in the two? The
one imposed by me, the 'me' created by thought, then if I impose
something on thought then there is conflict. Right? It is like a
tyrannical government imposing on someone, but the government
is what I have created.
So we are asking: has thought realized its own littleness, its own
pettiness, its own limitations; or is it pretending to be something
extraordinary, noble? - you know, all the rest of it - divine? - which
is nonsense because thought is memory, experience, remembrance.
So I must, in my dialogue there must be clarity about this point:
that there is no outside influence imposing on thought saying it is
limited. So thought then because there is no imposition - you
understand - there is no conflict, therefore it realizes it is limited.
Therefore whatever it does - its worship of god, its worship of
Jesus, its worship is limited, shoddy, petty, though it has created
marvellous cathedrals throughout Europe.
So there has been in my conversation with myself a discovery
that loneliness is created by thought. And thought has now realized
itself that it is limited, so it cannot solve the problem of loneliness.
You understand? As it cannot solve the problem of loneliness does
loneliness exist? You understand my question? Thought has made
this sense of loneliness. Right? And thought realizes that it is
limited and because it is limited, fragmentary, divided, it has
created this, this emptiness, loneliness, therefore when it realizes
this, loneliness is not. I wonder if you see this? Right?
So therefore there is freedom from attachment. I have done
nothing. You understand? I have watched it, the attachment, what
is implied in attachment, greed, fear, loneliness, all that, and by
tracing it, looking at it, observing it, not analysing it, examining,
but just looking, looking, looking, and there is a discovery that
thought has done all this. Right? Thought because it is fragmentary
it has created this attachment. So when it realizes, attachment
ceases. I wonder if you see this? There is no effort made at all,
because the moment there is effort it is back again. You
understand?
So we have said if there is love there is no attachment; if there
is attachment there is no love. So there has been the removal of the
major factor through negation of what it is not, which is, love is not
attachment. You know what it means in your daily life - no
remembrance of anything, my wife, my girl-friend, or my
neighbour told me, no remembrance of any hurt, no image about
her because I am attached to the image, not to her. I am attached to
the image thought has created about her. She has hurt me, she has
bullied me, she has given me comfort - I have had a pleasant time
sexually, ten different things which are all the movement of
thought, which has created the image, and it is the image I am
attached to. So attachment has gone.
But there are other factors: fear, pleasure, comfort in that
person, or in that idea. Now must I get through all these step by
step, one by one, or all over? You understand my question? Must I
go through, must I investigate as I have investigated attachment,
fear? Must I investigate the desire for comfort? Must I observe
why I seek comfort? Is it because I am insufficient, I want comfort,
I want a comfortable chair therefore I want a comfortable woman -
or a man, or whatever it is, a comfortable idea? I think most of us
do. To have a comfortable, secure idea which can never be shaken,
and to which I am deadly attached, and so anybody who says,
nonsense to that I get angry, I get jealous, I get upset because he is
shaking my house. So I say I don't have to go through all the
investigation of all these various factors: I see it at one glance, I
have captured it. You understand now?
So through negation of what is not love the other thing is. I
don't have to ask what is love. I don't have to run after it. If I run
after it, it is not love, it is a reward. So I have ended in that enquiry,
slowly, carefully, without distortion, without illusion, I have
negated everything that it is not - the other is.
Now, I have had a good dialogue with myself.
Q: May I ask a question? Maybe I didn't get it. Would you say
that loneliness is created by experiencing loneliness?
K: I have explained all this Madam. Not that I have explained, I
have had a dialogue with myself. If you have listened to it then you
have got it.