An Interview with
Wassily Leontief
Interviewed by Duncan K. Foley
BARNARD COLLEGE OF COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
April 14, 1997
Wassily Leontief is one of the central creators and shapers of twentiethcentury
economics. He invented input–output theory and the techniques
for constructing input–output tables from economic and technological
data and was responsible for making input–output tables the most powerful
and widely used tool of structural economic analysis. The theory of
input–output matrices played an important role in the clarification of
general equilibrium theory in the 1940s and 1950s as well. Leontief
has also made fundamental and seminal contributions to the theories of
demand, international trade, and economic dynamics. His research interests
include monetary economics, population, econometric method, environmental
economics, distribution, disarmament, induced technical change,
international capital movements, growth, economic planning, and the
Soviet and other socialist economies. Leontief has played a vigorous part
in formulating national and international policies addressing technology,
trade, population, arms control, and the environment. He has also been
a well-informed and influential critic of contemporary economic method,
theory, and practice. Leontief received the Nobel Memorial Prize for
Economics in 1973.
I met Wassily Leontief on April 14, 1997, at his apartment high above
Washington Square Park in New York City. Leontief reclined on a sofa
in the living room, with Mrs. Leontief going about her business in the
Reprinted from Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2, 1998, 116–140. Copyright © 1998
Cambridge University Press.
16 Duncan K. Foley
background, occasionally asking
after Leontief ’s comfort. Leontief’s
voice on the tape ranges from an
assertive forte to a whispery piano.
He is by turns animated, thoughtful,
puzzled, inspiring, and charming.
A chiming clock marking the
passage of quarter-hours and characteristic
New York street noise
occasionally obscure his words on
the tape. I have edited the transcript
for continuity and clarity.
Foley: There has been considerable
discussion about the relation
between input–output analysis
and Marx’s schemes of reproduction
from Volume II of Capital.
What was the role, if any, of Marx
in your education as an economist?
Were Marx’s schemes of reproduction an inspiration or influence
on your development?
Leontief: I did my undergraduate work in Russia, and that’s where
I learned Marx, but I am not a militant Marxist economist. When I
developed input–output analysis it was as a response to the weaknesses
of classical–neoclassical supply-and-demand analysis. It was terribly disjointed
essentially, I always thought. You read my Presidential Address, I
think? I felt that general equilibrium theory does not see how to integrate
the facts and I developed input–output analysis quite consciously to
provide a factual background, to register the facts in a systematic way, so
it would be possible to explain the operation of this system.
Foley: So, did the structure of Marx’s schemes of reproduction play
any role in forming your ideas?
Leontief: No. Not really. No. Marx was not a very good mathematician.
He was always mixed up in math, and the labor theory of value
didn’t make much sense, but essentially I interpret Marx and am interested
in Marx only as a classical economist. And it is possibly Quesnay,
the ideas of Quesnay, that influenced me. It is very difficult to say what
influenced you. I got my training as an economist as an undergraduate.
Already I read systematically all economists beginning with the seventeenth
century. I just read and read, so I had a pretty good background
in the history of economic thought, and my feeling is that I understand
the state of the science.
Figure 1.1 Wassily Leontief.
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 17
Foley: You were in the Soviet Union in the very first years of the
Soviet experiment?
Leontief: I left the Soviet Union in 1925. I got in trouble with the
government, actually. I had to go away in order to be able to work.
Foley: Was anyone at that time thinking about a statistical basis for
planning in the Soviet Union?
Leontief: No. The first thing which had some relation to it was essentially
a national income analysis. Like all national income analyses, it was
not very disaggregated. Everything gives you one figure, while I thought
that to understand the operation of the system, one figure is not enough.
You want to see how it disaggregates. I was not interested in improving
the system; I was just concentrating on understanding how it works. Of
course, it’s nice to understand before you improve, but my feeling is that
to understand the economic system is the first job of the economist.
Foley: Then, in 1925, you moved to Berlin?
Leontief: To Berlin. I got my Ph.D. very quickly, and I had two
professors. I was research assistant of Professor Sombart, who was a quite
interesting historical economist, and Bortkiewicz, who was a mathematical
economist. But Professor Sombart didn’t understand mathematics.
Foley: Were they particularly interested in the statistical side of input–
output tables?
Leontief: No, and economists in their empirical efforts must be factual.
But there is a tendency to be abstract, theoretical, particularly among the
better economists.
Foley: How long did you stay in Berlin?
Leontief: About two years. I got my Ph.D. very quickly. Then I was
in the Institute for World Economics—a big Institute in Kiel—and I
was invited to be a member of the staff, and this is essentially where I
developed my idea of the input–output approach.
Foley: Were there other scholars at Kiel working on that general line,
or anything related to that type of thing?
Leontief: No. I was isolated.
Foley: It must have been a tremendous job to do the statistical groundwork
for input–output analysis.
Leontief: Yes, it was. I decided the only thing was practically to show
how to do it, and I did this with one assistant. I was invited to the
United States by the National Bureau of Economic Research. I received
some foundation money and my assistant and I worked very hard, I
mean, using all kinds of information—technological information, naturally,
beginning with the Census. The U.S. Census was the best statistical record
of an economy. From there I was invited to Harvard, where I spent 45
years. When the war began, interest in input–output analysis grew. I was
18 Duncan K. Foley
kind of a consultant on economic planning. It was for the Air Force,
which of course was very important during the war. The best input–
output matrix was computed by the Air Force. They had also an input–
output table of the German economy, because it enabled them to choose
targets. Usually I’m not very pragmatic, but if you want to do something,
you have to understand what you’re doing, and for the Air Force
that was the committed choice of targets and so on, so input–output
analysis was very interesting to them.
Foley: What was your reaction to Keynes’s work during the 1930s?
Have you changed your mind since then?
Leontief: No, not at all. My attitude was rather critical because I felt
that he developed his theory to justify his political advice. Keynes was
more of a politician than an analyst. I never became a Keynesian,
although I wrote some of the first criticisms of Keynes. If you look at my
bibliography you’ll find them. But I tried to do it systematically; that is,
not so much the political side but just the approach, which was for me
too pragmatic. Now, you improve the system, all right, but first describe
the system in order to improve it.
Foley: Did you have an alternative theory of the Depression at that time?
Leontief: No. My feeling is that the fundamental theoretical understanding
of economic fluctuations is as a dynamic process. I still believe,
what explains the fluctuations of economies is some kind of difference,
differential equations. Of course, structural change is very important, particularly
now. It’s always dynamic. It’s a system of interrelationships,
a system of equations, but still the quantitative approach is important.
Since I paid so much attention to the relationship between observation
and theory, at the same time I developed a theory of input–output
analysis which is really mathematical, and tried myself to collect data. I
think I influenced the course of economic statistics.
Foley: Yes. Input–output analysis and national income analysis are the
two major systems that came into place in the 1940s and 1950s.
Leontief: Right. I don’t think there is really a dichotomy. I think
input–output analysis is just much more detailed. Stone, for example,
who was commissioned to develop the statistical economic system for the
United Nations, assigned a very great role to input–output analysis,
as a foundation for the aggregation to national income.
Foley: In a system of that kind, there’s usually some attempt to model
both supply-side effects and demand-side effects.
Leontief: I was always slightly worried about having demand analysis
as a separate thing. My feeling is that households are an element of the
system. In a good theoretical formulation, households are just a large
sector of the economy.
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 19
Foley: This echoes the classical idea that the reproduction of the
population is an aspect of the reproduction of the economic system.
Leontief: Exactly. This goes back to Quesnay.
Foley: I’ve also talked with Richard Goodwin about this theme of the
interplay between structural change and fluctuations.
Leontief: Richard Goodwin was my student. He studied with me, he
was my assistant. He couldn’t get a permanent appointment at Harvard
and then went to England. He was a good friend. He was very interesting.
Foley: I talked with Goodwin about this at one time. He did have a
job at Harvard in the late 1940s, but it was an untenured job, right?
Leontief: Yes. He couldn’t get tenure. And this was the reason why he
went to England.
Foley: Yes, that’s what he told me as well, but I was somewhat
puzzled as to why someone who had been doing the kind of work he was
doing in the late 1940s would not have been a shoo-in for tenure.
Leontief: I think possibly it was politics. He was on the left.
Foley: So that shaded the evaluation of his scientific work?
Leontief: Yes. That was it, frankly.
Foley: So you would still now look for the major cause of businesscycle
fluctuations in lags, but the impulses in supply-side structural change?
Leontief: Yes, structural changes, but be very careful, because a system,
a dynamic system, without structural change would have lags, and
latent eigenroots that create fluctuations. Of course, at the present time,
technological change is very important. Technological change is the driving
force of economic change and the cause of social change.
Foley: To come to a slightly more technical issue, what about the
question of whether the fluctuations are damped or undamped?
Leontief: They don’t have from a mathematical point of view necessarily
to be damped. This raises the problem, why don’t we explode? And
there are some forces which prevent them from exploding, including
economic forces, such as policy and other nonlinear effects.
Foley: In the 1930s, you had a controversy with Marschak over
demand analysis.
Leontief: Yes, now I do not remember the details, but I think there
was a logical flaw in Marschak’s position.
Foley: Did this have anything to do with the development of input–
output analysis?
Leontief: That was already after I developed input–output analysis,
which I really developed when I was in Kiel, and at the National Bureau.
In the National Bureau, I was very subversive, because the National Bureau
under Mitchell was extremely empirical, while I on the other side had a
very strong theoretical intuition. To understand the process you have to
20 Duncan K. Foley
have a theory. I organized an underground theoretical seminar in the
National Bureau. It was underground, because it was against the principle
of the National Bureau.
Foley: In the 1940s, there was a rather sharp controversy between the
Cowles Foundation and the National Bureau around issues of empirical
method and theory. Koopmans wrote a very sharp paper at that time.
Leontief: Since I thought mathematics plays a great, important role,
I would of course be on the side of the Cowles Commission.
Foley: But you found yourself institutionally associated with the National
Bureau.
Leontief: Exactly. Because I always felt, as I explained in my Presidential
Address, if you want to really understand an empirical science, you
must have the facts. And the problem is how to organize the facts.
Essentially, theory organizes facts.
Foley: So your position was a kind of synthesis of these two points
of view.
Leontief: Yes. Right.
Foley: The Cowles Commission developed a very characteristic approach
to econometrics and measurement problems in the 1940s. Did you find
yourself sympathetic to that way of doing it?
Leontief: No. I criticized it very early.
Foley: Did you foresee that there would be a role for input–output
analysis in guiding government policy after the Second World War? This
is an interesting period because it set the pattern for the next decades.
Leontief: Not only in government, but also in industry. I remember
when the question arose much later about the position of the automobile
industry in the American economy, there was some kind of association
of industrialists who said “go to Leontief,” because I published some work
using the example of the auto industry. I published empirical work, and
my principle always, though I could not always adhere to it, was always,
when I made some theoretical observation to use the data—not just to
say it, but really to see how it works.
Foley: And so you used input–output analysis, say, to study the future
of the auto industry or prospects for specific industries?
Leontief: Right, right. During the Cold War, there was an economist
by the name of Hoffenberg. He did a lot of empirical analysis. In constructing
an input–output table of the United States, he played a very
important role. He was a really excellent intuitive statistician. And, you
must understand, it takes a particular knack to understand statistics. When
I constructed the first input–output table, which was very early, I often
used the telephone. I called up industries, particularly firms which were
engaged in the distribution of commodities, and got the data from them.
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 21
Foley: So you would ask the distributors what their customers’ proportions
were in terms of the sectors?
Leontief: Exactly! I just went straight to them.
Foley: Did the U.S. government have a functioning input–output
table in 1946?
Leontief: Yes, yes. In the Department of Commerce, in the Bureau of
Economic Analysis. National income computations were conducted in
the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and they had an input–output table.
Although the best input–output table was constructed by the Department
of Labor. Roosevelt’s Secretary of Labor, Frances Perkins, wrote to
me that the President had asked her the question, what will happen to
the American economy after the war? She said, we don’t know how to do
it. We tried to look at the literature, but we don’t know how to study
this type of thing, and then one of my first articles appeared and they
said, all right, we thought possibly you could tell us how to do it. They
sent a representative, and I said, get the facts and good theory; and, as
a matter of fact, at that time under Roosevelt the government was very
active and intelligent. Yes, they told me, all right, collect the facts. Come
to Washington and collect the facts. I said, no. One cannot collect facts
in Washington. I must do it at Harvard. And they opened a division of
the Bureau of Labor Statistics at Harvard, at the Littauer School, and I
hired people, not many economists, mostly engineers, and we constructed
an input–output table. The next detailed input–output table was constructed
with the money of the Defense Department. And they had a lot.
Without money it’s very difficult to construct an input–output table; it’s
a resource-intensive activity.
Foley: After the war, was there a competition between Keynesian
demand management and a more structurally oriented input–output
approach to economic policy?
Leontief: Oh, I think the Keynesian approach definitely took over. I
don’t think there was much competition. Keynes took over.
Foley: Why did that happen?
Leontief: Because Keynes was very pragmatically oriented. In spirit, he
was very much a politician, an excellent politician. I think he developed
his theory essentially as an instrument to support his policy advice. He
was incredibly intelligent.
Foley: Well, it sounds as if you had your political contacts, too, in the
Labor Department and the Defense Department, and the Commerce
Department.
Leontief: Oh, yes, but you know it was different. It was much more
modest. The Labor Department studied the problem of the supply of
labor, different skills and so on. It was much more technical. They still
22 Duncan K. Foley
Figure 1.2 Members of Professor Leontief ’s seminar of the August 1948
Salzburg Seminar in American Studies. 1, Friedrich G. Seib (Germany);
2, Bjarn Larsen (?) (Norway); 3, Helge Seip (Norway); 4, Leendert Koyck (?)
(Holland); 5, Gérard Debreu (France); 6, Paul Winding (Denmark); 7, Robert
Solow (U.S.A.); 8, Mrs. Robert Solow (U.S.A.); 9, Mario Di Lorenzo (Italy);
10, Arvo Puukari (Finland); 11, Jacques D. Mayer (France); 12, Odd Aukrust
(Norway); 13, Professor William G. Rice (U.S.A.); 14, Joseph Klatzmann
(France); 15, unknown (Germany); 16, Bjarke Fog (Denmark); 17, Professor
Leontief Wassily (U.S.A.); 18, Per Silve Tweite (Norway).
have an input–output division in the Labor Department—the Bureau of
Labor Statistics.
Foley: The late 1940s, as we look back on it, seems to be the time
when a methodological synthesis took place in economics. How did
you view the relation of input–output to the developing methodological
consensus in economics and econometric theory? Did you see it as part
of it or as a different path?
Leontief: You see, I was somewhat skeptical of the whole curve-fitting
notion. I thought of technological information. The people who know
the structure of the economy are not statisticians but technologists, but
of course to model technological information is very difficult. My
idea was not to infer the structure indirectly from econometric or statistical
techniques, but to go directly to technological and engineering
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 23
sources. I had some proposals to this effect, which could not be realized
because there was no money. Empirical analyses are extremely expensive.
Foley: And the input–output type is more expensive than the indirect
statistical investigation.
Leontief: Oh yes, much more. It was indirect statistical methods that
were used. I think I have a very strong theoretical streak. I am essentially
a theorist. But I felt very strongly that theory is just construction of
frameworks to understand how real systems work. It is an organizing
principle, while for many economists theory is a separate object.
Foley: Some economists think of theory as predictive or behavioral.
Leontief: Yes. I think if one knows, or one agrees, what the formal
nature of a mathematical system is, one can do certain predictions because
of the general nature of the system. I published a couple of articles on
prediction. There are short-run problems and long-run problems in quantitative
analysis, and I have a feeling that conventional prediction is good
for short-run problems; but technological change, which is the driving
force of all economic development, is a long-run process.
Foley: So, from this point of view, specific hypotheses about human
behavior, or expectation formation, or preferences would play a subsidiary
role.
Figure 1.3 Joseph Schumpeter, Wassily Leontief, and Paul Sweezy at
Harvard in the late 1940s.
24 Duncan K. Foley
Leontief: A subsidiary role. I think so, because my feeling is that,
particularly under a market system, a capitalist system, the big industrialists
play a really big role, and they try to make profits, to choose technologies
which maximize profits—essentially in the short run. Of course, national
policy has to be taken into account, but business is certainly a short-term
type of system.
Foley: In sectors like transportation or power generation where you
have long-term investments, this can create problems.
Leontief: I agree. There you need long-run engineering, power generation,
and—I suppose—environment, which is important now.
Foley: You talked about the money and resource problem. Was there
a competition for resources between national income approaches and
input–output approaches in the United States during the 1950s?
Leontief: I have a feeling that, at least in the Department of Commerce,
they realized input–output was very useful for national income
computations. As a matter of fact, there was a period of time—possibly
even now—when the national income computation essentially summarized
the results of the input–output analysis. Funding is always a problem.
For input–output analysis, particularly analysis of technological
change, we need more of an engineering understanding, because scientific
progress is now the driving force in technological change.
Foley: Do you see any feedback in the other direction, to the priorities
in scientific research from economic bottlenecks?
Leontief: Oh, no doubt, no doubt. First of all, it was always true of
the war industry. Scientific progress helped the military.
Foley: In the 1960s and early 1970s, there was another major change
in economic doctrine, a shift from a Keynesian consensus to what’s
now called rational-expectations models and the notion of market clearing
and perfect foresight. You were a professor at Harvard at that time.
How did you see that happening in the profession? What factors determined
that change?
Leontief: In the earlier times, Keynes dominated economic thinking. I
do not know to what extent the whole expectations revolution made
any headway. It is a very delicate thing mathematically, and I do not follow
the literature closely now, but I think there was not so much analysis
about expectations. There was just talk about it. I did not see any material
contribution to the theory of expectations, except the very short run,
naturally, for the business cycle, which is important.
Foley: So you don’t think that was the result of any empirical superiority
of this new approach?
Leontief: No, I don’t think so.
Foley: Was it just that Keynesianism ran out of steam?
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 25
Leontief: I think so.
Foley: You said that you were not that taken with the Keynesian
point of view to begin with, so I suppose you observed this with some
equanimity.
Leontief: Yes. I’m not a monetary economist, but I think that deeper
analysis of the flow of money might give a little more meat to this field.
Foley: There has been the development of the flow of funds accounts.
Leontief: Yes, but it was very aggregative. For our understanding
how the economic system works, disaggregation is very important.
Foley: Would it make sense to try to link flow of funds with input–
output analysis at the same levels of disaggregation?
Leontief: Oh, yes, but I didn’t see anybody try to do it. Of course,
there’s no money there, but I think the money flows are important. I
sometimes suggested the possibility of aligning money flows from micro up
rather than from macro down, because I think in every corporation there
is some high functionary who is in charge of money flows—budgets,
credit, and so on—and he has to make a plan. The only planning that exists
is for money flows, and there is his counterpart in a bank, who is close
to operations and, if I’m not mistaken, there is a cooperation between
the official in the company who sees to it that they have enough credit,
and the credit manager in the bank, who is very often in charge of separate
corporations. I made a couple of proposals to work on this. The interesting
thing is to have the same figures from two points of view. It might be
very helpful to understand how they interact to determine the short-run
path of investment.
Foley: There’s not been a lot of economic theorizing in that area.
Most of the models assume some kind of equilibrium conditions, but
you said that it was a mistake to start from equilibrium as opposed to
explicit dynamics.
Leontief: Exactly, exactly.
Foley: When you resigned from Harvard in 1974, soon after you
received the Nobel Memorial Prize, you sharply criticized the direction
of economics as a discipline and called for a reevaluation and redirection
of research methodology in economics. Do you think that redirection
has taken place?
Leontief: No.
Foley: Would you have the same view on the success of economics
as a science now?
Leontief: Yes. My feeling is we require patient, practical economic
advice. Our basis of understanding how the economy works is not very
strong. Practical advice could and should be more based on understanding
how the system works.
26 Duncan K. Foley
Foley: We’ve mentioned several times this afternoon the role of
mathematics. Some people argue that economics has become too dominated
by mathematical formalism.
Leontief: I completely agree. Very many mathematical economists
were simply mathematicians who were not good enough to become pure
mathematicians, so mathematical economics, which had always been dull,
gave them a marvelous pretext to become economists.
Foley: But on the other hand, you’ve strongly supported the role of
mathematics in theory in economics. When is mathematics fertile and
when does it become just a formalism?
Leontief: My feeling is that mathematics is simply logic. The general
insights are the most important. For example, I think mathematics gives
us good reason to feel that all fluctuations are due to lags—it’s dynamics.
This is a real mathematical insight. Mathematicians know it. As a matter of
fact, one of the problems I had in my theoretical work was how to avoid
explosive fluctuations, because there are so many eigenvalues in those big
matrices, and some explode.
Foley: What was your own training as a mathematician?
Leontief: I took mathematics courses, but I tried to improve my range
of mathematics very early, when I realized that mathematical argument
was of great importance for economics. I read a lot. I took basic courses
in the university. My tendency was always to combine the empirical and
theoretical. In economics that combination requires mathematical concepts,
such as systems analysis.
Foley: But you’re also saying that the vision of the economic structure
and relations has to come first.
Leontief: I think, together, because if we have only that vision, it never
adds up to anything. When I developed input–output analysis before
going to the National Bureau of Economic Research, I felt it terribly
important to have a good insight into the mathematical relationships. I
think that the mathematics which economics used are not of a particularly
high order. For example, those who translated neoclassical economics
into mathematics didn’t develop any very interesting insights. They
obviously developed some things, but didn’t come to any very interesting
insights into how the economic system works, and they were, on the
whole, not interested in empirical analysis.
Foley: From having talked with other people about that, I think there
were very high hopes that the formalization of economics would yield
some substantive insights.
Leontief: Without data you couldn’t do it. Absolutely, without data it
couldn’t work. It can just establish certain principles of equilibrium and
nonequilibrium.
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 27
Foley: You think that more or less exhausted the real scientific contribution
of the program?
Leontief: I think so. They would have made more progress if they really
had good, very detailed, empirical information. For example, it would be
very interesting to see how modern technological change has affected the
demand for labor. It might reduce the demand for labor, and even create
a social problem, because labor isn’t just one more factor of production.
Then you will have to support labor. My speculative intuition is that the
government now has to support a large part of income through education
expenditure, health expenditure, and of course social security—and
possibly a kind of welfare—but social security is more important. My
feeling is that ultimately the transfer of income so as to provide people
money to buy consumers’ goods will become part of social security. It’s
already very large—I’m amazed how large my family social security is.
Foley: This is a Keynesian theme, the support of demand through
government subsidies.
Leontief: Yes, Yes, but it’s not only supporting demand. Keynes was
supporting employment, which this does not do. Just demand. You feed
people. Technology will reduce employment, or certainly not increase
employment. Certainly I think that technology competes with labor,
ordinary labor: If you produce everything automatically naturally you’re
not going to employ so much labor.
Foley: So this is an example of your sense that there should be a
substantive foundation for the investigation in the real structure of what’s
going on?
Leontief: Yes. Technological change was always the driving force for
economic development beginning in prehistorical time, but now, when
technological change has become propelled by scientific investigation,
this type of analysis is extremely important. Economists attempted to do
it, but mostly by making general statements. The moment energy becomes
cheaper, technological change becomes important. Production now requires
much more energy.
Foley: Do you think the establishment of the Nobel Memorial Prize in
Economics has, on the whole, fostered a better atmosphere for research
in economics?
Leontief: You know, there’s a problem. I think they’ll soon run out
of candidates for Nobel Prizes in economics. I think we have already
problems now.
Foley: Did the Nobel Prize have any particular impact on your work
or your life as a scientist?
Leontief: On my life, some. Not on my work. Naturally, it was easier
to get jobs. Not necessarily easier to get financing. Now, for example, I
28 Duncan K. Foley
cannot get any financing. So, I suppose my academic life got easier, but,
as I said, there is a problem how the Nobel committee can continue. I
think they have already begun to shift from theoretical to institutional
economists. Now there is a problem because in technical economics at
least you can point out some hierarchy, and also major steps forward,
breakthroughs, while in institutional economics I don’t really see any
large breakthroughs. As a matter of fact, I am concerned that economists
are not sufficiently interested now in institutional changes brought about
by the development of new technologies, which I think is definitely the
driving force.
Foley: There’s been a lot of discussion about whether economics should
take any other science as its model, in particular physics or biology, and,
if so, which one. Did you ever think in those terms, that economics
should be like a physics of society or a biology of society?
Leontief: I think it doesn’t help much. Naturally, mathematical economists
like to look to physics. I think it was the Darwinian approach that
was really interesting, and I think that in one way the great intellectual
revolutionary was Darwin. Incredible revolution, not only in biology, but
in the analysis of all living processes. I think Darwin—it was Newton and
Darwin who I think were the great contributors to the understanding of
social change. Darwinism is very important, although, of course, it is
interesting that Darwin was influenced by Malthus. What are you interested
in?
Foley: One of the things I’ve been spending some time on recently is
evolutionary modeling of technical change. The issue of global warming
evolves over the kind of very long timescale on which changes in technology
will be decisive.
Leontief: Oh, yes. I completely agree. Technology is terribly important.
Foley: If you look over a shorter time horizon, substitution of existing
technologies might be important, but I think over a long time period,
it’s going to be the direction of technological change, and the bias of
technological change. The question is whether there’s any way to control
it.
Leontief: Exactly. Not necessarily consciously, but. . . . Now, of course,
there is a much closer link between scientific change and technological
change. One hardly even can visualize technological change without
science, and, with global warming, these things are terribly important.
And what can we do? We can do many things. Slow down, for one.
Foley: That’s not popular in a world anxious to develop as fast as
it can.
Leontief: It is remarkable how technologically backward many lessdeveloped
economies are. Once you begin to cut trees, you can do it
very quickly.
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 29
Foley: If you were encountering a younger scholar who had some
innovative but expensive idea like input–output, how would you recommend
that person proceed?
Leontief: He has to publish something. I do not know who gets money
nowadays. I haven’t been following the development of the field recently.
I’m, after all, over 90 years old, but, of course, big money is spent not on
research, but on data collection. Some people have good ideas and can
really do something with the data, but economics has come closer and
closer to technology now. To exploit the influence of technological change
on economic change, you just can’t compute some supply curve; you
must really have a mass of information. I wrote up how it can be done,
and I nearly succeeded in getting money to do it. My feeling is one could
even do some anticipation, prediction, if one had really detailed data. I
got in touch with engineering societies, the society of mechanical engineers,
and they were ready to provide information. I think this is the
future of the work, in the interaction between economics and engineering,
science, and the substructure of production.
Foley: Did you ever have any personal or scientific contact with Piero
Sraffa, the Anglo-Italian who worked on linear models?
Leontief: No. I never met him. But I think he was a very interesting
man. His vision was interesting. In general, I think the input–output
analysis is not necessarily linear. I would interpret it as an outgrowth of
neoclassical theory. Sraffa was interested in something slightly different,
the indirect relationships. I don’t insist on linear relationships, only I’m
conscious of the fact that dealing with nonlinear systems is terribly complicated;
and even in computations, what do mathematicians do? Linearize
the system in pieces, and then put it together. This is the way most of us
use mathematics in a field in which data is important.
Foley: I was going to ask you about the relationship between
production-function analysis and input–output. Production functions seem
to have taken over the economics of production.
Leontief: Oh, yes. The production function is too flexible. First of all,
continuity is silly. I visualize different methods of production as cooking
recipes, including even such things as temperature and so forth, and what
must be known in order to be able to cook the dish. This approach
might enable us to analyze technological change. The technological
production function was essentially an attempt not to go into empirical
analysis. You see, given production functions, you don’t need that. You
guess at a few parameters, instead of having to look in detail at what’s
happening, and if you try to generalize production functions, it’s dangerous,
very dangerous.
Foley: What are your thoughts on the advantages and disadvantages of
linking sectoral and establishment- or firm-level data?
30 Duncan K. Foley
Leontief: I think the institutional organization of production through
the establishment in some way reflects technology, but it is a very delicate
situation, because it’s not very simple, how economic activities are distributed
to different human organizations. It has some relation to what is
actually being done, but it’s very delicate. Human organizations are very
complicated. You can accomplish this linkage in some respects and not
some other respects, but I agree with both approaches, particularly since
the establishment is not enough. Even establishments are now institutional
organizations.
Foley: One practical problem is that, as you disaggregate the input–
output structure, you find that one firm begins to appear in several
different sectors. This also touches on the theme you were talking about
earlier of finance. Finance comes at the firm level.
Leontief: I completely agree, and here, we agree with the need for
continuity. Institutional organizations change very easily. So far as top
management is concerned, the firm doesn’t reflect technology at all. You
can have the same corporation making ice cream and making steel. This
is, I think, unavoidable, but, possibly because of my interests, I would
rather favor establishments first, and then corporations, because the establishment
is a homogeneous concept. It is quite an interesting problem.
Foley: Where do you think the future of economics, and macroeconomics
in particular, lies?
Leontief: I think problems of income distribution will increase in
importance. As I mentioned before, labor will be not so important, and
the problem will be just to manage the system. People will get their
income allocated through social security—already now we get it through
social security, and we try to invent pretexts to provide social security
for people. Here, I think, the role of the government will be incredibly
important, and those economists who try to minimize the role of the
government, I fear, show a superficial understanding of how the economic
system works. My feeling is, if we abolished the government now,
already there would be complete chaos. Now, planning plays a role,
naturally, but I don’t emphasize just planning as a role for the government,
which is I think extremely important, and its importance is bound
to increase because of technological change. If one asks oneself, what will
happen to the system if we abolished completely the government, it
would be horrible.
Foley: But you think that’s particularly true because of the pressures
technological change in capitalism are putting on the social fabric, and a
weakening of the nexus between labor and income?
Leontief: Oh yes. Absolutely. The labor market is not a sufficient
instrument to move from production to consumption.
An Interview with Wassily Leontief 31
Foley: I’m just going to ask you one more question. You’ve been a
lifetime participant observer in the subculture of American economics
and the larger world of American science and politics. If you were an
anthropologist, how would you characterize economists as a tribe or a
culture compared to the physicists or biologists?
Leontief: It depends what economists you have in mind. Academic
economists are just part of the academic establishment, but I suppose
we economists are as indispensable as accountants. In managing a system,
you have to have represented the point of view and principle which
managers have, and economists are just a particular type of management,
if you disregard academic economists, who are a special type.
Foley: Within academics, do you see any difference between economists
and their counterparts in science or the engineers that you work
with?
Leontief: You see different tendencies in economics. Some prominent
economists have just proved a couple of theorems, or codified classical
and neoclassical textbooks.
Foley: You’re suggesting that economists value classificatory or formal
contributions more than finding out something about the world itself ?
Leontief: Yes. My observation was a critical one. Particularly since I
am interested in society, I see economics as a social science. Certainly
economists should contribute something to understanding how human
society developed, and here, economists have to cooperate with anthropologists
and others.
32 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
2
An Interview with
David Cass
Interviewed by Stephen E. Spear
CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
and
Randall Wright
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
February 13, 1998
David Cass is undoubtedly one of the central contributors to modern
dynamic economics. His fundamental contributions include work on optimal
growth problems, overlapping-generations models, sunspot equilibria, and
general equilibrium models with incomplete markets. His research has
shaped in profound ways the manner in which we do both micro- and
macroeconomics. From laying the foundations of real business-cycle theory
via the Cass–Koopmans model, to providing us with general tools and
techniques to analyze dynamic economic models, to furthering our understanding
of monetary economics, to making fundamental contributions
to the economics of extrinsic uncertainty, Cass’s work has played a major
part in the development of much of modern macroeconomic theory. In
addition to being a first-class scholar, Cass is also truly his own man and
a free spirit of the highest order.
In this interview, we tried to gain some insights into the story of David
Cass and his approach to economic theory. Also, given the title as well as
the intended readership of Macroeconomic Dynamics, we made a real
Reprinted from Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2, 1998, 533–558. Copyright © 1998
Cambridge University Press.
An Interview with David Cass 33
Figure 2.1 David Cass, June 3,
1994, on the occasion of receiving an
honorary degree (“docteur ès sciences
economiques honoris causa”) from
the University of Geneva.
effort to get him to discuss modern
macroeconomics and the
influence his work has had on its
development. We edited out some
parts of the discussion in the
interests of space, but what remains
is essentially unedited. As
most readers will know, David
Cass has collaborated extensively
with Karl Shell over the years.
We met with Dave in his office
at the University of Pennsylvania’s
Economics Department just
before noon. Amid the boxes
and piles of articles, books, and
CDs, he sat in his standard jeans
and T-shirt, looking about as
disheveled as he usually does. We
chatted there for a while, went out
and continued over lunch, and
then returned to complete the
interview several hours later. It
was an unseasonably warm day in
February, and Friday the 13th to
be exact. That is traditionally an unlucky day, but one that turned out in
this case to be a real treat, at least for us! We hope that you get as much
out of this conversation with Dave as we did.
MD (Macroeconomic Dynamics): Let’s begin by talking about
graduate school and your adviser, [Hirofumi] Uzawa. How did you first
hook up with him?
Cass: Okay. I viewed Stanford’s graduate program as being completely
chaotic. I’ll give you an example. The first year I went to Stanford, they
had a qualifying oral in the first semester and everybody had realized that
this was patently absurd. So they had abolished the requirement, but
they’d scheduled the orals already, so they decided to hold them. My
oral—and I didn’t even know people on the Stanford faculty very well at
the time—my oral was composed of Ken Arrow and somebody else.
When I found out about Arrow, I was terrified. So I went in and Ken
asked me a question and I gave some half-assed answer, and he has this
capability of taking someone’s answer and then reframing it in a way that
makes a lot of sense. So, my qualifying exams consisted of my short
responses to Arrow and then him elaborating to make sense of them.
34 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
But the point is, they had this requirement that they abolished but they
scheduled, and that was typical. So basically, at Stanford you were kind
of left on your own as a graduate student. There was just no coherence
in the program. Now, I don’t remember exactly how I first met Uzawa,
but there was a mathematical economics group who had offices separate
from the department in a little house on campus called Serra House, and
that is where what I consider the really good people at Stanford were:
Arrow, Uzawa , Scarf. We had other kinds of mathematical social scientists
there. And somehow, Karl [Shell] knew about Serra House right away,
and we had our offices there.
MD: Did you and Karl enter in the same year?
Cass: Yeah, and somehow Karl introduced me to Serra House. I don’t
remember how we got involved with Uzawa, but we just got involved with
him. Maybe he ran a seminar or something. I don’t really remember how
we met, but it was clear that this guy was really into research and very
good at directing people, so we hooked up with him. Then, the last two
years at Stanford (I stayed four years), I basically spent at Serra House
working with Uzawa. He always had seminars going. Uzawa, in my view,
by conventional standards, is a terrible lecturer, but he is an awesome
teacher. His greatest virtue is that when he lectures he shows you how he
does research. If he doesn’t prepare, he will tell you about a paper he is
working on, and he gets up and basically re-creates the mistakes that he
made and corrects them. He explains why he decided to do this and that,
and it is just like you are taught by doing research.
So, I took a couple of courses from him and found them great, but
from conventional standards they were probably a disaster. He taught
econometrics, and he wanted to calculate some estimator, probably a
limited information maximum likelihood estimator, but he didn’t really
remember anything about it. Half of the course consisted of Uzawa
coming in and starting to prove a theorem about this estimator, and he
would go on for about an hour or an hour and a half, and then he would
realize that he had gone off on the wrong track again and he would say
“Oh, sorry.” Next time he would start up again—it was really incredible!
But it was interesting. He has a really good mind for working from first
principles and for working out how you solve a problem.
Uzawa was a marvelous person to work with. I model my career in
terms of working with graduate students after the experience I had working
with Uzawa. He treats them exactly as equals and he spends a hell of
a lot of time one-on-one with them in all kinds of situations. Don’t think
it was only in the office—it could be going to a bar, or any of that. He
just spent an enormous amount of time. Now Uzawa probably never
read anything that I wrote. I am sure he didn’t. But he always wanted to
An Interview with David Cass 35
talk about it. He’d always force his students to deal with that, and he had
a group of students in seminars, so that all the students knew what the
other students were doing. Of course, we had a focused subject—growth
theory and, more particularly, applications of a fancy version of the
calculus of variations, the maximum principle, to growth models. So we
all had a common background but, actually, that personal thing is one of
the reasons I got into trouble with the Penn administration. One of the
basic issues I had about dealing with graduate students here was that
somehow the administration wanted me to distinguish very carefully
between my professional activities and my social activities, and I told
them that wasn’t consistent with my idea of how you deal with graduate
students, and it isn’t. So this is all in response to the question of how
did you meet Uzawa—and the actual details about meeting Uzawa I do
not remember.
MD: Did you know that you wanted to do growth theory?
Cass: Not at all.
MD: What was your undergraduate training?
Cass: I was a joint Economics–Russian Studies major.
MD: Russian Studies?
Cass: Yeah. Very anomalous because languages were probably my
weakest suit.
MD: Where was that?
Cass: The University of Oregon. I always thought that I was to become
a lawyer because that’s a tradition in my family. I spent a year at the
Harvard Law School and hated every minute of it. I spent most of my
time re-reading great Russian literature, and I learned how to answer
exams just by deductive logic. I’d memorize a few definitions and go
from there, which got me through. Then I went in the army and I
decided that what I really wanted to do was to go back to graduate
school in Economics, and I decided to stay on the West Coast. I was
very lucky. I didn’t know anything about graduate schools but it seemed
like the major choices were Berkeley and Stanford. Just by chance I
decided Stanford rather than Berkeley, and I think it was a hell of a
good decision, because the faculty that I got inspired by are really
world class.
MD: So why did you decide to go to graduate school in economics?
Cass: I liked economics, and I realized that my undergraduate degree
was the tip of the iceberg. They were just barely getting into the use of
equations in class and it was kind of fascinating to me—the idea of being
formal about a social science.
MD: So you probably had very little mathematics training when you
went to grad school.
36 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
Cass: I had virtually no math training. I had taken college trig, algebra,
geometry, and that was it. In fact, I remember the first day of class at
Stanford there was a guy teaching a macro course; his name was Bob
Slighton. The first day of class he wrote down a general equilibrium
model and decided that he was going to calculate a multiplier, which is
just a derivative of the model. He filled the blackboard in the front of
the room and the side of the room and I didn’t understand a word
of this. I knew what a derivative was but I didn’t know what a partial
derivative was. He was doing all this partial differentiation. Of course, in
those days, in terms of partial differentiation, people didn’t really understand
what they were doing. They would write down differential forms,
what in differential topology are called the tangent spaces, and they’d
be dealing with calculus on manifolds but didn’t really understand it.
The technique was kind of incomprehensible.
I went home from that class and I said, “Well, you’re not really prepared
to sit in graduate classes in economics,” so I basically re-registered
for calculus and statistics and I think I sat through Slighton’s class, which
was excellent. The micro class was more problematic. It was taught by a
guy named Melvin Reder, a labor economist, and he came in the first day
of class and put his feet on the chalkboard and said something deprecating
about economic theory, so I never went back. The first term I spent
learning introductory calculus and probability theory. The probability
theory was actually taught by a guy whom I later learned was a worldclass
probabilist. It was marvelous because he introduced everything via
examples, and then you could study for the exam because you had a
good feel for what probability theory was all about.
MD: Did you and Karl work together at Stanford?
Cass: No. One of the funny things about Stanford, and this may be
true in other graduate programs too, they preselected people that they
assumed were going to be stars. Karl was an undergraduate math major
at Princeton who basically went to Stanford because he knew about Ken
Arrow, and Karl was a preselected star. (He was not selected as top star
of the class; I forgot the name of the guy who was, but he turned out
to be a real bust.) Since I decided not to take economics the first year I
was there, I really didn’t have much to do with economics students, and
I only got to know Karl probably toward the end of my second year.
He introduced me to Serra House, and there Uzawa’s students all worked
together because we all knew each others’ problems, so we could communicate
very quickly. But none of us actually wrote papers together.
Karl and I started collaborating on papers much later, in the early 1970s,
but, again, Karl knew my thesis and I knew Karl’s thesis throughout the
whole development phase, so basically who contributed what to what as
graduate students with Uzawa was always up in the air.
An Interview with David Cass 37
MD: And how were you led to your thesis topic?
Cass: Optimal growth? Well, it was basically the fascination Uzawa
had with the maximum principle.
MD: What growth theory did you know before that?
Cass: At that period there was a distinction between what we wanted
to do, optimal or prescriptive growth, and descriptive growth à la Solow.
He wrote a ton of papers, starting with the very famous paper on the
one-sector model, and then he wrote many others describing competitive
growth models that had more goods, and maybe some specialized technology,
and he kept repeating how you describe a competitive equilibrium
and its efficiency properties (something Malinvaud did much more elegantly
in his justifiably famous Econometrica paper). So that’s descriptive
growth theory. Then there was this famous paper by Ramsey, and Uzawa
was clearly fascinated by two-sector versions of the neoclassical growth
model. He wrote several papers on that. Then he decided to go into
optimal growth theory and produced a paper which was essentially a
two-sector model with a linear objective function. Basically, he re-created
the calculus of variations himself—he is a very original guy—and then he
discovered the maximum principle and became fascinated with it. Uzawa
also gave a seminar on economic history in which he went back and took
all the great names in economics, starting with Ricardo, Marx, . . . and
reproduced what they were doing as a growth model. I was very influenced
by Uzawa’s work. I didn’t even know about Ramsey at the time.
MD: That is interesting because sometimes one hears about Ramsey as
this hidden classic. But didn’t some people know about Ramsey? Didn’t
Uzawa?
Cass: No, I don’t think so, because I didn’t find out about Ramsey
until after I had written the first chapter of my thesis on optimum
growth. And then I was, to be perfectly honest, I was a bit embarrassed
about it.
MD: How did you discover Ramsey?
Cass: I don’t remember now. Maybe somebody mentioned it; maybe
Uzawa knew about it, but not really, because he thought my contribution
was absolutely seminal. In a way it is not at all. In fact I always
have been kind of embarrassed because that paper is always cited although
now I think of it as an exercise, almost re-creating and going a little
beyond the Ramsey model.
MD: Ramsey had no discounting and you did have discounting. That’s
one difference, right?
Cass: Ramsey had no discounting. He made a big point of talking about
the correctness of the social welfare function from a moral viewpoint, I
believe, maybe in his side remarks. Tjalling Koopmans was very sensitive
to this issue, too, when he wrote a paper of this sort. It turns out to be
38 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
much harder to solve the problem with no discounting because, even if
the objective is written as a function of a functional, it is not well-defined
because it may be infinite-valued, and you have to use a trick to make
sense out of it. You have to take the difference between utility of consumption
and utility of the golden rule consumption so that you get a
function that is well defined. As a technical aside, it is very interesting
that the Ramsey problem is a counterexample to something which people
now always do. I think they do it in macro without even thinking about
it, when they do dynamic optimization, and they write down transversality
conditions as necessary, which I also said something about in my thesis,
and this is dead wrong. The Ramsey problem is a counterexample to this:
You have an optimum, but it doesn’t satisfy the transversality condition.
MD: Is this an issue only in the no-discounting case?
Cass: Yeah, that’s in the undiscounted case. It has to do with the condition
in capital theory that is called nontightness, which is a sufficient
condition for the transversality condition to be necessary, and basically is
an interiority condition that enables you to use a separating hyperplane
theorem. Now I have forgotten what the original question was!
MD: How you came to the optimal growth problem.
Cass: Actually, even though Uzawa always went back and read literature
and was always motivated by literature, I didn’t pick that up from
him at all; I just decided to work on this problem because the techniques
were new and exciting and it seemed like an interesting problem. So I
taught myself the maximum principle, some differential equations, and so
on, by talking to people, seeing Uzawa working, and basically reading
math books. Our bible at the time was Pontryagin’s original book on the
maximum principle. That is really interesting too, because that book is
very geometric, and Pontryagin’s blind.
MD: Was it in Russian? You would have had a natural advantage there.
Cass: I could have read a little bit of Russian, but it was translated.
Anyway, he’s blind, and yet all of his thinking is purely geometric; he
pictures things. So I just put the two together, and then Uzawa thought
this was great. I’m not sure why, I guess probably because Tjalling
Koopmans was working on this problem and Tjalling was a bit of an idol
for Uzawa. Actually, Uzawa liked to one-up people. At some point he
was talking to Tjalling about the problem, and Tjalling was describing
what he was doing and Uzawa interrupted and said, “Well, I have a
graduate student who did that problem.” Then Tjalling got very nervous
about it, he was always very nervous about . . . , oh, authorship and who
was first and that sort of thing, and we had some correspondence.
Koopmans was also very interested in the no-discounting case, so he
solved the much harder problem in some ways, in addition to solving the
An Interview with David Cass 39
problem with discounting. Tjalling did all his analysis from first principles;
he derived all of the conditions.
MD: Then you went on the job market.
Cass: I’ll tell you a story about the job market that reflects the character,
the idiosyncratic character, of Uzawa. Uzawa originally engineered for
me to have a postdoc at Purdue, which was a pretty good department,
but then he had contact with Koopmans at the Cowles Foundation, who
were interested in doing some hiring. Uzawa decided that would be a
better job, but his idea of supporting a student on the market was that
it was immoral to have more than one offer. So I went to the winter
meetings in Boston with just an interview with the Cowles Foundation,
and a couple more that I had arranged that turned into disasters. I spent
most of the time in the hotel room watching football, and I was rooming
with Karl who had a million interviews! It came down to the last day of
interviews and everything depended on my passing an interview with the
Cowles Foundation, which was a lunch with Tjalling and Herb Scarf and
I don’t remember who else, very likely Jim Tobin. I talked a little about
my thesis, but Tjalling already knew about it, and he decided to question
me with “What will you be working on 10 years from now?” As with any
graduate student, I couldn’t even think two months ahead. I had no idea
what I would be doing!
For some reason, they couldn’t make me a regular appointment, and
I remember Tjalling had obligated himself to make an appointment that
it turned out he couldn’t make, so he signed me as a research associate
at the Cowles Foundation for one year, on a one-year appointment, with
the promise that it would be extended and I’d become an assistant
professor as well as research associate. You can’t believe salaries in those
days, even adjusted for inflation. My salary when I started was $8,000.
MD: Tell us about Yale.
Cass: Yale was a great postgraduate education. The Cowles Foundation,
at that point, had a lot of money, and a policy of hiring or having in
residence lots of junior faculty. The physical setting was in a separate
building, in a separate little house. People like Tobin, in particular, really
encouraged us. I really remember my days at Yale very fondly. When I
was first there I talked a lot with Ned Phelps. Then of course I met
Manny Yaari, and Manny and I talked a lot and ended up writing papers
just based on these conversations. The consumption loan paper came
about this way.
MD: And that was when you got into overlapping-generations models?
Cass: Yeah, overlapping generations was with Manny.
MD: Was the overlapping-generations model something many people
were interested in then, in the late 1960s? Presumably not, since
40 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
Samuelson’s paper was published in the 1950s and then sat there for a
long time without attracting much additional attention.
Cass: Yeah, it sat there for a long time. The Cass and Yaari paper used
to have a lot of cites, and I think the main reason for that was it revivified
interest in the overlapping-generations model. That’s not a paper that I
think of as a great paper because we were really struggling. I don’t want
to be quoted on this, but in my opinion I don’t think that there is much
in that paper that survives.
MD: So you and Yaari were chatting about things and began talking
about overlapping generations. Had you and Karl talked about it
previously?
Cass: No, I don’t think so. My recollection is that I really first thought
about it the first year I was at Cowles.
Going on about Cowles, my second year and into my third year, there
was this big influx from MIT: Joe Stiglitz, Marty Weitzman, Bill Nordhaus,
and others, too, and the environment was just great. Hell, I shared offices
with Joe Stiglitz. I probably never would have gotten to know Joe and
take him very seriously, because he is so quick and so sloppy, except that
we shared an office together. Joe used to come in and sit down in the
morning and say, “I am going to write a paper today.” And he’d sit at
his typewriter and write a paper. This just drove me nuts because I am
very deliberate. So I got into a habit, when Joe would tell me he was
going to write a paper about something, of talking with him about it. He
would come up with some point and I would say, “Well, Joe, how do
you know that’s true?” Actually, we ended up writing a lot of papers
together based on the fact that I would ask Joe, “How do you know
that that is true?” One of those papers is still cited a lot. It is about portfolio
choice—the reduction to choice between two assets. I think that
was a hard paper and we have really cool results from it, but it’s just to
justify a simplification. In order to justify the simplification, it turns out
you have to make extremely strong assumptions about preferences.
Anyway, Cowles was extraordinary. Very stimulating. For the most
part, nobody was proprietary about sharing ideas. Nobody would try to
protect their ideas. They talked about them.
MD: Was Yaari there as a visitor?
Cass: No, Manny had had his first appointment with Cowles. He
was promoted to, I suppose, associate without tenure, a standard step. I
was too, while I was there. Then he came up for tenure, and he had to
decide whether he was going to go back to Hebrew University in Israel
or stay at Cowles. Yale actually made some, I thought, really stupid
personnel decisions. Partly it was motivated by the fact that they wanted
to keep a throughput of junior faculty; they didn’t want to get a large
An Interview with David Cass 41
senior group. So they turned down Manny. Another example of a serious
mistake is that they turned down Ned Phelps. Hey, he has got an
extraordinarily creative mind. So does Yaari. I have tremendous feeling
and respect for both of them. And they were turned down flat.
I was also one of the young people that was throughput at Yale, if you
will. I don’t think that they were seriously considering giving me tenure
and, to be honest, I didn’t have a lot of publications when I would have
come up for tenure, maybe a half dozen. I remember, I was on the
market and I went to Johns Hopkins, and the department chair there
told me they couldn’t seriously consider me because I didn’t have enough
publications. But for some reason Dick Cyert had decided several years
before that he really wanted me to come to Carnegie. Cyert is nothing if
not tenacious—he kept after me every year. Originally (you probably
don’t want to repeat this exactly), my view of Carnegie was that it was a
serious place but that the typical paper was just to apply the Kuhn–
Tucker Theorem to some problem, and I didn’t find that very exciting.
But then I went to Carnegie and met some of the junior faculty. I knew
Bob Lucas very well and he was a big draw.
MD: How did you know Lucas?
Cass: Well, Bob was at Chicago, probably just finishing up, when
Uzawa moved from Stanford to Chicago. Bob never worked with Uzawa,
but Bob’s work was probably also not particularly fashionable with any
other faculty there because he was interested in doing the kind of things
Uzawa did. So he became sort of a semiprotégée of Uzawa. I don’t want
to exaggerate that, but anyway, I remember my first encounter with Bob
intellectually. He gave some version of a dynamic IO problem, something
about industrial structure, firms entering and exiting, as I remember.
Anyway, I met Bob because Uzawa kept track of his graduate students
and he used to hold conferences when he was in Chicago, where he had
also built up a group of graduate students. One of the first conferences I
went to, Bob Lucas was there and that is how I met him. He was obviously
very smart, very serious, and we got along very well and so he was quite
a draw to go to Carnegie. I knew he was not the kind of guy to just
apply Kuhn–Tucker conditions, so he clearly did not fit my stereotype.
So I went to visit and I met other people at Carnegie. Len Rapping,
for example, was a very interesting person. He was originally a die-hard
Chicago market-oriented person who had a complete change of heart
during the Vietnam War, but still a very interesting and smart guy. The
other person that I remember who really impressed me was Herb Simon,
who was clearly a really interesting and creative individual. And I said,
“Well, your stereotype is wrong, and that might be a very interesting place
to go.” When I went to Carnegie it was a very good place. It was not a
42 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
business school; even though they had a Master in Business Administration
program, it was just not a traditional business school.
MD: This would have been around 1970?
Cass: Yes, this was in 1970. It was a small faculty and a relatively small
number of MBAs. We taught the MBAs the same as we taught the Ph.D.’s
almost, and at that point, unlike today, the MBAs came and they were
expected to perform, and they didn’t raise questions about whether the
stuff was too hard or didn’t have anything to do with business. Carnegie
was an absolute innovator in introducing quantitative techniques, and
especially economics as kind of a broad basis for most fields in business.
In fact, a great example of that was the development of finance as something
serious. The finance people won’t like this but, to learn finance,
you basically learn economic techniques, and that originally took place at
Carnegie and took place in the standard way that Carnegie operated. If
they had a course to teach, they would just assign somebody to teach the
course. Merton Miller was one of the people assigned to teach a course on
finance along with Franco Modigliani, and so: Modigliani–Miller. They
were puzzled by something, and used economic methodology to solve it.
Carnegie was really a great place. They used the MBA program also to
find good Ph.D. students. You didn’t mind teaching MBAs at Carnegie
because you could teach them a serious course. You didn’t have to pull
your punches because they were expected to learn programming, expected
to learn serious economics, serious econometrics, and so on. The other
thing about Carnegie is that it had a very good system for supporting
and encouraging young faculty to interact and to have time to do research.
They were really good, as Cowles had been, about teaching loads, summer
support, secretarial support, and support for travel until you were well
enough recognized that you could go out and raise your own money. So
I had nothing but respect for Carnegie Mellon, GSIA at Carnegie Mellon,
and the team run by Dick Cyert. I have enormous respect for Dick.
MD: What were you working on in those days?
Cass: One of the nice things about Cyert was that he basically paid for
a year’s leave between being at Cowles and being at Carnegie, so I spent
that year in Tokyo, and I wrote several papers there. One I really liked
the best, I think it is one of my best papers, and I don’t think that it is
one that is very widely read. It is solving the following problem:
In the neoclassical growth model, you can have competitive equilibria
which are not optimal, not efficient, if you use consumption as the criterion.
You can basically overaccumulate capital. The best example of that
—an example by Ned Phelps—is if you look at the same neoclassical
model and you look at a steady state that is above the golden-rule path,
you can move from that steady state and take one step back to the golden-
An Interview with David Cass 43
Figure 2.2 A conference at Carnegie Mellon University in honor of Dick
Cyert, September 11, 1993. Pictured (from left to right) are Dave Cass,
Robert Lucas, Dick Cyert, Allan Meltzer, Edward Prescott, and Timothy
McGuire.
rule capital stock, and get a consumption bonus and have higher consumption
ever after that. Being at the upper point you still have competitive
prices, they are just not efficiency prices. If you look at those
competitive paths, you can rule out the ones that are inefficient if you
impose the transversality condition. So the transversality condition is a
sufficient condition for ruling out capital overaccumulation.
I found this to be a very interesting problem: What is a necessary and
sufficient condition? The transversality condition is a sufficient condition
for efficiency, but is not necessary. The golden-rule path itself is a counterexample,
as I said earlier. The golden-rule path is efficient, and for
some criterion is also Pareto optimal, but there the transversality condition
is not satisfied since the interest rate is identically zero. Manny Yaari
and I had started working on this problem two years before, and we got
one solution for it that was in terms of a condition that wasn’t that
interpretable. Now I know why I didn’t like the condition. I wanted a
condition on the price path itself that was necessary and sufficient, so I
worked all year in Japan on that and got a complete solution. I really like
that paper.
So I spent a year in Japan working on that problem, and then I wrote
a couple of other papers on things I wanted to write about. One of them
44 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
was actually very much Solow-like. I took the Wicksellian model, the pointinput/
point-output model and analyzed competitive equilibrium. I like
that paper a lot, too, but it’s very specialized. I doubt anyone has ever
read it. And Joe and I finished our paper on portfolio choice that year.
The biggest stumbling block for that was that in the paper itself there are
computations for specific parametric forms and neither Joe nor I was that
excited about, or that careful sometimes, dealing with parametric forms.
So we really had a hell of a lot of trouble agreeing upon what was the
correct way to write down these examples to illustrate our theorem. In
the final version of that paper there were still algebraic errors; somehow
neither of us took the responsibility for proofreading it.
Then I kind of fished around for a while. I worked more on growth
theory. I got interested in the general problem, which was then very
unfashionable because it was at the tail end of the neoclassical growth
period, of the stability of competitive dynamical systems more generally.
Karl and I produced a paper that I like a lot, although it might have been
a little archaic even then, on this problem.
MD: Was that the first time you worked with Karl?
Cass: That was the first time Karl and I really worked together on a
paper. Karl was at Penn at that time. Anyway, back at Carnegie I wrote
some minor papers, like on the Hamiltonian representation of efficient
production, a paper on duality; these were not major papers. Probably
I got to talking with programmers and got back to doing things with
programming at Carnegie. The guy I really talked to a lot was—I remember
him well, in fact he died some years ago—a guy named Bob Jeroslow,
who was really a mathematical logician turned programmer. He was
extraordinarily clever. The big thing in programming then was integer
programming, finding algorithms that would solve integer programming
problems. There were lots of algorithms but people didn’t have any idea
of why they worked, and Bob was really good at constructing for any
algorithm a counterexample that would never converge. I used to talk to
him a lot. He started to get interested in economics and I got interested
in programming again, so I wrote some programming papers.
After that, Karl and I got into the stability thing, which we spent a
couple of years finishing up. Then at some point—I don’t now how this
should appear in this interview—the Dean, Cyert, became President and
we had to hire a new Dean. At Carnegie the faculty was very involved in
this process, and we actually talked a lot about the kind of person we
wanted. For some reason we settled on Arnie Weber, who was a Chicago
Business School labor economist. That turned out to be, from Carnegie’s
viewpoint and my own viewpoint, a disaster, because the guy had no feel
for the Carnegie tradition at all. He did not understand the fact that
Carnegie was quantitative, and that the quantitative emphasis was on
An Interview with David Cass 45
economics, and that meant that you were going to have a lot of economists
around. An example of this, a personal example, is that very early on
Arnie called me into his office for some reason, and I had an interview
with him. He told me that I was a luxury good and that I didn’t do
business. I did theoretical economics and it wasn’t something that business
schools could really support, and he did it in a very obnoxious way
that really pissed me off. And I said “f— you, Arnie.”
MD: Literally?
Cass: Yeah, I said “f— you,” and I decided that since I was working
with Karl it might make sense to come to Penn, even though I had a few
reservations about Penn because I knew it was very econometric-model
oriented. But they made me a good offer so I couldn’t turn it down.
MD: Could we stay on your time at Carnegie for a while?
Cass: Yeah, we could do that.
MD: Okay. Ph.D. students: One of the prominent ones you worked
with there was Finn Kydland.
Cass: Finn Kydland, yeah, I was on his committee, and actually worked
with him a lot on one or two chapters, but not most of his thesis. His
thesis was all programming. Another one was Bill Barnett. I don’t remember
if I was formally on Barnett’s committee. I know I talked to him a lot
but I may have left before he finished or he may have just drifted off. The
main group I worked with includes people who came my first year at
Carnegie, such as John Donaldson and Bob Forsythe. Those two stand
out in my mind.
MD: Kydland’s work with Ed Prescott began the development of real
business-cycle theory, and the workhorse model in real business-cycle
theory is the Cass–Koopmans model. Did you and Finn ever talk about
growth theory?
Cass: No, as I said, Finn when he was a graduate student was doing
programming.
MD: Let’s talk about Lucas’s use of the overlapping-generations
model.
Cass: I’ll tell you, that is an interesting paper we’re talking about, in
Journal of Economic Theory, an interesting paper. I wasn’t so interested in
the macro, but what struck me, and this is related to some of my later work,
was the assumption that Bob made to solve for equilibrium, that the
state variables were obvious (that is actually the first time that I thought
about the sunspot idea). Bob and I had some long discussions, and I
would say, “Well Bob, why is this the actual state space in this model?”
That question came up—and now I am jumping ahead—after I came
to Penn. At some point Karl and I started talking about that and we
developed what we called the idea of sunspots. But the initial impetus
toward that for me was talking to Lucas.
46 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
MD: Also, technically, Lucas’s paper was one of the first uses in
economics of contraction mappings.
Cass: Well, Bob was very fixated on using contraction mappings to
get fixed points. I think maybe he always uses that technique. I don’t think
he even knows Brouwer’s Theorem! No, actually he does. He just likes
contraction mappings. Anyway, the view in capital theory, as I understood
it, was that you could treat, from a fundamental state space, uncertainty
as well as time. So a commodity index could represent time, uncertainty,
and commodity characteristics like location, whatever you wanted. But
the viewpoint in growth theory is precisely that equilibrium is just prices
that depend on the underlying state space. Bob went a step further and—
I’m not even sure how I would say it—it is more like a function of the
underlying state variables, or to put it more accurately, the state space
itself is generated via some underlying process through observed variables.
So that’s what the state space itself is, for instance, money and
some actual random shocks. Money is one of the state variables, though
it’s actually defined on the underlying state space. The states of the world
are described by money and a random variable that has to do with islandspecific
shocks.
The ultimate question is, “What is a state space?”
MD: Brock and Mirman was another seminal paper.
Cass: Brock and Mirman was kind of a milestone because they focused
on introducing uncertainty into the neoclassical model. Where did I
meet Buzz Brock? Somehow, Buzz was a student at Berkeley and I think
his thesis had to do with optimal growth in a multisector model. That is
probably when I first met him. Our careers overlapped in several dimensions,
for instance, when Jan and I spent the year later visiting Cal Tech
and Buzz spent part of the year there. We had quite a bit of contact
when Brock was working on growth theory, and then we just kind of
drifted apart. He is still very active. I just haven’t kept up with him or
much of his work.
MD: When you were at Carnegie and people like Lucas and Prescott
were working on the new macro stuff, were you paying attention?
Cass: Not really.
MD: Or do you think that this work is more microeconomics?
Cass: It was clearly micro and was being called macro, and you know,
actually, for some reason, I never talked a lot with Bob about it. I don’t
know why. We had a great personal relationship, but somehow we didn’t
talk much about that. Our styles are really different, so we didn’t talk a
lot about that work, except we would go to lunch together and we would
talk about it more on a casual level, but it was not at the blackboard
level. It probably had to do with the fact that Bob was in the Chicago
tradition and was very concerned about empirical testing—whatever the
An Interview with David Cass 47
hell that means—something that I have little sympathy for and very little
interest in, to be perfectly honest. So there was quite a difference in
viewpoints about why you did theory and what the relevance of theory is,
and I am still of the opinion that theory is more a way of organizing your
thoughts, how you think about the world. And it’s strongest in providing
counterexamples when people confidently claim that something is
true in general. If you can construct a not-unreasonable model in which
this phenomenon is not true, then [Bronx cheer]. You can’t assert with
any confidence that some proposition is true. Now this clearly does go
over to the question of when an assertion is true or not true if you want
to quantify it. You can stay at the qualitative level—like the Laffer curve,
an idea that was by example. Then you can construct models, plausible
models, where you can get either result, and that makes his proposition
absolutely dubious. I don’t know how the data look. Probably most
regressions are very mixed: Take a bunch of data and fit some curve to it
and then claim that you summarize the data with some curve and that’s
a dubious claim.
MD: This is probably a good point to ask you how you feel
about calibration, as pushed by Prescott and others over the past decade
or so.
Cass: The main problem I have with calibration is the level of abstraction
of the models that are being calibrated. I mean, if you are calibrating
something that is essentially like a neoclassical model, then I kind of
wonder what the hell that means. I suppose when I thought about it
(and I haven’t thought in great detail about it, to be honest), the whole
notion of calibration and how you say that you’ve got a model that fits
the data well is pretty amorphous. For example, to say that it generates
time series for certain parameter values that share certain characteristics
with the observed time series, I think you have to have a formal methodology
for talking about what it means for two time series to be close.
I thought that when I paid attention to the real business-cycle stuff, the
idea of what to calibrate or what a good model is was pretty vague. Now
I am probably being unfair to the real business-cycle people, because
there are some really smart people working in the area, and they’ve
probably refined the idea of calibration and gone beyond the simple
calculations of the original neoclassical growth model; but probably not
very far beyond, because you’re still dealing with aggregate time series.
My student John Donaldson, who works in the area, is very good and I
have a lot of respect for him.
But the thing about real business-cycle theory, I suppose, is that it is
almost like a religion. I have talked quite a bit with Victor [Rios-Rull],
whom I have a lot of respect for, who has this view, this view that he is
convinced quite strongly about, that this is the only way to look at the
48 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
world, to look at economics. When anybody tells me it’s the only thing,
I’m skeptical. I don’t believe that using general equilibrium theory is
the only way of looking at the world. I think I have learned a lot from
game theory, focusing on strategic ideas, the importance of strategy, and
imperfect information.
MD: Isn’t that general equilibrium?
Cass: It can be, but there are other ways of looking at imperfect
information and all these ways are important. But I also think that the
general equilibrium model itself has a role, that it is still an important
benchmark, and that there are still a lot of interesting things that can be
done with that theory.
MD: That is one thing that you do have in common with Prescott.
Cass: Yeah, absolutely. But, if anything, maybe Prescott is more extreme.
I have learned a hell of a lot being at Penn, where there are good game
theorists. I mean, I have really learned a lot. I could probably teach a
Figure 2.3 Cass singing with Randy Wright’s band (The Contractions) at
the Penn Economics department’s “skit night,” at which economics graduate
students lampoon the department faculty, and vice versa, March 3, 1998.
Pictured (from left to right) are Randy Wright, Dave Cass, Andrei Shevchenko
(a Penn Economics graduate student), Gwen Eudey (Georgetown University,
visiting at the Research Department, FRB of Philadelphia), and Boyen
Jovanovic (at piano).
An Interview with David Cass 49
game theory course without ever having read more than a dozen articles,
just from having been here.
MD: Let’s talk more about the Penn years, which are tied in with
overlapping-generations models.
Cass: Karl and I got back, if my memory serves, into thinking about
the overlapping-generations model sometime in the middle to late 1970s.
If I had to pinpoint a date I would peg the year about 1977. I’ll tell you
the genesis, to my recollection. Karl and I were having a discussion because
there was a seminar here run by more junior faculty, and we participated,
and we would go back and read some classics in macro that people
wanted to read. One of the papers people wanted to talk about was Lucas
1972. I don’t remember why one of us decided to present it, but it got
me to thinking again about this issue I’d raised with Bob about the state
space, and Karl and I talked about it. Karl was astute enough to observe
that we could formalize the idea of having arbitrary variables in the state
space. So Karl constructed the first example of sunspot equilibrium, and
I think it is the one that appeared in his so-called Malinvaud lecture. It’s
a linear OLG model where households’ allocations but not their welfare
depend on sunspots, and so I objected to the example. I said, “Karl, that’s
not a convincing example. It doesn’t matter from a welfare viewpoint.”
We were going to a conference that Karl and I had organized at
Squam Lake in New Hampshire on growth theory, and after this discussion,
I spent most of the conference closeted in my room trying
to construct an example of a sunspot equilibrium in an overlappinggenerations
model where sunspots mattered for allocations. The first
example I came up with was with quadratic utility. It was laborious as
holy hell! So Karl and I were going to talk about this at this conference,
and nobody understood the idea at all. They just didn’t understand, until
that last day when we actually gave the paper, and Steve Salop was the
only person who understood the idea. This was sort of discouraging.
MD: Was this an overlapping-generations problem?
Cass: This was an overlapping-generations model, but in the
overlapping-generations model (as Steve Spear will attest, because his
thesis is about this), you have to be careful picking your utility function.
I do remember that I decided that I couldn’t get sunspot equilibria for
the standard parametric forms, and I was going to need cross-product
terms, so . . . anyway, Karl and I came back and we knew this was a great
idea, but somehow the reception that it got was a little discouraging, so
we didn’t really start working on it until much later. Karl’s enthusiasm
for the idea was extraordinarily high, and he talked about it a lot. He
went to Paris in the late 1970s where he gave his Malinvaud lecture,
which he always cites because he wants us to claim priority, correctly.
50 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
One of the other people he talked to a lot about it was Costas Azariadis.
My view is that Karl explained the idea to Costas a number of times,
and Costas finally picked up on it and he wrote a paper about it. He
realized, not from a utility approach, but by having a first-order Markov
system of probabilities, that one can get sunspot equilibria. Steve’s thesis
actually develops the general story, and he solved that problem long
before, for example, Azariadis and Guesnerie did. But I have to credit
Costas with something. When Costas produced a working paper or maybe
even before that we realized that if we were going to develop the idea
we’d better get to it.
MD: And this led to the Journal of Political Economy paper?
Cass: The JPE paper constructs a standard simple example that didn’t
require using the overlapping-generations structure, although we built
on one of the properties of the overlapping-generations model, the friction
you get by restricting participation on certain markets. Much later we wrote
a paper showing that there’s another aspect of the overlapping-generations
model, that somehow the open-endedness of time also plays a role. We
constructed an example where there were complete markets and unrestricted
participation—it is something like the following. This is basically
an overlapping-generations model where the uncertainty is all in the
first period, you either get an alpha or a beta, and you can buy insurance
against that, but because of the infinite structure of the model, you
would still have sunspot equilibria. So there are two causes for sunspot
equilibria: One of them has to do with the time structure of overlapping
generations; the other has to do with not having enough access to asset
markets.
MD: Didn’t Jim Peck pick up on the second thing in his thesis?
Cass: Yeah, yeah, that’s right. I haven’t thought much about sunspots,
especially in the overlapping-generations model, for quite a while, but he
develops a generalization about nonstationary sunspot equilibria in the
OLG model. I think sunspots are really interesting, but even when Karl
and I wrote that JPE paper, my interests had already diverged to thinking
the way I did on the general equilibrium problem, in which you can
actually do a finite-dimensional model. Of course, we have this simple
but important theorem which says that if you have all the hypotheses
that are necessary, stated and unstated, to get the First Welfare Theorem,
then you can’t have sunspots. Then we have what Karl used to call the
Philadelphia Pholk theorem, which is that if you violate any of these
hypotheses you can get sunspot equilibria. It’s not quite true, because
all it is saying is that if you have a theorem that says A, B, and C imply
D, it’s likely to be the case that if you drop one of the assumptions
the conclusion is not going to be true. But, of course, it may be that it
An Interview with David Cass 51
can still be true. I guess that is where Karl and I diverged on this a little,
but he’s gotten very interested in the absence of convexity. Now, his
examples are perfectly okay, but it is not quite true to say that if you
have some nonconvexity then you have sunspots, because—as Heracles
Polemarchakis and I pointed out—you can have nonconvexity in production
and, since profit maximization is relative to a hyperplane, you can
substitute everything under the hyperplane and call that the production
set, and you get the first welfare theorem back.
The JPE example is a real simple example where there are two states
of the world and we interpret it, in the structure of the overlappinggenerations
model, as two classes of households. One class can trade
assets against the state of the world, while the other can’t because it is
born later, so it has to trade just on the spot market. That is one kind of
example. But I got interested in constructing other examples of sunspot
equilibria. In particular, in the early 1980s, I went to spend a year in
Paris, and the first project I wanted to work on was to construct a sunspot
example where there was a missing market. Somehow I decided the way
to do that was in a model where you had assets, and not enough assets to
span the states of the world. That’s how I got interested in incomplete
markets. That’s another paper I like a lot, “The Leading Example”
paper. I had real trouble getting it published because I wrote it precisely in
the JPE style, a kind of a followup to the first paper but, to the Chicago
mind, sunspots are irrelevant, just not interesting. Ironic as holy hell.
MD: In the famous Kareken and Wallace volume, one thing Cass and
Shell say is that by definition the overlapping-generations model is the
only dynamic disaggregated model, which one may take to mean it is
the only interesting macro model.
Cass: I have to get back now to the train of thought about the
overlapping-generations model. I got interested in the overlappinggenerations
model because of sunspots. And then Okuno and Zilcha—
this may have even been at the same conference at Squam Lake—
presented a paper which was an attempt to prove that if you introduced
money into the overlapping-generations model, then equilibrium where
money had a nontrivial price would necessarily be Pareto optimal. There
was a flaw in their proof.
MD: Neil Wallace was always inclined to say that in Minnesota.
Cass: Their work was based on trying to verify formally what Neil
believed. I saw their proof, read their proof very carefully, and it had an
error in it. I decided that it probably wasn’t true, depending on some
characteristics of the utility functions, and so on, so I decided to work on
a counterexample. Basically, I constructed a lot of counterexamples, where
you can introduce money and, for one reason or another—heterogeneity,
52 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
nonstationarity, and so on—you will not get Pareto optimality. I got
interested in the overlapping-generations model again. Karl and I really did
believe in it, and we started working more generally on the overlappinggenerations
model after we’d worked on sunspots. We really did believe
at that time that it was the only serious model where money played a
role. Of course, subsequently you have some very famous papers which
present other basic paradigms in which money plays a basic role.
MD: Although mathematically those structures maybe aren’t so different?
Cass: Well, I was going to talk about that. The Kiyotaki–Wright model
I like a lot, but as I have pointed out to you, Randy, I think that the
ultimate principle in both of those models is that the horizon is indefinite.
If you truncated your search model, you wouldn’t get a role for money
either. So even though we didn’t have the imagination to think of another
model, and this, for example, would be your model with search, in which
there would be an infinite horizon, I think you were right in asserting
that the underlying time structure of the overlapping-generations model
is what provides a reason for having money. I still think that the ultimate
thing is that money has value because people believe it is going to have
value, and the only way they’ll consistently believe it will have value is if
they’re never forced to put up. And that’s common to Kiyotaki–Wright
and the overlapping-generations model.
MD: Well, it’s interesting, because there are some infinite horizon
models in which money has no role. So the infinite horizon isn’t a sufficient
condition.
Cass: Just the infinite horizon does not necessarily give you a role for
money. In addition, you have to have some type of imperfection, some
violation of the hypotheses of the first welfare theorem, like restricted
participation (overlapping generations), or noncompetitive behavior (the
search model).
MD: Do you agree that there are still many issues in monetary economics
that are yet to be sorted out?
Cass: Oh absolutely. It would be nice but probably impossible to have
a consistent model where we could get away from having to have an
indefinite future to give value to money, but it is hard to conceive of how
you would do that. John Geanakoplos has a model, it’s an incomplete
markets model with money and cash-in-advance constraints, where he
gets value for money because money is issued by a bank and you have to
repay the bank. But, ultimately, the bank is just throwing money away at
the end of the day, and somehow the model is not really closed. It’s a
little unsatisfying.
MD: What are the issues with an infinite horizon?
Cass: I changed my mind sometime in the 1980s about the infinite
horizon. I suppose ultimately the reason that I object to it relates to
An Interview with David Cass 53
rational expectations, although I would define rational expectations in a
more general equilibrium than a macro way. I define rational expectations
to mean that you have a well-defined state space, and that in those
states every individual has common beliefs about the prices that will prevail.
For those beliefs about future prices, today’s markets will clear, and when
tomorrow’s state rolls around, given the plans, one equilibrium in the
realized spot market will be at the prices that they forecast. Now there’s
a little problem in that there could be other equilibria. No equilibrium
model that I’m aware of has a sensible process for actually achieving
equilibrium prices, so it’s not clear why the particular prices they forecast
are going to be the ones that occur. Getting back to the issue, I can kind
of understand why I might want to use rational expectations as a benchmark
when the predictions that we’re making are not too far ahead. But
this is generally a question of assuming that you know what the structure
of the world is. There’s a big difference in my mind between that and
assuming implicitly that you know this forever. I have become very uncomfortable
with that.
MD: Is your view that for some relevant questions it may be more
appropriate to use a short-run model?
Cass: I think you can use a short-run model, but the objection there
is exactly the motivation behind the overlapping-generations model, that
when you reach a certain period, if you reach that period, then it is
reasonable for people to expect that there will be a period to follow.
It’s sort of like an induction argument. You can’t cut the world off because,
in the last period, people are still going to be looking ahead one period.
I mean, I understand that argument, I’m just uncomfortable with the
conclusion that the model has to be infinite dimensional. I guess in my
experience, except for these paradoxes of infinity, I find that infinitedimensional
and finite-dimensional models are isomorphic. But they aren’t
isomorphic on this one dimension of providing a role for fiat money and
I’m uncomfortable with that. So I’m willing to introduce one of the
artifacts I used to scoff at, that people, for example, get utility from holding
money, or that they’re constrained to hold money, in order to close
the model. I am more comfortable with that artifact than with the artifact
of introducing the infinite horizon. I have come full circle. I am sure that
Karl and I in our defense of the overlapping-generations model scoffed
a lot at these other artificial ways of closing the model, but I’m more
sympathetic to that now.
MD: Continuing on with incomplete markets, one of the things that
has been happening in macro is the integration of the finance side.
Cass: Introducing finance into macro more generally, I think, is key,
and I also think that macro fundamentally is going to be dealing with
missing markets.
54 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
MD: Some people find incomplete markets models to be a little ad
hoc because some subset of the markets is simply shut down.
Cass: It is very ad hoc, but the first step to understand the problem is
to build a model where you assumed it. There is a lot of work now going
on in which you try to justify missing markets, for example, along the
line of, if you have a complete state space then idiosyncratic variables
should appear as part of the definition of the state space. Then you won’t
have markets for the idiosyncratic risk because of the problem of moral
hazard. Small numbers is another possibility. People are now trying to
build more formal models that start out with some kind of standard
information imperfection that would drive you to have incomplete markets.
They want to make the incompleteness endogenous.
Another way of doing this is to maintain the structure of the incomplete
markets model, but then to introduce agents who are optimizing
the structure of the assets. I don’t think those models have been very
successful, probably because they require, for example, that the agents
who are going to create the instruments have to be able to forecast (since
it’s a Nash equilibrium) what the other agents are introducing and then
doing, what the equilibria are. You have to make this very strong informational
assumption in order to get a formal model. This is an example
of the kinds of problems that occur. You know, people are very aware
of that, although I still think that a lot of things that are true in the
model where incomplete markets are simply assumed will then be true in
models where you explain why you have incompleteness. I have this
belief. One of the results in incomplete markets that I like a lot was a
result that I worked out in kind of a crude way, and then Yves Balasko
and I wrote a paper about, and John Geanakoplos and Andreu Mas-
Colell wrote a paper about at the same time, that shows that with incomplete
markets you get a huge indeterminacy of equilibria in a real sense.
I think that result is going to be robust.
MD: And that actually feeds back into monetary models since it
implies nonneutral monetary policies when markets are incomplete.
Cass: Yes, and I am going to go a step further than that. The simplest
version of indeterminacy comes about because you can pick different
price numeraires, like price numeraires period by period, with incomplete
markets. But another cause of indeterminacy, which creates even more
indeterminacy, is that you can make the asset structure a parameter of the
model.
MD: Haven’t you made the point that one of the things about sunspots
or dynamics is that market clearing and rational expectations are
not enough to pin down very much?
Cass: Right. This is kind of self-destructive in a way.
An Interview with David Cass 55
MD: Some people say similar things because of fundamental belief in
Keynesian macro—is that why you do it?
Cass: No, it isn’t. I have to admit that this is kind of an anomaly,
because what it is ultimately is destructive. I’ve been using a competitive
equilibrium model as a benchmark and it has no predictive power, so
in a way it is kind of self-destructive. I’m very interested in that. Intellectually,
it interests me to try to figure out what it is that will pin down
equilibrium. I am still at the stage where I don’t know what the answer is.
MD: It’s certainly a clear intellectual challenge for the future.
Cass: Well, it is an intellectual puzzle. And I must admit that in my
career in economics I have always been interested in an intellectual
puzzle, even though it’s not fashionable, it may have no practical
relevance—God knows what—you can criticize it on a million grounds.
A good example of that is spending a couple of years working on this
problem of characterizing Pareto optimality and efficiency in an infinitedimensional
growth model.
MD: What is in the future for micro, macro, general equilibrium,
game theory? What lies ahead?
Cass: I have a very short work horizon. I always have. I think ahead to
the next problem I am going to work on. I have always been penalized
greatly when applying for grants, because I haven’t the foggiest idea of
what I will be working on in the future!
MD: It goes back to the question you told us Koopmans asked on the
job market, doesn’t it?
Cass: Maybe that’s the whole problem, yeah! We’ve come full circle.
But I actually know that there is a big component of serendipity in research.
I mean, if you told me 15 years ago that I would be doing general
equilibrium with incomplete markets, I would have said “Are you crazy?”
The serendipity there is that I wanted to construct examples of sunspot
equilibria with missing markets, and I realized that there were a lot of
interesting questions about the model that I wanted to use for that
purpose. In particular, the reason that I got into indeterminacy is that,
in the sunspot model, if you have a missing financial instrument, then
you get a continuum of sunspot equilibria; that turns out to be a general
property of incomplete markets. The question I am pursuing now is what
will actually cut down the set of equilibria. The best you could hope for
is a finite number of equilibria, and I don’t think the answer is that you
have to introduce money in a way that normalizes prices spot by spot,
because there is still something that is given as a primitive in the model
that should be endogenous, and that’s the asset structure. That needs to
be endogenized. Now, the question is, whether when you put things in
that framework, you still get indeterminacy. I’m interested in that question.
56 Stephen E. Spear and Randall Wright
MD: So you want to endogenize the asset structure.
Cass: Yeah, you endogenize the asset structure. There are examples
when you endogenize the asset structure that you do pin down the equilibrium,
in a sense, but you really don’t. A good example is work by
Alberto Bisin, in his thesis, where he introduces basically this game theoretic
idea where some households introduce new financial instruments
and the way that they do it is in the Nash way. They take as given what
all the other households are doing and they look at how the equilibrium
is going to vary across their actions and they optimize. Now the problem
with that is that we know with Nash equilibrium typically there’s a
plethora. What this cuts down on is the number of equilibria after the set
of financial instruments is determined. Somehow, in his model, there is a
section which deals with real indeterminacy which shows that you don’t
have a lot of equilibria associated with a given asset structure. But you do
have a lot of equilibria associated with the Nash equilibrium. You’ve just
moved the indeterminacy back one step.
MD: You were saying something a few minutes ago about the way you
do research—about looking at the model as well as the questions that
you think the model may help us answer. Can you expand on that?
Cass: Well, what drives me to do research is not what drives an awful
lot of people to do research. I mean, I’m never much motivated by what
some people call real-world problems. I am much more of a structuralist.
I have pursued some questions just because they are interesting puzzles
to me, not because of any economic relevance.
MD: One thing interesting about your career is that you may have
worked on these things for whatever reason—independent of any interest
in, say, real-world policy—and yet the Cass–Koopmans model is the
foundation for modern business-cycle theory, your work on overlappinggenerations
models is related to much practical research in monetary
economics, and your sunspot stuff also has macro policy relevance.
Cass: That is the beauty of a true intellectual discipline. It has room
for people like me.
MD: Somewhere down the food chain?
Cass: Well, no, . . . you just learn something! You should never scoff
at an intellectual’s looking at a question, because you never know
when what they are going to come up with will be actually interesting for
other reasons.
MD: It may take 20 or 30 years, too.
Cass: It may take forever. And it may not ever happen.