EAST OF EDEN
John Steinbeck
PENGUIN BOOKS
John Steinbeck was born in Salinas, California, in 1902. The
town is a few miles from the Pacific Coast and near the
fertile Salinas Valley—an area that was to be the
background of much of his fiction. He studied marine
biology at Stanford University but left without taking a
degree and, after a series of laboring jobs, began to write.
An attempt at a free-lance literary career in New York City
failed, and he returned to California, continuing to write in a
lonely cottage. Popular success came to him only in 1935
with Tortilla Flat. That book’s promise was confirmed by
succeeding works—In Dubious Battle, Of Mice and Men, and
especially The Grapes of Wrath, a novel so powerful that it
remains among the archetypes of American culture. Often
set in California, Steinbeck’s later books include Cannery
Row, The Wayward Bus, East of Eden, The Short Reign of
Pippin IV, and Travels with Charley. He died in 1968,
having won a Nobel Prize in 1962. In announcing the award,
the Swedish Academy declared: “He had no mind to be an
unoffending comforter and entertainer. Instead, the topics
he chose were serious and denunciatory, for instance the
bitter strikes on California’s fruit and cotton plantations. ...
His literary power steadily gained impetus. ... The little
masterpiece Of Mice and Men ... was followed by those
incomparable short stories which he collected together in
the volume The Long Valley. The way had now been paved
for the great work ... the epic chronicle The Grapes of
Wrath.”
BY JOHN STEINBECK
FICTION
Cup of Gold
The Pastures of Heaven
To a God Unknown
Tortilla Flat
In Dubious Battle
Saint Katy the Virgin
Of Mice and Men
The Red Pony
The Long Valley
The Grapes of Wrath
The Moon Is Down
Cannery Row
The Wayward Bus
The Pearl
Burning Bright: A Play in Story Form
East of Eden
Sweet Thursday
The Winter of Our Discontent
The Short Reign of Pippin IV: A Fabrication
NONFICTION
Sea of Cortez: A Leisurely Journal of Travel and Research
(in collaboration with Edward F. Ricketts)
Bombs Away: The Story of a Bomber Team
A Russian Journal (with pictures by Robert Capa)
The Log from the Sea of Cortez
Once There Was a War
Travels with Charley in Search of America
America and Americans
Journal of a Novel: The East of Eden Letters
PLAYS, A DOCUMENTARY, AND A SCREENPLAY
Of Mice and Men
The Moon Is Down
The Forgotten Village
Viva Zapata!
COLLECTIONS
The Portable Steinbeck
The Short Novels of John Steinbeck
Steinbeck: A Life in Letters
CRITICAL LIBRARY EDITION
The Grapes of Wrath
(edited by Peter Lisca)
EAST
OF EDEN
JOHN STEINBECK
PENGUIN BOOKS
Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth,
Middlesex, England
Penguin Books, 625 Madison Avenue,
New York, New York 10022, U.S.A.
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood,
Victoria, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Limited, 2801 John Street,
Markham, Ontario, Canada L3R 1B4
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road,
Auckland 10, New Zealand
First published in the United States of America by
The Viking Press 1952
First published in Canada by The Macmillan Company of
Canada Limited 1952
Viking Compass Edition published 1970
Reprinted 1974
Published in Penguin Books 1979
Copyright 1952 by John Steinbeck
All rights reserved
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION
DATA
Steinbeck, John, 1902-1968.
East of Eden.
I. Title.
[PZ3.S8195Eas 1979] [PS3537.T3234] 813’.5’2 79-14915
ISBN 0 14 00.4997 5
Printed in the United States of America by
Offset Paperback Mfrs., Inc., Dallas, Pennsylvania
Set in Times Roman
Except in the United States of America,
this book is sold subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise,
be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated
without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of
binding or cover other than that in which it is
published and without a similar condition
including this condition being imposed
on the subsequent purchaser
PASCAL COVICI
Dear Pat,
You came upon me carving some kind of little figure out of
wood and you said, “Why don’t you make something for
me?”
I asked you what you wanted, and you said, “A box.”
“What for?”
“To put things in.”
“What things?”
“Whatever you have,” you said.
Well, here’s your box. Nearly everything I have is in it, and
it is not full. Pain and excitement are in it, and feeling good
or bad and evil thoughts and good thoughts—the pleasure
of design and some despair and the indescribable joy of
creation.
And on top of these are all the gratitude and love I have for
you.
And still the box is not full.
JOHN
Contents
PART ONE 8
Chapter 1 9
Chapter 2 11
Chapter 3 14
Chapter 4 22
Chapter 5 24
Chapter 6 27
Chapter 7 31
Chapter 8 39
Chapter 9 47
Chapter 10 51
Chapter 11 56
PART TWO 64
Chapter 12 65
Chapter 13 66
Chapter 14 73
Chapter 15 76
Chapter 16 85
Chapter 17 89
Chapter 18 98
Chapter 19 104
Chapter 20 109
Chapter 21 115
Chapter 22 120
PART THREE 130
Chapter 23 131
Chapter 24 138
Chapter 25 146
Chapter 26 154
Chapter 27 158
Chapter 28 166
Chapter 29 171
Chapter 30 175
Chapter 31 180
Chapter 32 184
Chapter 33 189
PART FOUR 194
Chapter 34 195
Chapter 35 196
Chapter 36 198
Chapter 37 203
Chapter 38 209
Chapter 39 213
Chapter 40 221
Chapter 41 225
Chapter 42 229
Chapter 43 230
Chapter 44 234
Chapter 45 238
PART FIVE 245
Chapter 46 246
Chapter 47 248
Chapter 48 250
Chapter 49 253
Chapter 50 261
Chapter 51 266
Chapter 52 272
Chapter 53 276
Chapter 54 280
Chapter 55 283
About the e-Book 288
PART ONE
Chapter 1
1
The Salinas Valley is in Northern California. It is a long
narrow swale between two ranges of mountains, and the
Salinas River winds and twists up the center until it falls at
last into Monterey Bay.
I remember my childhood names for grasses and secret
flowers. I remember where a toad may live and what time
the birds awaken in the summer—and what trees and
seasons smelled like—how people looked and walked and
smelled even. The memory of odors is very rich.
I remember that the Gabilan Mountains to the east of the
valley were light gay mountains full of sun and loveliness
and a kind of invitation, so that you wanted to climb into
their warm foothills almost as you want to climb into the
lap of a beloved mother. They were beckoning mountains
with a brown grass love. The Santa Lucias stood up against
the sky to the west and kept the valley from the open sea,
and they were dark and brooding—unfriendly and
dangerous. I always found in myself a dread of west and a
love of east. Where I ever got such an idea I cannot say,
unless it could be that the morning came over the peaks of
the Gabilans and the night drifted back from the ridges of
the Santa Lucias. It may be that the birth and death of the
day had some part in my feeling about the two ranges of
mountains.
From both sides of the valley little streams slipped out of
the hill canyons and fell into the bed of the Salinas River. In
the winter of wet years the streams ran full-freshet, and
they swelled the river until sometimes it raged and boiled,
bank full, and then it was a destroyer. The river tore the
edges of the farm lands and washed whole acres down; it
toppled barns and houses into itself, to go floating and
bobbing away. It trapped cows and pigs and sheep and
drowned them in its muddy brown water and carried them
to the sea. Then when the late spring came, the river drew in
from its edges and the sand banks appeared. And in the
summer the river didn’t run at all above ground. Some pools
would be left in the deep swirl places under a high bank. The
tules and grasses grew back, and willows straightened up
with the flood debris in their upper branches. The Salinas
was only a part-time river. The summer sun drove it
underground. It was not a fine river at all, but it was the
only one we had and so we boasted about it—how dangerous
it was in a wet winter and how dry it was in a dry summer.
You can boast about anything if it’s all you have. Maybe the
less you have, the more you are required to boast.
The floor of the Salinas Valley, between the ranges and
below the foothills, is level because this valley used to be
the bottom of a hundred-mile inlet from the sea. The river
mouth at Moss Landing was centuries ago the entrance to
this long inland water. Once, fifty miles down the valley, my
father bored a well. The drill came up first with topsoil and
then with gravel and then with white sea sand full of shells
and even pieces of whalebone. There were twenty feet of
sand and then black earth again, and even a piece of
redwood, that imperishable wood that does not rot. Before
the inland sea the valley must have been a forest. And those
things had happened right under our feet. And it seemed to
me sometimes at night that I could feel both the sea and the
redwood forest before it.
On the wide level acres of the valley the topsoil lay deep and
fertile. It required only a rich winter of rain to make it
break forth in grass and flowers. The spring flowers in a wet
year were unbelievable. The whole valley floor, and the
foothills too, would be carpeted with lupins and poppies.
Once a woman told me that colored flowers would seem
more bright if you added a few white flowers to give the
colors definition. Every petal of blue lupin is edged with
white, so that a field of lurins is more blue than you can
imagine. And mixed with these were splashes of California
poppies. These too are of a burning color—not orange, not
gold, but if pure gold were liquid and could raise a cream,
that golden cream might be like the color of the poppies.
When their season was over the yellow mustard came up
and grew to a great height. When my grandfather came into
the valley the mustard was so tall that a man on horseback
showed only his head above the yellow flowers. On the
uplands the grass would be strewn with buttercups, with
hen-and-chickens, with black-centered yellow violets. And a
little later in the season there would be red and yellow
stands of Indian paintbrush. These were the flowers of the
open places exposed to the sun.
Under the live oaks, shaded and dusky, the maidenhair
flourished and gave a good smell, and under the mossy
banks of the water courses whole clumps of five-fingered
ferns and goldy-backs hung down. Then there were
harebells, tiny lanterns, cream white and almost sinful
looking, and these were so rare and magical that a child,
finding one, felt singled out and special all day long.
When June came the grasses headed out and turned brown,
and the hills turned a brown which was not brown but a gold
and saffron and red—an indescribable color. And from then
on until the next rains the earth dried and the streams
stopped. Cracks appeared on the level ground. The Salinas
River sank under its sand. The wind blew down the valley,
picking up dust and straws, and grew stronger and harsher
as it went south. It stopped in the evening. It was a rasping
nervous wind, and the dust particles cut into a man’s skin
and burned his eyes. Men working in the fields wore goggles
and tied handkerchiefs around their noses to keep the dirt
out.
The valley land was deep and rich, but the foothills wore
only a skin of topsoil no deeper than the grass roots; and the
farther up the hills you went, the thinner grew the soil, with
flints sticking through, until at the brush line it was a kind
of dry flinty gravel that reflected the hot sun blindingly.
I have spoken of the rich years when the rainfall was
plentiful. But there were dry years too, and they put a terror
on the valley. The water came in a thirty-year cycle. There
would be five or six wet and wonderful years when there
might be nineteen to twenty-five inches of rain, and the land
would shout with grass. Then would come six or seven
pretty good years of twelve to sixteen inches of rain. And
then the dry years would come, and sometimes there would
be only seven or eight inches of rain. The land dried up and
the grasses headed out miserably a few inches high and
great bare scabby places appeared in the valley. The live
oaks got a crusty look and the sagebrush was gray. The land
cracked and the springs dried up and the cattle listlessly
nibbled dry twigs. Then the farmers and the ranchers would
be filled with disgust for the Salinas Valley. The cows would
grow thin and sometimes starve to death. People would
have to haul water in barrels to their farms just for
drinking. Some families would sell out for nearly nothing
and move away. And it never failed that during the dry years
the people forgot about the rich years, and during the wet
years they lost all memory of the dry years. It was always
that way.
2
And that was the long Salinas Valley. Its history was like
that of the rest of the state. First there were Indians, an
inferior breed without energy, inventiveness, or culture, a
people that lived on grubs and grasshoppers and shellfish,
too lazy to hunt or fish. They ate what they could pick up
and planted nothing. They pounded bitter acorns for flour.
Even their warfare was a weary pantomime.
Then the hard, dry Spaniards came exploring through,
greedy and realistic, and their greed was for gold or God.
They collected souls as they collected jewels. They gathered
mountains and valleys, rivers and whole horizons, the way a
man might now gain title to building lots. These tough,
dried-up men moved restlessly up the coast and down. Some
of them stayed on grants as large as principalities, given to
them by Spanish kings who had not the faintest idea of the
gift. These first owners lived in poor feudal settlements, and
their cattle ranged freely and multiplied. Periodically the
owners killed the cattle for their hides and tallow and left
the meat to the vultures and coyotes.
When the Spaniards came they had to give everything they
saw a name. This is the first duty of any explorer—a duty
and a privilege. You must name a thing before you can note
it on your hand-drawn map. Of course they were religious
people, and the men who could read and write, who kept the
records and drew the maps, were the tough untiring priests
who traveled with the soldiers. Thus the first names of
places were saints’ names or religious holidays celebrated at
stopping places. There are many saints, but they are not
inexhaustible, so that we find repetitions in the first
namings. We have San Miguel, St. Michael, San Ardo, San
Bernardo, San Benito, San Lorenzo, San Carlos, San
Francisquito. And then the holidays—Natividad, the
Nativity; Nacimiente, the Birth; Soledad, the Solitude. But
places were also named from the way the expedition felt at
the time: Buena Esperenza, good hope; Buena Vista because
the view was beautiful; and Chualar because it was pretty.
The descriptive names followed: Paso de los Robles because
of the oak trees; Los Laureles for the laurels; Tularcitos
because of the reeds in the swamp; and Salinas for the alkali
which was white as salt.
Then places were named for animals and birds seen—
Gabilanes for the hawks which flew in those mountains;
Topo for the mole; Los Gatos for the wild cats. The
suggestions sometimes came from the nature of the place
itself: Tassajara, a cup and saucer; Laguna Seca, a dry lake;
Corral de Tierra for a fence of earth; Paraiso because it was
like Heaven.
Then the Americans came—more greedy because there were
more of them. They took the lands, remade the laws to
make their titles good. And farmholds spread over the land,
first in the valleys and then up the foothill slopes, small
wooden houses roofed with redwood shakes, corrals of split
poles. Wherever a trickle of water came out of the ground a
house sprang up and a family began to grow and multiply.
Cuttings of red geraniums and rosebushes were planted in
the dooryards. Wheel tracks of buckboards replaced the
trails, and fields of corn and barley and wheat squared out of
the yellow mustard. Every ten miles along the traveled
routes a general store and blacksmith shop happened, and
these became the nuclei of little towns, Bradley, King City,
Greenfield.
The Americans had a greater tendency to name places for
people than had the Spanish. After the valleys were settled
the names of places refer more to things which happened
there, and these to me are the most fascinating of all names
because each name suggests a story that has been forgotten.
I think of Bolsa Nueva, a new purse; Morocojo, a lame Moor
(who was he and how did he get there?); Wild Horse Canyon
and Mustang Grade and Shirt Tail Canyon. The names of
places carry a charge of the people who named them,
reverent or irreverent, descriptive, either poetic or
disparaging. You can name anything San Lorenzo, but Shirt
Tail Canyon or the Lame Moor is something quite different.
The wind whistled over the settlements in the afternoon,
and the farmers began to set out mile-long windbreaks of
eucalyptus to keep the plowed topsoil from blowing away.
And this is about the way the Salinas Valley was when my
grandfather brought his wife and settled in the foothills to
the east of King City.
Chapter 2
1
I must depend on hearsay, on old photographs, on stories
told, and on memories which are hazy and mixed with fable
in trying to tell you about the Hamiltons. They were not
eminent people, and there are few records concerning them
except for the usual papers on birth, marriage, land
ownership, and death.
Young Samuel Hamilton came from the north of Ireland and
so did his wife. He was the son of small farmers, neither rich
nor poor, who had lived on one landhold and in one stone
house for many hundreds of years. The Hamiltons managed
to be remarkably well educated and well read; and, as is so
often true in that green country, they were connected and
related to very great people and very small people, so that
one cousin might be a baronet and another cousin a beggar.
And of course they were descended from the ancient kings of
Ireland, as every Irishman is.
Why Samuel left the stone house and the green acres of his
ancestors I do not know. He was never a political man, so it
is not likely a charge of rebellion drove him out, and he was
scrupulously honest, which eliminates the police as prime
movers. There was a whisper—not even a rumor but rather
an unsaid feeling—in my family that it was love drove him
out, and not love of the wife he married. But whether it was
too successful love or whether he left in pique at
unsuccessful love, I do not know. We always preferred to
think it was the former. Samuel had good looks and charm
and gaiety. It is hard to imagine that any country Irish girl
refused him.
He came to the Salinas Valley full-blown and hearty, full of
inventions and energy. His eyes were very blue, and when he
was tired one of them wandered outward a little. He was a
big man but delicate in a way. In the dusty business of
ranching he seemed always immaculate. His hands were
clever. He was a good blacksmith and carpenter and
woodcarver, and he could improvise anything with bits of
wood and metal. He was forever inventing a new way of
doing an old thing and doing it better and quicker, but he
never in his whole life had any talent for making money.
Other men who had the talent took Samuel’s tricks and sold
them and grew rich, but Samuel barely made wages all his
life.
I don’t know what directed his steps toward the Salinas
Valley. It was an unlikely place for a man from a green
country to come to, but he came about thirty years before
the turn of the century and he brought with him his tiny
Irish wife, a tight hard little woman humorless as a chicken.
She had a dour Presbyterian mind and a code of morals that
pinned down and beat the brains out of nearly everything
that was pleasant to do.
I do not know where Samuel met her, how he wooed her,
married. I think there must have been some other girl
printed somewhere in his heart, for he was a man of love
and his wife was not a woman to show her feelings. And in
spite of this, in all the years from his youth to his death in
the Salinas Valley, there was no hint that Samuel ever went
to any other woman.
When Samuel and Liza came to the Salinas Valley all the
level land was taken, the rich bottoms, the little fertile
creases in the hills, the forests, but there was still marginal
land to be homesteaded, and in the barren hills, to the east
of what is now King City, Samuel Hamilton homesteaded.
He followed the usual practice. He took a quarter-section
for himself and a quarter-section for his wife, and since she
was pregnant he took a quarter-section for the child. Over
the years nine children were born, four boys and five girls,
and with each birth another quarter-section was added to
the ranch, and that makes eleven quarter-sections, or
seventeen hundred and sixty acres.
If the land had been any good the Hamiltons would have
been rich people. But the acres were harsh and dry. There
were no springs, and the crust of topsoil was so thin that the
flinty bones stuck through. Even the sagebrush struggled to
exist, and the oaks were dwarfed from lack of moisture.
Even in reasonably good years there was so little feed that
the cattle kept thin running about looking for enough to eat.
From their barren hills the Hamiltons could look down to
the west and see the richness of the bottom land and the
greenness around the Salinas River.
Samuel built his house with his own hands, and he built a
barn and a blacksmith shop. He found quite soon that even
if he had ten thousand acres of hill country he could not
make a living on the bony soil without water. His clever
hands built a well-boring rig, and he bored wells on the
lands of luckier men. He invented and built a threshing
machine and moved through the bottom farms in harvest
time, threshing the grain his own farm would not raise. And
in his shop he sharpened plows and mended harrows and
welded broken axles and shod horses. Men from all over the
district brought him tools to mend and to improve. Besides,
they loved to hear Samuel talk of the world and its thinking,
of the poetry and philosophy that were going on outside the
Salinas Valley. He had a rich deep voice, good both in song
and in speech, and while he had no brogue there was a rise
and a lilt and a cadence to his talk that made it sound sweet
in the ears of the taciturn farmers from the valley bottom.
They brought whisky too, and out of sight of the kitchen
window and the disapproving eye of Mrs. Hamilton they
took hot nips from the bottle and nibbled cuds of green wild
anise to cover the whisky breath. It was a bad day when
three or four men were not standing around the forge,
listening to Samuel’s hammer and his talk. They called him
a comical genius and carried his stories carefully home, and
they wondered at how the stories spilled out on the way, for
they never sounded the same repeated in their own
kitchens.
Samuel should have been rich from his well rig and his
threshing machine and his shop, but he had no gift for
business. His customers, always pressed for money,
promised payment after harvest, and then after Christmas,
and then after—until at last they forgot it. Samuel had no
gift for reminding them. And so the Hamiltons stayed poor.
The children came along as regularly as the years. The few
overworked doctors of the county did not often get to the
ranches for a birth unless the joy turned nightmare and
went on for several days. Samuel Hamilton delivered all his
own children and tied the cords neatly, spanked the bottoms
and cleaned up the mess. When his youngest was born with
some small obstruction and began to turn black, Samuel put
his mouth against the baby’s mouth and blew air in and
sucked it out until the baby could take over for himself.
Samuel’s hands were so good and gentle that neighbors
from twenty miles away would call on him to help with a
birth. And he was equally good with mare, cow, or woman.
Samuel had a great black book on an available shelf and it
had gold letters on the cover—Dr. Gunn’s Family Medicine.
Some pages were bent and beat up from use, and others
were never opened to the light. To look through Dr. Gunn is
to know the Hamiltons’ medical history. These are the used
sections—broken bones, cuts, bruises, mumps, measles,
backache, scarlet fever, diphtheria, rheumatism, female
complaints, hernia, and of course everything to do with
pregnancy and the birth of children. The Hamiltons must
have been either lucky or moral for the sections on
gonorrhea and syphilis were never opened.
Samuel had no equal for soothing hysteria and bringing
quiet to a frightened child. It was the sweetness of his
tongue and the tenderness of his soul. And just as there was
a cleanness about his body, so there was a cleanness in his
thinking. Men coming to his blacksmith shop to talk and
listen dropped their cursing for a while, not from any kind
of restraint but automatically, as though this were not the
place for it.
Samuel kept always a foreignness. Perhaps it was in the
cadence of his speech, and this had the effect of making men,
and women too, tell him things they would not tell to
relatives or close friends. His slight strangeness set him
apart and made him safe as a repository.
Liza Hamilton was a very different kettle of Irish. Her head
was small and round and it held small round convictions.
She had a button nose and a hard little set-back chin, a
gripping jaw set on its course even though the angels of God
argued against it.
Liza was a good plain cook, and her house—it was always
her house—was brushed and pummeled and washed.
Bearing her children did not hold her back very much—two
weeks at the most she had to be careful. She must have had
a pelvic arch of whalebone, for she had big children one after
the other.
Liza had a finely developed sense of sin. Idleness was a sin,
and card playing, which was a kind of idleness to her. She
was suspicious of fun whether it involved dancing or singing
or even laughter. She felt that people having a good time
were wide open to the devil. And this was a shame, for
Samuel was a laughing man, but I guess Samuel was wide
open to the devil. His wife protected him whenever she
could.
She wore her hair always pulled tight back and bunned
behind in a hard knot. And since I can’t remember how she
dressed, it must have been that she wore clothes that
matched herself exactly. She had no spark of humor and
only occasionally a blade of cutting wit. She frightened her
grandchildren because she had no weakness. She suffered
bravely and uncomplainingly through life, convinced that
that was the way her God wanted everyone to live. She felt
that rewards came later.
2
When people first came to the West, particularly from the
owned and fought-over farmlets of Europe, and saw so much
land to be had for the signing of a paper and the building of
a foundation, an itching land-greed seemed to come over
them. They wanted more and more land—good land if
possible, but land anyway. Perhaps they had filaments of
memory of feudal Europe where great families became and
remained great because they owned things. The early
settlers took up land they didn’t need and couldn’t use; they
took up worthless land just to own it. And all proportions
changed. A man who might have been well-to-do on ten
acres in Europe was rat-poor on two thousand in California.
It wasn’t very long until all the land in the barren hills near
King City and San Ardo was taken up, and ragged families
were scattered through the hills, trying their best to scratch
a living from the thin flinty soil. They and the coyotes lived
clever, despairing, submarginal lives. They landed with no
money, no equipment, no tools, no credit, and particularly
with no knowledge of the new country and no technique for
using it. I don’t know whether it was a divine stupidity or a
great faith that let them do it. Surely such venture is nearly
gone from the world. And the families did survive and grow.
They had a tool or a weapon that is also nearly gone, or
perhaps it is only dormant for a while. It is argued that
because they believed thoroughly in a just, moral God they
could put their faith there and let the smaller securities take
care of themselves. But I think that because they trusted
themselves and respected themselves as individuals,
because they knew beyond doubt that they were valuable
and potentially moral units—because of this they could give
God their own courage and dignity and then receive it back.
Such things have disappeared perhaps because men do not
trust themselves any more, and when that happens there is
nothing left except perhaps to find some strong sure man,
even though he may be wrong, and to dangle from his
coattails.
While many people came to the Salinas Valley penniless,
there were others who, having sold out somewhere else,
arrived with money to start a new life. These usually bought
land, but good land, and built their houses of planed lumber
and had carpets and colored-glass diamond panes in their
windows. There were numbers of these families and they got
the good land of the valley and cleared the yellow mustard
away and planted wheat.
Such a man was Adam Trask.
Chapter 3
1
Adam Trask was born on a farm on the outskirts of a little
town which was not far from a big town in Connecticut. He
was an only son, and he was born six months after his father
was mustered into a Connecticut regiment in 1862. Adam’s
mother ran the farm, bore Adam, and still had time to
embrace a primitive theosophy. She felt that her husband
would surely be killed by the wild and barbarous rebels, and
she prepared herself to get in touch with him in what she
called the beyond. He came home six weeks after Adam was
born. His right leg was off at the knee. He stumped in on a
crude wooden leg he himself had carved out of beechwood.
And already it was splitting. He had in his pocket and placed
on the parlor table the lead bullet they had given him to bite
while they cut off his frayed leg.
Adam’s father Cyrus was something of a devil—had always
been wild—drove a two-wheeled cart too fast, and managed
to make his wooden leg seem jaunty and desirable. He had
enjoyed his military career, what there was of it. Being wild
by nature, he had liked his brief period of training and the
drinking and gambling and whoring that went with it. Then
he marched south with a group of replacements, and he
enjoyed that too—seeing the country and stealing chickens
and chasing rebel girls up into the haystacks. The gray,
despairing weariness of protracted maneuvers and combat
did not touch him. The first time he saw the enemy was at
eight o’clock one spring morning, and at eight-thirty he was
hit in the right leg by a heavy slug that mashed and
splintered the bones beyond repair. Even then he was lucky,
for the rebels retreated and the field surgeons moved up
immediately. Cyrus Trask did have his five minutes of
horror while they cut the shreds away and sawed the bone
off square and burned the open flesh. The toothmarks in the
bullet proved that. And there was considerable pain while
the wound healed under the unusually septic conditions in
the hospitals of that day. But Cyrus had vitality and swagger.
While he was carving his beechwood leg and hobbling about
on a crutch, he contracted a particularly virulent dose of the
clap from a Negro girl who whistled at him from under a
pile of lumber and charged him ten cents. When he had his
new leg, and painfully knew his condition, he hobbled about
for days, looking for the girl. He told his bunkmates what he
was going to do when he found her. He planned to cut off
her ears and her nose with his pocketknife and get his
money back. Carving on his wooden leg, he showed his
friends how he would cut her. “When I finish her she’ll be a
funny-looking bitch,” he said. “I’ll make her so a drunk
Indian won’t take out after her.” His light of love must have
sensed his intentions, for he never found her. By the time
Cyrus was released from the hospital and the army, his
gonorrhea was dried up. When he got home to Connecticut
there remained only enough of it for his wife.
Mrs. Trask was a pale, inside-herself woman. No heat of sun
ever reddened her cheeks, and no open laughter raised the
corners of her mouth. She used religion as a therapy for the
ills of the world and of herself, and she changed the religion
to fit the ill. When she found that the theosophy she had
developed for communication with a dead husband was not
necessary, she cast about for some new unhappiness. Her
search was quickly rewarded by the infection Cyrus brought
home from the war. And as soon as she was aware that a
condition existed, she devised a new theology. Her god of
communication became a god of vengeance—to her the most
satisfactory deity she had devised so far—and, as it turned
out, the last. It was quite easy for her to attribute her
condition to certain dreams she had experienced while her
husband was away. But the disease was not punishment
enough for her nocturnal philandering. Her new god was an
expert in punishment. He demanded of her a sacrifice. She
searched her mind for some proper egotistical humility and
almost happily arrived at the sacrifice—herself. It took her
two weeks to write her last letter with revisions and
corrected spelling. In it she confessed to crimes she could
not possibly have committed and admitted faults far beyond
her capacity. And then, dressed in a secretly made shroud,
she went out on a moonlight night and drowned herself in a
pond so shallow that she had to get down on her knees in
the mud and hold her head under water. This required great
will power. As the warm unconsciousness finally crept over
her, she was thinking with some irritation of how her white
lawn shroud would have mud down the front when they
pulled her out in the morning. And it did.
Cyrus Trask mourned for his wife with a keg of whisky and
three old army friends who had dropped in on their way
home to Maine. Baby Adam cried a good deal at the
beginning of the wake, for the mourners, not knowing about
babies, had neglected to feed him. Cyrus soon solved the
problem. He dipped a rag in whisky and gave it to the baby
to suck, and after three or four dippings young Adam went
to sleep. Several times during the mourning period he
awakened and complained and got the dipped rag again and
went to sleep. The baby was drunk for two days and a half.
Whatever may have happened in his developing brain, it
proved beneficial to his metabolism: from that two and a
half days he gained an iron health. And when at the end of
three days his father finally went out and bought a goat,
Adam drank the milk greedily, vomited, drank more, and
was on his way. His father did not find the reaction
alarming, since he was doing the same thing.
Within a month Cyrus Trask’s choice fell on the seventeenyear-
old daughter of a neighboring farmer. The courtship
was quick and realistic. There was no doubt in anybody’s
mind about his intentions. They were honorable and
reasonable. Her father abetted the courtship. He had two
younger daughters, and Alice, the eldest, was seventeen.
This was her first proposal.
Cyrus wanted a woman to take care of Adam. He needed
someone to keep house and cook, and a servant cost money.
He was a vigorous man and needed the body of a woman,
and that too cost money—unless you were married to it.
Within two weeks Cyrus had wooed, wedded, bedded, and
impregnated her. His neighbors did not find his action
hasty. It was quite normal in that day for a man to use up
three or four wives in a normal lifetime.
Alice Trask had a number of admirable qualities. She was a
deep scrubber and a corner-cleaner in the house. She was
not very pretty, so there was no need to watch her. Her eyes
were pale, her complexion sallow, and her teeth crooked,
but she was extremely healthy and never complained during
her pregnancy. Whether she liked children or not no one
ever knew. She was not asked, and she never said anything
unless she was asked. From Cyrus’s point of view this was
possibly the greatest of her virtues. She never offered any
opinion or statement, and when a man was talking she gave
a vague impression of listening while she went about doing
the housework.
The youth, inexperience, and taciturnity of Alice Trask all
turned out to be assets for Cyrus. While he continued to
operate his farm as such farms were operated in the
neighborhood, he entered on a new career—that of the old
soldier. And that energy which had made him wild now
made him thoughtful. No one now outside of the War
Department knew the quality and duration of his service.
His wooden leg was at once a certificate of proof of his
soldiering and a guarantee that he wouldn’t ever have to do
it again. Timidly he began to tell Alice about his campaigns,
but as his technique grew so did his battles. At the very first
he knew he was lying, but it was not long before he was
equally sure that every one of his stories was true. Before he
had entered the service he had not been much interested in
warfare; now he bought every book about war, read every
report, subscribed to the New York papers, studied maps.
His knowledge of geography had been shaky and his
information about the fighting nonexistent; now he became
an authority. He knew not only the battles, movements,
campaigns, but also the units involved, down to the
regiments, their colonels, and where they originated. And
from telling he became convinced that he had been there.
All of this was a gradual development, and it took place
while Adam was growing to boyhood and his young halfbrother
behind him. Adam and little Charles would sit silent
and respectful while their father explained how every
general thought and planned and where they had made their
mistakes and what they should have done. And then—he had
known it at the time—he had told Grant and McClellan
where they were wrong and had begged them to take his
analysis of the situation. Invariably they refused his advice
and only afterward was he proved right.
There was one thing Cyrus did not do, and perhaps it was
clever of him. He never once promoted himself to
noncommissioned rank. Private Trask he began, and Private
Trask he remained. In the total telling, it made him at once
the most mobile and ubiquitous private in the history of
warfare. It made it necessary for him to be in as many as
four places at once. But perhaps instinctively he did not tell
those stories close to each other. Alice and the boys had a
complete picture of him: a private soldier, and proud of it,
who not only happened to be where every spectacular and
important action was taking place but who wandered freely
into staff meetings and joined or dissented in the decisions
of general officers.
The death of Lincoln caught Cyrus in the pit of the stomach.
Always he remembered how he felt when he first heard the
news. And he could never mention it or hear of it without
quick tears in his eyes. And while he never actually said it,
you got the indestructible impression that Private Cyrus
Trask was one of Lincoln’s closest, warmest, and most
trusted friends. When Mr. Lincoln wanted to know about
the army, the real army, not those prancing dummies in gold
braid, he turned to Private Trask. How Cyrus managed to
make this understood without saying it was a triumph of
insinuation. No one could call him a liar. And this was
mainly because the lie was in his head, and any truth coming
from his mouth carried the color of the lie.
Quite early he began to write letters and then articles about
the conduct of the war, and his conclusions were intelligent
and convincing. Indeed, Cyrus developed an excellent
military mind. His criticisms both of the war as it had been
conducted and of the army organization as it persisted were
irresistibly penetrating. His articles in various magazines
attracted attention. His letters to the War Department,
printed simultaneously in the newspapers, began to have a
sharp effect in decisions on the army. Perhaps if the Grand
Army of the Republic had not assumed political force and
direction his voice might not have been heard so clearly in
Washington, but the spokesman for a block of nearly a
million men was not to be ignored. And such a voice in
military matters Cyrus Trask became. It came about that he
was consulted in matters of army organization, in officer
relationships, in personnel and equipment. His expertness
was apparent to everyone who heard him. He had a genius
for the military. More than that, he was one of those
responsible for the organization of the G.A.R. as a cohesive
and potent force in the national life. After several unpaid
offices in that organization, he took a paid secretaryship
which he kept for the rest of his life. He traveled from one
end of the country to the other, attending conventions,
meetings, and encampments. So much for his public life.
His private life was also laced through with his new
profession. He was a man devoted. His house and farm he
organized on a military basis. He demanded and got reports
on the conduct of his private economy. It is probable that
Alice preferred it this way. She was not a talker. A terse
report was easiest for her. She was busy with the growing
boys and with keeping the house clean and the clothes
washed. Also, she had to conserve her energy, though she
did not mention this in any of her reports. Without warning
her energy would leave her, and she would have to sit down
and wait until it came back. In the night she would be
drenched with perspiration. She knew perfectly well that
she had what was called consumption, would have known
even if she was not reminded by a hard, exhausting cough.
And she did not know how long she would live. Some people
wasted on for quite a few years. There wasn’t any rule about
it. Perhaps she didn’t dare to mention it to her husband. He
had devised a method for dealing with sickness which
resembled punishment. A stomach ache was treated with a
purge so violent that it was a wonder anyone survived it. If
she had mentioned her condition, Cyrus might have started
a treatment which would have killed her off before her
consumption could have done it. Besides, as Cyrus became
more military, his wife learned the only technique through
which a soldier can survive. She never made herself
noticeable, never spoke unless spoken to, performed what
was expected and no more, and tried for no promotions. She
became a rear rank private. It was much easier that way.
Alice retired to the background until she was barely visible
at all.
It was the little boys who really caught it. Cyrus had decided
that even though the army was not perfect, it was still the
only honorable profession for a man. He mourned the fact
that he could not be a permanent soldier because of his
wooden leg, but he could not imagine any career for his sons
except the army. He felt a man should learn soldiering from
the ranks, as he had. Then he would know what it was about
from experience, not from charts and textbooks. He taught
them the manual of arms when they could barely walk. By
the time they were in grade school, close-order drill was as
natural as breathing and as hateful as hell. He kept them
hard with exercises, beating out the rhythm with a stick on
his wooden leg. He made them walk for miles, carrying
knapsacks loaded with stones to make their shoulders
strong. He worked constantly on their marksmanship in the
woodlot behind the house.
2
When a child first catches adults out—when it first walks
into his grave little head that adults do not have divine
intelligence, that their judgments are not always wise, their
thinking true, their sentences just—his world falls into panic
desolation. The gods are fallen and all safety gone. And
there is one sure thing about the fall of gods: they do not fall
a little; they crash and shatter or sink deeply into green
muck. It is a tedious job to build them up again; they never
quite shine. And the child’s world is never quite whole
again. It is an aching kind of growing.
Adam found his father out. It wasn’t that his father changed
but that some new quality came to Adam. He had always
hated the discipline, as every normal animal does, but it was
just and true and inevitable as measles, not to be denied or
cursed, only to be hated. And then—it was very fast, almost
a click in the brain—Adam knew that, for him at least, his
father’s methods had no reference to anything in the world
but his father. The techniques and training were not
designed for the boys at all but only to make Cyrus a great
man. And the same click in the brain told Adam that his
father was not a great man, that he was, indeed, a very
strong-willed and concentrated little man wearing a huge
busby. Who knows what causes this—a look in the eye, a lie
found out, a moment of hesitation?--then god comes
crashing down in a child’s brain.
Young Adam was always an obedient child. Something in
him shrank from violence, from contention, from the silent
shrieking tensions that can rip at a house. He contributed to
the quiet he wished for by offering no violence, no
contention, and to do this he had to retire into secretness,
since there is some violence in everyone. He covered his life
with a veil of vagueness, while behind his quiet eyes a rich
full life went on. This did not protect him from assault but it
allowed him an immunity.
His half-brother Charles, only a little over a year younger,
grew up with his father’s assertiveness. Charles was a
natural athlete, with instinctive timing and coordination and
the competitor’s will to win over others, which makes for
success in the world.
Young Charles won all contests with Adam whether they
involved skill, or strength, or quick intelligence, and won
them so easily that quite early he lost interest and had to
find his competition among other children. Thus it came
about that a kind of affection grew up between the two boys,
but it was more like an association between brother and
sister than between brothers. Charles fought any boy who
challenged or slurred Adam and usually won. He protected
Adam from his father’s harshness with lies and even with
blame-taking. Charles felt for his brother the affection one
has for helpless things, for blind puppies and new babies.
Adam looked out of his covered brain—out the long tunnels
of his eyes—at the people of his world: His father, a onelegged
natural force at first, installed justly to make little
boys feel littler and stupid boys aware of their stupidity; and
then—after god had crashed—he saw his father as the
policeman laid on by birth, the officer who might be
circumvented, or fooled, but never challenged. And out of
the long tunnels of his eyes Adam saw his half-brother
Charles as a bright being of another species, gifted with
muscle and bone, speed and alertness, quite on a different
plane, to be admired as one admires the sleek lazy danger of
a black leopard, not by any chance to be compared with
one’s self. And it would no more have occurred to Adam to
confide in his brother—to tell him the hunger, the gray
dreams, the plans and silent pleasures that lay at the back of
the tunneled eyes—than to share his thoughts with a lovely
tree or a pheasant in flight. Adam was glad of Charles the
way a woman is glad of a fat diamond, and he depended on
his brother in the way that same woman depends on the
diamond’s glitter and the self-security tied up in its worth;
but love, affection, empathy, were beyond conception.
Toward Alice Trask, Adam concealed a feeling that was akin
to a warm shame. She was not his mother—that he knew
because he had been told many times. Not from things said
but from the tone in which other things were said, he knew
that he had once had a mother and that she had done some
shameful thing, such as forgetting the chickens or missing
the target on the range in the woodlot. And as a result of her
fault she was not here. Adam thought sometimes that if he
could only find out what sin it was she had committed, why,
he would sin it too—and not be here.
Alice treated the boys equally, washed them and fed them,
and left everything else to their father, who had let it be
known clearly and with finality that training the boys
physically and mentally was his exclusive province. Even
praise and reprimand he would not delegate. Alice never
complained, quarreled, laughed, or cried. Her mouth was
trained to a line that concealed nothing and offered nothing
too. But once when Adam was quite small he wandered
silently into the kitchen. Alice did not see him. She was
darning socks and she was smiling. Adam retired secretly
and walked out of the house and into the woodlot to a
sheltered place behind a stump that he knew well. He
settled deep between the protecting roots. Adam was as
shocked as though he had come upon her naked. He
breathed excitedly, high against his throat. For Alice had
been naked—she had been smiling. He wondered how she
had dared such wantonness. And he ached toward her with a
longing that was passionate and hot. He did not know what
it was about, but all the long lack of holding, of rocking, of
caressing, the hunger for breast and nipple, and the softness
of a lap, and the voice-tone of love and compassion, and the
sweet feeling of anxiety—all of these were in his passion,
and he did not know it because he did not know that such
things existed, so how could he miss them?
Of course it occurred to him that he might be wrong, that
some misbegotten shadow had fallen across his face and
warped his seeing. And so he cast back to the sharp picture
in his head and knew that the eyes were smiling too.
Twisted light could do one or the other but not both.
He stalked her then, game-wise, as he had the wood-chucks
on the knoll when day after day he had lain lifeless as a
young stone and watched the old wary chucks bring their
children out to sun. He spied on Alice, hidden, and from
unsuspected eye-corner, and it was true. Sometimes when
she was alone, and knew she was alone, she permitted her
mind to play in a garden, and she smiled. And it was
wonderful to see how quickly she could drive the smile to
earth the way the woodchucks holed their children.
Adam concealed his treasure deep in his tunnels, but he was
inclined to pay for his pleasure with something. Alice began
to find gifts—in her sewing basket, in her worn-out purse,
under her pillow—two cinnamon pinks, a bluebird’s
tailfeather, half a stick of green sealing wax, a stolen
handkerchief. At first Alice was startled, but then that
passed, and when she found some unsuspected present the
garden smile flashed and disappeared the way a trout
crosses a knife of sunshine in a pool. She asked no questions
and made no comment.
Her coughing was very bad at night, so loud and disturbing
that Cyrus had at last to put her in another room or he
would have got no sleep. But he did visit her very often—
hopping on his one bare foot, steadying himself with hand
on wall. The boys could hear and feel the jar of his body
through the house as he hopped to and from Alice’s bed.
As Adam grew he feared one thing more than any other. He
feared the day he would be taken and enlisted in the army.
His father never let him forget that such a time would come.
He spoke of it often. It was Adam who needed the army to
make a man of him. Charles was pretty near a man already.
And Charles was a man, and a dangerous man, even at
fifteen, and when Adam was sixteen.
3
The affection between the two boys had grown with the
years. It may be that part of Charles’ feeling was contempt,
but it was a protective contempt. It happened that one
evening the boys were playing peewee, a new game to them,
in the dooryard. A small pointed stick was laid on the
ground, then struck near one end with a bat. The small stick
flew into the air and then was batted as far as possible.
Adam was not good at games. But by some accident of eye
and timing he beat his brother at peewee. Four times he
drove the peewee farther than Charles did. It was a new
experience to him, and a wild flush came over him, so that
he did not watch and feel out his brother’s mood as he
usually did. The fifth time he drove the peewee it flew
humming like a bee far out in the field. He turned happily to
face Charles and suddenly he froze deep in his chest. The
hatred in Charles’ face frightened him. “I guess it was just an
accident,” he said lamely. “I bet I couldn’t do it again.”
Charles set his peewee, struck it, and, as it rose into the air,
swung at it and missed. Charles moved slowly toward Adam,
his eyes cold and noncommittal. Adam edged away in terror.
He did not dare to turn and run for his brother could outrun
him. He backed slowly away, his eyes frightened and his
throat dry. Charles moved close and struck him in the face
with his bat. Adam covered his bleeding nose with his hands,
and Charles swung his bat and hit him in the ribs, knocked
the wind out of him, swung at his head and knocked him out.
And as Adam lay unconscious on the ground Charles kicked
him heavily in the stomach and walked away.
After a while Adam became conscious. He breathed
shallowly because his chest hurt. He tried to sit up and fell
back at the wrench of the torn muscles over his stomach. He
saw Alice looking out, and there was something in her face
that he had never seen before. He did not know what it was,
but it was not soft or weak, and it might be hatred. She saw
that he was looking at her, dropped the curtains into place,
and disappeared. When Adam finally got up from the ground
and moved, bent over, into the kitchen, he found a basin of
hot water standing ready for him and a clean towel beside it.
He could hear his stepmother coughing in her room.
Charles had one great quality. He was never sorry—ever. He
never mentioned the beating, apparently never thought of it
again. But Adam made very sure that he didn’t win again—at
anything. He had always felt the danger in his brother, but
now he understood that he must never win unless he was
prepared to kill Charles. Charles was not sorry. He had very
simply fulfilled himself.
Charles did not tell his father about the beating, and Adam
did not, and surely Alice did not, and yet he seemed to
know. In the months that followed he turned a gentleness on
Adam. His speech became softer toward him. He did not
punish him any more. Almost nightly he lectured him, but
not violently. And Adam was more afraid of the gentleness
than he had been at the violence, for it seemed to him that
he was being trained as a sacrifice, almost as though he was
being subjected to kindness before death, the way victims
intended to the gods were cuddled and flattered so that they
might go happily to the stone and not outrage the gods with
unhappiness.
Cyrus explained softly to Adam the nature of a soldier. And
though his knowledge came from research rather than
experience, he knew and he was accurate. He told his son of
the sad dignity that can belong to a soldier, how he is
necessary in the light of all the failures of man—the penalty
of our frailties. Perhaps Cyrus discovered these things in
himself as he told them. It was very different from the flagwaving,
shouting bellicosity of his younger days. The
humilities are piled on a soldier, so Cyrus said, in order that
he may, when the time comes, be not too resentful of the
final humility—a meaningless and dirty death. And Cyrus
talked to Adam alone and did not permit Charles to listen.
Cyrus took Adam to walk with him one late afternoon, and
the black conclusions of all of his study and his thinking
came out and flowed with a kind of thick terror over his son.
He said, “I’ll have you know that a soldier is the most holy
of all humans because he is the most tested—most tested of
all. I’ll try to tell you. Look now—in all of history men have
been taught that killing of men is an evil thing not to be
countenanced. Any man who kills must be destroyed
because this is a great sin, maybe the worst sin we know.
And then we take a soldier and put murder in his hands and
we say to him, ‘Use it well, use it wisely.’ We put no checks
on him. Go out and kill as many of a certain kind or
classification of your brothers as you can. And we will
reward you for it because it is a violation of your early
training.”
Adam wet his dry lips and tried to ask and failed and tried
again. “Why do they have to do it?” he said. “Why is it?”
Cyrus was deeply moved and he spoke as he had never
spoken before. “I don’t know,” he said. “I’ve studied and
maybe learned how things are, but I’m not even close to why
they are. And you must not expect to find that people
understand what they do. So many things are done
instinctively, the way a bee makes honey or a fox dips his
paws in a stream to fool dogs. A fox can’t say why he does it,
and what bee remembers winter or expects it to come
again? When I knew you had to go I thought to leave the
future open so you could dig out your own findings, and then
it seemed better if I could protect you with the little I know.
You’ll go in soon now—you’ve come to the age.”
“I don’t want to,” said Adam quickly.
“You’ll go in soon,” his father went on, not hearing. “And I
want to tell you so you won’t be surprised. They’ll first strip
off your clothes, but they’ll go deeper than that. They’ll
shuck off any little dignity you have—you’ll lose what you
think of as your decent right to live and to be let alone to
live. They’ll make you live and eat and sleep and shit close
to other men. And when they dress you up again you’ll not
be able to tell yourself from the others. You can’t even wear
a scrap or pin a note on your breast to say, ‘This is me—
separate from the rest.’ ”
“I don’t want to do it,” said Adam.
“After a while,” said Cyrus, “you’ll think no thought the
others do not think. You’ll know no word the others can’t
say. And you’ll do things because the others do them. You’ll
feel the danger in any difference whatever—a danger to the
whole crowd of like-thinking, like-acting men.”
“What if I don’t?” Adam demanded.
“Yes,” said Cyrus, “sometimes that happens. Once in a while
there is a man who won’t do what is demanded of him, and
do you know what happens? The whole machine devotes
itself coldly to the destruction of his difference. They’ll beat
your spirit and your nerves, your body and your mind, with
iron rods until the dangerous difference goes out of you.
And if you can’t finally give in, they’ll vomit you up and
leave you stinking outside—neither part of themselves nor
yet free. It’s better to fall in with them. They only do it to
protect themselves. A thing so triumphantly illogical, so
beautifully senseless as an army can’t allow a question to
weaken it. Within itself, if you do not hold it up to other
things for comparison and derision, you’ll find slowly,
surely, a reason and a logic and a kind of dreadful beauty. A
man who can accept it is not a worse man always, and
sometimes is a much better man. Pay good heed to me for I
have thought long about it. Some men there are who go
down the dismal wrack of soldiering, surrender themselves,
and become faceless. But these had not much face to start
with. And maybe you’re like that. But there are others who
go down, submerge in the common slough, and then rise
more themselves than they were, because—because they
have lost a littleness of vanity and have gained all the gold of
the company and the regiment. If you can go down so low,
you will be able to rise higher than you can conceive, and
you will know a holy joy, a companionship almost like that
of a heavenly company of angels. Then you will know the
quality of men even if they are inarticulate. But until you
have gone way down you can never know this.”
As they walked back toward the house Cyrus turned left and
entered the woodlot among the trees, and it was dusk.
Suddenly Adam said, “You see that stump there, sir? I used
to hide between the roots on the far side. After you
punished me I used to hide there, and sometimes I went
there just because I felt bad.”
“Let’s go and see the place,” his father said. Adam led him to
it, and Cyrus looked down at the nestlike hole between the
roots. “I knew about it long ago,” he said. “Once when you
were gone a long time I thought you must have such a place,
and I found it because I felt the kind of place you would
need. See how the earth is tamped and the little grass is
torn? And while you sat in there you stripped little pieces of
bark to shreds. I knew it was the place when I came upon it.”
Adam was staring at his father in wonder. “You never came
here looking for me,” he said.
“No,” Cyrus replied. “I wouldn’t do that. You can drive a
human too far. I wouldn’t do that. Always you must leave a
man one escape before death. Remember that! I knew, I
guess, how hard I was pressing you. I didn’t want to push
you over the edge.”
They moved restlessly off through the trees. Cyrus said, “So
many things I want to tell you. I’ll forget most of them. I
want to tell you that a soldier gives up so much to get
something back. From the day of a child’s birth he is taught
by every circumstance, by every law and rule and right, to
protect his own life. He starts with that great instinct, and
everything confirms it. And then he is a soldier and he must
learn to violate all of this—he must learn coldly to put
himself in the way of losing his own life without going mad.
And if you can do that—and, mind you, some can’t—then you
will have the greatest gift of all. Look, son,” Cyrus said
earnestly, “nearly all men are afraid, and they don’t even
know what causes their fear—shadows, perplexities, dangers
without names or numbers, fear of a faceless death. But if
you can bring yourself to face not shadows but real death,
described and recognizable, by bullet or saber, arrow or
lance, then you need never be afraid again, at least not the
same way you were before. Then you will be a man set apart
from other men, safe where other men may cry in terror.
This is the great reward. Maybe this is the only reward.
Maybe this is the final purity all ringed with filth. It’s nearly
dark. I’ll want to talk to you again tomorrow night when
both of us have thought about what I’ve told you.”
But Adam said, “Why don’t you talk to my brother? Charles
will be going. He’ll be good at it, much better than I am.”
“Charles won’t be going,” Cyrus said. “There’d be no point in
it.”
“But he would be a better soldier.”
“Only outside on his skin,” said Cyrus. “Not inside, Charles
is not afraid so he could never learn anything about courage.
He does not know anything outside himself so he could
never gain the things I’ve tried to explain to you. To put him
in an army would be to let loose things which in Charles
must be chained down, not let loose. I would not dare to let
him go.”
Adam complained, “You never punished him, you let him
live his life, you praised him, you did not haze him, and now
you let him stay out of the army.” He stopped, frightened at
what he had said, afraid of the rage or the contempt or the
violence his words might let loose.
His father did not reply. He walked on out of the woodlot,
and his head hung down so that his chin rested on his chest,
and the rise and fall of his hip when his wooden leg struck
the ground was monotonous. The wooden leg made a side
semicircle to get ahead when its turn came.
It was completely dark by now, and the golden light of the
lamps shone out from the open kitchen door. Alice came to
the doorway and peered out, looking for them, and then she
heard the uneven footsteps approaching and went back to
the kitchen.
Cyrus walked to the kitchen stoop before he stopped and
raised his head. “Where are you?” he asked.
“Here—right behind you—right here.”
“You asked a question. I guess I’ll have to answer. Maybe it’s
good and maybe it’s bad to answer it. You’re not clever. You
don’t know what you want. You have no proper fierceness.
You let other people walk over you. Sometimes I think
you’re a weakling who will never amount to a dog turd.
Does that answer your question? I love you better. I always
have. This may be a bad thing to tell you, but it’s true. I love
you better. Else why would I have given myself the trouble
of hurting you? Now shut your mouth and go to your
supper. I’ll talk to you tomorrow night. My leg aches.”
4
There was no talk at supper. The quiet was disturbed only
by the slup of soup and gnash of chewing, and his father
waved his hand to try to drive the moths away from the
chimney of the kerosene lamp. Adam thought his brother
watched him secretly. And he caught an eye flash from Alice
when he looked up suddenly. After he had finished eating
Adam pushed back his chair. “I think I’ll go for a walk,” he
said.
Charles stood up. “I’ll go with you.”
Alice and Cyrus watched them go out the door, and then she
asked one of her rare questions. She asked nervously, “What
did you do?”
“Nothing,” he said.
“Will you make him go?”
“Yes.”
“Does he know?”
Cyrus stared bleakly out the open door into the darkness.
“Yes, he knows.”
“He won’t like it. It’s not right for him.”
“It doesn’t matter,” Cyrus said, and he repeated loudly, “It
doesn’t matter,” and his tone said, “Shut your mouth. This is
not your affair.” They were silent a moment, and then he
said almost in a tone of apology, “It isn’t as though he were
your child.”
Alice did not reply.
The boys walked down the dark rutty road. Ahead they
could see a few pinched lights where the village was.
“Want to go in and see if anything’s stirring at the inn?”
Charles asked.
“I hadn’t thought of it,” said Adam.
“Then what the hell are you walking out at night for?”
“You didn’t have to come,” said Adam.
Charles moved close to him. “What did he say to you this
afternoon? I saw you walking together. What did he say?”
“He just talked about the army—like always.”
“Didn’t look like that to me,” Charles said suspiciously. “I
saw him leaning close, talking the way he talks to men—not
telling, talking.”
“He was telling,” Adam said patiently, and he had to control
his breath, for a little fear had begun to press up against his
stomach. He took as deep a gulp of air as he could and held
it to push back at the fear.
“What did he tell you?” Charles demanded again.
“About the army and how it is to be a soldier.”
“I don’t believe you,” said Charles. “I think you’re a goddam
mealy-mouthed liar. What’re you trying to get away with?”
“Nothing,” said Adam.
Charles said harshly, “Your crazy mother drowned herself.
Maybe she took a look at you. That’d do it.”
Adam let out his breath gently, pressing down the dismal
fear. He was silent.
Charles cried, “You’re trying to take him away! I don’t know
how you’re going about it. What do you think you’re doing?”
“Nothing,” said Adam.
Charles jumped in front of him so that Adam had to stop, his
chest almost against his brother’s chest. Adam backed away,
but carefully, as one backs away from a snake.
“Look at his birthday!” Charles shouted. “I took six bits and
I bought him a knife made in Germany—three blades and a
corkscrew, pearl-handled. Where’s that knife? Do you ever
see him use it? Did he give it to you? I never even saw him
hone it. Have you got that knife in your pocket? What did he
do with it? ‘Thanks,’ he said, like that. And that’s the last I
heard of a pearl-handled German knife that cost six bits.”
Rage was in his voice, and Adam felt the creeping fear; but
he knew also that he had a moment left. Too many times he
had seen the destructive machine that chopped down
anything standing in its way. Rage came first and then a
coldness, a possession; noncommittal eyes and a pleased
smile and no voice at all, only a whisper. When that
happened murder was on the way, but cool, deft murder,
and hands that worked precisely, delicately. Adam
swallowed saliva to dampen his dry throat. He could think
of nothing to say that would be heard, for once in rage his
brother would not listen, would not even hear. He bulked
darkly in front of Adam, shorter, wider, thicker, but still not
crouched. In the starlight his lips shone with wetness, but
there was no smile yet and his voice still raged.
“What did you do on his birthday? You think I didn’t see?
Did you spend six bits or even four bits? You brought him a
mongrel pup you picked up in the woodlot. You laughed like
a fool and said it would make a good bird dog. That dog
sleeps in his room. He plays with it while he’s reading. He’s
got it all trained. And where’s the knife? ‘Thanks,’ he said,
just Thanks.’ ” Charles spoke in a whisper, and his shoulders
dropped.
Adam made one desperate jump backward and raised his
hands to guard his face. His brother moved precisely, each
foot planted firmly. One fist lanced delicately to get the
range, and then the bitter-frozen work—a hard blow in the
stomach, and Adam’s hands dropped; then four punches to
the head. Adam felt the bone and gristle of his nose crunch.
He raised his hands again and Charles drove at his heart.
And all this time Adam looked at his brother as the
condemned look hopelessly and puzzled at the executioner.
Suddenly to his own surprise Adam launched a wild,
overhand, harmless swing which had neither force nor
direction. Charles ducked in and under it and the helpless
arm went around his neck. Adam wrapped his arms around
his brother and hung close to him, sobbing. He felt the
square fists whipping nausea into his stomach and still he
held on. Time was slowed to him. With his body he felt his
brother move sideways to force his legs apart. And he felt
the knee come up, past his knees, scraping his thighs, until it
crashed against his testicles and flashing white pain ripped
and echoed through his body. His arms let go. He bent over
and vomited, while the cold killing went on.
Adam felt the punches on temples, cheeks, eyes. He felt his
lip split and tatter over his teeth, but his skin seemed
thickened and dull, as though he were encased in heavy
rubber. Dully he wondered why his legs did not buckle, why
he did not fall, why unconsciousness did not come to him.
The punching continued eternally. He could hear his brother
panting with the quick explosive breath of a sledgehammer
man, and in the sick starlit dark he could see his brother
through the tear-watered blood that flowed from his eyes.
He saw the innocent, noncommittal eyes, the small smile on
wet lips. And as he saw these things—a flash of light and
darkness.
Charles stood over him, gulping air like a run-out dog. And
then he turned and walked quickly back, toward the house,
kneading his bruised knuckles as he went.
Consciousness came back quick and frightening to Adam.
His mind rolled in a painful mist. His body was heavy and
thick with hurt. But almost instantly he forgot his hurts. He
heard quick footsteps on the road. The instinctive fear and
fierceness of a rat came over him. He pushed himself up on
his knees and dragged himself off the road to the ditch that
kept it drained. There was a foot of water in the ditch, and
the tall grass grew up from its sides. Adam crawled quietly
into the water, being very careful to make no splash.
The footsteps came close, slowed, moved on a little, came
back. From his hiding place Adam could see only a darkness
in the dark. And then a sulphur match was struck and
burned a tiny blue until the wood caught, lighting his
brother’s face grotesquely from below. Charles raised the
match and peered around, and Adam could see the hatchet
in his right hand.
When the match went out the night was blacker than before.
Charles moved slowly on and struck another match, and on
and struck another. He searched the road for signs. At last
he gave it up. His right hand rose and he threw the hatchet
far off into the field. He walked rapidly away toward the
pinched lights of the village.
For a long time Adam lay in the cool water. He wondered
how his brother felt, wondered whether now that his
passion was chilling he would feel panic or sorrow or sick
conscience or nothing. These things Adam felt for him. His
conscience bridged him to his brother and did his pain for
him the way at other times he had done his homework.
Adam crept out of the water and stood up. His hurts were
stiffening and the blood was dried in a crust on his face. He
thought he would stay outside in the darkness until his
father and Alice went to bed. He felt that he could not
answer any questions, because he did not know any answers,
and trying to find one was harsh to his battered mind.
Dizziness edged with blue lights came fringing his forehead,
and he knew that he would be fainting soon.
He shuffled slowly up the road with wide-spread legs. At the
stoop he paused, looked in. The lamp hanging by its chain
from the ceiling cast a yellow circle and lighted Alice and
her mending basket on the table in front of her. On the
other side his father chewed a wooden pen and dipped it in
an open ink bottle and made entries in his black record
book.
Alice, glancing up, saw Adam’s bloody face. Her hand rose to
her mouth and her fingers hooked over her lower teeth.
Adam dragfooted up one step and then the other and
supported himself in the doorway.
Then Cyrus raised his head. He looked with a distant
curiosity. The identity of the distortion came to him slowly.
He stood up, puzzled and wondering. He stuck the wooden
pen in the ink bottle and wiped his fingers on his pants.
“Why did he do it?” Cyrus asked softly.
Adam tried to answer, but his mouth was caked and dry. He
licked his lips and started them bleeding again. “I don’t
know,” he said.
Cyrus stumped over to him and grasped him by the arm so
fiercely that he winced and tried to pull away. “Don’t lie to
me! Why did he do it? Did you have an argument?”
“No.”
Cyrus wrenched at him. “Tell me! I want to know. Tell me!
You’ll have to tell me. I’ll make you tell me! Goddam it,
you’re always protecting him! Don’t you think I know that?
Did you think you were fooling me? Now tell me, or by God
I’ll keep you standing there all night!”
Adam cast about for an answer. “He doesn’t think you love
him.”
Cyrus released the arm and hobbled back to his chair and
sat down. He rattled the pen in the ink bottle and looked
blindly at his record book. “Alice,” he said, “help Adam to
bed. You’ll have to cut his shirt off, I guess. Give him a
hand.” He got up again, went to the corner of the room
where the coats hung on nails, and, reaching behind the
garments, brought out his shotgun, broke it to verify its
load, and clumped out of the door.
Alice raised her hand as though she would hold him back
with a rope of air. And her rope broke and her face hid her
thoughts. “Go in your room,” she said. “I’ll bring some
water in a basin.”
Adam lay on the bed, a sheet pulled up to his waist, and
Alice patted the cuts with a linen handkerchief dipped in
warm water. She was silent for a long time and then she
continued Adam’s sentence as though there had never been
an interval, “He doesn’t think his father loves him. But you
love him—you always have.”
Adam did not answer her.
She went on quietly, “He’s a strange boy. You have to know
him—all rough shell, all anger until you know.” She paused
to cough, leaned down and coughed, and when the spell was
over her cheeks were flushed and she was exhausted. “You
have to know him,” she repeated. “For a long time he has
given me little presents, pretty things you wouldn’t think
he’d even notice. But he doesn’t give them right out. He
hides them where he knows I’ll find them. And you can look
at him for hours and he won’t ever give the slightest sign he
did it. You have to know him.”
She smiled at Adam and he closed his eyes.