
	Hector! The story of the warrior! Heroes, spectacular fights, drama, impressing scenes!

Here you can find everything you want to know about Hector, The Trojan War and even Homer, the famous writer. Breathtaking stories, between history and mythology!

Do you want more than just read about Hector? Travel and find Hector and the extraordinary Troy, on today’s map! We show you the way!

	  
	Hector is one of the most important characters of the Greek mythology. He is a Trojan prince and a great fighter in the Trojan War. 

The eldest son of King Priam of Troy and Hecuba, Hector is also the descendant of Dardanus, who lived under Mount Ida, and of Tros, the founder of Troy. 

	The price was expected to become king of Troy, after his father, but the city was attacked by the Achaean invaders. He acts as leader of the Trojans and their

 allies in the defense of Troy. 
	He becomes one of the Nine Worthies, for his courage and noble nature. In spite of his fighting skills and great power, Hector is killed and the kingdom was

 destroyed. 

	 Mythology contains no information about Hector’s childhood, not even about his years before the Trojan War. He became famous during the Trojan War, for his

 courage and fundamental role in defeating the city. 

	Some say, that before the Trojan War, Hector went to Hellas, and having taken the city of Troezen, carried away Aethra , mother of Theseus, to Troy. Hector

 has no hesitation in being the commander of the troops that defended the city. But he does not approve of war between the Greeks and the Trojans and most of all,

 Hector disagrees with his brother Paris, who was at the origin of the conflict. 

	By abducting Helen, from her husband, Menelaus, Paris threatened the existence of Troy. Hector addresses hard words to his brother:"Paris, you pretty boy,

 you woman seducer, why were you ever born? Why weren't you killed before your wedding day?" (Homer, Iliad).
	
	Paris stole Helen from Menelaus, her husband, but he is avoiding a fight. Annoyed by his brothers’ acts, Hector says: "Can you be the man who carried off

 a beautiful woman from a distant land and warlike family, to be a curse to your father, to the city, and to the whole people? Are you too cowardly to stand up to

 the brave man whom you wronged? You would soon find out the kind of fighter he is whose lovely wife you stole." (Homer, Iliad ).

	Therefore, Paris accepts to fight and proposes a duel between himself and Menelaus. The prize for the winner was Helen and the end of the war. The duel

 brings an inconclusive result and only the divine intervention can give the solution. With the intervention of Aphrodite, Menelaus claims the victory, but Pandarus

 wounds with an arrow. 
	
	The war starts again and Hector’s conclusion to his brother is:"It is your fault that this city is invaded by the sounds of battle." (Hector 1 to Paris.

 Homer, Iliad 6.327). The Greeks attack and Trojans are being driven back. Hector, as the commander must go out and lead a counter-attack. Before leaving, he talks

 to his family, who waited for him at the gate of the city. His wife, Andromache, carrying their son, Astyanax, tries to convince him not to go. 

	Although he knows that Troy and the house of Priam are doomed to fall apart, and that his end will be to die in war or go into slavery in a foreign land, he
 
 can not refuse to fight. He explains everything to his family embraces his son and wife and prays to Zeus for their good faith, mostly for his son to become a more

 powerful leader than he could ever be.  
	
	Hector and Paris rally the Trojans and start fighting with the Greeks. Helenus, Hector’s brother, being inspired by the gods, tells Hector he will not die

 in this
	
 battle. This encourages Hector who decides to challenge each of Greek great warriors, to single combat. 

	Nine Greek heroes step up to the challenge. They draw by lot to see who is to face Hector. Ajax wins, and fights Hector. Their continually fight all day long.

 Their duel ends without a victory and with both of them expressing their admiration for the other’s skills Hector gives Ajax his sword, which Ajax would later use to
 
 commit suicide. Ajax gives Hector his girdle, which is later, used to attach Hector's corpse to the chariot on which Achilles drag him around the walls of Troy. 

	The Greek and the Trojans bury the dead and start preparing for another battle, on the sea. 

 The battle on sea takes place with the intrusion of divine power as mythology specifies, Zeus puts into balance the two armies and decides to sink down the Greeks.

 The Trojans push back the Greeks into their camp, but Agamemnon, their leader rallies the Greeks. The Trojans are driven off, and after night falls Hector takes the

 camp and burns the ships. The next day Agamemnon rallies the Greeks and drives back the Trojans. Agamemnon leaves the field, wounded on the arm by a spear, and then

 Hector rallies the Trojans. 

	The battle goes from field, inside the camp and Hector is hit by a stone thrown by Ajax. Divine forces interfere again when Apollo arrives from Olympus and

 infuses strength into the fighters Hector calls for fire to destroy a ship but the Trojans cannot bring it to him, as Ajax kills everyone who tries. Everything

 happens according to the will of gods, who decided the downfall of Troy. 

	Patroclus, Achilles' closest companion, disguised in the armor of Achilles, enters the combat trying to force a Trojan withdrawal. Hector, with the aid of

 Apollo kills Patroclus. 
	
	Hector gives the armor of his victim, which was Achilles' armor, to his men to take back to the city. Glaucus tells Hector he is coward for not challenging
 
 Ajax.Hector calls for the armor, puts it on and rallies the Trojans. Zeus sees his act and helps him for this fight but the Greeks win. Patroclus' death makes

 Achilles came to battle. 

	Trojans held a council to decide what to do. Hector's comrade-in-arms Polydamas recommends that the Trojans return to the walls of the city, but Hector

 disagrees, still hoping for victory.The next day Achilles, pushes the Trojans back to the city and Hector is left alone to face him. Hector is afraid of Achilles

 and he tries to escape the fight. Achilles chases him three times around the city. But, at the end, Hector excels his fear and decides to face Achilles.Athena,

 in the disguise of Hector's brother Deiphobus, deludes Hector, giving help to Achile. When his brother suddenly disappears, Hector realizes that he was doomed and

 that the gods supported Achilles. But being a real warrior Hector decides to fight to the end. Hector then draws his sword but Achilles recognizes the armor he was

 wearing, and remembers its weakness, a chink at the throat. He plunged his spear through the chink and Hector dies slowly. Hector begged Achilles not to desecrate

 his body but the angry Achilles, refuses and describes to Hector what he would do to his dead body. With his last power, Hector promises Achilles that Paris and

 Apollo would be the ones to avenge his death. Achilles then slits Hector's heels, and takes the girdle that Ajax had given him fastens it to his chariot and drives

 the dead body through the dust to the Danaan camp. Although Achilles mistreats the body, for the next twelve days, it remains preserved from all injury, because of

 the intrusion of god Hermes. 

	Gods send two messengers down to earth, to Achilles: Iris, and Achilles' mother. Achilles' mother tells Achilles to allow King Priam to come and take the body

 for ransom. Achilles allows him to take the body for a ransom - twelve fine robes, twelve white mantles, several richly embroidered tunics, ten bars of yellow gold,

 a special gold cup, and several cauldrons. Priam returns to Troy with the body of his son, and it was given full funeral honors. Iliad finishes with the description

 of the funeral. Was Hector a real person? Did he really exist? Evidence for his existence is almost…inexistent. None of the Homeric heroes can be found in historical

 sources. Quasi-evidence is the names of Trojan heroes in the Linear B tablets, a script that was used for writing Mycenaean, an early form of Greek. The scripts refer

 to the names of some warrior that also appear in Homers’ works, including Hector.  While Trojans are mourning after Hector’s death, the Greeks are making plans to

 enter the city, using a hollowed-out wooden horse. The plan is being coordinated by Odysseus. The Greeks leave the horse outside the city gates, and then go to the

 beach and hide in their ships, behind a small island. Paris understands the danger and warns Priam about the horse. He says they should burn it to the ground. Priam

 disagrees, believing the priests' talk of the horse being a "peace offering by the Greeks". The Trojans take the horse into the city and celebrate their assumed

 victory. 

	A Trojan scout sees the Greeks, waiting on their ships, at the bay, but he gets killed by an archer. The whole of Troy is in the middle of the celebration,

 drunken, when the Greeks, come out of the wooden horse, attack the Trojans and open the gates of Troy. The entire Greek army entres the city. Helen and Andromeche,

 her son, gather a large group of women and children and other Trojans and take the secret path Hector showed to Andromeche. Paris refuses to accompany them and gives

 the sword of Troy to Aeneas, quoting his father "So long the sword of Troy remains in the hands of a Trojan, our people have a future". Priam is killed by Agamemnon

 while he was yelling to the Greeks who were breaking statues in the temple, "Have you no honor?  Achilles searches for Briseis, who is was in Agamemnon hands.

 She kills him with a knife, and is saved by Achilles from being stabbed by Agamemnon's. Paris finds Achilles and shoots an arrow straight through Achilles' fatal

 weakness, his heel.

	Achilles tells Briseis, who was crying to leave the city with Paris. Briseis refuses but she is taken by Paris towards the secret passageway. Achilles watches

 them leave, then he collapses with the arrow in his heel.The surviving Trojan soldiers have a last weak attempt to repel the invaders, but thei are defeated and the

 Greeks burst all together in the city and find Achilles dead. They perform the funeral rituals, the next morning.The last words belong to Odysseus: "If they ever tell

 my story, let them say that I walked with giants. Men rise and fall like the winter wheat, but these names will never die. Let them say that I lived in the time of

 Hector, tamer of horses. Let them say I lived in the time of Achilles...."  

	Priam was the king of Troy during the Trojan War, according to Greek Mythology. He had numbers of wives and children. Among his children Hector was his

 eldest son by Hecuba who was heir to the Trojan throne. Priam had fifty sons and 50 daughters.His sons which were mentioned by Homer are, Hector, Paris, Deiphobus,

 Helenus, Polydorus, Troilus, Polites, Hippothous, Kebriones, Gorgythion, Agathon, Mestor, Chromius, Doryclus, Democoon, Antiphus, Lycaon, Pammon, Dius, Isus,

 Antiphonus and Echemmon. His daughters which were mentioned by Homer are Cassandra, Laodice and Medesicaste.Hecuba was the wife of Priam, King of Troy therefore she

 was the queen in Greek Mythology. Priam and Hecuba had nineteen children. She was the mother of Hector.During the Middle Ages, nine worthies were the mythological

 figures who were believed to personify the ideals of chivalry. Hector was among them. Jacques de Longuyon in his Voeux du Paon in 1312 described the Nine Worthies.

 No matter they were Pagan, Jewish or Christian, they were considered as the paragons of chivalry. After Longuyon, during the Middle Ages, it became popular to use

 this theme in literature and art.

	Pagan Worthies were Hector, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar. Jewish Worthies were Joshua, David and Judas Maccabeus. Christian Worthies were King Arthur, 

Charlemagne and Godfrey of Bouillon.These men were perfect warriors, came from royal families. They were the great examples of knighthood of their times. 

	During the Middle Ages, nine worthies were the mythological figures who were believed to personify the ideals of chivalry. Hector was among them. Jacques de

 Longuyon in his Voeux du Paon in 1312 described the Nine Worthies. No matter they were Pagan, Jewish or Christian, they were considered as the paragons of chivalry.

 After Longuyon, during the Middle Ages, it became popular to use this theme in literature and art.

	Pagan Worthies were Hector, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar. Jewish Worthies were Joshua, David and Judas Maccabeus. Christian Worthies were King Arthur,

 Charlemagne and Godfrey of Bouillon.

	These men were perfect warriors, came from royal families. They were the great examples of knighthood of their times. 

	All the information we have today about Troy, comes from the Epic Cycle, particularly from Homer's Iliad , the best known part of the cycle. Other material,

 such as Cypria , that some antique chronicles mention is lost to us. Greek mythology indicates the Trojans as being the citizens of the ancient municipality of Troy,

 a part of the region of Anatolia. Troy was considered to be a wealthy city, mostly due to its port trade with east and west. Also, the richness of the city came from

 iron production. No certain information exists about the language spoken in Troy.

	Troy was ruled by Heracleid dynasty, for 505 years until the time of Candaules. The generation before the Trojan War, Heracles captured Troy and killed

 Laomedon and his sons, except for young Priam. Priam later became king and during his reign, the Greeks invaded and captured Troy, in the Trojan War, 1193–1183 BCE,

 most recently dated to 1188 BCE. Troy is a legendary city, the place where the Trojan War took place, as the Epic Cycle, and especially the Iliad, describes it.

 But, Troy is also a real location, an archeological site.The location of Homeric Troy is in Turkey. 

	Turkish Truva is situated in Hisarlýk, Anatolia, close to the seacoast. The place is a part of Canakkale province in northwest Turkey, southwest of the

 Dardanelles. The archaeological site of Troy was added to the UNESCO World Heritage list in 1998. The Trojan horse, used in the movie Troy, released in 2004, is

 preserved on theseafront at Canakkale, Turkey 

	The archeological site of Troy is situated in Turkey, in the city of Hisarlik. The archeological excavation divided the ruins into different layers, numbered

 Troy I – Troy IX. The archaeological site of Troy has been part of the UNESCO World Heritage list, since 1998.The true location of Troy has always been subject for

 doubt. In 1822 the Scottish journalist Charles Maclaren published A dissertation on the topography of the plain of Troy, in witch he identified the position of the

 ancient city in north-western Anatolia. In 1866, Frank Calvert, after extensive surveys, declared the hill of New Ilium to be the site of ancient Troy. The hill,

 near the town of Chanak, was known to the Turks as Hisarlik.The excavation of the site started in 1868, with the work of German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann .

 In the 1870s he discovered the ruins of a series of ancient cities dating from the Bronze Age to the Roman period and declared one of these, at first Troy I, later

 Troy II, to be the city of Troy. Nine layers of Troy are universally accepted as Troy I (3000 – 2500 B.C.) Troy II (2500 – 2200 B.C.), Troy III ( 2200 – 2050 B.C. ),

 Troy IV ( 2052 – 1900 B. C. ), Troy V ( 1900 – 1800 B. C. ), Troy VI ( 1800 – 1300 B.C. ), Troy VI A ( 1300 – 1260 B.C. ), Troy VII B 1 ( 1260 – 1190 B. C. ) : Troy

 VII B 2 (1190 – 110 B.C.) Troy VIII (700 – 350 B. C.), Troy IX (350 – 400 A. D.). Troy had a great power during the Bronze Age, because of its strategic location

 between Europe and Asia.Between 3000 - 2000 B. C., Troy was more like a cultural centre, but after the Trojan War, the site was apparently abandoned. About 700 B. C.,

 Greeks occupied the city that received another name, Ilion. From the late 6th century B. C. Alexander the Great ruled over the area After the Romans captured Troy in

 85 B. C., it was partially rebuilt. Troy lost its importance, after the occupation of Constantinople. The excavations of the site continue to nowadays. The legend of

 the Trojan Heroes still fascinates many people. So, as all the great stories coming from history or just mythology, the story of Hector, Achilles and the Great War

 became a movie subject. Troy, the movie, was released on May 14, 2004. The plot is based on Homer's Iliad, but also includes material from other sources.

 	The film has the following cast of actors: Brad Pitt as Achilles, Eric Bana as Hector, Orlando Bloom as Paris, Diane Kruger as Helen, Brian Cox as Agamemnon,

 Sean Bean as Odysseus, Rose Byrne as Briseis, Garrett Hedlund as Patroclus, Peter O'Toole as Priam, Brendan Gleeson as Menelaus, and Tyler Mane as Ajax. Troy was

 directed by Wolfgang Petersen and written by David Benioff. It received an Oscar nomination for its costume design.The Trojan horse, used in the movie, is preserved

 on the seafront at Canakkale, Turkey.



	Despite assumptions to the contrary, archaeological work of the new Troy project has not been performed for the purpose of understanding Homer's Iliad or the Trojan

 War. For the past 16 years, more than 350 scholars, scientists, and technicians from nearly 20 countries have been collaborating on the excavations at the site in

 northwestern Turkey that began as an Early Bronze Age citadel in the third millennium B.C. and ended as a Byzantine settlement before being abandoned in A.D. 1350.

 However, as current director of the excavations, I am continually asked if Homer's Trojan War really happened. 
 
	The Size of Troy

	Troy appears to have been destroyed around 1180 B.C. (this date corresponds to the end of our excavation of levels Troy VIi or VIIa), probably by a war the

 city lost. There is evidence of a conflagration, some skeletons, and heaps of sling bullets. People who have successfully defended their city would have gathered 
 
 their sling bullets and put them away for another event, but a victorious conqueror would have done nothing with them. But this does not mean that the conflict was

 the war--even though ancient tradition usually places it around this time. After a transitional period of a few decades, a new population from the eastern Balkans

 or the northwestern Black Sea region evidently settled in the ruins of what was probably a much weakened city. The main argument against associating these ruins with

 the great city described in the Iliad has been that Troy in the Late Bronze Age was a wholly insignificant town and not a place worth fighting over. Our new

 excavations and the progress of research in southeastern Europe has changed such views regarding Troy considerably.It appears that this city was, by the standards of

 this region at that time, very large indeed, and most certainly of supraregional importance in controlling access from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea and from

 Asia Minor to southeast Europe and vice versa. Its citadel was unparalleled in the wider region and, as far as hitherto known, unmatched anywhere in southeastern

 Europe. Troy was also evidently attacked repeatedly and had to defend itself again and again, as indicated by repairs undertaken to the citadel's fortifications and

 efforts to enlarge and strengthen them.

 	German archaeologist Manfred Korfmann of the University of Tubingen has led the excavations at the site of Hisarllk/Troy in northwestern Turkey for the past

 16 years.A spectacular result of the new excavations has been the verification of the existence of a lower settlement from the seventeenth to the early twelfth

 centuries B.C. (Troy levels VI/VIIa) outside and south and east of the citadel. As magnetometer surveys and seven excavations undertaken since 1993 have shown, this

 lower city was surrounded at least in the thirteenth century by an impressive U-shaped fortification ditch, approximately eleven and a half feet wide and six and a

 half feet deep, hewn into the limestone bedrock. Conclusions about the existence and quality of buildings within the confines of the ditch have been drawn on the

 basis of several trial trenches and excavations, some of them covering a very large surface area. The layout of the city was confirmed by an intensive and

 systematic pottery survey in 2003. We have also discovered a cemetery outside the ditch to the south. The most recent excavations have determined that Troy, which

 now covers about seventy-five acres, is about fifteen times larger than previously thought. 

	The Setting of the Iliad

	Homer took for granted that his audience knew a war had been fought for what was alternately called Ilios or Troy. The bard was mainly concerned with

 describing the wrath of Achilles and its consequences. He used Troy and the war as a poetic setting for a conflict between men and gods. From the archaeologist's

 point of view, however, the Iliad can be interpreted as a "setting" in an entirely different sense. One may see Homer or his informants as eyewitnesses to Troy and

 the landscape of Troy at the close of the eighth century B.C., the period when scholars generally agree Homer composed his epic. 

 	Troy was largely a ruined site in Homer's day, but the remains of Troy VII, both the citadel and the lower city, were still impressive. Contemporary

 audiences and later ones from the area around the city were supposed to be able to recognize the general outlines of places where the action happened from

 descriptive references in the Iliad. They could visualize it, for instance, whenever they climbed up a slope to a sanctuary in "holy Ilios." "Holy Ilios" is the

 most frequently repeated epithet in the Iliad, and one would expect to see a sacred building in such a place. We can make a convincing case for a sanctuary or

 sanctuaries, maybe in the form of a wooden building, from the early seventh century B.C. at the latest--roughly contemporary with Homer--on this site, which

 subsequently served as a cult center into the late Roman Empire. There is nothing in the archaeological record to contradict the assertion that Troy and the

 surrounding countryside formed the setting for Homer's Iliad in 700 B.C.

	Evidence from Homer by Joachim Latacz
	
 Recent Homeric scholarship has shown that the Iliad is the culmination of a protracted oral transmission of past events, transmitted by epic poetry improvised and

 performed by singers.

	The Hittite Connection

	Although Troy is in Anatolia, Carl Blegen, who directed excavations at the site in the 1930s, regarded Troy VI/VIIa as a Greek settlement. The idea of a

 Greek Troy, one that had also been entertained by Schliemann, became firmly established. These excavators had come from Greece to Troy, both literally and

 figuratively, and later returned to Greece, and were biased, most likely unconsciously, in their outlook. However, until the 1930s there was very little

 archaeologically within Anatolia that might have been compared with Troy, and certainly not in western Anatolia. 

 We know today, from our own excavations and even from earlier ones, that in all main respects, Bronze Age Troy had stronger ties with Anatolia than with the Aegean.

 We've learned this from the tons of local pottery and small finds, such as a seal with a local hieroglyphic inscription, as well as the overall settlement picture,

 mud-brick architecture, and cremation burials. Research by Anatolian specialists has shown that what we today call Troy was in the Late Bronze Age the kingdom of

 Wilusa, powerful enough to conclude treaties with the Hittite Empire; even the Egyptians seem to have been familiar with the city. Furthermore, according to Hittite

 records, there were political and military tensions around Troy precisely during the thirteenth and early twelfth centuries B.C.--the supposed time of Homer's Trojan

 War.

	
	Was There A Trojan War?

 	Computer-modeling specialists have enabled the excavators of Troy to transform their raw data into a reconstruction of the citadel and lower city at the time

 of the Trojan War. On the basis of my years of experience and knowledge of Troy, I feel the question ought to be: "Why should the scholars who won't rule out a

 possible degree of historicity in the basic events in the Iliad have to defend their position?" In light of the remarkable amount of discovery that has taken place

 over the last ten to fifteen years, the onus to defend positions should now be on those who believe there is absolutely no historical association between what

 happened at Late Bronze Age Troy and the events in the Iliad. On what basis, for instance, are claims made that Troy in the thirteenth and twelfth centuries B.C.

 was a third-class city, unworthy of foreign invasion and ultimately of Homer's attention? We expect that doubters will finally take note of the new archaeological

 facts of the case and the findings of a really interdisciplinary approach to Troy research.

	According to the archaeological and historical findings of the past decade especially, it is now more likely than not that there were several armed conflicts
 
in and around Troy at the end of the Late Bronze Age. At present we do not know whether all or some of these conflicts were distilled in later memory into the

 "Trojan War" or whether among them there was an especially memorable, single "Trojan War." However, everything currently suggests that Homer should be taken

 seriously, that his story of a military conflict between Greeks and the inhabitants of Troy is based on a memory of historical events--whatever these may have been.

 If someone came up to me at the excavation one day and expressed his or her belief that the Trojan War did indeed happen here, my response as an archaeologist

 working at Troy would be: Why not?


	The causes of the Trojan War actually began before the Greek hero Achilles was born.The two powerful gods, Zeus and Poseidon try to forced sea-goddess Thatis

 to lay with them. Themis or Prometheus warned the gods that any son Thetis borne would become greater than his father, and in Zeus' case, would probably one day

 rule Olympus. That really dampened both gods' amorous pursuit of the goddess. Zeus decided to quickly marrying Thetis off to a mortal.Zeus chose the hero Peleus,

 son of Aeacus, as the most worthy of mortals. All the gods and goddesses attended her wedding except Eris, goddess of discord. Furious of this slight, Eris threw

 a golden apple, inscribed "For the fairest", in the midst of the guests. The wedding was marred, when three powerful goddesses wished to claim the prize as the

 fairest: Hera, Athena and Aphrodite.

	The three goddesses asked Zeus to be their judge. Wishing to have nothing to with the contest, Zeus directed Hermes to refer the arbitration to Paris,

 a Trojan prince, the young son of Priam and Hecuba.Each goddess offered to reward him if he chose her. Athena offered to make him become a great hero or general;

 Hera offered to make him ruler of the richest and powerful kingdom; while Aphrodite offered him the most beautiful woman in the world in marriage: Helen of Sparta.

 Paris foolishly decided in Aphrodite's favour and awarded her the golden apple as the fairest of them all. Troy was to suffer the enmity of the two most powerful

 goddesses.But Helen had many powerful Greek suitors wooing her in Sparta. So powerful in fact that her father Tyndareus or Tyndareus (her real father was Zeus),

 king of Sparta, was afraid that anyone she chose, would offend the other suitors.
	
	This problem was solved when the prudent Odysseus, king of Ithaca, advised the Spartan king, that each suitor must swear an oath, that they will defend the

 interests of whoever Helen chooses to marry. Any who refused to swear this oath, would not be eligable. All the suitors agreed and swore the oaths to accept whoever

 became Helen's husband.According to the Catalogues of Women, Hesiod wrote what some of the leaders had offered to Helen  rich bridal gifts, such as bowls, cauldrons 
 
 or tripods made of gold.Helen chose Menelaus (Menelaus) as her husband. Menelaus was the son of Atreus, and brother of Agamemnon, the king of Mycenae. Menelaus
 
 married Helen and Tyndareus abdicated from the throne, leaving Menelaus to become the king of Sparta.(Odysseus knew that Helen would never choose him, but Tyndarekus

 helped the hero to win Tyndareus' niece – Penelope, the daughter of Icarius and cousin of Helen.Odysseus defeated other suitors of Penelope in a foot-race and married

 the Spartan princess.)


	At that time, Paris was living in Mount Ida with his wife, Oenone, a mountain nymph, but he abandoned her for Helen. Oenone told Paris if he was ever wounded

 that he should come to her, so she could heal him. Oenone had hoped that her husband would return to her.Despite been warned by his brother and sister, Helenus and

 Cassandra, who were gifted in divination that his journey would cause the destruction of Troy, Paris sailed to Greece with his cousin Aeneas.At Sparta, Paris became

 guest of Menelaus and Helen. Aphrodite made Helen fall in love with the Trojan prince. When Menelaus went to attend his grandfather's funeral in Crete, Helen ran off

 to Troy with Paris with most of the treasures in Sparta, but leaving her daughter, named Hermione, behind.With Helen gone, Menelaus (Menelaus) called upon Helen's

 former suitors to fulfil their obligations and aid him in bringing her back. All of the former suitors answered Menelaus' call to arms, bringing contingents of men

 and ships with them. Menelaus' brother, Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, had brought 100 ships with him. Agamemnon became commander-in-chief of the Greek forces.

	Agamemnon and Menelaus learned from the Greek seer Calchas that Troy could not fall without two warriors, Achilles and Odysseus.Odysseus was the son of

 Laertes, king of Ithaca, and of Anticleia, the daughter of the master thief Autolycus. Odysseus was renowned for his wisdom, eloquence, cunning and resourcefulness.

 Odysseus wanted to avoid being recruited into the Greek army, because he had learned that though the war would last only ten years, he would not return home to

 Ithaca, until twenty years later. Beside that, Odysseus had only recently married Penelope, the daughter of Icarius and cousin to Helen of Sparta. They had an

 infant son, named Telemachus.When Menelaus, Nestor and Palemedes arrived to conscript Odysseus, the hero feigned madness. Odysseus would plough the field with a

 horse and an ox, wearing a madman cap. Odysseus sowed the field with salts.Palemedes, the son of Nauplius, was the just as shrewd and cunning as the wily Ithacan

 king. Palemedes suspected Odysseus' ploy, snatched the infant from Penelope's breast, and place the baby in front of the approaching plough. Odysseus had to steer

 the plough-team aside, to avoid trampling his son. Palemedes had exposed Odysseus' feigned madness.Odysseus had no choice but to join the army. Odysseus gathered

 his warriors, taking only twelve ships from the islands of Ithaca and Cephallenia.However, Odysseus never forgave Palemedes for exposing and conscripting him into

 the army. When they reached Troy, Odysseus was to exact revenge upon Palemedes. (See Arrival in Troy about the death of Palemedes).


	Achilles was the son of King Peleus of Phthia and of Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris. The wise Centaur Cheiron brought up Achilles, where he learned

 to hunt and fight in the forest around Mount Pelion.Thetis was not only a sea goddess; she was also gifted with oracular power, like many sea deities. Thetis saw

 that her son would win great glory in the war, but she knew the price, was a short life. But Achilles had choice on what his fate will be. Achilles could choose not

 to go to the war, where he will live a long but obscure life of tending his father's herd. Thetis was determined that her son will have a long life. To hide

 Achilles, she dressed the youth in a girl dress and made his hair grew long, before spirited him away to the women quarters at the court of Lycomedes, in Scyrus.

 During his stay in Lycomedes' court, Deïdameia, the king's lovely daughter, fell in love with the youth. They became lovers and Deïdameia bore a son, named

 Neoptolemus, to Achilles. Neoptolemus would later participate in the final year of the war.Menelaus, Nestor and Odysseus then went to recruit Achilles into the army,

 so they sailed to the island of Scyrus. However, the disguise Thetis used on her son was perfect. Odysseus used his cunning and resourcefulness to uncover Achilles

 disguise.Odysseus brought many gifts for the women in Lycomedes' court, such as beautiful dresses and robes, jewellery and perfumes. Also among the gifts were spears,

 swords and shields.At Odysseus' pre-arranged signal, war-horns were sounded that the palace was under attack. While the women and girls of Scyrus fled in terror,

 Achilles leaped into action, taken up the spear and shield, thereby revealing his identity to the Greek leaders.Once discovered, Achilles eagerly joined the army,

 because he preferred a short but glorious life than a long but oblivious life of a farmer. Achilles returned to his father's kingdom, Phthia (southern Thessaly),

 where he received warriors and fifty ships, from his father. The warriors were the legendary Myrmidons, originally from the island of Aegina. See Aegina about the

 Myrmidons' origin.Achilles received the magical armour of Peleus, which was a wedding gift to his father, made by the smith god, Hephaestus. Peleus also gave his

 magic sword to his son, as well as his chariot drawn by two immortal horses, Xanthus and Balius. Either his father or Cheiron gave Achilles a long javelin or lance,

 made from ash tree of Mount Pelion. Apollordorus tell us that Achilles was only fifteen years old, when he joined the army.Before Achilles left for Troy, Thatis

 warned her son to avoid killing Tenes, son of Apollo and king of the island of Tendos, or else he would later die at the sun god's hand (see Sacrifice at Aulis

 about the death of Tenes). Her other prophecy warned Achilles not to be the first Greek to jump on Trojan soil, or else he would be the first to die (see Arrival

 in Troy about the death of the first Greek leader).

 With these last two warriors added to the Greek army, the entire forces assembled at Aulis, Boeotia, with their thousand ships. The Greek leaders accepted Agamemnon

 as the chief-in-command of the army.Agamemnon sacrificed to all the gods, except Artemis. When they sacrificed to Apollo, Calchas informed the leaders that the war

 was to last for ten years, because a snake swallowed eight sparrow chicks from a nest, but with the ninth chick, the snake turned into stone.The fleet set out for

 Troy. However, they landed instead in Mysia, where they attacked Teuthrania, thinking it was Troy.Telephus  the son of Heracles and Auge, the daughter of Aleus of

 Tegea, was the king of Teuthrania. Telephus had married Laodice or Astyoche, the daughter of Priam and Hecuba.Telephus defended his kingdom, killing many Greeks,

 including the young King Thersander of Thebes, the son of Polyneices. Achilles wounded Telephus in the thigh. When the Greeks realised that they had not attack Troy,

 they set out to sea for Troy. However, a violent storm drove the Greek fleet back to Greece, where they regathered their forces at Aulis.Meanwhile, Telephus' wound

 would not heal properly. When Telephus consulted the oracle of Apollo, he found out that his wound would only heal from the spear that had wounded him.Telephus

 disguised himself as a beggar, abducted the infant Orestes, the son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra. Telephus threatened to kill Agamemnon's son unless Achilles 

 healed him. However, Achilles was not a healer and knew not how to proceed.

	First, Agamemnon had managed to come to an agreement with Telephus. Telephus would guide the fleet to Troy, as well as not to aid his father-in-law, King

 Priam of Troy, in the coming war. Then the seer Calchas once again advised them that Achilles should scrap the rust from the wound with the spearhead. Telephus's

 wound was immediately healed.Yet, the Greek fleet could not leave the harbour, because of unfavourable winds that blew for months. Calchas discovered that the

 storm that drove them back to Greece, and the winds that was now keeping them in Aulis, was because of the huntress goddess, Artemis.When Agamemnon had first

 sacrificed to the gods, he had failed to honour Artemis, the sister of Apollo, so the goddess punished the entire fleet by sending strong, unfavorable winds.

 According to a different version, Agamemnon had killed a stag in sacred grove, and then boasted that he was a better hunter than the goddess herself.The seer

 Calchas learned that Agamemnon had offended the goddess, and Artemis would not be satisfied unless he had sacrificed his own daughter, Iphigeneia (Iphigenia).

 At first, Agamemnon refused to sacrifice his daughter, but discovered the price of leadership. The other Greek leaders forced Agamemnon into submission;

 otherwise he would have to step down from commander-in-chief's post.

	Odysseus devised a plan to lure Iphigeneia to her death. They sent a false message from Agamemnon that he would marry Iphigeneia to Achilles.When Iphigeneia

 arrived at Aulis with her mother, Clytemnestra, they discovered the deception. Achilles was offended that Agamemnon had used his name as a bait to lure

 Clytemnestra and Iphigeneia to Aulis. Achilles would have defended innocent maiden against the other Greeks, but Iphigeneia bravely accepted her fate, and agreed

 to be sacrifice.At the sacrificial altar, before the priest could sacrifice Iphigeneia, a thick fog covered the altar, and when the fog cleared, the maiden

 was gone. The goddess had replaced Iphigeneia with a fawn.Artemis had spirited Iphigeneia away, according to the Cyrpia (Epic Cycle) and Euripides' Iphigeneia at

 Aulis, to the land of Tauris, where she would stay as the high priestess of Artemis, until she was rescued by her brother, Orestes, years later after the war.

 (See Iphigeneia among the Taurians.)According to the Catalogues of Women and in Pausanias' Geographia, Artemis had transformed Iphigeneia into the goddess Hecate.
 
 According to some versions, they say that Iphigeneia was killed in the sacrifice. Whichever version you have read, the unfavourable winds died, and the Greek fleet

 sailed once again for Troy.



	Telephus guided the Greek fleet as they sailed towards Troy. One of their stops was on the island of Lemnos.While they were still on the island, Philoctetes

 went hunting, but was bitten by a poisonous water snake. The wound would not heal and began to fester. The unpleasant odour from the snakebite also caused the Greeks

 to abandon Philoctetes on the island. According to Sophocles' Philoctetes, it was Odysseus and Agamemnon who ordered the others to abandon Philoctetes.Philoctetes

 would remain on the island until the last year of the war. The Greeks leaders would find out that Troy couldn't fall without the bow and arrows of Heracles, which

 Philoctetes possessed. See Fall of Troy about Philoctetes.



	The fleet stopped at another island, called Tenedos, where the Greeks fought Tenes, the king of Tenedos. Tenes was the son of Cycnus, who was the king of

 Colonae, near Troy. However, others say Tenes was the son of Apollo.As I had mentioned earlier in the Conscriptions, Thetis had warned her son not to kill the son of

 Apollo, or else he would later died at the god's hands.Achilles either forgotten or ignored his mother's warning. In the heat of the fighting, however, Achilles

 killed Tenes. See Death of Achilles.Among those warriors who join the Greek army, the best were: Achilles, leader of the Myrmidons, son of Peleus and Thetis. Ajax,

 the tall Salamian leader, son of Telamon and Periboea. Diomedes, the Argive leader, son of Tydeus and Deïpyle (Deipyle); and Odysseus, the resourceful and cunning

 king of Ithaca, son of Laërtes (Laertes) and Anticleia. (Follow this links, for the list Greek leaders who fought in the Trojan War) King Priam's eldest son, Hector, was commander-in-chief of the Trojan forces. Hector was the best warrior on the Trojan side. Hector knew that he was fated to die in the war, but as heir and eldest son of Priam, he was duty bound to defend Troy, even though he thought that his brother was wrong to start this war.

His second-in-command was also a Trojan royal prince, from the Dardanian House, Aeneas, son of Aphrodite and Anchises. Aeneas was the bravest Trojan next to Hector.

	Other renowned allies were two leaders from Lycia, Sarpedon, son of Zeus and Deïdameia, wife of Evander, and Glaucus, son of Hippolochus. (Follow this links,

 for the list Trojan and their allied leaders who fought in the Trojan War)



	Before landing in Troy, the Greeks send Menelaus and Odysseus as ambassadors, to ask for Helen's return. The Trojan elder from Dardania, Antenor and some

 other elders supported return of Helen to her husband Menelaus, in order to prevent a war.Paris, however, refused to hand over Helen, was vehemently supported by

 Antimachus, another Trojan elder. Antimachus even tried to have Menelaus and Odysseus killed before they could leave the city. This plan would have succeeded had

 Antenor not rescued the Greeks.Returning to the ships, Menelaus brought the inevitable news of war. The Greek ships landed on the coast of Troy, but not of them

 wish to lead, because it was prophesied that the first Greek to set foot on the soil will be the first to die.One of the leader, Protesilaus try to defy fate, leap

 ashore and after killing several Trojans, was killed himself by Hector. The first Trojan leader to fall to Achilles was Cycnus, a son of Poseidon.


	Odysseus never forgave Palemedes, the son of Nauplius, for outwitting him and putting his son (Telemachus) in danger, when Odysseus feigning madness to avoid

 coming to Troy (see Conscriptions).According to the Cypria (Epic Cycle), Odysseus and Diomedes drowned Palemedes, while he went fishing.But the more popular version

 says that Odysseus, with probably the help from Diomedes, conspired to have Palemedes discredited and killed. Odysseus had fake letter from King Priam that was

 addressed to Palemedes. The letter would implicate Palemedes of committing treason. The cunning Odysseus also planted evidence of treason on Palemedes. Odysseus

 had gold secretly buried in Palemedes's tent.When the other leaders discovered the letter and the gold, Palemedes was stoned as a traitor, without a trial. Later,

 after the war, Nauplius and his other son, Oeax, would exact their own avenge on the returning leaders of the Greek army. See Aftermath of the War about Nauplius'

 revenge.

	During the ninth year of war, the Greeks realising that they could not expect to win the war, while the Trojans continued to receive troops and supplies from

 Troy's neighboring kingdoms and vassals, they decided to set about destroying the vassals. By destroying the surrounding kingdoms, the Greeks not only gained

 supplies but also women captives.

	Achilles took Briseïs (Briseis) as his concubine, while Agamemnon took Chryseïs (Chryseis), daughter of Trojan priest of Apollo, Chryses . Chryses had offered

 generous ransom to Agamemnon, and even promised to pray to his god for a Greek victory in the war, but Agamemnon foolishly refused his offers. The commander-in-chief

 insulted and threatened the priest. When her father failed to persuade Agamemnon to return his daughter, Chryses prayed to Apollo, who sends a pestilence through

 the Greek camp.

	For 9 days, the Achaeans died from the pestilence diseases. On the 10th day, Achilles called for assembly and other Greek leaders forced Agamemnon to agree

 to return Chryseïs to her father. Achilles warned Agamemnon that they couldn't fight the Trojans if they were dying from the pestilence. In anger, Agamemnon

 foolishly took Achilles' concubine Briseïs, to compensate for the loss of his own concubine.Angered by Agamemnon's action, Achilles withdrew from the war effort

 with his men, the Myrmidons. Achilles was never a suitor of Helen, so he had no obligation to fight in this war. The withdrawal of Achilles resulted in disastrous

 loss to Greeks in the next few days of fighting.Achilles called upon his mother Thetis , the sea goddess, for aid. Thetis went to Olympus, asking for a boon from

 Zeus.When Hera, Poseidon and Athena had rebelled against Zeus, and bound him in chain, in Olympus. It was Thetis who came to Zeus' aid and freed Zeus and called upon

 the Hundred-Handed, Briareus. A Hundred-Handed seemed to frighten the gods more than Zeus. So when Thetis pleaded to Zeus to aid her son, Zeus granted her boon,

 simply by nodding his head. Zeus agreed to make the Greeks suffer, because of Agamemnon's insult to her son. But Zeus knew full well of consequence of granting such

 boon; it would cause far more death on both sides. And this aid from Zeus would inevitably lead Achilles to repay this boon for a higher price.

 Homer spent much of the second chapter of the Iliad, listing the leaders of both sides, which became known as the "Catalogue of Ships".

 The Greek leaders were concern that Achilles' withdrawal from the battle, because they could be defeated. Agamemnon foolishly said in public, in front of the

 assembled army, that it would better to leave Troy than being killed or taken prisoners by their enemies. The Greek warriors believed Agamamenon, and they all rushed

 towards the ships. But Odysseus stopped them through his inspiring skill as an orator. The Achaeans armed themselves for battles, as did the Trojans and their allies.

 first, the battle seemed to favour the Greeks. Hector rebuked his brother for not taking a more active part in the war, which Paris started when he abducted and

 married Helen. So Paris declared his intention to face Menelaus (Menelaus).

A truce was called between the two sides. It was decided that the war should end, and the fight should be settled between Menelaüs and Helen, the two rivals and

 husbands of Helen. Troy would return Helen back to Menelaüs if he should win this duel. If Menelaüs should lose the combat, then the Greeks must return to Greece

 without Helen.

	Menelaus proved to be a better warrior than Paris, but before Menelaus could kill his rival, the love goddess Aphrodite spirited Paris away. It was agreed

 on both sides that Menelaüs had won the combat, so peace settlement was reached.Zeus however sent his daughter Athena to disrupt the peace, for Troy was destined

to fall, soon. Disguised as Laodocus, the son of Antenor, Athena tricked Pandarus, leader from Zeleia, to kill Menelaüs. Pandarus was one of the best archers on the Trojan side. Pandarus thought he would gain glory for killing Paris' rival. So Pandarus fired his arrow at Menelaüs. Athena prevented the arrow from killing Menelaüs, only allowing the arrow to graze him.

The Greeks believing that the Trojans had broken the peace, so they attacked the Trojans. The truce was broken and fighting broke out on both sides.



	The Argive hero Diomedes performed the best on the Greek side on that day. Diomedes killed many Trojans, including Pandarus. Diomedes had also seriously

 wounded Aeneas. Diomedes was so inspired by Athena that he had even wounded the goddess Aphrodite, who tried to rescue her son. Diomedes even confronted the war-god

 Ares, who was disguised as Stentor, who was fighting on the Trojan side. Diomedes wounded Ares with his spear.Diomedes even faced Apollo until he was driven back

 by the god of light with a warning that it was foolish to attack a god.Aphrodite returned to Olympus, where Zeus comforted her, and her mother Dione healed her.

 Ares also returned to Olympus, complaining to Zeus, about Athena's interference, and helping a mortal to wound him. However, Zeus offered no sympathy to his son,

 and rebuked his son as a whining coward (as you see here, Athena was Zeus' favourite child).Diomedes also confronted the Lycian leader, Glaucus (Glaucos). The two

 enemy warriors discovered that their grandfathers were guest-friends. Guest-friends were important to the Greeks, and involved exchange of gifts between host and

 guest. A host and guest were also under the obligations of not fighting one another.Diomedes and Glaucus decided to renew the guest-friend relationship between

 them. They promised not to fight each other in the battlefield, and exchanged armours. Homer remarked on that Diomedes received armour of gold from Glaucus, which

 was worth more than the bronze armour he gave to Glaucus.



	Since the Greeks were getting the better of the day, Hector returned to the city and asked his mother (Hecuba) and sisters to offer sacrifices to the goddess

 Athena, since she was actually the patron goddess of Troy. There was a wooden image of Athena, called the Palladium, which supposedly protected Troy from being

 captured. However, Athena ignored the Trojan women's prayers and sacrifices, because of her enmity towards Paris and Troy, since the day of the Judgement of Paris.



	While in the city, Hector met his wife, Andromache, and his son, Astyanax at the temple of Athena. Here there is a moving scene where Andromache was worried

 over her husband's safety in the battlefield. She had already lost her father and brothers to Achilles. Hector had foreseen his own death and that of Troy, yet as

 the commander of the Trojan forces, Hector must fight or else he would be branded a coward by his warriors; something that Hector could not bear.

	Finally, Hector wished to embrace his son, but his fearsome helmet frightened Astyanax. So the boy drew back from him, which made Hector laughed. Hector

 prayed to the gods that his son would be as brave and fearsome warrior as himself. But this was not meant to be.



	The day's fighting ended with one last single combat, in which Hector challenged the bravest of the Greeks. Many Greek champions wanted to fight Hector in a

 duel. They drew lot, and Ajax, the son of Telamon, was given the right to face Hector. When the duel ended in a draw, in which the two heroes exchanged gifts. Ajax

 received a sword from Hector, while he gave Hector a purple girdle.

A one-day truce was agreed upon from both sides, to allow them to bury their comrades who had fallen that day. Nestor advised the Greek leaders that it would be wise

 to build a defensive wall around the Greek camp. There have been no walls around the camp, because they had nothing to fear, when Achilles was among them. So walls

 of earthwork were quickly erected in the morning, to protect the camp and ships

 
 





 

 




