Childhood in Maya society
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2011)
The role of the children in the Maya society was first and foremost to help their elders. Once children turned five or six they were expected to contribute to the family. They were treated as young adults and received more responsibilities as they grew older. Young girls were expected to perform household duties, while young boys were to help their fathers in farming. Mostly women raised the children, but “When a boy was about four or five … his father began the training of his son” (Sharer, 482). When adolescents turned 15, they were expected to be independent. Most adolescents had no childhood. The family was still there to help them, but for the most part they were on their own to provide for themselves. Today, this tradition of work ethic still applies to adolescents.
The Maya desired some unnatural physical characteristics for their children. For instance, at a very young age boards were pressed on babies' foreheads to create a flattened surface. This process was widespread among the upper class. Another practice was to cross babies' eyes. To do this, objects were dangled in front of a newborn’s eyes, until the newborn’s eyes were completely and permanently crossed. In addition, there were a few unique customs regarding children. For example, most Maya children were named according to the day they were born. Every day of the year had a specific name for both boys and girls and parents were expected to follow that practice. Also a “puberty ceremony” was held when boys and girls reached a certain age, and at the conclusion of the procession the child was available for marriage. This ritual was an important occurrence, and afterward a big feast was held for everyone who attended.
Most burial sites for children were not as elaborate as adult burial sites. “Infants/toddlers generally lacked offerings… for [children] who died before reaching the age of five, the only elaboration or special treatment consisted of inclusion within a probable family group…” ( Ardren, 67). However, some burial sites for children did contain more gifts than other youngsters. This suggests that the family had a great deal of remorse, and/or the child had high standings in society.
Several values were stressed to Maya children. Not only was a strong work ethic desirable, but working for the betterment of the community was necessary. Families were extremely important to the Mayan culture, and respecting the leaders in one’s family was imperative. “A sense of responsibility is another important quality which children have to learn. This includes independence, self-confidence and the ability to make decisions” (Heckt, 325). It is believed that the most important quality for children to have was common sense, and they received this by shadowing their parents and observing them. The adults in the family were accountable for teaching the children everyday knowledge, which would allow their children to one day act independently.
Punishments for children ranged from threats to physical punishments. The most widely used reprimand was “verbal action”. Rewards were given as encouragement for younger children to act well. Whether Maya used physical abuse as punishment or not is questionable, and there are many conflicting resources that dispute this topic.[citation needed]
More on contemporary Mayan children
Current parental ideas or ethnotheories about child development and related rearing practices as well as children's culture among the Maya had been rarely investigated until anthropologists, developmental psychologists and other social scientists began questioning the absence of children as co-participants in their development as well as agents of cultural change and continuity. As a result, there are a number of published studies that document and analyze how Mayan children are constructed. Regarding children's punishment, Redfield and Villa Rojas' ethnography and Gaskin (1999) and my own field observations support the view that Yucatec Mayan parents rely on threatening rather than on physical punishment. As years have passed whether this holds true or not needs to be investigated.
Among Yucatec Maya parents, the ceremony called hetsmek' (also meaning the customary manner of carrying young children astride the hip) is still practiced even among professionals living in Merida, the capital city of the State of Yucatán, and migrants to the US. Even though the more complex ceremonies are performed in Eastern Yucatan, the basic rationality remains the same everywhere. This practice as well as ideas on development are documented in Cervera (2006, 2007, 2008) as well as in Gaskins (2003). Similarly, change and continuity of ideas on rain among children are documented in Mendez (2009).

See more references of studies on contemporary Mayan children
[edit]References

Ardren, Traci and Scott R. Hutson; (2006) The Social Experience of Childhood in Ancient Mesoamerica, University Press of Colorado
.
Goncu, Artin; (1999) Children’s Engagement in the World, University of Cambridge Press.
Sharer, Robert; (1994) The Ancient Maya, Stanford.
Heckt, Meike; (1999) "Mayan Education In Guatemala: A Pedagogical Model and Its Political Context" in International Review of Education Volume 45, Number 3-4, pp.321–337.
Cervera, M. D. (2007). El hetsmek' como expresión simbólica de la construcción de los niños mayas yucatecos como personas. Pueblos y Fronteras Digital "La noción de persona en México y Centroamérica", 4, http://www.pueblosyfronteras.unam.mx/a07n04/art_09.html.
Cervera, M. D. (2008). La construcción cultural de los niños mayas de Yucatán. In J. Lizama (Ed.), Escuela y proceso cultural. Ensayos sobre la educación formal dirigida a los mayas (pp. 57-88). México, DF: CIESAS.
Cervera, M. D., & Méndez, R. M. (2006). Temperament and ecological context among Yucatec Mayan children. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 30, 326-337.
de León, L. (2001). "¿Cómo construir un niño zinacanteco?": Conceptos espaciales y lengua materna en la adquisición del tzotzil. In C. Rojas & L. de León (Eds.), La adquisición de la lengua materna: español, lenguas mayas, euskera (pp. 99-124). México, DF: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México y Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social.
de León, L. (2005). La llegada del alma: Lenguaje, infancia y socialización entre los mayas de Zinacantán. México, DF: Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia y Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social.
Euán, R. G., & Cervera, M. D. (2009). Amarras lo que aprendes en la escuela y en la casa: Etnoteorías parentales y rezago educativo. In J. C. Mijangos (Ed.), La lucha contra el rezago educativo. El caso de los mayas de Yucatán (pp. 167-186). Mérida, Yucatán: Unas Letras.
Gaskins, S. (1996). How Mayan parental theories come into play. In C. M. Super & S. Harkness (Eds.), Parents' cultural belief systems: Their origins, expressions, and consequences (pp. 345-363). New York: Guilford.
Gaskins, S. (1999). Children's Daily Lives in a Mayan village: A Case Study of Culturally Constructed Roles and Activities. In A. Göncü (Ed.), Children's Engagement in the World: Sociocultural Perspectives (pp. 25-61). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gaskins, S. (2000). Children's Daily Activities in a Mayan Village: A Culturally Grounded Description. Cross-Cultural Research, 34, 375-389.
Gaskins, S. (2003). From corn to cash: Change and continuity within Mayan families. Ethos, 31, 248-273.
Méndez, R.C. (2009). Concepciones infantiles sobre la lluvia y su relación con la milpa en una comunidad maya. Master’s thesis. Maestría en Ciencias en la especialidad de Ecología Humana. Departamento de Ecología Humana. CINVESTAV. IPN. Unidad Mérida, Mérida, México, http://www.mda.cinvestav.mx/ecohum/tesis_estudiantes/TesisRMendez09.pdf
Redfield, R., & Villa Rojas, A. (1990). Chan Kom: A Maya village. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland.
Maya death rituals were an important part of their religion.
The Maya are thought of as religious people, who lived in fear of the destructive nature of their gods. Death rituals became an important part of their religion; they developed many traditions to commemorate the recently deceased and worship long-departed ancestors. The Maya greatly respected death; they were taught to fear it and grieved deeply for the dead. They also believed that certain deaths were more noble than others; for example, people who died by suicide, sacrifice, complications of childbirth and in battle were thought to be transported directly into heaven. The guilty and evil suffered eternally in Xilbalba, the Maya underworld. Otherwise, death was thought of as a journey, with the possibility of rebirth. The Maya believed that certain individuals, important to their lineage, became deities that acted as patrons for the surviving family and many subsequent generations.
The Maya dead were laid to rest with maize placed in their mouth. Maize, highly important in Maya culture, is a symbol of rebirth and also was food for the dead for the journey to the otherworld. Similarly, a jade or stone bead placed in the mouth served as currency for this journey. Often, whistles carved from rocks into the shapes of gods or animals were included in the grave offerings to help the deceased find their way to the spirit world. The Maya associated the color red with death and rebirth and often covered graves and skeletal remains with cinnabar. The bodies of the dead were wrapped in cotton mantles before being buried. Burial sites were oriented to provide access to the otherworld. Graves faced north or west, in the directions of the Maya heavens, and others were located in caves, believed to be entrances to the underworld.
Burial practices of the Maya changed over the course of time. In the late Preclassic period, people were buried in a flexed position, later the dead were laid to rest in an extended position. In the late Classic period, the elite constructed vaulted tombs, and some rulers ordered the construction of large burial complexes. In the post-Classic period, cremation became more common than elaborate burial sites.
There have been many archaeological discoveries of lavish tombs within ceremonial complexes from the Classic period. However, only a city’s most important ruler was buried in this way. These aristocrats were placed in tombs at the bottoms of funerary pyramids that sometimes consisted of nine stepped platforms symbolizing the nine layers of the underworld. Other temples were constructed with 13 vaults the symbolizing the layers of the heavens in Maya cosmology. These temples reflected the continued worship of these important nobles. The tombs were filled with precious goods including fine polychrome pottery, effigy figurines, jade and marble pieces, masks, mushroom figures, obsidian, exotic shells and valuable stones. In some instances, members of the royal family or young attendants would be sacrificed to accompany the lord in death.
Other elite members of society were buried in vaults with an array of luxury items. The bodies of higher-ranking members of society were buried inside sarcophagi. They sometimes were buried in family crypts or underneath the family home. These funerary constructions of the royal often destroyed the residence itself. Commoners were also buried near or under their houses. These graves did not have extensive burial offerings, but often contained objects that identified the individual: a tool or possession.
[edit]References

Bunson, Margaret R., and Stephen M. Bunson. "death rituals., Maya." Encyclopedia of Ancient Mesoamerica. New York: Facts On File, Inc., 1996.
Foster, Lynn V. Handbook to Life in the Ancient Maya World. New York: Facts on File, Inc., 2001.
Gallenkamp, Charles. Maya: The Riddle and Rediscovery of a Lost Civilization. New York: David McKay Company, Inc, 1976.
Maya medicine
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Health and medicine among the ancient Maya was a complex blend of mind, body, religion, ritual, and science. Important to all, medicine was practiced only by a select few, who generally inherited their positions and received extensive education. These shamans act as a medium between the physical world and spirit world. They practice sorcery for the purpose of healing, foresight, and control over natural events. Since medicine was so closely related to religion and sorcery, it was essential that Maya medicine men had vast medical knowledge and skill. It is known that the Maya sutured wounds with human hair, reduced fractures, and were even skilled dental surgeons, making prostheses from jade and turquoise and filling teeth with iron pyrite.
In understanding Maya health and medicine, it is important to recognize that the Maya equated sickness with the captivity of one’s soul by supernatural beings, angered by some perceived misbehavior (Colby, 84). For this reason, curing a sickness involved elements of ritual, cleansing, and often herbal remedy. Research of Maya ethno-medicine shows that though supernatural causes are related to illness, a large percentage of Maya medical texts are devoted to the treatment of symptoms based upon objective observations of the effects of certain plants on the human system (Roys 20). Herbal remedies were eaten, drank, smoked, snorted, rubbed on the skin, and even used in the form of enemas to force rapid absorption of a substance into the blood stream. Cleansing techniques such as fasting, sweating, and purging flushed substances out of the body and reshaped consciousness (Houston, Stuart, & Taube, 277).
Contents [hide]
1 Medicine Ways
2 Ritual practices
3 Sweat baths
4 Plant and herbal medicine
5 Use of mind-altering substances
6 References
7 External links
[edit]Medicine Ways

Divination is a cultural decision mechanism that mediates consciousness and cultural processes as a society responds to such stressor situations as sickness and social conflict. Furthermore, a codified divinatory system translates the behavioral, biological, and physical conditions in which individuals of a culture typically find themselves and how it relates to the universe (Colby, 84). Given this information, it is easy to see the importance of the medicine man in Maya society. Medicine men, known to the ancient Maya as ah-men, held the special ability to alter consciousness to determine causes for events not understood, such as reasons for illness or misfortune (Sharer 750).
A complicated process, the medicine man or spiritual leader takes from his spiritual reading, his acquired knowledge and skill, and details from the sick individuals past to prescribe a remedy. Since it was perceived by the Maya that sickness was a punishment for a mistake or transgression, it was important that the medicine man inquire about details of the individuals past so that he could assign weight to certain attributes. This was done in a methodological fashion, first inquiring about ascriptive attributes, followed by specific events of the person’s life, and lastly about circumstantial or acquired attributes (Colby, 90). This aspect of the medicine man’s job would be similar to a modern day therapy session. In addition to ritualistic and spiritual elements, the medicine man had extensive knowledge of medicinal plants and how they should be used. After studying the symptoms of a sickness, a medicine man may prescribe an herbal remedy to his patient. The number of times or days that the remedy should be ingested or applied depended on an individual’s gender; typically the number thirteen was associated with men, and the number nine associated with women.
The medicine men of ancient Maya society provided many services to their communities and were held in high regard. Known for their extensive knowledge and spirituality, medicine men were called upon for many reasons, but most often for their healing capabilities. These Maya doctors often employed specialists for specific healing techniques such as bone-setting and child birth, similar to the method of modern doctors. In addition to his duties as doctor and sorcerer, the medicine men not only cured disease, but also sporadically accepted compensation to cause them. In this capacity the ah-men was called ah-pul-yaah, or the “disease thrower”, causing problems such as children screaming and yellow fever (Roys, 23).
[edit]Ritual practices

Maya rituals differ from region to region, but many similar patterns in ceremonies, whether being performed for individual or group need, have been noted. First, all rituals are preceded by foresight of a medicine man, who determines the day of the ceremony through calendrical divination. The medicine men of the Ixil Maya of Guatemala, who kept track of days in their heads, would lay out red seeds from the coral tree onto the pre-Columbian calendar to count them and figure out what day best suited the specific ritual (Colby, 86). As a symbol of spiritual purification, the individual or individuals would observe a fasting and abstinence period before the ritual day.
Consistent patterns are shown throughout the Maya world as to the happenings of the day of the ritual as well. During the ceremony, elements including expulsion of the evil spirit from the participant, incensing of the idols, prayers, offerings, and sacrifices were all practiced. If the ritual was used to cure a disease, the offering may be in the form of food or ornaments, and sacrifice in the form of human blood letting (Sharer 748). Following the ceremony would be dancing, feasting, and ritual drinking by all; characterized by the Spanish as general drunkenness.
Today the Maya keep many of the ritualistic traditions of their ancestors. Elements of prayer, offerings, blood sacrifice (replacing human blood with that of sacrificed chickens), burning of copal incense, dancing, feasting, and ritual drinking continue in traditional ceremonies. It is noted that even if illusory, ritualistic practice can have real effects on neurotransmitters, immunological functioning, and other information substance of the body; all of which figure into the healing process (Colby, 101).
[edit]Sweat baths

An important purification element to the ancient Maya was the sweat bath, or zumpul-ché. Similar to a modern day sauna, sweat baths were constructed of stone walls and ceilings, with a small opening in the top of the ceiling. Water poured onto the hot rocks in the room created steam, offering a setting in which to sweat out impurities. Sweat baths were used for a range of conditions and situations. New mothers who had recently conceived a child would seek revitalization in them, while individuals who were sick could find healing power in sweating.
Maya kings made a habit out of visiting the sweat baths as well because it left them feeling refreshed and, as they believed, cleaner. In addition, Maya rulers performed ritual purification ceremonies to appease the gods and secure the well-being of their communities (Benjamin, 2). It is hypothesized that kings popularized this method of healing because of their regular use of sweat baths. Archeologists have uncovered sweat baths at sites including Tikal, Aguateca, and Nakbe, but the most impressive find to date is in Piedras Negras, a Classic Maya city in Guatemala. In addition to the recognizable palaces, temples and ball courts, archaeologists have uncovered eight stone buildings that served as sweat baths to Maya royalty.
[edit]Plant and herbal medicine

The study and observation of plants has been of high importance to the Maya for centuries. However, the study of medicinal plants was limited to the priestly class. Plants and herbal remedies were often used in collaboration with other techniques to cure disease and sickness. Knowledge of the effects of certain plants on human beings was often used to prescribe an anecdote to a particular ailment, but it is also important to note that medicine men also frequently relied on the color of a plant or other remedy in certain situations. For instance, yellow plants and fruits were used in curing jaundice; red for problems characterized by blood; and burned feathers of red birds in curing yellow fever (Roys, 21).
In cases of skin irritation, wounds, bruises, and headaches, fresh vegetation was often used in the form of plasters applied directly to the skin. Plasters were also rubbed on the skin to shield evil spirits. Depending on the ailment, plants were boiled and used in herbal drinks and/or baths, eaten raw, snorted, smoked, or inserted into one of the body’s orifices. Common plants used for medicine include, but are not limited to, chili peppers, cacao, tobacco, agave, and the pitarilla tree. In addition, animal parts, such as those from the crocodile, insects, fish, and birds were combined into the herbal concoctions. In most cases, a mixture of plant and animal product was prepared to cure a specific ailment. The Maya medicine men were not simple healers through plant medicine. Listed below are a description of broad sicknesses and diseases by Roys, for which medicine men used their plant remedies. These categories also contain subcategories to specialize the mixtures used even further.
HERBAL REMEDIES FOR: Aches and Pains; Asthma; Colds; Disease of the Lungs and Breathing Passages; Birth and Obstetrics; Diseases of Women; Bites and Stings of Animals and Insects; Bleeding; Bowel Complaints, Abdominal Pain and Vomiting; Burns; Charms and Magic; Chills and Fever; Convulsions, Nervous Complaints - Irritability, Depression, Loss of Sleep, Nightmares, Vertigo, Insomnia; Dislocations and Complaints of the Bones; Earaches; Eye Complaints; Fainting and Unconsciousness; Falling; Hair and Disease of the Scalp; Headache; Hiccoughs; Inflammation; Insanity; Jaundice; Mouth and Tongue Problems; Nosebleed and Excessive Sneezing; Poisoning; Skin Diseases, Ulcers, Abscesses, Cancer and Tumors; Sunstroke; Sweating; Teeth and Gums; Urine (bladder problems); Wounds, Cuts, Bruises, and Ruptures.

[edit]Use of mind-altering substances

For the most part, mind-altering substances were used in ceremony or ritual by medicine men to achieve a higher state of consciousness or trance-like state. However, the common Maya citizen used these substances for the same reasons, in a controlled environment. For the most part, these substances were used for mental and spiritual health purposes. Flora such as peyote, the morning glory, certain mushrooms, tobacco, and plants used to make alcoholic substances, were commonly used. The smoking of tobacco mixed with other plants produced a trance-like state. Alcoholic substances were used at rituals and were extremely strong and mind-altering. Hallucinogens were used to communicate with the spirit world. A number of these substances were used not to cure sickness or disease, but instead for pain relief. In addition, as depicted in Maya pottery and carvings, ritual enemas were used for a more rapid absorption and effect of the substance. In contrast to modern culture, these remedies were used to restore balance and harmony to the body.
[edit]References

Anderson, E.N. (2005) Political Ecology in a Yucatec Maya Community. University of Arizona Press.
Benjamin, Patricia. (2006) Massage and Sweat baths Among the Ancient Maya. Massage Therapy Journal. Spring 2004:144-148.
Colby, Benjamin N. (2004) Calendrical Divination by the Ixil Maya of Guatemala. In Divination and Healing: University of Arizona Press.
Houston, Stephen, David Stuart, and Karl Taube. (2006) The Memory of Bones. University of Texas Press.
Kunow, Marianna. (2003) Maya Medicine. University of New Mexico Press.
Roys, Ralph L. (1931) The Ethno-Botany of the Maya. Tulane University.
Sharer, Robert. (2006) The Ancient Maya. Stanford.
The Music that was central to pre-Columbian Maya culture still remains a bit of a mystery today. On the other hand, many aspects of Maya music have come to light from archaeological discoveries, ancient Maya murals, and ancient Maya texts. It is evident from these sources that music played a key role in the expressive arts of Maya culture. Music served many functions in Maya society, not to mention the role society played on music itself.
Contents [hide]
1 Functions of Maya music
2 The instruments
3 References
4 Discography
5 External links
[edit]Functions of Maya music

It is believed that musicians served many ceremonial functions in ancient Maya culture. In various funeral ceremonies, it is believed that a procession of drum and flute players would follow the casket of important women, filling the air with a gloomy and natural tune. After the casket is laid, the musicians would then cast their instruments, breaking them in the tomb just before it is sealed.
Music also filled the halls of Bonampak after victories of war. In the ancient murals of the Maya city, conch trumpet players are depicted playing for the leaders of their city after a successful campaign. In a display of skill and artisanship, the murals of Bonampak clearly illustrate that musicians, while servants of the city lords, were held in much higher regard than common townsfolk.
Common people in Maya culture did, as well, share interests in music. Archaeological finds have unearthed many unadorned drums and whistles in lower class housing. While it is unclear whether such instruments were reserved for ceremonial traditions, it is certain that simple drums and whistles filled many houses in ancient Maya territories.
[edit]The instruments



Three Maya flutes exhibited at the Museo Nacional de Antropología e Historia, México
There were several classes of instruments in Maya culture: Percussion instruments of the Pre-Columbian era included mainly drums and maracas, mostly wood and occasionally tortoise shell. Archaeological evidence from the Pacbitun site also shows that sophisticated forms of maracas along with the small balls inside the hollow maracas were actually crafted in fired ceramic materials.
In the same find, archaeologists discovered additional ceremonial flutes and ocarinas. Similarly crafted out of fired ceramic, the flutes and ocarinas of Pacbitun represent the most extravagant and unique collection of Maya instruments. While most flutes and ocarinas of their time consisted of bone, wood, or reed material, this unique collection sheds light on the important aspect of music in Maya culture. No remnants of pre-Columbian stringed instruments were found until archaeologists discovered a jar in Guatemala, attributed to the Maya of the Late Classic Era (600–900 CE), depicting a stringed musical instrument which has since been reproduced. This instrument is astonishing in at least two respects. First, it is the very few string instruments known in the Americas prior to the introduction of European musical instruments. Second, when played, it produces a sound virtually identical to a jaguar's growl.[1]
[edit]References

Bourg, Cameron Hideo.(2005) Ancient Maya Music Now With Sound: A Thesis
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures By B.A., L.S.U., 2003 December
Editors of "Archaeology Magazine" (2002) Secrets of the Maya. Hatherleigh Press, Long Island City, NY, ISBN 1-57826-123-6.
Houston, Stephen et al. (2006) The Memory of Bones: Body, Being and Experience Among the Classic Maya. University of Texas Press, Houston, ISBN 978-0-292-71294-2.
Orellana, Sandra L (1984) The Tzutujil Mayas: Continuity and Change 1250-1650. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Sadie, Stanley. (2001) The New Grove: Dictionary of Music and Musicians. Second Edition Vol. 16, MacMillan Publishers Limited
Sheeny, Daniel E., Bruno Nettl, Ruth M. Stone James Porter and Timothy Rice. (1998–2002) The Garland Encyclopedia of World Music. The Music and Mexico’s Native People by: Nations and Musical Traditions Native Musical Traditions: Native Musical Instruments, Garland Publishers. Vol 2. New York,
Stevenson, Robert. (1971) Music in Mexico: A Historical Survey. Apollo Edition
Tedlock, Dennis (tr.) (1985) Popul Vuh: The Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life. Simon & Schuster; New York, NY.
^ http://mcis2.princeton.edu/jaguar/jaguar.html
[edit]Discography

Ah-Kin. 1996. Children of the Moon. Ah-Kin Bonampak. Earthtone Records
Berenholtz, Jim and Mazatl Galindo. 2004. The Land of the Feathered Serpent. Hu Ra.
Hunac Ceel Cauich (fl. late 12th and early 13th centuries) was a Mayan general from Telchaquillo who conquered Chichen Itzá and founded the Cocom dynasty. While the rulers of Chichen Itzá were in part descendants of Toltec outsiders who might have been disliked for being foreign oppressors or the war a simple one of conquest, the Mayan legendary history attributes the cause of the war to the theft of a wife of a powerful ruler by a power lord. (On the other hand, rulers of both the attackers and the attacked are labeled Itzá.)
According to the history, Hunac Ceel, also known as Cauich, unsuccessfully fought the Itzás, having been taken captive. Ah Mex Cuc threw him into the sacred cenote of Chichén Itzá as a sacrifice to the gods. However, he survived an entire night in the water and told a prophecy of the rain god Chac about the year's coming harvest and went on, under the sponsorship of Ah Mex Cuc, to become lord of Mayapan, a city which, along with Chichen Itzá and Uxmal, ruled northern Yucatan (Chapter II, "The Rise of Hunac Ceel" in CHILAM BALAM OF CHUMAYEL, see translation here). With the assistance of highland forces, he attacked Chichen Itzá, overthrowing the local ruling elite and establishing Mayapan as the sole ruler of the region. Ralph L. Roys, in his commentary to the Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel posits the interpretation that someone from Chichen Itzá stole away with the bride Ah Ulil, the ruler of Izamal. Hunac Ceel and his Mexican allies used this as pretext or reason to sack the city in Izamal's name and to go on to profoundly re-order the entire political landscape (Appendix C: "The Hunac Ceel Episode").
[edit]Legacy

Hunac Ceel's actions upset not only the political balance of power in north Yucatan but the demographics of Chichen Itzá and the Peten Lake area, where the Itzá were still living at the time of European contact.
The feature film Kings of the Sun begins with Hunac Ceel's forces attacking Chichen Itzá.
In the year 2000, the Mexican folk dance and music group Hunac-Ceel was founded in San Luis Potosí.[1]
[edit]Sources

The main source describing Hunac Ceel's conspiracy and conquest is the Books of Chilam Balam, especially the Books of Chilam Balam of Mani and of Chumayel, which describe Hunac Ceel as using treachery to drive Chac-xib-chab out of Chichen Itzá in the year Tun 10 of Katun 8 Ahau, accompanied by the depopulation of the city and of his rise to power resulting from the event at the cenote.

Maya textiles
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Maya civilization
People · Languages · Society
Religion · Mythology · Sacrifice
Cities · Architecture · Calendar
Stelae · Textiles · Trade
Pre-Columbian Music · Writing
History
Preclassic Maya
Classic Maya collapse
Spanish conquest of Yucatán
Spanish conquest of Guatemala
v · d · e

This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. (Consider using more specific cleanup instructions.) Please help improve this article if you can. The talk page may contain suggestions. (September 2009)
Knowledge of pre-Hispanic Mayan textiles is limited mostly to elite costumes.
Contents [hide]
1 Huipil
2 Technicalities
3 Ideological aspects
4 See also
5 References
[edit]Huipil

The most prevalent and influential aspect of women’s clothing in ancient Maya is the huipil, which is still prominent in Guatemalan and Mexican culture today. The huipil is a loose rectangular garment with a hole in the middle for the head made from lightweight sheer cotton. The huipil is usually white with colorful cross-stripping and zigzag designs woven into the cloth using the brocade technique still commonly used today. The huipil could be worn loose or tucked into a skirt; this depends on the varying lengths of the huipil. Huipils were important displaying one’s religion and tribal affiliation. Different communities tended to have different designs, colors, lengths as well as particular huipils for ceremonial purposes. It was uncommon and often disgraceful to wear a huipil design from another community within one’s village; although, it was a sign of respect to wear a community’s huipil when visiting another village. Although, women were not just limited to their community’s design. Instead the design offered an outline for what women were required to have and within the community design women were allowed creativity to make theirs different from others often to express praise to different kiuggkes animals around the collar.
[edit]Technicalities

Besides other duties one of the top priorities for women was the weaving of cotton cloth for their family because textiles were a significant form of art and religious beliefs. In ancient Maya women had two natural types of cotton to work with, one white and the other light brown, both of which were commonly dyed. The preparation of cotton for spinning was very burdensome, as it had to be washed and picked clean of seeds. Mayan women wove in patterns on a backstrap loom with spindle fibers and bone picks. Bone picks were unique in that they had different designs for most families and were usually passed on from generation to generation with the elite having the most expensive and beautiful. Elite women were also given the opportunity to work with the most expensive dyes, feathers, and pearl beads. However, women of the elite not only had to prepare the best clothing for their families they also had to be talented in weaving tapestry, brocade, embroidery, and tie-dyeing for tribute to other families and rulers. Weavers had three different natural dyes to work with, indigo which supplied different shades of blue. Cochineal, an insect that when crushed and dried makes the color red, and a coastal mollusk which they used to whiten cloth by extracting fluid from its glands. Women also worked with maguey, which is a variety of fibers taken from an agaves plant. Maguey was of major value as a cordage material used for horse gear, nets, hammocks, and bags.
[edit]Ideological aspects

The Maya believed that clothing could transform a person and a person could transform the garment and is expressed through it, so naturally clothing was of great cultural significance. They would often make textiles to enhance religious power; the most common way of doing this was dressing for the maize gods. Women and men would wear a net overskirt made of jade, the color of life, which represented their high place in society. In order to dress as a maize deity and manipulate the regeneration of the maize plant they would weave serpents onto huipils to symbolize lightning. The lightning god is the god believed to have created maize on the top of Mt. Sustenance. Mayan elite would also wear a shark shell belt and a jade-netted collar to the maize deity costume. Other significant costumes consisted of wearing many quetzal and eagle feathers on headdresses to represent and elite’s power in blue and green tones, which represented the fifth direction, the center of celestial, terrestrial and the underworld levels of the cosmos. Kings would also wear jaguar skin skirts, which signified their connection between the sky and the earth.
[edit]See also

Maya clothing
Textiles of Oaxaca
[edit]References

Martin, Simon et al. (2004) Courtly Art of the Ancient Maya, London: Thames and Hudson, p16-198.
O'Neale, Lila M. (1945) Textile of Highland Guatemala. Washington D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington, p7-27.
Schevill, Margot B. (1993) Maya Textiles of Guatemala (1st ed.) Austin: University of Texas Press, p8-60.
[hide]v · d · eTextile arts
Fundamentals	
Applique · Beadwork · Crochet · Dyeing · Embroidery · Fabric (textiles) · Felting · Fiber · Knitting · Lace · Macramé · Nålebinding · Needlework · Patchwork · Passementerie · Plying · Quilting · Rope · Rug making · Sewing · Stitch · Spinning · Sprang · Tapestry · Tatting · Textile printing · Weaving · Yarn

History of ...	
Byzantine silk  · Clothing and textiles · Silk · Quilting · Silk in the Indian subcontinent · Textiles in the Industrial Revolution · Timeline of textile technology
Regional and ethnic	
African · Andean · Australian Aboriginal · Hmong · Korean · Maori · Mayan · Mexican · Navajo · Oaxacan
Related	
Blocking · Fiber art · Mathematics and fiber arts · Manufacturing · Preservation · Recycling · Textile industry · Textile Museums · Units of measurement · Wearable fiber art
Reference	
Dyeing terms · Sewing terms · Textile terms
View page ratings
Rate this page
What's this?
Trustworthy
Objective
Complete
Well-written
I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional)
This page was last modified on 1 June 2011 at 23:06.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of use for details.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Contact us
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersMobile view 
Maya clothing describes the clothing typical in the Maya civilization. The ordinary garment of men was a cotton breechcloth wrapped around the middle, with sometimes a sleeveless shirt, either white or dyed in colors. Mayan women usually wear traje, which is a combination of a woven, multicolored blouse called a huipil or a corte, a woven wraparound skirt that reaches to the ankles, and is held together by faja (sash) at the waist,[1] and plaited their hair in long tresses. Sandals were worn by both sexes. Tattooing and head-flattening were occasionally practised, and the face and body were always painted. The Maya, then as now, were noted for personal neatness and frequent use of both cold and hot baths.
Due to the temperate type of weather of the Maya territory, there hadn’t existed a need in clothes as defense from the elements. Maya clothes were some sorts of adornment and the most amazing clothing was for the cleric. Big earplugs, beads, decorations attached to the mouth, nose, hands, waist, legs were worn by the Maya dignitaries for stunning effect. Mayan farmers did not wear much. The men wore a plain loincloth or somewhat a band of cloth that was winded around their waist. A number of them at least had moccasins made of deer skin. The female possessed two items of clothing a length of ornamented material with holes made for arms and head, well-known as a kub. Male and female used a heavier rectangle of material famous as a manta, that functioned as an overwrap on cool days, and as blanket at night. The manta served as a blind across the door. Sisal as well as cotton was planted on a large scale, and women were busy with weaving. Authorities believe that cotton was cultivated for nobility and clerics. At the same time as the clothing of the farmers was plain, that of the rich was a great deal brighter and elaborates. Even though their garments were thin, the Maya were partial to personal decoration. The masses wore knick-knacks of stone, bone, wood, mainly on their faces. For nobility, the adornments were made of metal and sometimes jade. Besides, they filed down their teeth and at times covered the ones with plates made of what considered to be valuable stones, for example obsidian, iron pyrites as well as most precious kinds of jade. They used paint in a very impressive way on their bodies, it could be applied using ceramic slices dipped in the pot with the paint. The hues of the paints meant a lot. The Maya also were fond of tattooing.†

Ancient Egypt
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the British history magazine, see Ancient Egypt (magazine).


The Great Sphinx and the pyramids of Giza are among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of ancient Egypt.


Map of ancient Egypt, showing major cities and sites of the Dynastic period (c. 3150 BC to 30 BC)

Ancient Egypt was an ancient civilization of Northeastern Africa, concentrated along the lower reaches of the Nile River in what is now the modern country of Egypt. Egyptian civilization coalesced around 3150 BC (according to conventional Egyptian chronology)[1] with the political unification of Upper and Lower Egypt under the first pharaoh.[2] The history of ancient Egypt occurred in a series of stable Kingdoms, separated by periods of relative instability known as Intermediate Periods. The Old Kingdom of the Early Bronze Age, the Middle Kingdom of the Middle Bronze Age and the New Kingdom of the Late Bronze Age. Egypt reached the pinnacle of its power during the New Kingdom, in the Ramesside period, after which it entered a period of slow decline. Egypt was conquered by a succession of foreign powers in this late period. In the aftermath of Alexander the Great's death, one of his generals, Ptolemy Soter, established himself as the new ruler of Egypt. This Ptolemaic Dynasty ruled Egypt until 30 BC, when it fell to the Roman Empire and became a Roman province.[3]
The success of ancient Egyptian civilization came partly from its ability to adapt to the conditions of the Nile River Valley. The predictable flooding and controlled irrigation of the fertile valley produced surplus crops, which fueled social development and culture. With resources to spare, the administration sponsored mineral exploitation of the valley and surrounding desert regions, the early development of an independent writing system, the organization of collective construction and agricultural projects, trade with surrounding regions, and a military intended to defeat foreign enemies and assert Egyptian dominance. Motivating and organizing these activities was a bureaucracy of elite scribes, religious leaders, and administrators under the control of a Pharaoh who ensured the cooperation and unity of the Egyptian people in the context of an elaborate system of religious beliefs.[4][5]
The many achievements of the ancient Egyptians include the quarrying, surveying and construction techniques that facilitated the building of monumental pyramids, temples, and obelisks; a system of mathematics, a practical and effective system of medicine, irrigation systems and agricultural production techniques, the first known ships,[6] Egyptian faience and glass technology, new forms of literature, and the earliest known peace treaty.[7] Egypt left a lasting legacy. Its art and architecture were widely copied, and its antiquities carried off to far corners of the world. Its monumental ruins have inspired the imaginations of travellers and writers for centuries. A new-found respect for antiquities and excavations in the early modern period led to the scientific investigation of Egyptian civilization and a greater appreciation of its cultural legacy.[8]
Contents [hide]
1 History
1.1 Predynastic period
1.2 Early Dynastic Period
1.3 Old Kingdom
1.4 First Intermediate Period
1.5 Middle Kingdom
1.6 Second Intermediate Period and the Hyksos
1.7 New Kingdom
1.8 Third Intermediate Period
1.9 Late Period
1.10 Ptolemaic Dynasty
1.11 Roman Period
2 Government and economy
2.1 Administration and commerce
2.2 Social status
2.3 Legal system
2.4 Agriculture
2.4.1 Animals
2.5 Natural resources
2.6 Trade
3 Language
3.1 Historical development
3.2 Sounds and grammar
3.3 Writing
3.4 Literature
4 Culture
4.1 Daily life
4.2 Cuisine
4.3 Architecture
4.4 Art
4.5 Religious beliefs
4.6 Burial customs
4.7 Military
5 Technology, medicine, and mathematics
5.1 Technology
5.2 Faience and glass
5.3 Medicine
5.4 Shipbuilding
5.5 Mathematics
6 Legacy
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links
History

History of Egypt

This article is part of a series
Prehistory
Ancient Egypt
Early Dynastic Period
Old Kingdom
First Intermediate Period
Middle Kingdom
Second Intermediate Period
New Kingdom
Third Intermediate Period
Late Period
Classical Antiquity
Persian Egypt
Ptolemaic Egypt
Roman & Byzantine Egypt
Medieval Egypt
Fatimid Egypt
Ayyubid Egypt
Mamluk Egypt
Ottoman Egypt
French occupation
Egypt under Muhammad Ali
Modern Egypt
Khedivate of Egypt
Sultanate of Egypt
Kingdom of Egypt
Republic
Egypt Portal
v · d · e
Dynasties of Ancient Egypt
Predynastic Egypt
Protodynastic Period
Early Dynastic Period
Old Kingdom
First Intermediate Period
Middle Kingdom
Second Intermediate Period
New Kingdom
Third Intermediate Period
First Persian Period
Late Period
Second Persian Period
Ptolemaic Dynasty
Main articles: History of ancient Egypt, History of Egypt, and Population history of Egypt
The Nile has been the lifeline of its region for much of human history.[9] The fertile floodplain of the Nile gave humans the opportunity to develop a settled agricultural economy and a more sophisticated, centralized society that became a cornerstone in the history of human civilization.[10] Nomadic modern human hunter-gatherers began living in the Nile valley through the end of the Middle Pleistocene some 120 thousand years ago. By the late Paleolithic period, the arid climate of Northern Africa became increasingly hot and dry, forcing the populations of the area to concentrate along the region.
Predynastic period
Main article: Predynastic Egypt


A typical Naqada II jar decorated with gazelles. (Predynastic Period)
In Predynastic and Early Dynastic times, the Egyptian climate was much less arid than it is today. Large regions of Egypt were covered in treed savanna and traversed by herds of grazing ungulates. Foliage and fauna were far more prolific in all environs and the Nile region supported large populations of waterfowl. Hunting would have been common for Egyptians, and this is also the period when many animals were first domesticated.[11]
By about 5500 BC, small tribes living in the Nile valley had developed into a series of cultures demonstrating firm control of agriculture and animal husbandry, and identifiable by their pottery and personal items, such as combs, bracelets, and beads. The largest of these early cultures in upper Egypt, the Badari, was known for its high quality ceramics, stone tools, and its use of copper.[12]
In Northern Egypt, the Badari was followed by Amratian and Gerzean cultures,[13] which brought a number of technological improvements. In Gerzian times, early evidence exists of contact with Canaan and the Byblos coast.[14]
In southern Egypt, the Naqada culture, similar to the Badari, began to expand along the Nile by about 4000 BC. As early as the Naqada I Period, predynastic Egyptians imported obsidian from Ethiopia, used to shape blades and other objects from flakes.[15] Over a period of about 1,000 years, the Naqada culture developed from a few small farming communities into a powerful civilization whose leaders were in complete control of the people and resources of the Nile valley.[16] Establishing a power center at Hierakonpolis, and later at Abydos, Naqada III leaders expanded their control of Egypt northwards along the Nile.[17] They also traded with Nubia to the south, the oases of the western desert to the west, and the cultures of the eastern Mediterranean to the east.[17] Royal Nubian burials at Qustul produced artifacts bearing the oldest known examples of Egyptian dynastic symbols, such as the white crown of Egypt and falcon.[18][19]
The Naqada culture manufactured a diverse selection of material goods, reflective of the increasing power and wealth of the elite, as well as societal personal-use items, which included combs, small statuary, painted pottery, high quality decorative stone vases, cosmetic palettes, and jewelry made of gold, lapis, and ivory. They also developed a ceramic glaze known as faience, which was used well into the Roman Period to decorate cups, amulets, and figurines.[20] During the last predynastic phase, the Naqada culture began using written symbols that eventually evolved into a full system of hieroglyphs for writing the ancient Egyptian language.[21]
Early Dynastic Period


The Narmer Palette depicts the unification of the Two Lands.[22]
Main article: Early Dynastic Period of Egypt
The 3rd century BC Egyptian priest Manetho grouped the long line of pharaohs from Menes to his own time into 30 dynasties, a system still used today.[23] He chose to begin his official history with the king named "Meni" (or Menes in Greek) who was then believed to have united the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt (around 3100 BC).[24] The transition to a unified state actually happened more gradually than ancient Egyptian writers would have us believe, and there is no contemporary record of Menes. Some scholars now believe, however, that the mythical Menes may have actually been the pharaoh Narmer, who is depicted wearing royal regalia on the ceremonial Narmer Palette in a symbolic act of unification.[25]
In the Early Dynastic Period about 3150 BC, the first of the Dynastic pharaohs solidified their control over lower Egypt by establishing a capital at Memphis, from which they could control the labor force and agriculture of the fertile delta region as well as the lucrative and critical trade routes to the Levant. The increasing power and wealth of the pharaohs during the early dynastic period was reflected in their elaborate mastaba tombs and mortuary cult structures at Abydos, which were used to celebrate the deified pharaoh after his death.[26] The strong institution of kingship developed by the pharaohs served to legitimize state control over the land, labor, and resources that were essential to the survival and growth of ancient Egyptian civilization.[27]
Old Kingdom
Main article: Old Kingdom


Khafre Enthroned
Stunning advances in architecture, art, and technology were made during the Old Kingdom, fueled by the increased agricultural productivity made possible by a well-developed central administration.[28] Some of Ancient Egypt's crowning achievements, the Giza pyramids and Great Sphinx, were constructed during the Old Kingdom. Under the direction of the vizier, state officials collected taxes, coordinated irrigation projects to improve crop yield, drafted peasants to work on construction projects, and established a justice system to maintain peace and order.[29]
Along with the rising importance of a central administration arose a new class of educated scribes and officials who were granted estates by the pharaoh in payment for their services. Pharaohs also made land grants to their mortuary cults and local temples to ensure that these institutions had the resources to worship the pharaoh after his death. By the end of the Old Kingdom, five centuries of these feudal practices had slowly eroded the economic power of the pharaoh, who could no longer afford to support a large centralized administration.[30] As the power of the pharaoh diminished, regional governors called nomarchs began to challenge the supremacy of the pharaoh. This, coupled with severe droughts between 2200 and 2150 BC,[31] ultimately caused the country to enter a 140-year period of famine and strife known as the First Intermediate Period.[32]
First Intermediate Period
Main article: First Intermediate Period of Egypt
After Egypt's central government collapsed at the end of the Old Kingdom, the administration could no longer support or stabilize the country's economy. Regional governors could not rely on the king for help in times of crisis, and the ensuing food shortages and political disputes escalated into famines and small-scale civil wars. Yet despite difficult problems, local leaders, owing no tribute to the pharaoh, used their newfound independence to establish a thriving culture in the provinces. Once in control of their own resources, the provinces became economically richer—a fact demonstrated by larger and better burials among all social classes.[33] In bursts of creativity, provincial artisans adopted and adapted cultural motifs formerly restricted to the royalty of the Old Kingdom, and scribes developed literary styles that expressed the optimism and originality of the period.[34]
Free from their loyalties to the pharaoh, local rulers began competing with each other for territorial control and political power. By 2160 BC, rulers in Herakleopolis controlled Lower Egypt, while a rival clan based in Thebes, the Intef family, took control of Upper Egypt. As the Intefs grew in power and expanded their control northward, a clash between the two rival dynasties became inevitable. Around 2055 BC the Theban forces under Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II finally defeated the Herakleopolitan rulers, reuniting the Two Lands and inaugurating a period of economic and cultural renaissance known as the Middle Kingdom.[35]
Middle Kingdom
Main article: Middle Kingdom of Egypt


Amenemhat III, the last great ruler of the Middle Kingdom
The pharaohs of the Middle Kingdom restored the country's prosperity and stability, thereby stimulating a resurgence of art, literature, and monumental building projects.[36] Mentuhotep II and his 11th Dynasty successors ruled from Thebes, but the vizier Amenemhat I, upon assuming kingship at the beginning of the 12th Dynasty around 1985 BC, shifted the nation's capital to the city of Itjtawy located in Faiyum.[37] From Itjtawy, the pharaohs of the 12th Dynasty undertook a far-sighted land reclamation and irrigation scheme to increase agricultural output in the region. Moreover, the military reconquered territory in Nubia rich in quarries and gold mines, while laborers built a defensive structure in the Eastern Delta, called the "Walls-of-the-Ruler", to defend against foreign attack.[38]
Having secured military and political security and vast agricultural and mineral wealth, the nation's population, arts, and religion flourished. In contrast to elitist Old Kingdom attitudes towards the gods, the Middle Kingdom experienced an increase in expressions of personal piety and what could be called a democratization of the afterlife, in which all people possessed a soul and could be welcomed into the company of the gods after death.[39] Middle Kingdom literature featured sophisticated themes and characters written in a confident, eloquent style,[34] and the relief and portrait sculpture of the period captured subtle, individual details that reached new heights of technical perfection.[40]
The last great ruler of the Middle Kingdom, Amenemhat III, allowed Asiatic settlers into the delta region to provide a sufficient labor force for his especially active mining and building campaigns. These ambitious building and mining activities, however, combined with inadequate Nile floods later in his reign, strained the economy and precipitated the slow decline into the Second Intermediate Period during the later 13th and 14th dynasties. During this decline, the foreign Asiatic settlers began to seize control of the delta region, eventually coming to power in Egypt as the Hyksos.[41]
Second Intermediate Period and the Hyksos
Main article: Second Intermediate Period of Egypt
Around 1785 BC, as the power of the Middle Kingdom pharaohs weakened, Asiatic immigrants living in the Eastern Delta town of Avaris seized control of the region and forced the central government to retreat to Thebes, where the pharaoh was treated as a vassal and expected to pay tribute.[42] The Hyksos ("foreign rulers") imitated Egyptian models of government and portrayed themselves as pharaohs, thus integrating Egyptian elements into their Middle Bronze Age culture.[43]
After their retreat, the Theban kings found themselves trapped between the Hyksos to the north and the Hyksos' Nubian allies, the Kushites, to the south. After years of inaction tenuous, Thebes gathered enough strength to challenge the Hyksos in a conflict that lasted more than 30 years, until 1555 BC [42] The pharaohs Seqenenre Tao II and Kamose were ultimately able to defeat the Nubians, but it was Kamose's successor, Ahmose I, who successfully waged a series of campaigns that permanently eradicated the Hyksos' presence in Egypt. In the New Kingdom that followed, the military became a central priority for the pharaohs seeking to expand Egypt’s borders and secure her complete dominance of the Near East.[44]


The maximum territorial extent of Ancient Egypt (15th century BC)
New Kingdom
Main article: New Kingdom
The New Kingdom pharaohs established a period of unprecedented prosperity by securing their borders and strengthening diplomatic ties with their neighbors. Military campaigns waged under Tuthmosis I and his grandson Tuthmosis III extended the influence of the pharaohs to the largest empire Egypt had ever seen. When Tuthmosis III died in 1425 BC, Egypt extended from Niya in north Syria to the fourth waterfall of the Nile in Nubia, cementing loyalties and opening access to critical imports such as bronze and wood.[45] The New Kingdom pharaohs began a large-scale building campaign to promote the god Amun, whose growing cult was based in Karnak. They also constructed monuments to glorify their own achievements, both real and imagined. The female pharaoh Hatshepsut used such propaganda to legitimize her claim to the throne.[46] Her successful reign was marked by trading expeditions to Punt, an elegant mortuary temple, a colossal pair of obelisks and a chapel at Karnak. Despite her achievements, Hatshepsut's nephew-stepson Tuthmosis III sought to erase her legacy near the end of his reign, possibly in retaliation for usurping his throne.[47]


Four colossal statues of Ramesses II flank the entrance of his temple Abu Simbel.
Around 1350 BC, the stability of the New Kingdom was threatened when Amenhotep IV ascended the throne and instituted a series of radical and chaotic reforms. Changing his name to Akhenaten, he touted the previously obscure sun god Aten as the supreme deity, suppressed the worship of other deities, and attacked the power of the priestly establishment.[48] Moving the capital to the new city of Akhetaten (modern-day Amarna), Akhenaten turned a deaf ear to foreign affairs and absorbed himself in his new religion and artistic style. After his death, the cult of the Aten was quickly abandoned, and the subsequent pharaohs Tutankhamun, Ay, and Horemheb erased all mention of Akhenaten's heresy, now known as the Amarna Period.[49]
Around 1279 BC, Ramesses II, also known as Ramesses the Great, ascended the throne, and went on to build more temples, erect more statues and obelisks, and sire more children than any other pharaoh in history.[50] A bold military leader, Ramesses II led his army against the Hittites in the Battle of Kadesh and, after fighting to a stalemate, finally agreed to the first recorded peace treaty around 1258 BC.[51] Egypt's wealth, however, made it a tempting target for invasion, particularly by the Libyans and the Sea Peoples. Initially, the military was able to repel these invasions, but Egypt eventually lost control of Syria and Palestine. The impact of external threats was exacerbated by internal problems such as corruption, tomb robbery and civil unrest. The high priests at the temple of Amun in Thebes accumulated vast tracts of land and wealth, and their growing power splintered the country during the Third Intermediate Period.[52]


Around 730 BC Libyans from the west fractured the political unity of the country.
Third Intermediate Period
Main article: Third Intermediate Period of Egypt


25th Dynasty
Following the death of Ramesses XI in 1078 BC, Smendes assumed authority over the northern part of Egypt, ruling from the city of Tanis. The south was effectively controlled by the High Priests of Amun at Thebes, who recognized Smendes in name only.[53] During this time, Libyans had been settling in the western delta, and chieftains of these settlers began increasing their autonomy. Libyan princes took control of the delta under Shoshenq I in 945 BC, founding the so-called Libyan or Bubastite dynasty that ruled for some 200 years. Shoshenq also gained control of southern Egypt by placing his family members in important priestly positions. Libyan control began to erode as a rival dynasty in the delta arose in Leontopolis, and Kushites threatened from the south.
Drawing on millennia of interaction (trade, acculturation, occupation, assimilation, and war) with Northern Egyptians,[54] the Kushite king Piye left his spiritual homeland in Napata and invaded Northern Egypt around 727 BC. Piye easily seized control of Thebes and eventually the Delta[55] and recorded the episode on his stela of victory. Piye set the stage for subsequent 25th dynasty pharaohs,[56] such as Taharqa, to reunite the "Two lands" of Northern and Southern Egypt. The reunited Nile valley empire was as large as it had been since the New Kingdom. The 25th dynasty ushered in a renaissance period for Ancient Egypt.[57] Religion, the arts, and architecture were restored to their glorious Old, Middle, and New Kingdom forms. Pharaohs, such as Taharqa, built or restored temples and monuments throughout the Nile valley, including at Memphis, Karnak, Kawa, Jebel Barkal, etc.[58] It was during the 25th dynasty that the Nile valley saw the first widespread construction of pyramids (many in modern Sudan) since the Middle Kingdom.[59][60][61]
Egypt's far-reaching prestige declined considerably towards the end of the Third Intermediate Period. Its foreign allies had fallen under the Assyrian sphere of influence, and by 700 BC war between the two states became inevitable. Between 671 and 667 BC the Assyrians began their attack on Egypt. The reigns of both Kushite kings Taharqa and his successor, Tanutamun, were filled with constant conflict with the Assyrians, against whom the Nubian rulers enjoyed several victories.[62] Ultimately, the Assyrians pushed the Kushites back into Nubia, occupied Memphis, and sacked the temples of Thebes.[63]
Late Period
Main article: Late Period of ancient Egypt
With no permanent plans for conquest, the Assyrians left control of Egypt to a series of vassals who became known as the Saite kings of the Twenty-Sixth Dynasty. By 653 BC, the Saite king Psamtik I was able to oust the Assyrians with the help of Greek mercenaries, who were recruited to form Egypt's first navy. Greek influence expanded greatly as the city of Naukratis became the home of Greeks in the delta. The Saite kings based in the new capital of Sais witnessed a brief but spirited resurgence in the economy and culture, but in 525 BC, the powerful Persians, led by Cambyses II, began their conquest of Egypt, eventually capturing the pharaoh Psamtik III at the battle of Pelusium. Cambyses II then assumed the formal title of pharaoh, but ruled Egypt from his home of Susa, leaving Egypt under the control of a satrapy. A few successful revolts against the Persians marked the 5th century BC, but Egypt was never able to permanently overthrow the Persians.[64]
Following its annexation by Persia, Egypt was joined with Cyprus and Phoenicia in the sixth satrapy of the Achaemenid Persian Empire. This first period of Persian rule over Egypt, also known as the Twenty-Seventh dynasty, ended in 402 BC, and from 380–343 BC the Thirtieth Dynasty ruled as the last native royal house of dynastic Egypt, which ended with the kingship of Nectanebo II. A brief restoration of Persian rule, sometimes known as the Thirty-First Dynasty, began in 343 BC, but shortly after, in 332 BC, the Persian ruler Mazaces handed Egypt over to Alexander the Great without a fight.[65]
Ptolemaic Dynasty
Main articles: History of Ptolemaic Egypt and Ptolemaic dynasty
In 332 BC, Alexander the Great conquered Egypt with little resistance from the Persians and was welcomed by the Egyptians as a deliverer. The administration established by Alexander's successors, the Ptolemies, was based on an Egyptian model and based in the new capital city of Alexandria. The city showcased the power and prestige of Greek rule, and became a seat of learning and culture, centered at the famous Library of Alexandria.[66] The Lighthouse of Alexandria lit the way for the many ships that kept trade flowing through the city—as the Ptolemies made commerce and revenue-generating enterprises, such as papyrus manufacturing, their top priority.[67]
Greek culture did not supplant native Egyptian culture, as the Ptolemies supported time-honored traditions in an effort to secure the loyalty of the populace. They built new temples in Egyptian style, supported traditional cults, and portrayed themselves as pharaohs. Some traditions merged, as Greek and Egyptian gods were syncretized into composite deities, such as Serapis, and classical Greek forms of sculpture influenced traditional Egyptian motifs. Despite their efforts to appease the Egyptians, the Ptolemies were challenged by native rebellion, bitter family rivalries, and the powerful mob of Alexandria that formed after the death of Ptolemy IV.[68] In addition, as Rome relied more heavily on imports of grain from Egypt, the Romans took great interest in the political situation in the country. Continued Egyptian revolts, ambitious politicians, and powerful Syrian opponents made this situation unstable, leading Rome to send forces to secure the country as a province of its empire.[69]
Roman Period
Main article: History of Roman Egypt


The Fayum mummy portraits epitomize the meeting of Egyptian and Roman cultures.
Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 BC, following the defeat of Marc Antony and Ptolemaic Queen Cleopatra VII by Octavian (later Emperor Augustus) in the Battle of Actium. The Romans relied heavily on grain shipments from Egypt, and the Roman army, under the control of a prefect appointed by the Emperor, quelled rebellions, strictly enforced the collection of heavy taxes, and prevented attacks by bandits, which had become a notorious problem during the period.[70] Alexandria became an increasingly important center on the trade route with the orient, as exotic luxuries were in high demand in Rome.[71]
Although the Romans had a more hostile attitude than the Greeks towards the Egyptians, some traditions such as mummification and worship of the traditional gods continued.[72] The art of mummy portraiture flourished, and some of the Roman emperors had themselves depicted as pharaohs, though not to the extent that the Ptolemies had. The former lived outside Egypt and did not perform the ceremonial functions of Egyptian kingship. Local administration became Roman in style and closed to native Egyptians.[72]
From the mid-1st century, Christianity took root in Alexandria as it was seen as another cult that could be accepted. However, it was an uncompromising religion that sought to win converts from paganism and threatened the popular religious traditions. This led to persecution of converts to Christianity, culminating in the great purges of Diocletian starting in 303, but eventually Christianity won out.[73] In 391 the Christian Emperor Theodosius introduced legislation that banned pagan rites and closed temples.[74] Alexandria became the scene of great anti-pagan riots with public and private religious imagery destroyed.[75] As a consequence, Egypt's pagan culture was continually in decline. While the native population continued to speak their language, the ability to read hieroglyphic writing slowly disappeared as the role of the Egyptian temple priests and priestesses diminished. The temples themselves were sometimes converted to churches or abandoned to the desert.[76]
Government and economy

Administration and commerce


The pharaoh was usually depicted wearing symbols of royalty and power.
The pharaoh was the absolute monarch of the country and, at least in theory, wielded complete control of the land and its resources. The king was the supreme military commander and head of the government, who relied on a bureaucracy of officials to manage his affairs. In charge of the administration was his second in command, the vizier, who acted as the king's representative and coordinated land surveys, the treasury, building projects, the legal system, and the archives.[77] At a regional level, the country was divided into as many as 42 administrative regions called nomes each governed by a nomarch, who was accountable to the vizier for his jurisdiction. The temples formed the backbone of the economy. Not only were they houses of worship, but were also responsible for collecting and storing the nation's wealth in a system of granaries and treasuries administered by overseers, who redistributed grain and goods.[78]
Much of the economy was centrally organized and strictly controlled. Although the ancient Egyptians did not use coinage until the Late period, they did use a type of money-barter system,[79] with standard sacks of grain and the deben, a weight of roughly 91 grams (3 oz) of copper or silver, forming a common denominator.[80] Workers were paid in grain; a simple laborer might earn 5½ sacks (200 kg or 400 lb) of grain per month, while a foreman might earn 7½ sacks (250 kg or 550 lb). Prices were fixed across the country and recorded in lists to facilitate trading; for example a shirt cost five copper deben, while a cow cost 140 deben.[80] Grain could be traded for other goods, according to the fixed price list.[80] During the 5th century BC coined money was introduced into Egypt from abroad. At first the coins were used as standardized pieces of precious metal rather than true money, but in the following centuries international traders came to rely on coinage.[81]
Social status
Egyptian society was highly stratified, and social status was expressly displayed. Farmers made up the bulk of the population, but agricultural produce was owned directly by the state, temple, or noble family that owned the land.[82] Farmers were also subject to a labor tax and were required to work on irrigation or construction projects in a corvée system.[83] Artists and craftsmen were of higher status than farmers, but they were also under state control, working in the shops attached to the temples and paid directly from the state treasury. Scribes and officials formed the upper class in ancient Egypt, the so-called "white kilt class" in reference to the bleached linen garments that served as a mark of their rank.[84] The upper class prominently displayed their social status in art and literature. Below the nobility were the priests, physicians, and engineers with specialized training in their field. Slavery was known in ancient Egypt, but the extent and prevalence of its practice are unclear.[85]
The ancient Egyptians viewed men and women, including people from all social classes except slaves, as essentially equal under the law, and even the lowliest peasant was entitled to petition the vizier and his court for redress.[86] Both men and women had the right to own and sell property, make contracts, marry and divorce, receive inheritance, and pursue legal disputes in court. Married couples could own property jointly and protect themselves from divorce by agreeing to marriage contracts, which stipulated the financial obligations of the husband to his wife and children should the marriage end. Compared with their counterparts in ancient Greece, Rome, and even more modern places around the world, ancient Egyptian women had a greater range of personal choices and opportunities for achievement. Women such as Hatshepsut and Cleopatra even became pharaohs, while others wielded power as Divine Wives of Amun. Despite these freedoms, ancient Egyptian women did not often take part in official roles in the administration, served only secondary roles in the temples, and were not as likely to be as educated as men.[86] Also see a BBC History article online for more information on gender equality in ancient Egypt.[87]


Scribes were elite and well educated. They assessed taxes, kept records, and were responsible for administration.
Legal system
The head of the legal system was officially the pharaoh, who was responsible for enacting laws, delivering justice, and maintaining law and order, a concept the ancient Egyptians referred to as Ma'at.[77] Although no legal codes from ancient Egypt survive, court documents show that Egyptian law was based on a common-sense view of right and wrong that emphasized reaching agreements and resolving conflicts rather than strictly adhering to a complicated set of statutes.[86] Local councils of elders, known as Kenbet in the New Kingdom, were responsible for ruling in court cases involving small claims and minor disputes.[77] More serious cases involving murder, major land transactions, and tomb robbery were referred to the Great Kenbet, over which the vizier or pharaoh presided. Plaintiffs and defendants were expected to represent themselves and were required to swear an oath that they had told the truth. In some cases, the state took on both the role of prosecutor and judge, and it could torture the accused with beatings to obtain a confession and the names of any co-conspirators. Whether the charges were trivial or serious, court scribes documented the complaint, testimony, and verdict of the case for future reference.[88]
Punishment for minor crimes involved either imposition of fines, beatings, facial mutilation, or exile, depending on the severity of the offense. Serious crimes such as murder and tomb robbery were punished by execution, carried out by decapitation, drowning, or impaling the criminal on a stake. Punishment could also be extended to the criminal's family.[77] Beginning in the New Kingdom, oracles played a major role in the legal system, dispensing justice in both civil and criminal cases. The procedure was to ask the god a "yes" or "no" question concerning the right or wrong of an issue. The god, carried by a number of priests, rendered judgment by choosing one or the other, moving forward or backward, or pointing to one of the answers written on a piece of papyrus or an ostracon.[89]
Agriculture
See also: Ancient Egyptian cuisine


A tomb relief depicts workers plowing the fields, harvesting the crops, and threshing the grain under the direction of an overseer.
A combination of favorable geographical features contributed to the success of ancient Egyptian culture, the most important of which was the rich fertile soil resulting from annual inundations of the Nile River. The ancient Egyptians were thus able to produce an abundance of food, allowing the population to devote more time and resources to cultural, technological, and artistic pursuits. Land management was crucial in ancient Egypt because taxes were assessed based on the amount of land a person owned.[90]
Farming in Egypt was dependent on the cycle of the Nile River. The Egyptians recognized three seasons: Akhet (flooding), Peret (planting), and Shemu (harvesting). The flooding season lasted from June to September, depositing on the river's banks a layer of mineral-rich silt ideal for growing crops. After the floodwaters had receded, the growing season lasted from October to February. Farmers plowed and planted seeds in the fields, which were irrigated with ditches and canals. Egypt received little rainfall, so farmers relied on the Nile to water their crops.[91] From March to May, farmers used sickles to harvest their crops, which were then threshed with a flail to separate the straw from the grain. Winnowing removed the chaff from the grain, and the grain was then ground into flour, brewed to make beer, or stored for later use.[92]
The ancient Egyptians cultivated emmer and barley, and several other cereal grains, all of which were used to make the two main food staples of bread and beer.[93] Flax plants, uprooted before they started flowering, were grown for the fibers of their stems. These fibers were split along their length and spun into thread, which was used to weave sheets of linen and to make clothing. Papyrus growing on the banks of the Nile River was used to make paper. Vegetables and fruits were grown in garden plots, close to habitations and on higher ground, and had to be watered by hand. Vegetables included leeks, garlic, melons, squashes, pulses, lettuce, and other crops, in addition to grapes that were made into wine.[94]


Sennedjem plows his fields with a pair of oxen, used as beasts of burden and a source of food.
Animals
The Egyptians believed that a balanced relationship between people and animals was an essential element of the cosmic order; thus humans, animals and plants were believed to be members of a single whole.[95] Animals, both domesticated and wild, were therefore a critical source of spirituality, companionship, and sustenance to the ancient Egyptians. Cattle were the most important livestock; the administration collected taxes on livestock in regular censuses, and the size of a herd reflected the prestige and importance of the estate or temple that owned them. In addition to cattle, the ancient Egyptians kept sheep, goats, and pigs. Poultry such as ducks, geese, and pigeons were captured in nets and bred on farms, where they were force-fed with dough to fatten them.[96] The Nile provided a plentiful source of fish. Bees were also domesticated from at least the Old Kingdom, and they provided both honey and wax.[97]
The ancient Egyptians used donkeys and oxen as beasts of burden, and they were responsible for plowing the fields and trampling seed into the soil. The slaughter of a fattened ox was also a central part of an offering ritual.[96] Horses were introduced by the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period, and the camel, although known from the New Kingdom, was not used as a beast of burden until the Late Period. There is also evidence to suggest that elephants were briefly utilized in the Late Period, but largely abandoned due to lack of grazing land.[96] Dogs, cats and monkeys were common family pets, while more exotic pets imported from the heart of Africa, such as lions, were reserved for royalty. Herodotus observed that the Egyptians were the only people to keep their animals with them in their houses.[95] During the Predynastic and Late periods, the worship of the gods in their animal form was extremely popular, such as the cat goddess Bastet and the ibis god Thoth, and these animals were bred in large numbers on farms for the purpose of ritual sacrifice.[98]
Natural resources
Further information: Mining in Egypt
Egypt is rich in building and decorative stone, copper and lead ores, gold, and semiprecious stones. These natural resources allowed the ancient Egyptians to build monuments, sculpt statues, make tools, and fashion jewelry.[99] Embalmers used salts from the Wadi Natrun for mummification, which also provided the gypsum needed to make plaster.[100] Ore-bearing rock formations were found in distant, inhospitable wadis in the eastern desert and the Sinai, requiring large, state-controlled expeditions to obtain natural resources found there. There were extensive gold mines in Nubia, and one of the first maps known is of a gold mine in this region. The Wadi Hammamat was a notable source of granite, greywacke, and gold. Flint was the first mineral collected and used to make tools, and flint handaxes are the earliest pieces of evidence of habitation in the Nile valley. Nodules of the mineral were carefully flaked to make blades and arrowheads of moderate hardness and durability even after copper was adopted for this purpose.[101] Ancient Egyptians were among the first to use minerals such as sulfur as cosmetic substances.[102]
The Egyptians worked deposits of the lead ore galena at Gebel Rosas to make net sinkers, plumb bobs, and small figurines. Copper was the most important metal for toolmaking in ancient Egypt and was smelted in furnaces from malachite ore mined in the Sinai.[103] Workers collected gold by washing the nuggets out of sediment in alluvial deposits, or by the more labor-intensive process of grinding and washing gold-bearing quartzite. Iron deposits found in upper Egypt were utilized in the Late Period.[104] High-quality building stones were abundant in Egypt; the ancient Egyptians quarried limestone all along the Nile valley, granite from Aswan, and basalt and sandstone from the wadis of the eastern desert. Deposits of decorative stones such as porphyry, greywacke, alabaster, and carnelian dotted the eastern desert and were collected even before the First Dynasty. In the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods, miners worked deposits of emeralds in Wadi Sikait and amethyst in Wadi el-Hudi.[105]
Trade
The ancient Egyptians engaged in trade with their foreign neighbors to obtain rare, exotic goods not found in Egypt. In the Predynastic Period, they established trade with Nubia to obtain gold and incense. They also established trade with Palestine, as evidenced by Palestinian-style oil jugs found in the burials of the First Dynasty pharaohs.[106] An Egyptian colony stationed in southern Canaan dates to slightly before the First Dynasty.[107] Narmer had Egyptian pottery produced in Canaan and exported back to Egypt.[108]
By the Second Dynasty at latest, ancient Egyptian trade with Byblos yielded a critical source of quality timber not found in Egypt. By the Fifth Dynasty, trade with Punt provided gold, aromatic resins, ebony, ivory, and wild animals such as monkeys and baboons.[109] Egypt relied on trade with Anatolia for essential quantities of tin as well as supplementary supplies of copper, both metals being necessary for the manufacture of bronze. The ancient Egyptians prized the blue stone lapis lazuli, which had to be imported from far-away Afghanistan. Egypt's Mediterranean trade partners also included Greece and Crete, which provided, among other goods, supplies of olive oil.[110] In exchange for its luxury imports and raw materials, Egypt mainly exported grain, gold, linen, and papyrus, in addition to other finished goods including glass and stone objects.[111]
Language

Main article: Egyptian language
Historical development
r n kmt
'Egyptian language'
in hieroglyphs
 
				

The Egyptian language is a northern Afro-Asiatic language closely related to the Berber and Semitic languages.[112] It has the second longest history of any language (after Sumerian), having been written from c. 3200 BC to the Middle Ages and remaining as a spoken language for longer. The phases of Ancient Egyptian are Old Egyptian, Middle Egyptian (Classical Egyptian), Late Egyptian, Demotic and Coptic.[113] Egyptian writings do not show dialect differences before Coptic, but it was probably spoken in regional dialects around Memphis and later Thebes.[114]
Ancient Egyptian was a synthetic language, but it became more analytic later on. Late Egyptian develops prefixal definite and indefinite articles, which replace the older inflectional suffixes. There is a change from the older verb–subject–object word order to subject–verb–object.[115] The Egyptian hieroglyphic, hieratic, and demotic scripts were eventually replaced by the more phonetic Coptic alphabet. Coptic is still used in the liturgy of the Egyptian Orthodox Church, and traces of it are found in modern Egyptian Arabic.[116]
Sounds and grammar
Ancient Egyptian has 25 consonants similar to those of other Afro-Asiatic languages. These include pharyngeal and emphatic consonants, voiced and voiceless stops, voiceless fricatives and voiced and voiceless affricates. It has three long and three short vowels, which expanded in Later Egyptian to about nine.[117] The basic word in Egyptian, similar to Semitic and Berber, is a triliteral or biliteral root of consonants and semiconsonants. Suffixes are added to form words. The verb conjugation corresponds to the person. For example, the triconsonantal skeleton S-?-M is the semantic core of the word 'hear'; its basic conjugation is {{{2}}} 'he hears'. If the subject is a noun, suffixes are not added to the verb:[118] s?m ?mt 'the woman hears'.
Adjectives are derived from nouns through a process that Egyptologists call nisbation because of its similarity with Arabic.[119] The word order is PREDICATE–SUBJECT in verbal and adjectival sentences, and SUBJECT–PREDICATE in nominal and adverbial sentences.[120] The subject can be moved to the beginning of sentences if it is long and is followed by a resumptive pronoun.[121] Verbs and nouns are negated by the particle n, but nn is used for adverbial and adjectival sentences. Stress falls on the ultimate or penultimate syllable, which can be open (CV) or closed (CVC).[122]
Writing
Main articles: Egyptian hieroglyphs and Hieratic


The Rosetta stone (ca 196 BC) enabled linguists to begin the process of hieroglyph decipherment.[123]
Hieroglyphic writing dates to c. 3200 BC, and is composed of some 500 symbols. A hieroglyph can represent a word, a sound, or a silent determinative; and the same symbol can serve different purposes in different contexts. Hieroglyphs were a formal script, used on stone monuments and in tombs, that could be as detailed as individual works of art. In day-to-day writing, scribes used a cursive form of writing, called hieratic, which was quicker and easier. While formal hieroglyphs may be read in rows or columns in either direction (though typically written from right to left), hieratic was always written from right to left, usually in horizontal rows. A new form of writing, Demotic, became the prevalent writing style, and it is this form of writing—along with formal hieroglyphs—that accompany the Greek text on the Rosetta Stone.[citation needed]
Around the 1st century AD, the Coptic alphabet started to be used alongside the Demotic script. Coptic is a modified Greek alphabet with the addition of some Demotic signs.[124] Although formal hieroglyphs were used in a ceremonial role until the 4th century, towards the end only a small handful of priests could still read them. As the traditional religious establishments were disbanded, knowledge of hieroglyphic writing was mostly lost. Attempts to decipher them date to the Byzantine[125] and Islamic periods in Egypt,[126] but only in 1822, after the discovery of the Rosetta stone and years of research by Thomas Young and Jean-François Champollion, were hieroglyphs almost fully deciphered.[127]
Literature
Main article: Ancient Egyptian literature


The Edwin Smith surgical papyrus (ca 16th century BC) describes anatomy and medical treatments and is written in hieratic.
Writing first appeared in association with kingship on labels and tags for items found in royal tombs. It was primarily an occupation of the scribes, who worked out of the Per Ankh institution or the House of Life. The latter comprised offices, libraries (called House of Books), laboratories and observatories.[128] Some of the best-known pieces of ancient Egyptian literature, such as the Pyramid and Coffin Texts, were written in Classical Egyptian, which continued to be the language of writing until about 1300 BC. Later Egyptian was spoken from the New Kingdom onward and is represented in Ramesside administrative documents, love poetry and tales, as well as in Demotic and Coptic texts. During this period, the tradition of writing had evolved into the tomb autobiography, such as those of Harkhuf and Weni. The genre known as Sebayt (Instructions) was developed to communicate teachings and guidance from famous nobles; the Ipuwer papyrus, a poem of lamentations describing natural disasters and social upheaval, is a famous example.
The Story of Sinuhe, written in Middle Egyptian, might be the classic of Egyptian literature.[129] Also written at this time was the Westcar Papyrus, a set of stories told to Khufu by his sons relating the marvels performed by priests.[130] The Instruction of Amenemope is considered a masterpiece of near-eastern literature.[131] Towards the end of the New Kingdom, the vernacular language was more often employed to write popular pieces like the Story of Wenamun and the Instruction of Any. The former tells the story of a noble who is robbed on his way to buy cedar from Lebanon and of his struggle to return to Egypt. From about 700 BC, narrative stories and instructions, such as the popular Instructions of Onchsheshonqy, as well as personal and business documents were written in the demotic script and phase of Egyptian. Many stories written in demotic during the Graeco-Roman period were set in previous historical eras, when Egypt was an independent nation ruled by great pharaohs such as Ramesses II.[132]
Culture

Daily life


Statues depicting lower-class Ancient Egyptian occupations.


The ancient Egyptians maintained a rich cultural heritage complete with feasts and festivals accompanied by music and dance.
Most ancient Egyptians were farmers tied to the land. Their dwellings were restricted to immediate family members, and were constructed of mud-brick designed to remain cool in the heat of the day. Each home had a kitchen with an open roof, which contained a grindstone for milling flour and a small oven for baking bread.[133] Walls were painted white and could be covered with dyed linen wall hangings. Floors were covered with reed mats, while wooden stools, beds raised from the floor and individual tables comprised the furniture.[134]
The ancient Egyptians placed a great value on hygiene and appearance. Most bathed in the Nile and used a pasty soap made from animal fat and chalk. Men shaved their entire bodies for cleanliness, and aromatic perfumes and ointments covered bad odors and soothed skin.[135] Clothing was made from simple linen sheets that were bleached white, and both men and women of the upper classes wore wigs, jewelry, and cosmetics. Children went without clothing until maturity, at about age 12, and at this age males were circumcised and had their heads shaved. Mothers were responsible for taking care of the children, while the father provided the family's income.[136]
Music and dance were popular entertainments for those who could afford them. Early instruments included flutes and harps, while instruments similar to trumpets, oboes, and pipes developed later and became popular. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptians played on bells, cymbals, tambourines, and drums and imported lutes and lyres from Asia.[137] The sistrum was a rattle-like musical instrument that was especially important in religious ceremonies.
The ancient Egyptians enjoyed a variety of leisure activities, including games and music. Senet, a board game where pieces moved according to random chance, was particularly popular from the earliest times; another similar game was mehen, which had a circular gaming board. Juggling and ball games were popular with children, and wrestling is also documented in a tomb at Beni Hasan.[138] The wealthy members of ancient Egyptian society enjoyed hunting and boating as well.
The excavation of the workers village of Deir el-Madinah has resulted in one of the most thoroughly documented accounts of community life in the ancient world that spans almost four hundred years. There is no comparable site in which the organisation, social interactions, working and living conditions of a community can be studied in such detail.[139]
Cuisine
Main article: Ancient Egyptian cuisine
Egyptian cuisine remained remarkably stable over time; indeed, the cuisine of modern Egypt retains some striking similarities to the cuisine of the ancients. The staple diet consisted of bread and beer, supplemented with vegetables such as onions and garlic, and fruit such as dates and figs. Wine and meat were enjoyed by all on feast days while the upper classes indulged on a more regular basis. Fish, meat, and fowl could be salted or dried, and could be cooked in stews or roasted on a grill.[140]


Karnak temple's hypostyle halls are constructed with rows of thick columns supporting the roof beams.
Architecture
Main article: Ancient Egyptian architecture


The well preserved Temple of Horus at Edfu is an exemplar of Egyptian architecture.
The architecture of ancient Egypt includes some of the most famous structures in the world: the Great Pyramids of Giza and the temples at Thebes. Building projects were organized and funded by the state for religious and commemorative purposes, but also to reinforce the power of the pharaoh. The ancient Egyptians were skilled builders; using simple but effective tools and sighting instruments, architects could build large stone structures with accuracy and precision.[141]
The domestic dwellings of elite and ordinary Egyptians alike were constructed from perishable materials such as mud bricks and wood, and have not survived. Peasants lived in simple homes, while the palaces of the elite were more elaborate structures. A few surviving New Kingdom palaces, such as those in Malkata and Amarna, show richly decorated walls and floors with scenes of people, birds, water pools, deities and geometric designs.[142] Important structures such as temples and tombs that were intended to last forever were constructed of stone instead of bricks. The architectural elements used in the world's first large-scale stone building, Djoser's mortuary complex, include post and lintel supports in the papyrus and lotus motif.
The earliest preserved ancient Egyptian temples, such as those at Giza, consist of single, enclosed halls with roof slabs supported by columns. In the New Kingdom, architects added the pylon, the open courtyard, and the enclosed hypostyle hall to the front of the temple's sanctuary, a style that was standard until the Graeco-Roman period.[143] The earliest and most popular tomb architecture in the Old Kingdom was the mastaba, a flat-roofed rectangular structure of mudbrick or stone built over an underground burial chamber. The step pyramid of Djoser is a series of stone mastabas stacked on top of each other. Pyramids were built during the Old and Middle Kingdoms, but most later rulers abandoned them in favor of less conspicuous rock-cut tombs.[144] The 25th dynasty was a notable exception, as all 25th dynasty pharaohs constructed pyramids.[145][146][147]
Art


The Bust of Nefertiti, by the sculptor Thutmose, is one of the most famous masterpieces of ancient Egyptian art.
Main article: Art of Ancient Egypt
The ancient Egyptians produced art to serve functional purposes. For over 3500 years, artists adhered to artistic forms and iconography that were developed during the Old Kingdom, following a strict set of principles that resisted foreign influence and internal change.[148] These artistic standards—simple lines, shapes, and flat areas of color combined with the characteristic flat projection of figures with no indication of spatial depth—created a sense of order and balance within a composition. Images and text were intimately interwoven on tomb and temple walls, coffins, stelae, and even statues. The Narmer Palette, for example, displays figures that can also be read as hieroglyphs.[149] Because of the rigid rules that governed its highly stylized and symbolic appearance, ancient Egyptian art served its political and religious purposes with precision and clarity.[150]
Ancient Egyptian artisans used stone to carve statues and fine reliefs, but used wood as a cheap and easily carved substitute. Paints were obtained from minerals such as iron ores (red and yellow ochres), copper ores (blue and green), soot or charcoal (black), and limestone (white). Paints could be mixed with gum arabic as a binder and pressed into cakes, which could be moistened with water when needed.[151] Pharaohs used reliefs to record victories in battle, royal decrees, and religious scenes. Common citizens had access to pieces of funerary art, such as shabti statues and books of the dead, which they believed would protect them in the afterlife.[152] During the Middle Kingdom, wooden or clay models depicting scenes from everyday life became popular additions to the tomb. In an attempt to duplicate the activities of the living in the afterlife, these models show laborers, houses, boats, and even military formations that are scale representations of the ideal ancient Egyptian afterlife.[153]
Despite the homogeneity of ancient Egyptian art, the styles of particular times and places sometimes reflected changing cultural or political attitudes. After the invasion of the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period, Minoan-style frescoes were found in Avaris.[154] The most striking example of a politically driven change in artistic forms comes from the Amarna period, where figures were radically altered to conform to Akhenaten's revolutionary religious ideas.[155] This style, known as Amarna art, was quickly and thoroughly erased after Akhenaten's death and replaced by the traditional forms.[156]
Religious beliefs
Main article: Ancient Egyptian religion


The Book of the Dead was a guide to the deceased's journey in the afterlife.
Beliefs in the divine and in the afterlife were ingrained in ancient Egyptian civilization from its inception; pharaonic rule was based on the divine right of kings. The Egyptian pantheon was populated by gods who had supernatural powers and were called on for help or protection. However, the gods were not always viewed as benevolent, and Egyptians believed they had to be appeased with offerings and prayers. The structure of this pantheon changed continually as new deities were promoted in the hierarchy, but priests made no effort to organize the diverse and sometimes conflicting creation myths and stories into a coherent system.[157] These various conceptions of divinity were not considered contradictory but rather layers in the multiple facets of reality.[158]


The Ka statue provided a physical place for the Ka to manifest.
Gods were worshiped in cult temples administered by priests acting on the king's behalf. At the center of the temple was the cult statue in a shrine. Temples were not places of public worship or congregation, and only on select feast days and celebrations was a shrine carrying the statue of the god brought out for public worship. Normally, the god's domain was sealed off from the outside world and was only accessible to temple officials. Common citizens could worship private statues in their homes, and amulets offered protection against the forces of chaos.[159] After the New Kingdom, the pharaoh's role as a spiritual intermediary was de-emphasized as religious customs shifted to direct worship of the gods. As a result, priests developed a system of oracles to communicate the will of the gods directly to the people.[160]
The Egyptians believed that every human being was composed of physical and spiritual parts or aspects. In addition to the body, each person had a šwt (shadow), a ba (personality or soul), a ka (life-force), and a name.[161] The heart, rather than the brain, was considered the seat of thoughts and emotions. After death, the spiritual aspects were released from the body and could move at will, but they required the physical remains (or a substitute, such as a statue) as a permanent home. The ultimate goal of the deceased was to rejoin his ka and ba and become one of the "blessed dead", living on as an akh, or "effective one". For this to happen, the deceased had to be judged worthy in a trial, in which the heart was weighed against a "feather of truth". If deemed worthy, the deceased could continue their existence on earth in spiritual form.[162]


Pharaohs' tombs were provided with vast quantities of wealth, such as this golden mask from the mummy of Tutankhamun.
Burial customs
Main article: Ancient Egyptian burial customs
The ancient Egyptians maintained an elaborate set of burial customs that they believed were necessary to ensure immortality after death. These customs involved preserving the body by mummification, performing burial ceremonies, and interring with the body goods the deceased would use in the afterlife.[152] Before the Old Kingdom, bodies buried in desert pits were naturally preserved by desiccation. The arid, desert conditions were a boon throughout the history of ancient Egypt for burials of the poor, who could not afford the elaborate burial preparations available to the elite. Wealthier Egyptians began to bury their dead in stone tombs and use artificial mummification, which involved removing the internal organs, wrapping the body in linen, and burying it in a rectangular stone sarcophagus or wooden coffin. Beginning in the Fourth Dynasty, some parts were preserved separately in canopic jars.[163]


Anubis was the ancient Egyptian god associated with mummification and burial rituals; here, he attends to a mummy.
By the New Kingdom, the ancient Egyptians had perfected the art of mummification; the best technique took 70 days and involved removing the internal organs, removing the brain through the nose, and desiccating the body in a mixture of salts called natron. The body was then wrapped in linen with protective amulets inserted between layers and placed in a decorated anthropoid coffin. Mummies of the Late Period were also placed in painted cartonnage mummy cases. Actual preservation practices declined during the Ptolemaic and Roman eras, while greater emphasis was placed on the outer appearance of the mummy, which was decorated.[164]
Wealthy Egyptians were buried with larger quantities of luxury items, but all burials, regardless of social status, included goods for the deceased. Beginning in the New Kingdom, books of the dead were included in the grave, along with shabti statues that were believed to perform manual labor for them in the afterlife.[165] Rituals in which the deceased was magically re-animated accompanied burials. After burial, living relatives were expected to occasionally bring food to the tomb and recite prayers on behalf of the deceased.[166]
Military
Main article: Military history of Ancient Egypt


An Egyptian chariot.
The ancient Egyptian military was responsible for defending Egypt against foreign invasion, and for maintaining Egypt's domination in the ancient Near East. The military protected mining expeditions to the Sinai during the Old Kingdom and fought civil wars during the First and Second Intermediate Periods. The military was responsible for maintaining fortifications along important trade routes, such as those found at the city of Buhen on the way to Nubia. Forts also were constructed to serve as military bases, such as the fortress at Sile, which was a base of operations for expeditions to the Levant. In the New Kingdom, a series of pharaohs used the standing Egyptian army to attack and conquer Kush and parts of the Levant.[167]
Typical military equipment included bows and arrows, spears, and round-topped shields made by stretching animal skin over a wooden frame. In the New Kingdom, the military began using chariots that had earlier been introduced by the Hyksos invaders. Weapons and armor continued to improve after the adoption of bronze: shields were now made from solid wood with a bronze buckle, spears were tipped with a bronze point, and the Khopesh was adopted from Asiatic soldiers.[168] The pharaoh was usually depicted in art and literature riding at the head of the army, it has been suggested that at least a few pharaohs, such as Seqenenre Tao II and his sons, did do so.[169] although it has also been argued that "kings of this period did not personally act as frontline war leaders, fighting alongside their troops."[170] Soldiers were recruited from the general population, but during, and especially after, the New Kingdom, mercenaries from Nubia, Kush, and Libya were hired to fight for Egypt.[171]
Technology, medicine, and mathematics

Technology
Main article: Ancient Egyptian technology
In technology, medicine and mathematics, ancient Egypt achieved a relatively high standard of productivity and sophistication. Traditional empiricism, as evidenced by the Edwin Smith and Ebers papyri (c. 1600 BC), is first credited to Egypt, and the roots of the scientific method can also be traced back to the ancient Egyptians.[citation needed] The Egyptians created their own alphabet and decimal system.


Glassmaking was a highly developed art.
Faience and glass
Even before the Old Kingdom, the ancient Egyptians had developed a glassy material known as faience, which they treated as a type of artificial semi-precious stone. Faience is a non-clay ceramic made of silica, small amounts of lime and soda, and a colorant, typically copper.[172] The material was used to make beads, tiles, figurines, and small wares. Several methods can be used to create faience, but typically production involved application of the powdered materials in the form of a paste over a clay core, which was then fired. By a related technique, the ancient Egyptians produced a pigment known as Egyptian Blue, also called blue frit, which is produced by fusing (or sintering) silica, copper, lime, and an alkali such as natron. The product can be ground up and used as a pigment.[173]
The ancient Egyptians could fabricate a wide variety of objects from glass with great skill, but it is not clear whether they developed the process independently.[174] It is also unclear whether they made their own raw glass or merely imported pre-made ingots, which they melted and finished. However, they did have technical expertise in making objects, as well as adding trace elements to control the color of the finished glass. A range of colors could be produced, including yellow, red, green, blue, purple, and white, and the glass could be made either transparent or opaque.[175]
Medicine
Main article: Ancient Egyptian medicine


Ancient Egyptian medical instruments depicted in a Ptolemaic period inscription on the temple at Kom Ombo.
The medical problems of the ancient Egyptians stemmed directly from their environment. Living and working close to the Nile brought hazards from malaria and debilitating schistosomiasis parasites, which caused liver and intestinal damage. Dangerous wildlife such as crocodiles and hippos were also a common threat. The life-long labors of farming and building put stress on the spine and joints, and traumatic injuries from construction and warfare all took a significant toll on the body. The grit and sand from stone-ground flour abraded teeth, leaving them susceptible to abscesses (though caries were rare).[176]
The diets of the wealthy were rich in sugars, which promoted periodontal disease.[177] Despite the flattering physiques portrayed on tomb walls, the overweight mummies of many of the upper class show the effects of a life of overindulgence.[178] Adult life expectancy was about 35 for men and 30 for women, but reaching adulthood was difficult as about one-third of the population died in infancy.[179]
Ancient Egyptian physicians were renowned in the ancient Near East for their healing skills, and some, like Imhotep, remained famous long after their deaths.[180] Herodotus remarked that there was a high degree of specialization among Egyptian physicians, with some treating only the head or the stomach, while others were eye-doctors and dentists.[181] Training of physicians took place at the Per Ankh or "House of Life" institution, most notably those headquartered in Per-Bastet during the New Kingdom and at Abydos and Saïs in the Late period. Medical papyri show empirical knowledge of anatomy, injuries, and practical treatments.[182]
Wounds were treated by bandaging with raw meat, white linen, sutures, nets, pads and swabs soaked with honey to prevent infection,[183] while opium was used to relieve pain. Garlic and onions were used regularly to promote good health and were thought to relieve asthma symptoms. Ancient Egyptian surgeons stitched wounds, set broken bones, and amputated diseased limbs, but they recognized that some injuries were so serious that they could only make the patient comfortable until he died.[184]
Shipbuilding
Main article: Shipbuilding
Early Egyptians knew how to assemble planks of wood into a ship hull as early as 3000 BC. The Archaeological Institute of America reports[6] that some of the oldest ships yet unearthed are known as the Abydos boats. These are a group of 14 discovered ships in Abydos that were constructed of wooden planks "sewn" together. Discovered by Egyptologist David O'Connor of New York University,[185] woven straps were found to have been used to lash the planks together,[6] and reeds or grass stuffed between the planks helped to seal the seams.[6] Because the ships are all buried together and near a mortuary belonging to Pharaoh Khasekhemwy,[185] originally they were all thought to have belonged to him, but one of the 14 ships dates to 3000 BC,[185] and the associated pottery jars buried with the vessels also suggest earlier dating.[185] The ship dating to 3000 BC was 75 feet (23 m) long[185] and is now thought to perhaps have belonged to an earlier pharaoh.[185] According to professor O'Connor, the 5,000-year-old ship may have even belonged to Pharaoh Aha.[185]
Early Egyptians also knew how to assemble planks of wood with treenails to fasten them together, using pitch for caulking the seams. The "Khufu ship", a 43.6-meter vessel sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza in the Fourth Dynasty around 2500 BC, is a full-size surviving example that may have filled the symbolic function of a solar barque. Early Egyptians also knew how to fasten the planks of this ship together with mortise and tenon joints.[6] Despite the ancient Egyptian's ability to construct very large boats to sail along the easily navigable Nile, they were not known as good sailors and did not engage in widespread sailing or shipping in the Mediterranean or Red Seas.
Mathematics
Main article: Egyptian mathematics
The earliest attested examples of mathematical calculations date to the predynastic Naqada period, and show a fully developed numeral system.[186] The importance of mathematics to an educated Egyptian is suggested by a New Kingdom fictional letter in which the writer proposes a scholarly competition between himself and another scribe regarding everyday calculation tasks such as accounting of land, labor and grain.[187] Texts such as the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus and the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus show that the ancient Egyptians could perform the four basic mathematical operations—addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division—use fractions, compute the volumes of boxes and pyramids, and calculate the surface areas of rectangles, triangles, circles and even spheres.[citation needed] They understood basic concepts of algebra and geometry, and could solve simple sets of simultaneous equations.[188]
2/3
in hieroglyphs
 
Mathematical notation was decimal, and based on hieroglyphic signs for each power of ten up to one million. Each of these could be written as many times as necessary to add up to the desired number; so to write the number eighty or eight hundred, the symbol for ten or one hundred was written eight times respectively.[189] Because their methods of calculation could not handle most fractions with a numerator greater than one, they had to write fractions as the sum of several fractions. For example, they resolved the fraction two-fifths into the sum of one-third + one-fifteenth. Standard tables of values facilitated this.[190] Some common fractions, however, were written with a special glyph—the equivalent of the modern two-thirds is shown on the right.[191]
Ancient Egyptian mathematicians had a grasp of the principles underlying the Pythagorean theorem, knowing, for example, that a triangle had a right angle opposite the hypotenuse when its sides were in a 3–4–5 ratio.[192] They were able to estimate the area of a circle by subtracting one-ninth from its diameter and squaring the result:
Area ? [(8/9)D]2 = (256/81)r 2 ? 3.16r 2,
a reasonable approximation of the formula ?r 2.[192][193]
The golden ratio seems to be reflected in many Egyptian constructions, including the pyramids, but its use may have been an unintended consequence of the ancient Egyptian practice of combining the use of knotted ropes with an intuitive sense of proportion and harmony.[194]
Legacy

See also: Tourism in Egypt


Tourists riding a camel in front of Giza pyramids


Tourist at Sphinx, Giza Plateau
The culture and monuments of ancient Egypt have left a lasting legacy on the world. The cult of the goddess Isis, for example, became popular in the Roman Empire, as obelisks and other relics were transported back to Rome.[195] The Romans also imported building materials from Egypt to erect Egyptian style structures. Early historians such as Herodotus, Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus studied and wrote about the land, which Romans came to view as a place of mystery.[196]
During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Egyptian pagan culture was in decline after the rise of Christianity and later Islam, but interest in Egyptian antiquity continued in the writings of medieval scholars such as Dhul-Nun al-Misri and al-Maqrizi.[197] In the 17th and 18th centuries, European travelers and tourists brought back antiquities and wrote stories of their journeys, leading to a wave of Egyptomania across Europe. This renewed interest sent collectors to Egypt, who took, purchased, or were given many important antiquities.[198]
Although the European colonial occupation of Egypt destroyed a significant portion of the country's historical legacy, some foreigners had more positive results. Napoleon, for example, arranged the first studies in Egyptology when he brought some 150 scientists and artists to study and document Egypt's natural history, which was published in the Description de l'Egypte.[199]
In the 20th century, the Egyptian Government and archaeologists alike recognized the importance of cultural respect and integrity in excavations. The Supreme Council of Antiquities now approves and oversees all excavations, which are aimed at finding information rather than treasure. The council also supervises museums and monument reconstruction programs designed to preserve the historical legacy of Egypt.
See also

Outline of ancient Egypt
Glossary of Ancient Egypt artifacts
Index of ancient Egypt-related articles
Notes

^ "Chronology". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 25 March 2008.
^ Dodson (2004) p. 46
^ Clayton (1994) p. 217
^ James (2005) p. 8
^ Manuelian (1998) pp. 6–7
^ a b c d e Ward, Cheryl. "World's Oldest Planked Boats", in Archaeology (Volume 54, Number 3, May/June 2001). Archaeological Institute of America.
^ Clayton (1994) p. 153
^ James (2005) p. 84
^ Shaw (2002) pp. 17, 67–69
^ Shaw (2002) p. 17
^ Ikram, Salima (1992). Choice Cuts: Meat Production in Ancient Egypt. University of Cambridge. p. 5. ISBN 978-90-6831-745-9. OCLC 60255819. Retrieved 22 July 2009. LCCN 1997-140867
^ Hayes (1964) p. 220
^ Childe, V. Gordon (1953), "New light on the most ancient Near East" (Praeger Publications)
^ Patai, Raphael (1998), "Children of Noah: Jewish Seafaring in Ancient Times" (Princeton Uni Press)
^ Barbara G. Aston, James A. Harrell, Ian Shaw (2000). Paul T. Nicholson and Ian Shaw editors. "Stone," in Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology, Cambridge, 5–77, pp. 46–47. Also note: Barbara G. Aston (1994). "Ancient Egyptian Stone Vessels," Studien zur Archäologie und Geschichte Altägyptens 5, Heidelberg, pp. 23–26. (See on-line posts: [1] and [2].)
^ "Chronology of the Naqada Period". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ a b Shaw (2002) p. 61
^ Emberling, Geoff (2011). Nubia: Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York: Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. pp. 8. ISBN 978-0-615-48102-9.
^ "The Qustul Incense Burner".
^ "Faience in different Periods". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ Allen (2000) p. 1
^ Robins (1997) p. 32
^ Clayton (1994) p. 6
^ Shaw (2002) pp. 78–80
^ Clayton (1994) pp. 12–13
^ Shaw (2002) p. 70
^ "Early Dynastic Egypt". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ James (2005) p. 40
^ Shaw (2002) p. 102
^ Shaw (2002) pp. 116–7
^ Fekri Hassan. "The Fall of the Old Kingdom". British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 10 March 2008.
^ Clayton (1994) p. 69
^ Shaw (2002) p. 120
^ a b Shaw (2002) p. 146
^ Clayton (1994) p. 29
^ Shaw (2002) p. 148
^ Clayton (1994) p. 79
^ Shaw (2002) p. 158
^ Shaw (2002) pp. 179–82
^ Robins (1997) p. 90
^ Shaw (2002) p. 188
^ a b Ryholt (1997) p. 310
^ Shaw (2002) p. 189
^ Shaw (2002) p. 224
^ James (2005) p. 48
^ "Hatshepsut". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 December 2007.
^ Clayton (1994) p. 108
^ Aldred (1988) p. 259
^ Cline (2001) p. 273
^ From his two principal wives and large harem, Ramesses II sired more than 100 children. Clayton (1994) p. 146
^ Tyldesley (2001) pp. 76–7
^ James (2005) p. 54
^ Cerny (1975) p. 645
^ The Histories. Penguin Books. 2003. pp. 106–107,133–134,. ISBN 978-0-140-44908-2.
^ Shaw (2002) p. 345
^ The Histories. Penguin Books. 2003. pp. 151–158. ISBN 978-0-140-44908-2.
^ Diop, Cheikh Anta (1974). The African Origin of Civilization. Chicago, Illinois: Lawrence Hill Books. pp. 219–221. ISBN 1-55652-072-7.
^ Bonnet, Charles (2006). The Nubian Pharaohs. New York: The American University in Cairo Press. pp. 142–154. ISBN 978-977-416-010-3.
^ Mokhtar, G. (1990). General History of Africa. California, USA: University of California Press. pp. 161–163. ISBN 0-520-06697-9.
^ Emberling, Geoff (2011). Nubia: Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York: Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. pp. 9–11. ISBN 978-0-613-48102-9.
^ Silverman, David (1997). Ancient Egypt. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 36–37. ISBN 0-19-521270-3.
^ "The Kushite Conquest of Egypt", Ancient~Sudan: Nubia.
^ Shaw (2002) p. 358
^ Shaw (2002) p. 383
^ Shaw (2002) p. 385
^ Shaw (2002) p. 405
^ Shaw (2002) p. 411
^ Shaw (2002) p. 418
^ James (2005) p. 62
^ James (2005) p. 63
^ Shaw (2002) p. 426
^ a b Shaw (2002) p. 422
^ Shaw (2003) p. 431
^ "The Church in Ancient Society", Henry Chadwick, p. 373, Oxford University Press US, 2001, ISBN 0-19-924695-5
^ "Christianizing the Roman Empire A.D 100–400", Ramsay MacMullen, p. 63, Yale University Press, 1984, ISBN 0-300-03216-1
^ Shaw (2002) p. 445
^ a b c d Manuelian (1998) p. 358
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 363
^ Meskell (2004) p. 23
^ a b c Manuelian (1998) p. 372
^ Walbank (1984) p. 125
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 383
^ James (2005) p. 136
^ Billard (1978) p. 109
^ "Social classes in ancient Egypt". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 11 December 2007.
^ a b c Janet H. Johnson. "Women's Legal Rights in Ancient Egypt". University of Chicago, 2004. Retrieved 31 August 2010.
^ A maintained BBC History article by Dr. Joann Fletcher (last updated 5Nov2009).
^ Oakes (2003) p. 472
^ McDowell (1999) p. 168
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 361
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 514
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 506
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 510
^ Nicholson (2000) pp. 577 and 630
^ a b Strouhal (1989) p. 117
^ a b c Manuelian (1998) p. 381
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 409
^ Oakes (2003) p. 229
^ Greaves (1929) p. 123
^ Lucas (1962) p. 413
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 28
^ C.Michael Hogan. 2011. Sulfur. Encyclopedia of Earth, eds. A.Jorgensen and C.J.Cleveland, National Council for Science and the environment, Washington DC
^ Scheel (1989) p. 14
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 166
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 51
^ Shaw (2002) p. 72
^ Naomi Porat and Edwin van den Brink (editor), "An Egyptian Colony in Southern Palestine During the Late Predynastic to Early Dynastic," in The Nile Delta in Transition: 4th to 3rd Millennium BC (1992), pp. 433–440.
^ Naomi Porat, "Local Industry of Egyptian Pottery in Southern Palestine During the Early Bronze I Period," in Bulletin of the Egyptological, Seminar 8 (1986/1987), pp. 109–129. See also University College London web post, 2000.
^ Shaw (2002) p. 322
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 145
^ Harris (1990) p. 13
^ Loprieno (1995b) p. 2137
^ Loprieno (2004) p. 161
^ Loprieno (2004) p. 162
^ Loprieno (1995b) p. 2137-38
^ Vittman (1991) pp. 197–227
^ Loprieno (1995a) p. 46
^ Loprieno (1995a) p. 74
^ Loprieno (2004) p. 175
^ Allen (2000) pp. 67, 70, 109
^ Loprieno (2005) p. 2147
^ Loprieno (2004) p. 173
^ Allen (2000) p. 13
^ Allen (2000) p. 7
^ Loprieno (2004) p. 166
^ El-Daly (2005) p. 164
^ Allen (2000) p. 8
^ Strouhal (1989) p. 235
^ Lichtheim (1975) p. 11
^ Lichtheim (1975) p. 215
^ "Wisdom in Ancient Israel", John Day,/John Adney Emerton,/Robert P. Gordon/ Hugh Godfrey/Maturin Williamson, p23, Cambridge University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-521-62489-4
^ Lichtheim (1980) p. 159
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 401
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 403
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 405
^ Manuelian (1998) pp. 406–7
^ "Music in Ancient Egypt". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ Manuelian (1998) p. 126
^ “The Cambridge Ancient History: II Part I , The Middle East and the Aegean Region, c.1800-13380 B.C”, Edited I.E.S Edwards–C.JGadd–N.G.L Hammond-E.Sollberger, Cambridge at the University Press, p. 380, 1973, ISBN 0-521-08230-7
^ Manuelian (1998) pp. 399–400
^ Clarke (1990) pp. 94–7
^ Badawy (1968) p. 50
^ "Types of temples in ancient Egypt". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ Dodson (1991) p. 23
^ Mokhtar, G. (1990). General History of Africa. California, USA: University of California Press. pp. 161–163. ISBN 0-520-06697-9.
^ Emberling, Geoff (2011). Nubia: Ancient Kingdoms of Africa. New York: Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. pp. 9–11. ISBN 978-0-613-48102-9.
^ Silverman, David (1997). Ancient Egypt. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 36–37. ISBN 0-19-521270-3.
^ Robins (1997) p. 29
^ Robins (1997) p. 21
^ Robins (2001) p. 12
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 105
^ a b James (2005) p. 122
^ Robins (1998) p. 74
^ Shaw (2002) p. 216
^ Robins (1998) p. 149
^ Robins (1998) p. 158
^ James (2005) p. 102
^ "The Oxford Guide: Essential Guide to Egyptian Mythology", edited by Donald B. Redford, p. 106, Berkley, 2003, ISBN 0-425-19096-X
^ James (2005) p. 117
^ Shaw (2002) p. 313
^ Allen (2000) pp. 79, 94–5
^ Wasserman, et al. (1994) pp. 150–3
^ "Mummies and Mummification: Old Kingdom". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ "Mummies and Mummification: Late Period, Ptolemaic, Roman and Christian Period". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ "Shabtis". Digital Egypt for Universities, University College London. Retrieved 9 March 2008.
^ James (2005) p. 124
^ Shaw (2002) p. 245
^ Manuelian (1998) pp. 366–67
^ Clayton (1994) p. 96
^ Shaw, Garry J. (2009). "The Death of King Seqenenre Tao". Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 45.
^ Shaw (2002) p. 400
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 177
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 109
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 195
^ Nicholson (2000) p. 215
^ Filer (1995) p. 94
^ Filer (1995) pp. 78–80
^ Filer (1995) p. 21
^ Figures are given for adult life expectancy and do not reflect life expectancy at birth. Filer (1995) p. 25
^ Filer (1995) p. 39
^ Strouhal (1989) p. 243
^ Stroual (1989) pp. 244–46
^ Stroual (1989) p. 250
^ Filer (1995) p. 38
^ a b c d e f g Schuster, Angela M.H. "This Old Boat", 11 December 2000. Archaeological Institute of America.
^ Understanding of Egyptian mathematics is incomplete due to paucity of available material and lack of exhaustive study of the texts that have been uncovered. Imhausen et al. (2007) p. 13
^ Imhausen et al. (2007) p. 11
^ Clarke (1990) p. 222
^ Clarke (1990) p. 217
^ Clarke (1990) p. 218
^ Gardiner (1957) p. 197
^ a b Strouhal (1989) p. 241
^ Imhausen et al. (2007) p. 31
^ Kemp (1989) p. 138
^ Siliotti (1998) p. 8
^ Siliotti (1998) p. 10
^ El-Daly (2005) p. 112
^ Siliotti (1998) p. 13
^ Siliotti (1998) p. 100
References

Aldred, Cyril (1988). Akhenaten, King of Egypt. London, England: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05048-1.
Allen, James P. (2000). Middle Egyptian: An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-77483-7.
Badawy, Alexander (1968). A History of Egyptian Architecture. Vol III. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-00057-9.
Billard, Jules B. (1978). Ancient Egypt: Discovering its Splendors. Washington D.C.: National Geographic Society.
Cerny, J (1975). Egypt from the Death of Ramesses III to the End of the Twenty-First Dynasty' in The Middle East and the Aegean Region c.1380–1000 BC. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-08691-4.
Clarke, Somers; R. Engelbach (1990). Ancient Egyptian Construction and Architecture. New York, New York: Dover Publications, Unabridged Dover reprint of Ancient Egyptian Masonry: The Building Craft originally published by Oxford University Press/Humphrey Milford, London, (1930). ISBN 0-486-26485-8.
Clayton, Peter A. (1994). Chronicle of the Pharaohs. London, England: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05074-0.
Cline, Eric H.; O'Connor, David Kevin (2001). Amenhotep III: Perspectives on His Reign. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press. p. 273. ISBN 0-472-08833-5.
Dodson, Aidan (1991). Egyptian Rock Cut Tombs. Buckinghamshire, UK: Shire Publications Ltd. ISBN 0-7478-0128-2.
Dodson, Aidan; Hilton, Dyan (2004). The Complete Royal Families of Ancient Egypt. London, England: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05128-3.
El-Daly, Okasha (2005). Egyptology: The Missing Millennium. London, England: UCL Press. ISBN 1-84472-062-4.
Filer, Joyce (1996). Disease. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-72498-5.
Gardiner, Sir Alan (1957). Egyptian Grammar: Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs. Oxford, England: Griffith Institute. ISBN 0-900416-35-1.
Hayes, W. C. (October 1964). "Most Ancient Egypt: Chapter III. The Neolithic and Chalcolithic Communities of Northern Egypt". JNES 23: 217–272.
Imhausen, Annette; Eleanor Robson, Joseph W. Dauben, Kim Plofker, J. Lennart Berggren, Victor J. Katz (2007). The Mathematics of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, India, and Islam: A Sourcebook. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11485-4.
James, T.G.H. (2005). The British Museum Concise Introduction to Ancient Egypt. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 0-472-03137-6.
Kemp, Barry (1991). Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. London, England: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-06346-9.
Lichtheim, Miriam (1975). Ancient Egyptian Literature, vol 1. London, England: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-02899-6.
Lichtheim, Miriam (1980). Ancient Egyptian Literature, A Book of Readings. Vol III: The Late Period. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-24844-1.
Loprieno, Antonio (1995a). Ancient Egyptian: A linguistic introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-44849-2.
Loprieno, Antonio (1995b). "Ancient Egyptian and other Afroasiatic Languages". In Sasson, J. M.. Civilizations of the Ancient Near East. 4. New York, New York: Charles Scribner. pp. 2137–2150. ISBN 1-56563-607-4.
Loprieno, Antonio (2004). "Ancient Egyptian and Coptic". In Woodward, Roger D.. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the World's Ancient Languages. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 160–192. ISBN 0-521-56256-2.
Lucas, Alfred (1962). Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries, 4th Ed. London, England: Edward Arnold Publishers. ISBN 1-85417-046-5.
Mallory-Greenough, Leanne M. (2002). "The Geographical, Spatial, and Temporal Distribution of Predynastic and First Dynasty Basalt Vessels". The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology (London, England: Egypt Exploration Society) 88: 67–93. doi:10.2307/3822337. JSTOR 3822337.
Manuelian, Peter Der (1998). Egypt: The World of the Pharaohs. Bonner Straße, Cologne Germany: Könemann Verlagsgesellschaft mbH. ISBN 3-89508-913-3.
McDowell, A. G. (1999). Village life in ancient Egypt: laundry lists and love songs. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-814998-0.
Meskell, Lynn (2004). Object Worlds in Ancient Egypt: Material Biographies Past and Present (Materializing Culture). Oxford, England: Berg Publishers. ISBN 1-85973-867-2.
Midant-Reynes, Béatrix (2000). The Prehistory of Egypt: From the First Egyptians to the First Pharaohs. Oxford, England: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-21787-8.
Nicholson, Paul T. et al. (2000). Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-45257-0.
Oakes, Lorna (2003). Ancient Egypt: An Illustrated Reference to the Myths, Religions, Pyramids and Temples of the Land of the Pharaohs. New York, New York: Barnes & Noble. ISBN 0-7607-4943-4.
Robins, Gay (2000). The Art of Ancient Egypt. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-00376-4.
Ryholt, Kim (January 1997). The Political Situation in Egypt During the Second Intermediate Period. Copenhagen, Denmark: Museum Tusculanum. ISBN 87-7289-421-0.
Scheel, Bernd (1989). Egyptian Metalworking and Tools. Haverfordwest, Great Britain: Shire Publications Ltd. ISBN 0-7478-0001-4.
Shaw, Ian (2003). The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-500-05074-0.
Siliotti, Alberto (1998). The Discovery of Ancient Egypt. Edison, New Jersey: Book Sales, Inc. ISBN 0-7858-1360-8.
Strouhal, Eugen (1989). Life in Ancient Egypt. Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 0-8061-2475-X.
Tyldesley, Joyce A. (2001). Ramesses: Egypt's greatest pharaoh. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin. pp. 76–77. ISBN 0-14-028097-9.
Vittman, G. (1991). "Zum koptischen Sprachgut im Ägyptisch-Arabisch". Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes (Vienna, Austria: Institut für Orientalistik, Vienna University) 81: 197–227.
Walbank, Frank William (1984). The Cambridge ancient history. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-23445-X.
Wasserman, James; Faulkner, Raymond Oliver; Goelet, Ogden; Von Dassow, Eva (1994). The Egyptian Book of the dead, the Book of going forth by day: being the Papyrus of Ani. San Francisco, California: Chronicle Books. ISBN 0-8118-0767-3.
Wilkinson, R. H. (2000). The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London, England: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05100-3.
Further reading

Baines, John and Jaromir Malek (2000). The Cultural Atlas of Ancient Egypt (revised ed.). Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-4036-2.
Bard, KA (1999). Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. NY, NY: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-18589-0.
Grimal, Nicolas (1992). A History of Ancient Egypt. Blackwell Books. ISBN 0-631-19396-0.
Lehner, Mark (1997). The Complete Pyramids. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05084-8.
Redford, Donald B., ed (2001). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510234-7.
Wilkinson, R.H. (2003). The Complete Gods and Goddesses of Ancient Egypt. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05120-8.
External links

Find more about Ancient Egypt on Wikipedia's sister projects:
	Definitions from Wiktionary
	Images and media from Commons
	Learning resources from Wikiversity
	News stories from Wikinews
	Quotations from Wikiquote
	Source texts from Wikisource
	Textbooks from Wikibooks
BBC History: Egyptians—provides a reliable general overview and further links
Ancient Egypt Online - detailed articles on the history, religion, language and culture of the ancient Egyptians
Ancient History Encyclopedia on Egypt
Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book Door Marshall Clagett, 1989
Ancient Egyptian Metallurgy A site that shows the history of Egyptian metalworking
Napoleon on the Nile: Soldiers, Artists, and the Rediscovery of Egypt, Art History.
Ancient Egypt—maintained by the British Museum, this site provides a useful introduction to Ancient Egypt for older children and young adolescents
Digital Egypt for Universities. Outstanding scholarly treatment with broad coverage and cross references (internal and external). Artifacts used extensively to illustrate topics.
Priests of Ancient Egypt In-depth-information about Ancient Egypt's priests, religious services and temples. Much picture material and bibliography. In English and German.
Ancient Egypt
UCLA Encyclopedia of Egyptology
[show]v · d · eAncient Egypt
[show]v · d · eA history of empires
[show]v · d · ePeople in the Quran

View page ratings
Rate this page
What's this?
Trustworthy
Objective
Complete
Well-written
I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional)

Submit ratings
Categories: Ancient Egypt | African civilizations | Ancient history | Civilizations | Former empires of Africa | States of Ancient Africa
Log in / create accountArticleDiscussionReadView sourceView history
