
Iron Age
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the historical / archaeological period known as the Iron Age. For the mythological Iron Age, see Ages of Man.
Iron Age
This box: view · talk · edit
^ Bronze Age
Bronze Age collapse

Ancient Near East (1300 – 600 BC)

Aegean, Anatolia, Assyria, Caucasus, Cyprus, Egypt, Levant, Persia
India (1200 – 200 )

Painted Grey Ware
Northern Black Polished Ware
Mauryan period
Anuradhapura Kingdom
Europe (1200 BC – AD 400)

Aegean
Caucasus
Novocherkassk
Hallstatt C
La Tène C
Villanovan C
British Iron Age
Greece, Rome, Celts
Scandinavia
China (600 BC – 200 BC)

Spring and Autumn Period and Warring States Period
Japan (100 BC – AD 500)

Yayoi period
Korea (400 BC – 50 BC)

Late Gojoseon period
Proto-Three Kingdoms period
Nigeria (400 BC – AD 200)

Axial Age
Classical antiquity
Zhou Dynasty
Vedic period
Alphabetic writing
metallurgy
v Middle Ages
Historiography
Greek, Roman, Chinese, Islamic
The Iron Age is the archaeological period generally occurring after the Bronze Age, marked by the prevalent use of iron. The early period of the age is characterized by the widespread use of iron or steel. The adoption of such material coincided with other changes in society, including differing agricultural practices, religious beliefs and artistic styles. The Iron Age as an archaeological term indicates the condition as to civilization and culture of a people using iron as the material for their cutting tools and weapons.[1] The Iron Age is the 3rd principal period of the three-age system created by Christian Jürgensen Thomsen for classifying ancient societies and prehistoric stages of progress.[2]
In historical archaeology, the ancient literature of the Iron Age includes the earliest texts preserved in manuscript tradition. Sanskrit literature and Chinese literature flourished in the Age. Other text includes the Avestan Gathas, the Indian Vedas and the oldest parts of the Hebrew Bible. The principal feature that distinguishes the Iron Age from the preceding ages is the introduction of alphabetic characters, and the consequent development of written language which enabled literature and historic record.[1]
The beginning of the Iron Age in Europe and adjacent areas is characterized by forms of implements, weapons, personal ornaments, and pottery, and also by systems of decorative design, which are altogether different from those of the preceding age of bronze.[1] The work of blacksmiths,[3] developing implements and weapons, are hammered into shape, and as a necessary consequence the stereotyped forms of their predecessors in bronze, which were cast, but are gradually departed from, and the system of decoration, which in the Bronze Age consisted chiefly of a repetition of rectilinear patterns, gives place to a system of curvilinear and flowing designs.[1] The term "Iron Age" has low real chronological value, for there is not a universal synchronous sequence of the three epochs in all quarters of the world.[4] The dates and context vary depending on the geographical region; the sequence is not necessarily true of every part of the earth's surface, for there are areas, such as the islands of the South Pacific, the interior of Africa, and parts of North and South America, where the peoples have passed directly from the use of stone to the use of iron without the intervention of an age of bronze.[1]
Contents [hide]
1 Chronology
2 History
2.1 Near East
2.1.1 Near East timeline
2.1.2 Ancient Near East
2.2 Europe
2.2.1 European timeline
2.2.2 Eastern Europe
2.2.3 Central Europe
2.2.4 Aegean
2.2.5 Southern Europe
2.2.6 Western Europe
2.2.7 Northern Europe
2.3 Asia
2.3.1 Central Asia
2.3.2 North Asia
2.3.3 South Asia
2.3.3.1 South Asia timeline
2.3.3.2 Indian Subcontinent
2.3.3.3 Sri Lanka
2.3.4 East Asia
2.3.4.1 East Asia timeline
2.3.4.2 China
2.3.4.3 Korea
2.3.4.4 Japan
2.4 Africa
2.4.1 Africa Timeline
2.4.2 Ancient Egypt
2.4.3 Sub-Saharan
2.5 Indian subcontinent
2.5.1 India Timeline
3 Gallery
4 See also
5 Further reading
6 References
7 External links
Chronology

Human history
This box: view · talk · edit
^ Prehistory
Recorded History
Antiquity
Earliest records
Bronze Age
Iron Age
Middle Ages
Early Middle Ages
High Middle Ages
Late Middle Ages
Modern history
Early modern
Late modern
Contemporary
vFuture
Very little is known about human migration of the 12th to 9th centuries BC, but there were significant population movements. The Dorian invasion of Greece is conjectured to have led to the Greek Dark Ages. Groups in Anatolia and the Iranian plateau invaded the territory of the Elamite Empire. The Urartians were displaced by Armenians, and the Cimmerians and the Mushki migrated from the Caucasus into Anatolia. A Thraco-Cimmerian connection links these movements to the Proto-Celtic world of central Europe, leading to the introduction of Iron to Europe and the Celtic expansion to western Europe and the British Isles around 500 BC.
Modern archaeological evidence identifies the start of iron production as taking place in Anatolia around 1200 BC, though some contemporary archaeological evidence points to earlier dates. Around 3000 BC, iron was a scarce and precious metal in the Near East. Iron's qualities, in contrast to those of bronze, were not understood. Between 1200 BC and 1000 BC, diffusion in the understanding of iron metallurgy and utilization of iron objects was fast and far-flung. In the history of ferrous metallurgy, iron smelting — the extraction of usable metal from oxidized iron ores — is more difficult than tin and copper smelting. While these metals and their alloys can be cold-worked or melted in relatively simple furnaces (such as the kilns used for pottery) and cast into molds, smelted iron requires hot-working and can be melted only in specially designed furnaces. Thus it is not surprising that humans only mastered the technology of smelted iron after several millennia of bronze metallurgy.
It was thought that the lack of archaeological evidence of iron production made it seem unlikely that iron production was begun earlier elsewhere, and the Iron Age was seen as a case of simple diffusion of a new and superior technology from an invention point in Near East to other regions. It is known in the present age that meteoric iron, or iron-nickel alloy, was used by various ancient peoples thousands of years before the Iron Age. Such iron, being in its native metallic state, required no smelting of ores.[5][6] By the Middle Bronze Age, increasing numbers of smelted iron objects (distinguishable from meteoric iron by the lack of nickel in the product) appeared in the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and South Asia.
Iron in its natural form is very soft, though harder than bronze, and is not useful for tools unless it is combined with carbon to make steel. The percentage of carbon determines important characteristics of the final product: the lower the carbon content the softer the product, the higher the carbon content the harder the product. The systematic production and use of iron implements in Anatolia begins around 2000 BC.[7] Recent archaeological research in the Ganges Valley, India showed early iron working by 1800 BC.[8] However, this metal was expensive, perhaps because of the technical processes required to make steel, the most useful iron product. It is attested in both documents and in archaeological contexts as a substance used in high value items such as jewellery.
Snodgrass[9][10] suggests that a shortage of tin, as a part of the Bronze Age Collapse and trade disruptions in the Mediterranean around 1300 BC, forced metalworkers to seek an alternative to bronze. There is evidence of this in that many bronze items were recycled and made from implements into weapons during this time. With more widespread use of iron, the technology needed to produce workable steel was developed and the price lowered. As a result, even when tin became available again, iron had become the metal of choice for tools and weapons, and was cheap enough that it could replace bronze.[11] Forged iron implements superseded cast bronze tools. Iron, as a stronger and lighter material, becomes a technological advantage for civilizations that use it.
Recent archaeological work has modified not only this chronology, but also the causes of the transition from bronze to iron. New dates from India suggest that iron was being worked there as early as 1800 BC, and African sites are turning up dates as early as 1200 BC,[12][13][14] confounding the idea that there was a simple discovery and diffusion model. Increasingly, the Iron Age in Europe is being seen as a part of the Bronze Age collapse in the ancient Near East, in ancient India (with the post-Rigvedic Vedic civilization), ancient Iran, and ancient Greece (with the Greek Dark Ages). In other regions of Europe, the Iron Age began in the 8th century BC in Central Europe and the 6th century BC in Northern Europe. The Near Eastern Iron Age is divided into two subsections, Iron I and Iron II. Iron I (1200–1000 BC) illustrates both continuity and discontinuity with the previous Late Bronze Age. There is no definitive cultural break between the 13th and 12th century BC throughout the entire region, although certain new features in the hill country, Transjordan, and coastal region may suggest the appearance of the Aramaean and Sea People groups. There is evidence, however, that shows strong continuity with Bronze Age culture, although as one moves later into Iron I the culture begins to diverge more significantly from that of the late 2nd millennium.
History

 
During the Iron Age, the best tools and weapons were made from steel, particularly alloys which were produced with a carbon content between approximately 0.30% and 1.2% by weight. Alloys with less carbon than this, such as wrought iron, cannot be heat treated to a significant degree and will consequently be of low hardness, while a higher carbon content creates an extremely hard but brittle material that cannot be annealed, tempered, or otherwise softened. Steel weapons and tools were nearly the same weight as those of bronze, but stronger. However, steel was difficult to produce with the methods available, and alloys that were easier to make, such as wrought iron,[15] were more common in lower-priced goods. Many techniques have been used to create steel; Mediterranean ones differ dramatically from African ones, for example. Sometimes the final product is all steel, sometimes techniques like case hardening or forge welding were used to make cutting edges stronger.
Near East
Southeast Asia / Middle East
In Chaldaea and Assyria, the initial use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps 4000 BC.[4] One of the earliest smelted iron artifacts known is a dagger with an iron blade found in a Hattic tomb in Anatolia, dating from 2500 BC.[16] The widespread use of iron weapons which replaced bronze weapons rapidly disseminated throughout the Near East (southwest Asia) by the beginning of the 1st millennium BC.
Finds of Iron
Early examples and distribution of non precious metal finds.[17]
Date	Crete	Aegean	Greece	Cyprus	Total	Anatolia	Grand total
1300–1200 BC	5	2	9	0	16	33	49
1200–1100 BC	1	2	8	26	37	N.A.	37
1100–1000 BC	13	3	31	33	80	N.A.	80
1000–900 BC	37+	30	115	29	211	N.A.	211
Total Bronze Age	5	2	9	0	16	33	49
Total Iron Age	51	35	163	88	328	N.A.	328
 
 
Near East timeline
 
Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
         Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age      Historic Iron Age
Ancient Near East
Main article: Ancient Near East
The Iron Age in the Ancient Near East is believed to have begun with the discovery of iron smelting and smithing techniques in Anatolia or the Caucasus and Balkans in the late 2nd millennium BC (c. 1300 BC).[18] However, this theory has been challenged by the emergence of those placing the transition in price and availability issues rather than the development of technology on its own. The earliest bloomery smelting of iron is found at Tell Hammeh, Jordan around 930 BC (C14 dating).
The development of iron smelting was once attributed to the Hittites of Anatolia during the Late Bronze Age. It was believed that they maintained a monopoly on ironworking, and that their empire had been based on that advantage.[19] Accordingly, the invading Sea Peoples were responsible for spreading the knowledge through that region. This theory is no longer held in the common current thought of the majority of scholarship,[20] since there is no archaeological evidence of the alleged Hittite monopoly. While there are some iron objects from Bronze Age Anatolia, the number is comparable to iron objects found in Egypt and other places of the same time period; and only a small number of these objects are weapons.[21] As part of the Late Bronze Age-Early Iron Age, the Bronze Age collapse saw the slow, comparatively continuous spread of iron-working technology in the region. The Ugaritic script was in use during this time, around 1300 BC. Ugarit was one of the centres of the literate world.
Assyro-Babylonian literature, written in the Akkadian language, of Mesopotamia (Assyria and Babylonia) continues into the Iron Age up until the 6th centuries BC. The oldest Phoenician alphabet inscription is the Ahiram epitaph, engraved on the sarcophagus of King Ahiram from circa 1200 BC.[22] It has become conventional to refer to the alphabetic script as "Proto-Canaanite" until the mid-11th century BC, when it is first attested on inscribed bronze arrowheads, and as "Phoenician" only after 1050 BC.[23] The Paleo-Hebrew alphabet is identical to the Phoenician alphabet and dates to the 10th century BC.
Europe
In Europe, the use of iron covers the last years of the prehistoric period and the early years of the historic period.[4] The regional Iron Age may be defined as including the last stages of the prehistoric period and the first of the proto-historic periods.[1] Iron working was introduced to Europe in the late 11th century BC,[24] probably from the Caucasus, and slowly spread northwards and westwards over the succeeding 500 years. The widespread use of the technology of iron was implemented in Europe simultaneously with Asia.[25]
The usage of iron in northern Europe would seem to have been fairly general long before the invasion of Caesar. But iron was not in common use in Denmark until the 1st century AD. In the north of Russia and Siberia, its introduction was even as late as AD 800, whereas Ireland entered its Iron Age about the beginning of the 1st century. In Gaul, on the other hand, the Iron Age dates back some 500 years BC; whereas in Etruria the metal was known some six centuries earlier.[4] As the knowledge of iron seems to have travelled over Europe from the south northward, the commencement of the Iron Age was very much earlier in the southern than in the northern countries. Homer represents Greece as beginning her Iron Age twelve hundred years before the Common era. Greece, as represented in the Homeric poems, was then in the transition period from bronze to iron, while Scandinavia was only entering its Iron Age about the time of the Common era.[4]
The Iron Age in Europe is characterized by an elaboration of designs in weapons, implements, and utensils.[4] These are no longer cast but hammered into shape, and decoration is elaborate curvilinear rather than simple rectilinear; the forms and character of the ornamentation of the northern European weapons resembles in some respects Roman arms, while in other respects they are peculiar and evidently representative of northern art. The dead were buried in an extended position, whereas in the preceding Bronze Age cremation had been the rule.
European timeline
 
Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
         Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age      Historic Iron Age
Eastern Europe
The early 1st millennium BC marks the Iron Age in Eastern Europe. In the Pontic steppe and the Caucasus region, the Iron Age begins with the Koban and the Chernogorovka and Novocherkassk cultures from c. 900 BC. By 800 BC, it was spreading to Hallstatt C via the alleged "Thraco-Cimmerian" migrations.
Along with Chernogorovka and Novocherkassk cultures, on the territory of ancient Russia and Ukraine the Iron Age is to a significant extent associated with Scythians, who developed iron culture since the 7th century BC. The majority of remains of their iron producing and blacksmith's industries from 5th to 3rd century BC was found near Nikopol in Kamenskoe Gorodishche, which is believed to be the specialized metallurgic region of the ancient Scythia.[26][27]
From the Hallstatt culture, the Iron Age spreads west with the Celtic expansion from the 6th century BC. In Poland, the Iron Age reaches the late Lusatian culture in about the 6th century, followed in some areas by the Pomeranian culture.
The ethnic ascriptions of many Iron Age cultures has been bitterly contested, as the roots of Germanic, Baltic and Slavic peoples were sought in this area.
Central Europe
In Central Europe, the Iron Age is generally divided in the early Iron Age Hallstatt culture (HaC and D, 800–450) and the late Iron Age La Tène culture (beginning in 450 BC). The transition from bronze to iron in Central Europe is exemplified in the great cemetery, discovered in 1846, of Hallstatt, near Gmunden, where the forms of the implements and weapons of the later part of the Bronze Age are imitated in iron. In the Swiss or La Tene group of implements and weapons the forms are new and transition complete.[1]
The Celtic culture, or rather Proto-Celtic groups, had expanded to much of Central Europe, (Gauls) and following the Gallic invasion of the Balkans in 279 BC as far east as central Anatolia (Galatians). In Central Europe, the prehistoric Iron Age ends with the Roman Conquest.
Aegean
Main article: Greek Dark Ages
In the Greek Dark Ages, there was a widespread availability of edged weapons of iron, but a variety of explanations fits the available archaeological evidence. From around 1200 BC, the palace centres and outlying settlements of the Mycenaean culture began to be abandoned or destroyed, and by 1050 BC, the recognisable cultural features (such as Linear B script) had disappeared.
The Greek alphabet began in the 8th century BC.[28] It is descended from the Phoenician alphabet. The Greeks adapted the system, notably introducing characters for vowel sounds and thereby creating the first truly alphabetic (as opposed to abjad) writing system. As Greece sent out colonies west towards Sicily and Italy (Pithekoussae, Cumae), the influence of their alphabet extended further. The ceramic Euboean artifact inscribed with a few lines written in the Greek alphabet referring to "Nestor's cup", discovered in a grave at Pithekoussae (Ischia) dates from c. 730 BC; it seems to be the oldest written reference to the Iliad. The fragmentary Epic Cycles, a collection of Ancient Greek epic poems that related the story of the Trojan War, were a distillation in literary form of an oral tradition developed during the Greek Dark Age. The traditional material from which the literary epics were drawn treats the Mycenaean Bronze Age culture from the perspective of Iron Age and later Greece.
Southern Europe
Further information: Prehistoric Italy and Ancient peoples of Italy
In Italy, the Iron Age was probably introduced by the Villanovan culture but this culture is otherwise considered a Bronze Age culture, while the following Etruscan civilization is regarded as part of Iron Age proper. The Etruscans Old Italic alphabet spread throughout Italy from the 8th century. The Etruscan Iron Age was then ended with the rise and conquest of the Roman Republic, which conquered the last Etruscan city of Velzna in 265 BC.
Western Europe


Hill forts spread across Europe in the Iron Age and Maiden Castle in England is one of the largest.[29][30] Photograph taken in 1935 by Major George Allen (1891–1940).
The 'Celtic' culture had expanded to the group of islands of northwest Europe (Insular Celts) and Iberia (Celtiberians, Celtici and Gallaeci). On the British Isles, the British Iron Age lasted from about 800 BC[31] until the Roman Conquest and until the 5th century in non-Romanised parts. Structures dating from this time are often impressive, for example the brochs and duns of northern Scotland and the hill forts that dotted the islands. On the Iberian peninsula, the Paleohispanic scripts began to be used between 7th century to the 5th century BC. These scripts were used until the end of the 1st century BC or the beginning of the 1st century AD.
Northern Europe
The early Iron Age forms of Scandinavia show no traces of Roman influence, though these become abundant toward the middle of the period. The duration of the Iron Age is variously estimated according as its commencement is placed nearer to or farther from the opening years of the Christian era; but it is agreed on all hands that the last division of the Iron Age of Scandinavia, the Viking Period, is to be taken as from 700 to 1000 AD, when paganism in those lands was superseded by Christianity.[1]
The Iron Age north of the Alps is divided into the Pre-Roman Iron Age and the Roman Iron Age. In Scandinavia, further periods followed up to AD 1100: the Migration Period, the Vendel or Merovingian Period and the Viking Period. The earliest part of the Iron Age in north-western Germany and southern Jutland was dominated by the Jastorf culture.
Early Scandinavian iron production typically involved the harvesting of bog iron. The Scandinavian peninsula, Finland and Estonia show sophisticated iron production from c. 500 BC. Metalworking and Asbestos-Ceramic pottery co-occur to some extent. Another iron ore used was iron sand (such as red soil). Its high phosphorus content can be identified in slag. Such slag is sometimes found together with asbestos ware-associated axe types belonging to the Ananjino Culture.
Asia
The widespread use of the technology of iron was implemented in Asia simultaneously with Europe.[32] In China, the use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps 4000 years before the Common era.[4]
Central Asia
The Iron Age in Central Asia began when iron objects appear among the Indo-European Saka in present-day Xinjiang between the 10th century BC and the 7th century BC, such as those found at the cemetery site of Chawuhukou.[33]
North Asia
The Pazyryk culture is an Iron Age archaeological culture (ca. 6th to 3rd centuries BC) identified by excavated artifacts and mummified humans found in the Siberian permafrost in the Altay Mountains.
South Asia
South Asia timeline
 
Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
         Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age      Historic Iron Age
Indian Subcontinent
The history of metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent began during the 2nd millennium BC. Archaeological sites in India, such as Malhar, Dadupur, Raja Nala Ka Tila and Lahuradewa in present day Uttar Pradesh show iron implements in the period 1800 BC – 1200 BC.[8] Archaeological excavations in Hyderabad show an iron age burial site.[34] Rakesh Tewari[35] believes that around the beginning of the Indian Iron Age (13th century BC), iron smelting was widely practiced in India. Such use suggests that the date of the technology's inception may be around the 16th century BC.[8]
Epic India is traditionally placed around early 10th century BC and later on from the Sanskrit epics of Sanskrit literature. Composed between approximately 1500 BC and 600 BC of pre-classical Sanskrit, the Vedic literature forms four Vedas (the Rig, Yajur, Sama and Atharva). The main period of Vedic literary activity is the 9th to 7th centuries when the various schools of thought compiled and memorized their respective corpora. Following this, the scholarship around 500 to 100 BC organized knowledge into Sutra treatises.
The beginning of the 1st millennium BC saw extensive developments in iron metallurgy in India. Technological advancement and mastery of iron metallurgy was achieved during this period of peaceful settlements. One iron working centre in east India has been dated to the first millennium BC.[36] In Southern India (present day Mysore) iron appeared as early as 12th to 11th centuries BC; these developments were too early for any significant close contact with the northwest of the country.[36] The Indian Upanishads mention metallurgy.[37] and the Indian Mauryan period saw advances in metallurgy.[38] As early as 300 BC, certainly by AD 200, high quality steel was produced in southern India, by what would later be called the crucible technique. In this system, high-purity wrought iron, charcoal, and glass were mixed in crucible and heated until the iron melted and absorbed the carbon.[39]
The origins of the Brahmi script dates to the 6th century BC. The contact of the Hindu Kush region with the Near East occurred with the expansion of the Achaemenid Empire under Darius the Great to the Indus valley. The script to write an Indo-Aryan languages occurred is shows up in the reign of Emperor Ashoka in the 3rd century BC. The best-known Brahmi inscriptions are the rock-cut edicts of Ashoka in north-central India, dated to the 3rd century BC. The Bhattiprolu script have been found in old inscriptions located in the fertile Krishna river delta and the estuary region where the river meets the Bay of Bengal. The inscriptions date to before 100 BC,[40] putting them among the earliest evidence of Brahmi writing in South India.[41][42]
Sri Lanka
The protohistoric Early Iron Age in Sri Lanka lasted from 1000 to 600 BC. Radiocarbon evidence has been collected from Anuradhapura and Aligala shelter in Sigiriya.[43][44][45][46] The Anuradhapura settlement is recorded to extend 10 hectares by 800 BC and grew to 50 hectares by 700 - 600 BC to become a town.[47] The skeletal remains of an Early Iron Age chief was excavated in Anaikoddai, Jaffna. The name 'Ko Veta' is engraved in Brahmi script on a seal buried with the skeleton and is assigned by the excavators to the 3rd century BC. Ko, meaning "King" in Tamil, is comparable to such names as Ko Atan and Ko Putivira occurring in contemporary Brahmi inscriptions in south India.[48] It is also speculated that Early Iron Age sites may exist in Kandarodai, Matota, Pilapitiya and Tissamaharama.[49]
East Asia
East Asia timeline
 
Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
         Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age      Historic Iron Age
China
Main article: Iron Age China
In China, Chinese bronze inscriptions are found around 1200 BC. The development of iron metallurgy was transpired by the 9th century BC.[50][51] The large seal script is identified with a group of characters from a book entitled Shi Zhoù Pian (ca. 800 BC). Iron metallurgy reached the Yangzi Valley toward the end of the 6th century BC.[52] The few objects were found at Changsha and Nanjing. The mortuary evidence suggests that the initial use of iron in Lingnan belongs to the mid-to-late Warring States period (from about 350 BC). Important non-precious husi style metal finds include Iron tools found at the Tomb at Ku-wei ts'un of the fourth century BC..[53]
The techniques used in Lingnan are a combination of bivalve moulds of distinct southern tradition and the incorporation of piece mould technology from the Zhongyuan. The products of the combination of these two periods are bells, vessels, weapons and ornaments and the sophisticated cast.
An Iron Age culture of the Tibetan Plateau has tentatively been associated with the Zhang Zhung culture described in early Tibetan writings.
Korea
Main article: Proto–Three Kingdoms of Korea


Silla chest and neck armour from National Museum of Korea.
Iron objects were introduced to the Korean peninsula through trade with chiefdoms and state-level societies in the Yellow Sea area in the 4th century BC, just at the end of the Warring States Period but before the Western Han Dynasty began.[54][55] Yoon proposes that iron was first introduced to chiefdoms located along North Korean river valleys that flow into the Yellow Sea such as the Cheongcheon and Taedong Rivers.[56] Iron production quickly followed in the 2nd century BC, and iron implements came to be used by farmers by the 1st century in southern Korea.[54] The earliest known cast-iron axes in southern Korea are found in the Geum River basin. The time that iron production begins is the same time that complex chiefdoms of Proto-historic Korea emerged. The complex chiefdoms were the precursors of early states such as Silla, Baekje, Goguryeo, and Gaya[55][57] Iron ingots were an important mortuary item and indicated the wealth or prestige of the deceased in this period.[58]
Japan
Main articles: Yayoi period and Kofun period
The Yayoi period is an era in the history of Japan from about 300 BC to AD 300.[59] Distinguishing characteristics of the Yayoi period include the appearance of new pottery styles and the start of an intensive rice agriculture in paddy fields. The Yayoi followed the Jomon period (14,000 BC to 300 BC) and Yayoi culture flourished in a geographic area from southern Kyushu to northern Honshu.
The succeeding Kofun period lasts from around 250 to 538. The word kofun is Japanese for the type of burial mounds dating from this era. The Kofun and the subsequent Asuka periods are sometimes referred to collectively as the Yamato period. Iron items, such as tools, weapons, and decorative objects, are postulated to have entered Japan during this era or the late Yayoi period, most likely through contacts with the Korean Peninsula and China.
Africa
In Africa, where there was been no continent-wide universal Bronze Age, the use of iron succeeded immediately the use of stone.[4] Metallurgy was characterized by the absence of a Bronze Age, and the transition from "stone to steel" in tool substances. Sub-Saharan Africa has produced very early instances of carbon steel found to be in production around 2000 years before present in northwest Tanzania, based on complex preheating principles. The Meroitic script was developed in the Napatan Period (c. 700–300 BC).
Africa Timeline
 
Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
         Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age      Historic Iron Age
Ancient Egypt
In the Black Pyramid of Abusir, at least 3000 BC, Gaston Maspero found some pieces of iron, and in the funeral text of Pepi I, the metal is mentioned. [4] A sword bearing the name of pharaoh Merneptah as well as a battle axe with an iron blade and gold-decorated bronze shaft were both found in the excavation of Ugarit.[60]
Iron metal is singularly scarce in collections of Egyptian antiquities. Bronze remained the primary material there until the conquest by Assyria. The explanation of this would seem to lie in the fact that the relics are in most cases the paraphernalia of tombs, the funereal vessels and vases, and iron being considered an impure metal by the ancient Egyptians it was never used in their manufacture of these or for any religious purposes. It was attributed to Seth, the spirit of evil who according to Egyptian tradition governed the central deserts of Africa.[4]
Sub-Saharan
See also: Nok culture, Urewe, and Bantu expansion


Iron Age finds in East and Southern Africa, corresponding to the early 1st millennium Bantu expansion.
Discoveries of very early copper and bronze working sites in Niger, however, can still support that iron working may have developed in that region and spread elsewhere. Iron metallurgy has been attested very early, the earliest instances of iron smelting in Termit, Niger may date to as early as 1200 BC.[12] It was once believed that iron and copper working in Sub-Saharan Africa spread in conjunction with the Bantu expansion, from the Cameroon region to the African Great Lakes in the 3rd century BC, reaching the Cape around AD 400.[12]
Sub-Saharan Africa has produced very early instances of carbon steel found to be in production around 2000 years before present in northwest Tanzania, based on complex preheating principles. These discoveries, according to Schmidt and Avery (archaeologists credited with the discovery) are significant for the history of metallurgy.[61]
At the end of the Iron Age, Nubia became a major manufacturer and exporter of iron. This was after being expelled from Egypt by Assyrians, who used iron weapons.[62]
Indian subcontinent
Main article: Iron Age India
India Timeline
 
Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details
         Prehistoric (or Proto-historic) Iron Age      Historic Iron Age
Gallery

Iron Age Examples

Dun Carloway broch, Lewis, Scotland

 

A replica Iron Age thatched roof, Butser Ancient Farm, Hampshire, England
Iron age roundhouse
Broborg Knivsta, prehistoric castle

See also

General
Fogou
Lists
List of archaeological periods, List of archaeological sites
Metallurgy
Blast furnace, Roman metallurgy
Other
Synoptic table of the principal old world prehistoric cultures
Further reading

Waldbaum, Jane C. From Bronze to Iron. Göteburg: Paul Astöms Förlag (1978): 56-8
References

^ a b c d e f g h The Junior Encyclopedia Britannica: A reference library of general knowledge. (1897). Chicago: E.G. Melvin.
^ C. J. Thomsen and Jens Jacob Asmussen Worsaae first applied the system to artifacts.
^ this is what is usually meant when referring just to a "Smith"
^ a b c d e f g h i j Chisholm, H. (1910). The Encyclopædia Britannica. New York: The Encyclopædia Britannica Co.
^ Archaeomineralogy, p. 164, George Robert Rapp, Springer, 2002
^ Understanding materials science, p. 125, Rolf E. Hummel, Springer, 2004
^ Ironware piece unearthed from Turkey found to be oldest steel in The Hindu, Thursday, March 26, 2009
^ a b c The origins of Iron Working in India: New evidence from the Central Ganga plain and the Eastern Vindhyas by Rakesh Tewari (Director, U.P. State Archaeological Department)
^ A.M.Snodgrass (1967), "Arms and Armour of the Greeks". (Thames & Hudson, London)
^ A. M. Snodgrass (1971), "The Dark Age of Greece" (Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh).
^ Theodore Wertime and J. D. Muhly, eds. The Coming of the Age of Iron (New Haven, 1980).
^ a b c Duncan E. Miller and N.J. Van Der Merwe, 'Early Metal Working in Sub Saharan Africa' Journal of African History 35 (1994) 1–36; Minze Stuiver and N.J. Van Der Merwe, 'Radiocarbon Chronology of the Iron Age in Sub-Saharan Africa' Current Anthropology 1968.
^ How Old is the Iron Age in Sub-Saharan Africa? — by Roderick J. McIntosh, Archaeological Institute of America (1999)
^ Iron in Sub-Saharan Africa — by Stanley B. Alpern (2005)
^ A Brief History of Iron and Steel Production by Professor Joseph S. Spoerl (Saint Anselm College)
^ Richard Cowen () The Age of Iron Chapter 5 in a series of essay s on Geology, History, and People prepares for a course of the University of California at Davis. Online version.
^ Alex Webb, "Metalworking in Ancient Greece"
^ Jane C. Waldbaum, From Bronze to Iron: The Transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age in the Eastern Mediterranean (Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology, vol. LIV, 1978).
^ Muhly, James D. 'Metalworking/Mining in the Levant' pp. 174-183 in Near Eastern Archaeology ed. Suzanne Richard (2003), pp. 179-180.
^ Muhly, James D. 'Metalworking/Mining in the Levant' pp. 174-183 in Near Eastern Archaeology ed. Suzanne Richard (2003), pp. 179-180.
^ Waldbaum, Jane C. From Bronze to Iron. Göteburg: Paul Astöms Förlag (1978): 56-8.
^ Coulmas, Florian, Writing Systems of the World, Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Oxford, 1989. p. 141.
^ Markoe, Glenn E., Phoenicians. University of California Press. p. 111 ISBN 0-520-22613-5
^ Riederer, Josef; Wartke, Ralf-B.: "Iron", Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.): Brill's New Pauly, Brill 2009
^ John Collis, "The European Iron Age" (1989)
^ Great Soviet Encyclopedia, 3rd edition, entry on "???????? ???", available online here
^ Christian, D. A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia, Blackwell Publishing, 1998, p. 141, available online
^ Cook, B. F. Greek Inscriptions 1987
^ Maiden Castle, English Heritage, retrieved 2009-05-31
^ Maiden Castle, Pastscape.org.uk, retrieved 2009-05-27
^ Haselgrove, C. and Pope, R. (2007), 'Characterising the Earlier Iron Age', in C. Haselgrove and R. Pope (eds.), The Earlier Iron Age in Britain and the Near Continent. (Oxbow, Oxford)
^ John Collis, "The European Iron Age" (1989)
^ Mark E. Hall, "Towards an absolute chronology for the Iron Age of Inner Asia," Antiquity 71.274 [1997], 863-74.
^ "News By Industry". The Times Of India. 2008-09-10.
^ Director of Archaeology, (Uttar Pradesh)
^ a b Early Antiquity By I. M. Drakonoff. Published 1991. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226144658. pg 372
^ Upanisads By Patrick Olivelle. Published 1998. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0192835769. pg xxix
^ The New Cambridge History of India By J. F. Richards, Gordon Johnson, Christopher Alan Bayly. Published 2005. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521364248. pg 64
^ Juleff, G. (1996), "An ancient wind powered iron smelting technology in Sri Lanka", Nature, 379 (3): 60–63.
^ Richard Salomon, Indian epigraphy: a guide to the study of inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan languages Oxford University Press US, 1998. p. 34 (cf. cites one estimate of "not later than 200 BC", and of "about the end of the 2nd century B.C.")
^ The Bhattiprolu Inscriptions, G. Buhler, 1894, Epigraphica Indica, Vol.2
^ Buddhist Inscriptions of Andhradesa, Dr. B.S.L Hanumantha Rao, 1998, Ananda Buddha Vihara Trust, Secunderabad
^ Lahiru Weligamage (2002) The Ancient Sri Lanka
^ Deraniyagala, Siran, The Prehistory of Sri Lanka; an ecological perspective. (revised ed.), Colombo: Archaeological Survey Department of Sri Lanka, 1992: 709-29
^ Karunaratne and Adikari 1994, Excavations at Aligala prehistoric site. In: Bandaranayake and Mogren (1994). Further studies in the settlement archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla region. Sri Lanka, University of Kelaniya: Postgraduate Institute of Archaeolog :58
^ Mogren 1994. Objectives, methods, constraints and perspectives. In: Bandaranayake and Mogren (1994) Further studies in the settlement archaeology of the Sigiriya-Dambulla region. Sri Lanka, University of Kelaniya: Postgraduate Institute of Archaeolog: 39.
^ F. R. Allchin 1989. City and state formation in Early Historic South Asia. South Asian Studies 5:1-16: 3
^ Indrapala, K. The Evolution of an ethnic identity: The Tamils of Sri Lanka, pp. 324
^ Deraniyagala, Siran, The Prehistory of Sri Lanka; an ecological perspective. (revised ed.), Colombo: Archaeological Survey Department of Sri Lanka, 1992: 730-2, 735
^ Derevianki, A. P. 1973. Rannyi zheleznyi vek Priamuria
^ David N. Keightley. The Origins of Chinese civilization. Page 226.
^ Higham, Charles. 1996. The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia
^ Encyclopedia of World Art: Landscape in art to Micronesian cultures. McGraw-Hill. 1964.
^ a b Kim, Do-heon. 2002. Samhan Sigi Jujocheolbu-eui Yutong Yangsang-e Daehan Geomto [A Study of the Distribution Patterns of Cast Iron Axes in the Samhan Period]. Yongnam Kogohak [Yongnam Archaeological Review] 31:1–29.
^ a b Taylor, Sarah. 1989. The Introduction and Development of Iron Production in Korea. World Archaeology 20(3):422–431.
^ Yoon, Dong-suk. 1989. Early Iron Metallurgy in Korea. Archaeological Review from Cambridge 8(1):92–99.
^ Barnes, Gina L. 2001. State Formation in Korea: Historical and Archaeological Perspectives. Curzon, London.
^ Lee, Sung-joo. 1998. Silla - Gaya Sahoe-eui Giwon-gwa Seongjang [The Rise and Growth of Silla and Gaya Society]. Hakyeon Munhwasa, Seoul.
^ Prehistoric Archaeological Periods in Japan, Charles T. Keally
^ Richard Cowen, 'The Age of Iron Chapter 5 in a series of essay s on Geology, History, and People prepares for a course of the University of California at Davis. Online version
^ Peter Schmidt, Donald H. Avery. Complex Iron Smelting and Prehistoric Culture in Tanzania, Science 22 September 1978: Vol. 201. no. 4361, pp. 1085 - 1089
^ Collins, Rober O. and Burns, James M. The History of Sub-Saharan Africa. New York:Cambridge University Press, p. 37. ISBN 978-0-521-68708-9.
External links

General
A site with a focus on Iron Age Britain from resourcesforhistory.com
About Iron Age China and Europe
Publications
Andre Gunder Frank and William R. Thompson, Early Iron Age economic expansion and contraction revisited. American Institute of Archaeology, San Francisco, Ca., January, 2004.
News
Mass burial suggests massacre at Iron Age hill fort. Archaeologists have found evidence of a massacre linked to Iron Age warfare at a hill fort in Derbyshire. BBC. 17 April 2011
[hide]v · d · eThree-age system
Stone Age	
Stone tool • Flint tool • Paleolithic • Mesolithic • Neolithic • Lower Paleolithic • Middle Paleolithic • Upper Paleolithic • Japanese Paleolithic • Paleolithic Europe • Middle Stone Age • Later Stone Age • Epipaleolithic • Pre-Pottery Neolithic • Pre-Pottery Neolithic A • Pre-Pottery Neolithic B • Neolithic Revolution • List of Neolithic cultures of China • Nordic Stone Age • Neolithic British Isles • South Asian Stone Age • Stone-Age Poland • African archaeology • Recent African origin of modern humans
Bronze Age	
Chalcolithic • Bronze • Atlantic Bronze Age • Nordic Bronze Age • Bronze Age in Romania • Bronze Age collapse
Iron Age	
History of ferrous metallurgy • Iron meteorite • Metallurgy • British Iron Age • Pre-Roman Iron Age • Roman Iron Age • Germanic Iron Age • Iron Age Scandinavia • Iron Age India • Iron Age China
List of archaeological periods • List of time periods
View page ratings
Rate this page
What's this?
Trustworthy
Objective
Complete
Well-written
I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional)

Submit ratings
Categories: Iron Age
Log in / create accountArticleDiscussionReadView sourceView history


Assyrian law
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Assyrian law was very similar to Sumerian and Babylonian law,[1] however, notably more brutal than its predecessors.[1] The first copy of the code to come to light, dated to the reign of Tiglath-Pileser I, was discovered in the course of excavations by the German Oriental Society (1903–1914).[citation needed] Three Assyrian law collections have been found to date.[1] Punishments such as the cropping of ears and noses was common, as it was in the Code of Hammurabi, which was composed several centuries earlier.[2] Murder was punished by the family being allowed to decide the death penalty for the murderer.[3]
Contents [hide]
1 See also
2 Further reading
3 External links
4 References
[edit]See also

	Law portal
	Ancient Near East portal
List of ancient legal codes
[edit]Further reading

C. H. W. Johns (2004). Babylonian and Assyrian laws, contracts, and letters. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 1417922133
[edit]External links

The Code of the Assura, circa 1075 BCE (excerpts)
The Origin And History Of Hebrew Law
[edit]References

^ a b c Encarta (2007), s.v. Assyria. Archived 2009-10-31.
^ Haremhab’s Great Edict
^ Crime and Punishment in the Ancient World of the Bible - Unexplained

	This Ancient Near East-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
	This Assyrian-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
View page ratings
Rate this page
What's this?
Trustworthy
Objective
Complete
Well-written
I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional)

Submit ratings
Categories: Assyria | Legal history | Ancient Near East law | Ancient Near East stubs | Assyrian stubs
Log in / create accountArticleDiscussionReadEditView history

Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact Wikipedia
Toolbox
Print/export
Languages
???
This page was last modified on 1 July 2011 at 10:54.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of use for details.
Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Contact us
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersMobile view 

Legal history
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


King Hammurabi is revealed the code of laws by Shamash, god of justice
Legal history or the history of law is the study of how law has evolved and why it changed. Legal history is closely connected to the development of civilizations and is set in the wider context of social history. Among certain jurists and historians of legal process it has been seen as the recording of the evolution of laws and the technical explanation of how these laws have evolved with the view of better understanding the origins of various legal concepts, some consider it a branch of intellectual history. Twentieth century historians have viewed legal history in a more contextualized manner more in line with the thinking of social historians. They have looked at legal institutions as complex systems of rules, players and symbols and have seen these elements interact with society to change, adapt, resist or promote certain aspects of civil society. Such legal historians have tended to analyze case histories from the parameters of social science inquiry, using statistical methods, analyzing class distinctions among litigants, petitioners and other players in various legal processes. By analyzing case outcomes, transaction costs, number of settled cases they have begun an analysis of legal institutions, practices, procedures and briefs that give us a more complex picture of law and society than the study of jurisprudence, case law and civil codes can achieve.
Contents [hide]
1 Ancient world
2 Southern Asia
3 Eastern Asia
4 Islamic law
5 European laws
5.1 Roman Empire
5.2 Middle Ages
5.3 Modern European law
6 United States
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links
Ancient world

Main articles: Ma'at, Babylonian law, Ancient Greek law, and Leviticus
See also: Urukagina, Hittite laws, and Ostracism
Ancient Egyptian law, dating as far back as 3000 BC, had a civil code that was probably broken into twelve books. It was based on the concept of Ma'at, characterised by tradition, rhetorical speech, social equality and impartiality.[1] By the 22nd century BC, Ur-Nammu, an ancient Sumerian ruler, formulated the first law code, consisting of casuistic statements ("if... then..."). Around 1760 BC, King Hammurabi further developed Babylonian law, by codifying and inscribing it in stone. Hammurabi placed several copies of his law code throughout the kingdom of Babylon as stelae, for the entire public to see; this became known as the Codex Hammurabi. The most intact copy of these stelae was discovered in the 19th century by British Assyriologists, and has since been fully transliterated and translated into various languages, including English, German and French. The Torah from the Old Testament is probably the oldest body of law still relevant for modern legal systems, dating back to 1280 BC.[citation needed] It takes the form of moral imperatives, like the Ten Commandments and the Noahide Laws, as recommendations for a good society. Ancient Athens, the small Greek city-state, was the first society based on broad inclusion of the citizenry, excluding women and the slave class. Athens had no legal science, and Ancient Greek has no word for "law" as an abstract concept,[2] retaining instead the distinction between divine law (thémis), human decree (nomos) and custom (díke).[3] Yet Ancient Greek law contained major constitutional innovations in the development of democracy.[4]
Southern Asia

Main articles: Manu Smriti, Yajnavalkya Smriti, Arthashastra, and Dharmasastra
See also: Classical Hindu law, Classical Hindu law in practice, and Hindu law

Ancient India and China represent distinct traditions of law, and had historically independent schools of legal theory and practice. The Arthashastra, dating from the 400 BC, and the Manusmriti from 100 AD were influential treatises in India, texts that were considered authoritative legal guidance.[5] Manu's central philosophy was tolerance and pluralism, and was cited across South East Asia.[6] But this Hindu tradition, along with Islamic law, was supplanted by the common law when India became part of the British Empire.[7] Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore and Hong Kong also adopted the common law.
Eastern Asia

Main articles: Traditional Chinese law, Tang Code, and Great Qing Legal Code
The eastern Asia legal tradition reflects a unique blend of secular and religious influences.[8] Japan was the first country to begin modernizing its legal system along western lines, by importing bits of the French, but mostly the German Civil Code.[9] This partly reflected Germany's status as a rising power in the late nineteenth century. Similarly, traditional Chinese law gave way to westernization towards the final years of the Ch'ing dynasty in the form of six private law codes based mainly on the Japanese model of German law.[10] Today Taiwanese law retains the closest affinity to the codifications from that period, because of the split between Chiang Kai-shek's nationalists, who fled there, and Mao Zedong's communists who won control of the mainland in 1949. The current legal infrastructure in the People's Republic of China was heavily influenced by soviet Socialist law, which essentially inflates administrative law at the expense of private law rights.[11] Today, however, because of rapid industrialization China has been reforming, at least in terms of economic (if not social and political) rights. A new contract code in 1999 represented a turn away from administrative domination.[12] Furthermore, after negotiations lasting fifteen years, in 2001 China joined the World Trade Organization.[13]
Yassa of the Mongol Empire
Islamic law

Main article: Sharia
See also: Fiqh, Islamic ethics, and Early reforms under Islam
One of the major legal systems developed during the Middle Ages was Islamic law and jurisprudence. A number of important legal institutions were developed by Islamic jurists during the classical period of Islamic law and jurisprudence, One such institution was the Hawala, an early informal value transfer system, which is mentioned in texts of Islamic jurisprudence as early as the 8th century. Hawala itself later influenced the development of the Aval in French civil law and the Avallo in Italian law.[14]
European laws

Roman Empire
Main article: Roman law
Roman law was heavily influenced by Greek teachings.[15] It forms the bridge to the modern legal world, over the centuries between the rise and decline of the Roman Empire.[16] Roman law, in the days of the Roman republic and Empire, was heavily procedural and there was no professional legal class.[17] Instead a lay person, iudex, was chosen to adjudicate. Precedents were not reported, so any case law that developed was disguised and almost unrecognised.[18] Each case was to be decided afresh from the laws of the state, which mirrors the (theoretical) unimportance of judges' decisions for future cases in civil law systems today. During the 6th century AD in the Eastern Roman Empire, the Emperor Justinian codified and consolidated the laws that had existed in Rome so that what remained was one twentieth of the mass of legal texts from before.[19] This became known as the Corpus Juris Civilis. As one legal historian wrote, "Justinian consciously looked back to the golden age of Roman law and aimed to restore it to the peak it had reached three centuries before."[20]
Middle Ages


King John of England signs the Magna Carta
Main articles: Early Germanic law, Anglo-Saxon law, and Lex mercatoria
See also: Germanic tribal laws, Visigothic Code, Dom, Blutgericht, Magna Carta, and Schwabenspiegel
During the Byzantine Empire the Justinian Code was expanded and remained in force until the Empire fell, though it was never officially introduced to the West. Instead, following the fall of the Western Empire and in former Roman countries, the ruling classes relied on the Theodosian Code to govern natives and Germanic customary law for the Germanic incomers - a system known as folk-right - until the two laws blended together. Since the Roman court system had broken down, legal disputes were adjudicated according to Germanic custom by assemblies of learned lawspeakers in rigid ceremonies and in oral proceedings that relied heavily on testimony. After much of the West was consolidated under Charlemagne, law became centralised so as to strengthen the royal court system, and consequently case law, and abolished folk-right. However, once Charlemagne's kingdom difinitively splintered, Europe became feudalistic, and law was generally not governed above the county, municipal or lordship level, thereby creating a highly decentralised legal culture that favored the development of customary law founded on localized case law. However, in the 11th century, Crusaders, having pillaged the Byzantine Empire, returned with Byzantine legal texts including the Justinian Code, and scholars at the University of Bologna were the first to use them to interpret their own customary laws.[21] Mediæval European legal scholars began researching the Roman law and using its concepts[22] and prepared the way for the partial resurrection of Roman law as the modern civil law in a large part of the world.[23] There was, however, a great deal of resistance so that civil law rivaled customary law for much of the latter mediæval period. After the Norman conquest of England, which introduced Norman legal concepts into mediæval England, the English King's powerful judges developed a body of precedent that became the common law.[24] In particular, Henry II instituted legal reforms and developed a system of royal courts administered by a small number of judges who lived in Westminster and traveled throughout the kingdom.[25] Henry II also instituted the Assize of Clarendon in 1166, which allowed for jury trials and reduced the number of trials by combat. Louis IX of France also undertook major legal reforms and, inspired by ecclesiastical court procedure, extended Canon-law evidence and inquisitorial-trial systems to the royal courts. Also, judges no longer moved on circuits becoming fixed to their jurisdictions, and jurors were nominated by parties to the legal dispute rather than by the sheriff.[25] In addition, by the 10th century, the Law Merchant, first founded on Scandinavian trade customs, then solidified by the Hanseatic League, took shape so that merchants could trade using familiar standards, rather than the many splintered types of local law. A precursor to modern commercial law, the Law Merchant emphasised the freedom of contract and alienability of property.[26]
Modern European law
Main articles: Napoleonic code, Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, and English law
The two main traditions of modern European law are the codified legal systems of most of continental Europe, and the English tradition based on case law.
As nationalism grew in the 18th and 19th centuries, lex mercatoria was incorporated into countries' local law under new civil codes. Of these, the French Napoleonic Code and the German Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch became the most influential. As opposed to English common law, which consists of massive tomes of case law, codes in small books are easy to export and for judges to apply. However, today there are signs that civil and common law are converging. European Union law is codified in treaties, but develops through the precedent sat down by the European Court of Justice.
United States

The United States legal system developed primarily out of the English common law system (with the exception of the state of Louisiana, which continued to follow the French civilian system after being admitted to statehood). Some concepts from Spanish law, such as the prior appropriation doctrine and community property, still persist in some U.S. states, particularly those that were part of the Mexican Cession in 1848.
Under the doctrine of federalism, each state has its own separate court system, and the ability to legislate within areas not reserved to the federal government.
See also

Association of Young Legal Historians (AYLH)
Constitution of the Roman Republic
Notes

^ Théodoridés. "law". Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt.
* VerSteeg, Law in ancient Egypt
^ Kelly, A Short History of Western Legal Theory, 5-6
^ J.P. Mallory, "Law", in Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture, 346
^ Ober, The Nature of Athenian Democracy, 121
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 255
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 276
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 273
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 287
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 304
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 305
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 307
^ Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World, 309
^ Farah, Five Years of China WTO Membership, 263-304
^ Badr, Gamal Moursi (Spring, 1978). "Islamic Law: Its Relation to Other Legal Systems". The American Journal of Comparative Law (American Society of Comparative Law) 26 (2 [Proceedings of an International Conference on Comparative Law, Salt Lake City, Utah, February 24–25, 1977]): 187–198 [196–8]. doi:10.2307/839667. JSTOR 839667
^ Kelly, A Short History of Western Legal Theory, 39
^ As a legal system, Roman law has affected the development of law in most of Western civilization as well as in parts of the Eastern world. It also forms the basis for the law codes of most countries of continental Europe ("Roman law". Encyclopaedia Britannica.).
^ Gordley-von Mehren, Comparative Study of Private Law, 18
^ Gordley-von Mehren, Comparative Study of Private Law, 21
^ Stein, Roman Law in European History, 32
^ Stein, Roman Law in European History, 35
^ Stein, Roman Law in European History, 43
^ Roman and Secular Law in the Middle Ages
^ Roman law
^ Makdisi, John A. (June 1999). "The Islamic Origins of the Common Law". North Carolina Law Review 77 (5): 1635–1739 suggests that there may have been some importation of islamic concepts as well, but others have shown that occasional similarities are more likely coincidence than causal.
^ a b Klerman D, Mahoney PG (2007). "Legal Origins". Journal of Comparative Economics 35 (2): 278–293. doi:10.1016/j.jce.2007.03.007. Retrieved 2009-09-04.
^ Sealey-Hooley, Commercial Law, 14
References

Farah, Paolo (August 2006). "Five Years of China WTO Membership. EU and US Perspectives about China's Compliance with Transparency Commitments and the Transitional Review Mechanism". Legal Issues of Economic Integration 33 (3): 263–304.
Barretto, Vicente (2006). Dicionário de Filosofia do Direito. Unisinos Editora. ISBN 85-7431-266-5.
Glenn, H. Patrick (2000). Legal Traditions of the World. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198765754.
Sadakat Kadri, The Trial: A History from Socrates to O.J. Simpson, HarperCollins 2005. ISBN 0-00-711121-5
Kelly, J.M. (1992). A Short History of Western Legal Theory. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198762445.
Gordley, James R.; von Mehren, Arthur Taylor (2006). An Introduction to the Comparative Study of Private Law. ISBN 9-780-52168-185-8.
Sealy, L.S.; Hooley, R.J.A. (2003). Commercial Law. LexisNexis Butterworths.
Stein, Peter (1999). Roman Law in European History. Cambridge University Press. pp. 32. ISBN 0-521-64372-4.
Kempin, Jr., Frederick G. (1963). Legal History: Law and Social Change. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Further reading

The Oxford international encyclopedia of legal history, Oxford University Press, 2009
External links

The Legal History Project (Resources and interviews)
Some legal history materials
The Schoyen Collection
The Roman Law Library by Yves Lassard and Alexandr Koptev.
Law & Justice in Australia - online collection from the State Library of NSW
Legal History: Evolution of Law
CHD Centre for Legal History - Faculty of Law, University of Rennes 1
Centre for Legal History - Edinburgh Law School
The European Society for History of Law
Collection of Historical Statutory Material - Cornell Law Library
Historical Laws of Hong Kong Online - University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives
Basic Law Drafting History Online -University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives
Alan Watson Foundation- A Group of Scholars Dedicated to the Promotion of Legal History and Comparative Law
Senn, Marcel / Fenner, Timo / Räber, Boris /Brüngger, Thomas / Frick, Georges / Johnson, Chris Chronicle of the European history of law" [1], Zurich 2009 (German)exlusivly available
[hide]v · d · eLaw
Core subjects	
Administrative law · Case law · Constitutional law · Contract · Criminal law · Evidence · Law of obligations · Property law · Public international law · Public law · Restitution · Statutory law · Tort · Trust law

Other subjects	
Admiralty law · Aviation law · Banking law · Bankruptcy · Commercial law · Competition law · Conflict of laws · Consumer protection · Corporate law · Energy law · Entertainment law · Environmental law · Family law · Financial regulation · Human rights · Immigration law · Intellectual property · International criminal law · Labour law · Military law · Music law · Procedure (Civil · Criminal) · Product liability · Space law · Sports law · Tax law · Unjust enrichment · Wills
Legal systems	
Canon law · Civil law · Common law · Comparative law · Halakha · Roman law · Sharia · Socialist law · Statutory law · Xeer
Legal theory	
Critical legal studies · Economic analysis · History · International legal theory · Philosophy · Sociology
Legal institutions	
Bureaucracy · Civil society · Election management body · Executive · Judiciary · Legal profession · Legislature · Military · Police
Category · Portal
View page ratings
Rate this page
What's this?
Trustworthy
Objective
Complete
Well-written
I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional)

Submit ratings
Categories: Legal history
Log in / create accountArticleDiscussionReadView sourceView history

