HEALTH
 
The word "health" derives from Middle English helthe, meaning hale, hearty, sound in wind and limb. Dictionary definitions allude to soundness and efficient functioning and give the same meaning to financial health as to bodily health. Modern medical practice and public health are concerned about the health of individuals and populations. However, for most individuals and for many cultures, health is a philosophical and subjective concept, associated with contentment and often taken for granted when all is going well. Health in this sense is difficult to describe or define, but its absence is readily recognizable, even when replaced by minor departures from an accustomed level of health.
 
DEFINITIONS AND CONCEPTS OF HEALTH
 
In the preamble to the constitution of the World Health Organization (WHO) health is described as "a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity." This description has often been criticized as being too vague. Further, it describes an ideal state rarely attained by most people, and it contains no ingredients that can be readily measured or counted, either at the individual or the population level.
 
Another definition, composed by specialists in preventive medicine, specifies some tangible components of health; calling it "a state characterized by anatomical, physiological, and psychological integrity; ability to perform personally valued family, work, and community roles; ability to deal with physical, biological, psychological, and social stress; a feeling of well-being; and freedom from the risk of disease and untimely death" (Stokes, Noren, and Shindell, 1982). Everything mentioned in this definition can be measured and counted at the individual and at the population level, although assessing "a feeling of well-being" may be a challenge, and "freedom from the risk of disease and untimely death" is not an achievable state.

An increasing level of interest in health promotion in the early 1980s inspired a WHO working group to compose a definition recognizing the role of individuals and communities in determining their own health status. They can be paraphrased to the extent to which an individual or a group is able to realize aspirations and satisfy needs and to change or cope with the environment. Health is a resource for everyday life, not the objective of living; it is a positive concept, emphasizing social and personal resources as well as physical capabilities (Last, ed., 2000). This definition draws attention to the need for partnerships among individuals and communities, and to the importance of protecting the integrity of the environment in the cause of promoting good health. Moreover, many aspects of this definition are measurable.
 
The health of humans cannot be dissociated from the health of the life-supporting ecosystems with which humans interact and are interdependent. Moreover, no matter how healthy the present generation may be, the health of future generations is dependent upon the integrity and sustainability of these ecosystems. A definition of "sustainable health" that recognizes this interconnectedness states that health is a sustainable state of equilibrium among humans and other living things that share the earth (Last, ed., 2000). The key word in this definition is "equilibrium" meaning harmony. Human beings cannot long remain healthy in an environment in which they are out of harmony with other living things, or if other living things are dead or dying as a consequence of people's actions. This is true of all life forms, from the smallest microorganisms to the largest mammals. Since the mid–twentieth century, medical professionals have been trying to "conquer" pathogenic microorganisms with antibiotics. This is a war that ultimately cannot be won because micro-organisms have very short generation times, measurable in minutes. Microorganisms can therefore adapt to the challenge of antibiotics by evolving and producing antibiotic-resistant strains much more rapidly than new antibiotics can be developed.
 
An alternative to antibiotics, which is perhaps insufficiently implemented, is based on the ecological concept that humans are an integral part of the global ecosystem. Immunization programs aimed at protecting people from diphtheria, tetanus, and other diseases have been very effective. The microorganisms responsible for these diseases are still there, in people's throats, in the soil, wherever is their usual habitat. But once protected by immunization, people can live in harmony with these otherwise dangerous microbes. The challenge is to develop methods that will enable humans to live in harmony with other dangerous microorganisms and insect vectors of disease. This is a more certain way to ensure long-term health for the population than the impossible goal of attempting to exterminate these other life forms. Pathogens that have no other host than humans can sometimes be eradicated, as the smallpox virus was, and as the polio virus could soon be, at least regionally if not globally; but eradication is not feasible with microorganisms that can survive out-side human hosts.
 
HEALTH THEORIES AND THEIR PRACTICAL APPLICATION
 
Beliefs about the foundations of good health are inseparable from theories of disease. Primitive beliefs about good and evil spirits; the benevolent or malevolent intervention of fate, gods, or ancestors; disease as a punishment for sin (Murdock, 1980); theories such as those of Aristotle and Galen about the balance of bodily fluids (humors) and about the effects of miasmas or "bad air" survive in the names by which we know some common diseases, including influenza, malaria, cholera, and rheumatism. A preference for holiday resorts and convalescent hospitals at the seaside or in the mountains reflects a belief in the notion that some environments are inherently healthier than others—as, indeed, abundant evidence demonstrates.
 
Scientists can trace the evolution of medical science in the changing nomenclature of disease. Some modern diagnostic labels indicate a precise understanding of the causal mechanisms of disease—streptococal septicemia is, literally, the poisoning of the blood by streptococcus bacteria. Some that sound impressive, such as thrombocytopenic purpura (bruising associated with a deficiency of thrombocytes, or blood platelets) reveal partial knowledge: scientists know what causes the bleeding but not what causes the deficiency of platelets. Other disease names are deservedly vague—essential hypertension confesses out ignorance about what actually causes high blood pressure.
 
Modern medicine and public health embrace several theories that are confirmed by abundant empirical and experimental evidence, and medical professionals have an increasingly broad and deep understanding of the ways in which health of individuals and populations can be impaired, endangered, of permanently lost. Scientists know that many diseases are caused by invading pathogenic microorganisms, which are often communicable. Some diseases are due to a disruption or imbalance among endocrine glands that secrete hormones needed to ensure efficient bodily function, some are caused by dietary deficiency of essential vitamins or minerals, and others are caused by exposure to harmful chemicals or physical insults such as ionizing radiation or excessive noise. Some diseases are due to, or strongly associated with, emotional stress. There remains a residue of important, and sometimes common, diseases and causes of disability and premature death for which there is no known cause, although effective treatments have been developed for some of theses, often through trial and error or guesswork. High blood pressure is one such disease.
 
The activities of public health services aim to minimize the risk of serious departures from good health. The scope and methods of medical and public health practice demonstrate the depth and breadth of current understanding of the causes of disease, disability, and premature death, and also of the causes of good health.
 
Many who remain fit throughout a long lifetime attribute their good health (often incorrectly) to their behavior; whether it be to an ascetic or hedonistic way of life, to abstaining from (or indulging in) alcohol or tobacco, to vigorous exercise, or to leading a quiet, sedentary life. Some credit their parents or genetic heritage—certainly an important determinant of longevity—along with many environmental and behavioral factors. In fact, the causes of good health are as diverse and complex as the causes of disease.
 
Even literate, well-educated people sometimes have misguided views about what makes or keeps them healthy, often believing that regular daily exercise, regular bowel movements, or a specific dietary regime will alone suffice to preserve their good health. The Nobel laureate Linus Pauling believed that massive daily doses of Vitamin C preserved his health. Those who are less well educated and more gullible are easy prey to hucksters who purvey all manner of dubious nostrums to prolong life, enhance vitality or virility, promote fitness, and eliminate ailments ranging from halitosis and body odor to failing sexual potency and even cancer and heart disease.
 
Modern approaches to health education and health promotion make use of the Health Belief Model along with several other theoretical constructs to predict health-related behavior. These are based on assumptions derived from empirical studies of how people perceive their health and their understanding of what has to be done to preserve and protect their own health, or that of their children.
 
OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE PERCEPTIONS OF HEALTH
 
A well-trained physician, or an observant member of a family, can often tell at a glance that someone is unwell. There are obvious signs—pallor, sweating, unsteady gait, a bone-shaking cough. The converse is more challenging. Someone who appears to be outwardly perfectly fit—hale and hearty, sound in wind and limb—may harbor an early cancer that is eating away at a vital organ, or, when asked the right questions may reveal a potential mental health problem, though there is no physical evidence of a departure from excellent health. Health has many dimensions, and each must be assessed and measured on some sort of scale. This is what physicians do when conducting a routine medical history and physical examination, which includes various laboratory tests. The results of such an examination have a range of values that usually follow a normal distribution, and for many of these the decision that a particular value lies within or outside the range of normal is rather arbitrary, although it is based on empirical experience. For example, experience and follow-up of many sets of observations allow us to agree on what level of systolic and diastolic blood pressure give grounds for a confident recommendation that treatment is needed to reduce an excessively high pressure that could lead to a stroke or heart attack.
 
Conversely, many severely disabled people can function efficiently and cheerfully within their limited capacity—paraplegics can perform with consummate speed and skill in road races in wheelchairs, and blind people can play chess and swim in competitive tournaments. The theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking, described in his book, A Brief History of Time (1988), the full and productive life he leads, though he is profoundly disabled physically by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease). Physical, mental, and emotional health are clearly three different dimensions of health.
 
Determinants of Health. Both individual and population health are determined by physical, biological, behavioral, social, and cultural factors. First among the physical factors is the radiant energy of the sun, which is ultimately essential for all life on earth. In Airs, Waters, and Places, Hippocrates identified climate, environmental topography, and aspects of behavior as determinants of health. Climate is assuming greater importance than hitherto due to the climate changes caused by increasing industrialization and energy consumption. Environmentally, the presence or absence of trace elements in the soil or water, such as fluorides to toughen dental enamel, iodine to stimulate the thyroid gland, and lead compounds that damage the developing brain, act to enhance or impair our health.
 
Biological determinants of health are inherent or acquired. Genetic heritage is a contributing factor to longevity, and to susceptibility or resistance to a wide range of diseases that include the pathogenic microorganisms responsible for some of the great plagues that have afflicted humans for millennia. Molecular geneticists have demonstrated that the interaction of human communities with the plague bacillus, the influenza and smallpox viruses, the malaria parasite, and with several other microorganisms, played a role in determining the differentiation and distribution of early races of humans in Africa and Asia. On a much shorter time scale, pathogenic microorganisms may be the most important biological determinants of health and disease. Immunity or resistance to pathogens is a very important determinant of good health. Immunity is enhanced by prior exposure, or by maternal exposure in the case of newborn infants, who acquire maternal (passive) immunity to some infections before they are born, and have it reinforced after birth by antibodies in breast milk. Routine immunization of infants and small children protects them from harm by many common and formerly dangerous pathogens including those that cause diphtheria, tetanus, measles, poliomyelitis, and whooping cough. Nutritional status is another important influence on resistance to infection. Individuals and populations are most vulnerable when they are malnourished or starved, which is why plagues often accompany famines.
 
Behavioral determinants have been much studied. An association of certain diseases with particular personality types has been observed empirically for centuries. An irascible temperament, for example, has been linked to occurrence of strokes, and an association has been demonstrated between high risk of coronary heart disease and a type A personality, marked by forceful and aggressive behavior. Research on mind-body interactions, which unites the disciplines of psychology, neurology, and immunology, made great progress in the last quarter of the twentieth century and began to clarify and explain these relationships.
 
Social factors that influence or determine health are also complex. There is epidemiologic evidence that good health is determined at least in part by social connectedness. Persons who have many and frequent interactions with other family members and with a network of friends have a more favorable health experience in many ways than those who are socially isolated, live alone, are estranged from their family, and have little or no family and social support systems. It is difficult however, to unravel social connectedness and personality factors that may encourage gregariousness or a solitary way of life. Position in the social hierarchy plays a role. Michael Marmot, a professor at University College in London, and his colleagues studied British civil servants, showing that top managers lead healthier lives than middle managers, who in turn are healthier than semi-skilled and unskilled clerical workers. Social networks and support systems, and social positions, are in part determined by factors beyond the control of individuals. While they are interrelated with personality factors, they are very complex and not well understood.
 
Studies have shown that economic conditions dramatically effect health and longevity. A consistently strong relationship has been demonstrated between income levels and health status in every country where the relationship has been examined. Many interactions between social, economic, and cultural factors also help to determine or influence community health.
 
Culture is defined as the set of customs, traditions, values, intellectual, and artistic qualities, and religious beliefs that distinguish one social group or nation from another. Culture influences behavior through customs such as use of or abstention from meat, alcohol, and tobacco; the practice of rituals such as circumcision; marital customs such as the prevailing age at which women marry; attitudes toward family size, childbearing, and child rearing; personal hygiene; disposal of the dead; and much else. People's values may be the most significant component of culture that affects behavior and through behavior, health. For example, since the late nineteenth century, an understanding of the importance of personal hygiene has become part of the value system of many cultures. In the late twentieth century, values in many nations shifted towards a rejection of tobacco smoking as a socially acceptable custom. In the 1960s, the oral contraceptive pill contributed to the sexually liberated values and behavior that encouraged casual promiscuity, and which was only partially overshadowed by the threat of infection with HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) in the 1980s and later.
 
PREREQUISITES FOR HEALTH
 
Another way to consider conditions required for people's health to flourish was outlined by working groups of the World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe in the 1980s, during the development of targets to be met in order to achieve Health for All, a program conceived with the goal of assuring that essential health care is accessible to everyone through organized programs of health promotion. The prerequisites for health were identified as: freedom from the fear of war, equal opportunity for all, satisfaction of basic needs (food, education, clean water and sanitation, decent housing), secure work, a useful social role, and political will and public support. All these are embodied in one way or another in the determinants of health outlined above, but when expressed as they were by the WHO working groups, the relevance of human values to achievement of good health becomes more explicit. Ultimately, values may matter more than anything else in influencing health.
 
HEALTH PROMOTION AND HEALTH MAINTENANCE
 
The basic goals of health promotion and health maintenance are a safe environment, enhanced immunity, sensible behavior, good nutrition, well-born children, and prudent health care. Each of these merits a brief discussion.
 
Safe Environment. Among the fundamental requirements for good health are clean air, safe water, land free from toxic substances, and shelter that protects people against the elements. The term "filth diseases" coined in the mid–nineteenth century, summarizes many life-shortening environmental hazards that prevailed at that time. Unpolluted water, sanitary disposal of human wastes, and improved housing conditions transformed overall health by the end of the nineteenth century. Access to food and resources essential for survival, as well as freedom from threat of war, persecution, and discrimination, are included in the European Charter for Health Promotion. A high proportion of the world's people are in want of these essential requirements for good health.
 
Enhanced Immunity. Next in importance to the provision of pure water supplies and sanitary disposal of human waste is the protection of infants and children against lethal and crippling infectious diseases. By the middle of the twentieth century, immunization campaigns had virtually wiped out diphtheria, tetanus, and whooping cough. Smallpox was eradicated worldwide by 1980. Development in virus vaccines in the second half of the twentieth century added poliomyelitis, measles, rubella, and mumps, to the list of diseases preventable through vaccination. This list includes other dangerous diseases that are rare in Western industrial nations, including typhoid, typhus, and yellow fever.
 
Sensible Behavior. The way people behave influences their health in many ways, and behaving sensibly is an obvious requirement for good health. Health-related behavior is influenced by our values, which are determined by upbringing, by example, by experience, by the company one keeps, by the persuasive power of advertising (often a force of behavior that can harm health), and by effective health education. These influences affect everyone—especially impressionable children—and lead to good or poor health, depending on the predominance of sensible or risk-taking behaviors that result.
 
Good Nutrition. A balanced diet comprises a mixture of the main varieties of nutriments (protein, carbohydrates, fats, minerals, and vitamins). For many reasons, not everyone has easy access to or incentives to eat a balanced diet. Some cannot afford it, others are ignorant of what kinds of food are good for them and what kinds are not; many are attracted by the advertising, convenience, and low cost of junk foods. Nevertheless, those who eat a well-balanced diet are healthier than those who do not.
 
Well-Born Children. By this term we mean children who are free from genetic defects, safely and easily born to healthy mothers after a pregnancy of normal duration, and nurtured securely to ensure that they pass developmental milestones in a timely manner so they grow up fit and strong. A great many characteristics are summarized in that statement, and are discussed elsewhere in this encyclopedia.
 
Prudent Health Care. It has been said that, until about 1930, the average patient with the average disease consulting the average physician had a less than 50 percent chance of benefiting from the encounter. In some respects the situation has greatly improved since then, but doctors even now inadvertently harm some whom they attempt to help, and hospitals remain dangerous places where patients are at risk of infection by other patients and contaminated instruments, invasive procedures can go wrong, and medications can be administered to the wrong patient or given in wrong dosages.
 
HEALTH INDICATORS
 
The health of potential military recruits and applicants for life insurance is assessed by their past history of illness and harmful behavior (e.g., smoking), and by a physical examination that includes blood pressure, tests of exercise tolerance, and other measures. Similar methods can be used to assess the health of a nation. The physical examinations of military conscripts early in the twentieth century provided evidence of the poor health of the British working classes, and which in turn motivated the government to introduce the first tax-supported medical services. In the United States, the National Health Surveys provide information about the health status of Americans (such as the increasingly prevalent obesity among young people). But this is a costly way to assess a nation's health. Traditionally, health care professionals have relied on summary statistics, especially life expectancy, which is derived from the age distribution of the population as determined by a national census. Life expectancy at birth is particularly sensitive to infant mortality, which is another widely used indicator of a nation's level of health.
 
More sensitive indicators take into account the available evidence on commonly occurring disabling diseases to derive summary statistics such as disability-adjusted life years. Health measurement scales are more elaborate derivatives of disability-based health indicators. These require the use of questionnaires, interviews, and sometimes physical examination of individuals to derive a numerical score for particular aspects of health such as an ability to climb stairs, shop for food, prepare meals, get dressed unaided, or drive a car. Standardized interviews can also be used to derive a numerical score for aspects of mental health, social interaction with others, and employability. When all available health indicators are complied, various conclusions can be drawn. They show, for example, that Japan, Australia, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Canada are among the world's healthiest nations; while Sierra Leone, Mozambique, and Malawi are in many respects the least healthy. The United States is among the top twenty nations according to some indicators, and among the top twenty-five according to others. But no nation has a monopoly on indicators of good health. If athletic prowess is an indicator, African Americans consistently outperform all others in sprints, while Africans from Kenya outperform all others in middle- and long-distance running. Some small nations in the mountainous Caucasus region between the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea,
Determining which nations are healthy depends on which health indicators are looked at. The Netherlands, for example, ranks at the top using indicators of health quality—literacy levels, low incidence of abortion and unwanted pregnancy, low incidence rates of impairments, disabilities, and handicaps—though other countries may rank higher in terms of longevity and other indicators.
 
Table 1 shows the ranking of various nations based on years of healthy life expectancy or disability-adjusted life years, the age to which on average people are expected to live in good health. This number is reached by subtracting the average years of ill health from the overall life expectancy. The top nations are Japan, Australia, and France; the bottom three are Malawi, Niger, and Sierra Leone. The United States is twenty-fourth on this list, though it is the richest nation on earth in terms of economic indicators. The poorest fifth of residents in the United States have a healthy life expectancy of just fifty-five years, compared to seventy years for the nation as a whole. Clearly there is room for considerable improvement.
 
CONCLUSION
 
Health is clearly a complex, multidimensional concept. Personal or individual health is largely subjective. It is possible to be physically robust, to be "the picture of good health," and yet have serious mental or emotional impairment. Conversely, an individual can be profoundly disabled physically yet have an intact mind and be emotionally well-adjusted. So while many facets of health can be identified, the assessment or measurement of individual health must take them all into account. Economists can derive a single number—the net worth or gross domestic product—as a measure of the economic status of an individual or a nation. But there is no comparable one-dimensional measurement scale for the health of an individual, much less a nation. At best, public health professionals can create community or national profiles using crude health indicators like life expectancy; infant mortality rates; death or sickness rates from specific causes like cancer, heart disease, suicide, and homicide; or surrogate measurements such as use of drugs, (prescribed or over-the-counter) and spells of hospital care.
 
Health is, ultimately, poorly defined and difficult to measure, despite impressive efforts by epidemiologists, vital statisticians, social scientists, and political economists. The dramatic differences in levels of health among the nations of the world only challenge public health professionals to pursue global health standards.
 
At the beginning of the twenty-first century the principal causes of premature death and departures from good health were violence, including violent armed conflict; smoking-related disease; automobile accidents; and overindulgence in high-calorie foods that are ill-suited to modern, sedentary lifestyles. All of these are ultimately associated with human behavior, which is greatly determined by values. Only by adopting values that support a healthy lifestyle can people improve their overall health.
Health information is any quantifiable and non-quantifiable information that can be used by health decision-makers and clinicians to better understand disease processes and health care issues, and to prevent, diagnose or treat health problems. A health information system refers to inter-related component parts for acquiring and analyzing data and providing information (management information, health statistics, health literature) for the management of a health programme or system and for monitoring health activities. 

Country health information systems include a range of population-based and health facility-based data sources. The main population-based sources of health information are census, household surveys and (sample) vital registration systems. The main health facility-related data sources are public health surveillance, health services data (also sometimes referred to as health management information system or routine health information system) and health system monitoring data (e.g. human resources, health infrastructure, financing). Lastly, national health accounts can provide a comprehensive picture of health financing.

Health information should guide mobilization and allocation of resources, prioritization of health programmes and research, and improve efficiency and effectiveness of health programmes. For information to influence management in an optimal way, it has to be used by decision makers at each point of the management spiral. This means that not only policy makers and managers need to make use of information in decision making but also care providers including doctors, health technicians, and community health workers. WHO's work focuses on improving availability, quality and use of health information across levels.

In India, the health information exists at various levels, forms and systems. There is a wide variety of data that is collected by number of agencies mainly government both at the central and state level through routine data collection and also periodic sample surveys. While various initiatives at strengthening of health information systems is underway, challenges continue in terms of reliability, relevance, timeliness, harmonization as well as quality of data.  

Some of the key initiatives undertaken in collaboration with the Central Bureau of Health Intelligence (CBHI), MOHFW, GOI includes improving the quality and timeliness of health related information and statistics, review of health information systems, preparation of training material for ICD 10, development of National Health Profile 2005 & 2006. Another initiative has been the development of a health repository which seeks to compile and make available information and evidence from India on various health and related issues. 

With a view to strengthen evidence based policy making, measuring the burden of disease and conditions in the country and understanding which sub-populations are most effected is a critical component. In response to the lack of basic, accurate data for informed priority setting, WHO and others have undertaken work on estimating the global burden of disease (BoD). The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has developed a database for disease burden estimation for malaria, filaria, dengue and diarrhoeal diseases. 

This article is about the human condition. For other uses, see Health (disambiguation).
 

The Star of Life. 
Health is the level of functional and (or) metabolic efficiency of a living being. In humans, it is the general condition of a person in mind, body and spirit, usually meaning to being free from illness, injury or pain (as in “good health” or “healthy”). The World Health Organization (WHO) defined health in its broader sense in 1946 as "a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity." Although this definition has been subject to controversy, in particular as having a lack of operational value and the problem created by use of the word "complete", it remains the most enduring.Classification systems such as the WHO Family of International Classifications, including the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), are commonly used to define and measure the components of health.
 
The maintenance and promotion of health is achieved through different combination of physical, mental, and social well-being, together sometimes referred to as the “health triangle”.[6][7] The WHO's 1986 Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion furthered that health is not just a state, but also "a resource for everyday life, not the objective of living. Health is a positive concept emphasizing social and personal resources, as well as physical capacities."
 
Systematic activities to prevent or cure health problems and promote good health in humans are delivered by health care providers. Applications with regard to animal health are covered by the veterinary sciences. The term "healthy" is also widely used in the context of many types of non-living organizations and their impacts for the benefit of humans, such as in the sense of healthy communities, healthy cities or healthy environments. In addition to health care interventions and a person's surroundings, a number of other factors are known to influence the health status of individuals, including their background, lifestyle, and economic and social conditions; these are referred to as "determinants of health".
An increasing number of studies and reports from different organizations and contexts examine the linkages between health and different factors, including lifestyles, environments, health care organization, and health policy - such as the 1974 Lalonde report from Canada[11]; the Alameda County Study in California[12]; and the series of World Health Reports of the World Health Organization, which focuses on global health issues including access to health care and improving public health outcomes, especially in developing countries.
 
The concept of the "health field", as distinct from medical care, emerged from the Lalonde report from Canada. The report identified three interdependent fields as key determinants of an individual's health. These are:
 Lifestyle: the aggregation of personal decisions (i.e. over which the individual has control) that can be said to contribute to, or cause, illness or death;
 Environmental: all matters related to health external to the human body, and over which the individual has little or no control;
 Biomedical: all aspects of health, physical and mental, developed within the human body as influenced by genetic make-up.
 
Focusing more on lifestyle issues and their relationships with functional health, data from the Alameda County Study suggested that people can improve their health via exercise, enough sleep, maintaining a healthy body weight, limiting alcohol use, and avoiding smoking. The ability to adapt and to self manage have been suggested as core components of human health.
 
The environment is often cited as an important factor influencing the health status of individuals. This includes characteristics of the natural environment, the built environment, and the social environment. Factors such as clean water and air, adequate housing, and safe communities and roads all have been found to contribute to good health, especially the health of infants and children. Some studies have shown that a lack of neighborhood recreational spaces including natural environment leads to lower levels of personal satisfaction and higher levels of obesity, linked to lower overall health and well being. This suggests the positive health benefits of natural space in urban neighborhoods should be taken into account in public policy and land use.
 
Genetics, or inherited traits from parents, also play a role in determining the health status of individuals and populations. This can encompass both the predisposition to certain diseases and health conditions, as well as the habits and behaviors individuals develop through the lifestyle of their families - also referred to as the "nature versus nurture" debate, in other words the role of factors which can or cannot be controlled. For example, genetics may play a role in the manner in which people cope with stress, either mental, emotional or physical.
Public health has been described as "the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting health through the organized efforts and informed choices of society, organizations, public and private, communities and individuals." It is concerned with threats to the overall health of a community based on population health analysis. The population in question can be as small as a handful of people or as large as all the inhabitants of several continents (for instance, in the case of a pandemic). Public health has many sub-fields, but typically includes the interdisciplinary categories of epidemiology, biostatistics and health services. Environmental health, community health, behavioral health, and occupational health, are also important areas of public health.
 
The focus of public health interventions is to prevent and manage diseases, injuries and other health conditions through surveillance of cases and the promotion of healthy behaviors, communities and environments. Its aim is preventing from happening or re-occurring health problems by implementing educational programs, developing policies, administering services, and conducting research. In many cases, treating a disease or controlling a pathogen can be vital to preventing it in others, such as during an outbreak. Vaccination programs and distribution of condoms to prevent the spread of communicable diseases are examples of common preventive public health measures.
 
Public health also takes several actions to limit the health disparities between different areas of the country, continent or world. The great issue is addressing access of individuals and communities to health care, in terms of financial, geographical or sociocultural constraints in access to and use of services. Applications of the public health system include areas of maternal and child health, health services administration, emergency response, and prevention and control of infectious and chronic diseases.
 
The great positive impact of public health programs is widely acknowledged. Due in part to the policies and actions developed through public health, the 20th century registered a decrease of the mortality rates in infants and children and a continual increase in life expectancy in most parts of the world. For example, it is estimated that the life expectancy has increased for Americans by thirty years since 1900, and worldwide by six years since 1990.

For "The Office" television show episode, see Health Care (The Office).
 
Health care (or healthcare) is the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease, illness, injury, and other physical and mental impairments in humans. Health care is delivered by practitioners in medicine, chiropractic, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, allied health, and other care providers. It refers to the work done in providing primary care, secondary care and tertiary care, as well as in public health.
 
Access to health care varies across countries, groups and individuals, largely influenced by social and economic conditions as well as the health policies in place. Countries and jurisdictions have different policies and plans in relation to the personal and population-based health care goals within their societies. Health care systems are organizations established to meet the health needs of target populations. Their exact configuration varies from country to country. In some countries and jurisdictions, health care planning is distributed among market participants, whereas in others planning is made more centrally among governments or other coordinating bodies. In all cases, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), a well-functioning health care system requires a robust financing mechanism; a well-trained and adequately-paid workforce; reliable information on which to base decisions and policies; and well maintained facilities and logistics to deliver quality medicines and technologies.
 
Health care can form a significant part of a country's economy. In 2008, the health care industry consumed an average of 9.0 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) across the most developed OECD countries.The United States (16.0%), France (11.2%), and Switzerland (10.7%) were the top three spenders.
 
Health care is conventionally regarded as an important determinant in promoting the general health and wellbeing of peoples around the world. An example of this is the worldwide eradication of smallpox in 1980—declared by the WHO as the first disease in human history to be completely eliminated by deliberate health care interventions.

Primary care is the term for the health care services which play a central role in the local community. It refers to the work of health care professionals who act as a first point of consultation for all patients within the health care system. Such a professional would usually be a primary care physician, such as a general practitioner or family physician. Depending on the locality, health system organization, and sometimes at the patient's discretion, they may see another health care professional first, such as a pharmacist, a nurse (such as in the United Kingdom), a clinical officer (such as in parts of Africa), or an Ayurvedic or other traditional medicine professional (such as in parts of Asia). Depending on the nature of the health condition, patients may then be referred for secondary or tertiary care.
 
Primary care involves the widest scope of health care, including all ages of patients, patients of all socioeconomic and geographic origins, patients seeking to maintain optimal health, and patients with all manner of acute and chronic physical, mental and social health issues, including multiple chronic diseases. Consequently, a primary care practitioner must possess a wide breadth of knowledge in many areas. Continuity is a key characteristic of primary care, as patients usually prefer to consult the same practitioner for routine check-ups and preventive care, health education, and every time they require an initial consultation about a new health problem. The International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC) is a standardized tool for understanding and analyzing information on interventions in primary care by the reason for the patient visit.
 
Common chronic illnesses usually treated in primary care may include, for example: hypertension, diabetes, asthma, COPD, depression and anxiety, back pain, arthritis or thyroid dysfunction. Primary care also includes many basic maternal and child health care services, such as family planning services and vaccinations.
 
In context of global population ageing, with increasing numbers of older adults at greater risk of chonic non-communicable diseases, rapidly increasing demand for primary care services is expected around the world, in both developed and developing countries.The World Health Organization attributes the provision of essential primary care as an integral component of an inclusive primary health care strategy.

Secondary care is the health care services provided by medical specialists and other health professionals who generally do not have first contact with patients, for example, cardiologists, urologists and dermatologists.
 
It includes acute care: necessary treatment for a short period of time for a brief but serious illness, injury or other health condition, such as in a hospital emergency department. It also includes skilled attendance during childbirth, intensive care, and medical imaging services.
 
The "secondary care" is sometimes used synonymously with "hospital care". However many secondary care providers do not necessarily work in hospitals, such as psychiatrists or physiotherapists, and some primary care services are delivered within hospitals. Depending on the organization and policies of the national health system, patients may be required to see a primary care provider for a referral before they can access secondary care.
 
For example in the United States, which operates under a mixed market health care system, some physicians might voluntarily limit their practice to secondary care by requiring patients to see a primary care provider first, or this restriction may be imposed under the terms of the payment agreements in private/group health insurance plans. In other cases medical specialists may see patients without a referral, and patients may decide whether self-referral is preferred.
 
In the United Kingdom and Canada, patient self-referral to a medical specialist for secondary care is rare as prior referral from another physician (either a primary care physician or another specialist) is considered necessary, regardless of whether the funding is from private insurance schemes or national health insurance.
 
Allied health professionals, such as occupational therapists, speech therapists, and dietitians, also generally work in secondary care, accessed through either patient self-referral or through physician referral.

Tertiary care is specialized consultative health care, usually for inpatients and on referral from a primary or secondary health professional, in a facility that has personnel and facilities for advanced medical investigation and treatment, such as a tertiary referral hospital.
 
Examples of tertiary care services are cancer management, neurosurgery, cardiac surgery, plastic surgery, treatment for severe burns, advanced neonatology services, palliative, and other complex medical and surgical interventions.
 
Quaternary care
 
The term quaternary care is also used sometimes as an extension of tertiary care in reference to medicine of advanced levels which are highly specialized and not widely accessed. Experimental medicine and some types of uncommon diagnostic or surgical procedures are considered quaternary care. These services are usually only offered in a limited number of regional or national health care centres.
 
Home and community care
 
See also: Public health
 
Many types of health care interventions are delivered outside of health facilities. They include many interventions of public health interest, such as food safety surveillance, distribution of condoms and needle-exchange programmes for the prevention of transmissible diseases.
 
They also include the services of professionals in residential and community settings in support of self care, home care, long-term care, assisted living, treatment for substance use disorders, and other types of health and social care services.
The quantity and quality of many health care interventions are improved through the results of science, such as advanced through the medical model of health which focuses on the eradication of illness through diagnosis and effective treatment. Many important advances have been made through health research, including biomedical research and pharmaceutical research. They form the basis of evidence-based medicine and evidence-based practice in health care delivery.
 
For example, in terms of pharmaceutical research and development spending, Europe spends a little less than the United States (22.50bn compared to 27.05bn in 2006). The United States accounts for 80% of the world's research and development spending in biotechnology.
 
In addition, the results of health services research can lead to greater efficiency and equitable delivery of health care interventions, as advanced through the social model of health and disability, which emphasizes the societal changes that can be made to make population healthiers. Results from health services research often form the basis of evidence-based policy in health care systems.

Too often health systems have been defined with a reductionist perspective, for example reducing it to the health care systems. In many publications, for example, both expressions are used interchangeably. Some authors have developed arguments to expand the concept, indicating how many dimensions participate to it:
  Health systems should not be expressed in terms of their components only, but also of their interrelationships;
  Health systems should include not only the institutional or supply side of the health system, but also the population;
  Health systems must be seen in terms of their goals, which include not only health improvement, but also equity, responsiveness to legitimate expectations, respect of dignity, and fair financing, among others;
 
Health systems must also be defined in terms of their functions, including the direct provision of services, whether they are medical or public health services, but also "other enabling functions, such as stewardship, financing, and resource generation, including what is probably the most complex of all challenges, the health workforce".
 
International comparisons and performance
 
Health systems may vary substantially from countries to countries, and in the last years comparisons have been made on an international basis. The goals for health systems, according to the WHO's World Health Report 2000 - Health systems: improving performance (WHO, 2000), are good health, responsiveness to the expectations of the population, and fair financial contribution. There have been several debates around the results of this WHO exercise , and especially based on the country ranking linked to it , insofar as it appeared to depend mostly on the choice of the retained indicators.
 
Since 2000, more and more initiatives have been taken at the international and national levels in order to strengthen national health systems as the core components of the global health system. Having this scope in mind, it is essential to have a clear, and unrestricted, vision of national health systems that might generate further progresses in global health. The elaboration and the selection of performance indicators are indeed both highly dependent on the conceptual framework adopted for the evaluation of the health systems performances.
 
An increasing number of tools and guidelines are being published by international agencies and development partners to assist health system decision-makers to monitor and assess health systems strengthening including human resources development using standard definitions, indicators and measures.

A health care provider is an individual or an institution that provides preventive, curative, promotional or rehabilitative health care services in a systematic way to individuals, families or communities.
 
An individual health care provider (also known as a health worker) may be a health care professional, an allied health professional, a community health worker, or another person trained and knowledgeable in medicine, nursing or other allied health professions, or public/community health. Institutions (also known as health facilities) include hospitals, clinics, primary care centres and other service delivery points. The practice of health professionals and operation of health care institutions is typically regulated by national or state/provincial authorities through appropriate regulatory bodies for purposes of quality assurance.Together, they form part of an overall health care system.

Hospital
 
Main article: Hospital
 
A hospital is an institution for health care typically providing specialized treatment for inpatient (or overnight) stays. Some hospitals primarily admit patients suffering from a specific disease or affection, or are reserved for the diagnosis and treatment of conditions affecting a specific age group. Others have a mandate that expands beyond offering dominantly curative and rehabilitative care services to include promotional, preventive and educational roles as part of a primary health care approach. Today, hospitals are usually funded by the state, health organizations (for profit or non-profit), by health insurances or by charities and by donations. Historically, however, they were often founded and funded by religious orders or charitable individuals and leaders. Hospitals are nowadays staffed by professionally trained doctors, nurses, paramedical clinicians, etc., whereas in history, this work was usually done by the founding religious orders or by volunteers.
 
Health care centre
 
See also: Primary care
 
Health care centres, including clinics and ambulatory surgery centers, serve as first point of contact with a health professional and provide outpatient medical, nursing, dental and other types of care services. Like hospitals, they may be governed and funded by government, parastatal organizations, or private or religious organizations (for profit or not-for-profit).
 
Medical nursing home
 
Medical nursing homes, including residential treatment centers and geriatric care facilities, are health care institutions which have accommodation facilities and which engage in providing short-term or long-term medical treatment of a general or specialized nature not performed by hospitals to inpatients with any of a wide variety of medical conditions.
 
Pharmacies and drug stores
 
Main article: Pharmacy
 
Pharmacies and drug stores comprise establishments engaged in retailing prescription or nonprescription drugs and medicines, and other types of medical and orthopaedic goods. Regulated pharmacies may be based in a hospital or clinic or they may be privately operated, and are usually staffed by pharmacists, pharmacy technicians and pharmacy aides.
 
Medical laboratory and research
 
Main articles: Medical laboratory and Biomedical research
 
A medical laboratory or clinical laboratory is a laboratory where tests are done on biological specimens in order to get information about the health of a patient. Such laboratories may be divided into categorical departments such as microbiology, hematology, clinical biochemistry, immunology, serology, histology, cytology, cytogenetics, or virology. In many countries, there are two main types of labs that process the majority of medical specimens. Hospital laboratories are attached to a hospital, and perform tests on these patients. Private or community laboratories receive samples from general practitioners, insurance companies, and other health clinics for analysis.
 
A biomedical research facility is where basic research or applied research is conducted to aid the body of knowledge in the field of medicine. Medical research can be divided into two general categories: the evaluation of new treatments for both safety and efficacy in what are termed clinical trials, and all other research that contributes to the development of new treatments. The latter is termed preclinical research if its goal is specifically to elaborate knowledge for the development of new therapeutic strategies.
 
Practitioners and professionals
 
Health practitioners and professionals
 Athletic Trainers
 Audiologists and Speech Pathologists
 Chiropractors
 Clinical nurse specialists
 Clinical officers
 Community health workers
 Dentists
 Dietitians and Nutritionists
 Emergency medical technicians
 Feldshers
 Health administrators
 Medical Assistants
 Medical technologists
 Midwives, including Nurse Midwives
 Nurses
 Nurse practitioners
 Nurse anesthetists
 Occupational therapists
 Optometrists
 Pharmacists
 Pharmaconomists
 Pharmacy technicians
 Phlebotomists
 Physicians
 Physician Assistants
 Podiatrists
 Psychologists
 Psychotherapists
 Physiotherapists
 Respiratory Therapists
 Social Workers
 
Health care practitioners include physicians (including general practitioners and specialists), dentists, physician assistants, nurses (including advanced practice registered nurses), midwives, pharmacists, dietitians, therapists, psychologists, chiropractors, clinical officers, phlebotomists, physical therapists, respiratory therapists, occupational therapists, audiologists, speech pathologists, optometrists, emergency medical technicians, paramedics, medical laboratory technicians, medical prosthetic technicians, radiographers, social workers, and a wide variety of other human resources trained to provide some type of health care service. They often work in hospitals, health care centres and other service delivery points, but also in academic training, research and administration. Some provide care and treatment services for patients in private homes. Many countries have a large number of community health workers who work outside of formal health care institutions. Managers of health care services, medical records and health information technicians, and other assistive personnel and support workers are also considered a vital part of health care teams.






