The Mystery of Hunter's Lodge
'After all,' murmured Poirot, 'it is possible that I shall not die this
time.'
Coming from a convalescent influenza patient, I hailed the remark
as showing a beneficial optimism. I myself had been the first
sufferer from the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down. He was
now sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows, his head muffled in a
woollen shawl, and was slowly sipping a particularly noxious tisane
which I had prepared according to his directions. His eye rested
with pleasure upon a neatly graduated row of medicine bottles
which adorned the mantelpiece.
'Yes, yes,' my little friend continued. 'Once more shall I be myself
again, the great Hercule Poirot, the terror of evildoers! Figure to
yourself, mon ami, that I have a little paragraph to myself in Society
Gossip. But yes! Here it is: "Go it - criminals - all out! Hercule Poirot
- and believe me, girls, he's some Hercules! - our own pet society
detective can't get a grip on you. 'Cause why? 'Cause he's got la
grippe himself"!'
I laughed.
'Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming quite a public character.
And fortunately you haven't missed anything of particular interest
during this time.'
'That is true. The few cases I have had to decline did not fill me with
any regret.'
Our landlady stuck her head in at the door.
'There's a gentleman downstairs. Says he must see Monsieur Poirot
or you, Captain. Seeing as he was in a great to-do - and with all that
quite the gentleman - I brought up 'is card.'
She handed me the bit of pasteboard. 'Mr Roger Havering,' I read.
Poirot motioned with his head towards the bookcase, and I
obediently pulled forth Who's Who. Poirot took it from me and
scanned the pages rapidly.
'Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married 1913 Zoe, fourth
daughter of William Crabb.'
'H'm!' I said. 'I rather fancy that's the girl who used to act at the
Frivolity - only she called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember she
married some young man about town just before the War.'
'Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down and hear what our
visitor's particular little trouble is? Make him all my excuses.'
Roger Havering was a man of about forty, well set up and of smart
appearance. His face, however, was haggard, and he was evidently
labouring under great agitation.
'Captain Hastings? You are Monsieur Poirot's partner, I understand.
It is imperative that he should come with me to Derbyshire today.'
'I'm afraid that's impossible,' I replied. 'Poirot is ill in bed -
influenza.'
His face fell.
'Dear me, that is a great blow to me.'
'The matter on which you want to consult him is serious?'
'My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend I have in the world, was
foully murdered last night.'
'Here in London?'
'No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and received a telegram from my
wife this morning. Immediately upon its receipt I determined to
come round and beg Monsieur Poirot to undertake the case.'
'If you will excuse me a minute,' I said, struck by a sudden idea.
I rushed upstairs, and in a few brief words acquainted Poirot with
the situation. He took any further words out of my mouth.
'I see. I see. You want to go yourself, is it not so? Well, why not? You
should know my methods by now. All I ask is that you should report
to me fully every day, and follow implicitly any instructions I may
wire you.'
To this I willingly agreed.
II
An hour later I was sitting opposite Mr Havering in a first-class
carriage on the Midland Railway, speeding rapidly away from
London.
'To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must understand that
Hunter's Lodge, where we are going, and where the tragedy took
place, is only a small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire
moors. Our real home is near Newmarket, and we usually rent a flat
in town for the season. Hunter's Lodge is looked after by a
housekeeper who is quite capable of doing all we need when we
run down for an occasional weekend. Of course, during the
shooting season, we take down some of our own servants from
Newmarket. My uncle, Mr Harrington Pace (as you may know, my
mother was a Miss Pace of New York), has, for the last three years,
made his home with us. He never got on well with my father, or my
elder brother, and I suspect that my being somewhat of a prodigal
son myself rather increased than diminished his affection towards
me. Of course I am a poor man, and my uncle was a rich one - in
other words, he paid the piper! But, though exacting in many ways,
he was not really hard to get on with, and we all three lived very
harmoniously together. Two days ago my uncle, rather wearied
with some recent gaieties of ours in town, suggested that we
should run down to Derbyshire for a day or two. My wife
telegraphed to Mrs Middleton, the housekeeper, and we went down
that same afternoon. Yesterday evening I was forced to return to
town, but my wife and my uncle remained on. This morning I
received this telegram.' He handed it over to me:
'Come at once uncle Harrington murdered last night bring good
detective if you can but do come - Zoe.'
'Then, as yet you know no details?'
'No, I suppose it will be in the evening papers. Without doubt the
police are in charge.'
It was about three o'clock when we arrived at the little station of
Elmer's Dale. From there a five-mile drive brought us to a small grey
stone building in the midst of the rugged moors.
'A lonely place,' I observed with a shiver.
Havering nodded.
'I shall try and get rid of it. I could never live here again.'
We unlatched the gate and were walking up the narrow path to the
oak door when a familiar figure emerged and came to meet us.
'Japp!' I ejaculated.
The Scotland Yard inspector grinned at me in a friendly fashion
before addressing my companion.
'Mr Havering, I think? I've been sent down from London to take
charge of this case, and I'd like a word with you, if I may, sir.'
'My wife - '
'I've seen your good lady, sir - and the housekeeper. I won't keep
you a moment, but I'm anxious to get back to the village now that
I've seen all there is to see here.'
'I know nothing as yet as to what - '
'Ex-actly,' said Japp soothingly. 'But there are just one or two little
points I'd like your opinion about all the same. Captain Hastings
here, he knows me, and he'll go on up to the house and tell them
you're coming. What have you done with the little man, by the way,
Captain Hastings?'
'He's ill in bed with influenza.'
'Is he now? I'm sorry to hear that. Rather the case of the cart
without the horse, your being here without him, isn't it?'
And on his rather ill-timed jest I went on to the house. I rang the
bell, as Japp had closed the door behind him. After some moments
it was opened to me by a middle-aged woman in black.
'Mr Havering will be here in a moment,' I explained. 'He has been
detained by the inspector. I have come down with him from London
to look into the case. Perhaps you can tell me briefly what occurred
last night.'
'Come inside, sir.' She closed the door behind me, and we stood in
the dimly-lighted hall. 'It was after dinner last night, sir, that the
man came. He asked to see Mr Pace, sir, and, seeing that he spoke
the same way, I thought it was an American gentleman friend of Mr
Pace's and I showed him into the gun-room, and then went to tell Mr
Pace. He wouldn't give any name, which, of course, was a bit odd,
now I come to think of it. I told Mr Pace, and he seemed puzzled
like, but he said to the mistress: "Excuse me, Zoe, while I just see
what this fellow wants." He went off to the gun-room, and I went
back to the kitchen, but after a while I heard loud voices, as if they
were quarrelling, and I came out into the hall. At the same time, the
mistress she comes out too, and just then there was a shot and then
a dreadful silence. We both ran to the gun-room door, but it was
locked and we had to go round to the window. It was open, and
there inside was Mr Pace, all shot and bleeding.'
'What became of the man?'
'He must have got away through the window, sir, before we got to
it.'
'And then?'
'Mrs Havering sent me to fetch the police. Five miles to walk it was.
They came back with me, and the constable he stayed all night, and
this morning the police gentleman from London arrived.'
'What was this man like who called to see Mr Pace?'
The housekeeper reflected.
'He had a black beard, sir, and was about middle-aged, and had on
a light overcoat. Beyond the fact that he spoke like an American I
didn't notice much about him.'
'I see. Now I wonder if I can see Mrs Havering?'
'She's upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?'
'If you please. Tell her that Mr Havering is outside with Inspector
Japp, and that the gentleman he has brought back with him from
London is anxious to speak to her as soon as possible.'
'Very good, sir.'
I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the facts. Japp had two or
three hours' start of me, and his anxiety to be gone made me keen
to be close at his heels.
Mrs Havering did not keep me waiting long. In a few minutes I heard
a light step descending the stairs, and looked up to see a very
handsome young woman coming towards me. She wore a flamecoloured
jumper, that set off the slender boyishness of her figure.
On her dark head was a little hat of flame-coloured leather. Even
the present tragedy could not dim the vitality of her personality.
I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick comprehension.
'Of course I have often heard of you and your colleague, Monsieur
Poirot. You have done some wonderful things together, haven't
you? It was very clever of my husband to get you so promptly. Now
will you ask me questions? That is the easiest way, isn't it, of
getting to know all you want to about this dreadful affair?'
'Thank you, Mrs Havering. Now what time was it that this man
arrived?'
'It must have been just before nine o'clock. We had finished dinner,
and were sitting over our coffee and cigarettes.'
'Your husband had already left for London?'
'Yes, he went up by the 6.15.'
'Did he go by car to the station, or did he walk?'
'Our own car isn't down here. One came out from the garage in
Elmer's Dale to fetch him in time for the train.'
'Was Mr Pace quite his usual self?'
'Absolutely. Most normal in every way.'
'Now, can you describe this visitor at all?'
'I'm afraid not. I didn't see him. Mrs Middleton showed him straight
into the gun-room and then came to tell my uncle.'
'What did your uncle say?'
'He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at once. It was about five
minutes later that I heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out into
the hall and almost collided with Mrs Middleton. Then we heard the
shot. The gun-room door was locked on the inside, and we had to
go right round the house to the window. Of course that took some
time, and the murderer had been able to get well away. My poor
uncle' - her voice faltered - 'had been shot through the head. I saw
at once that he was dead. I sent Mrs Middleton for the police. I was
careful to touch nothing in the room but to leave it exactly as I found
it.'
I nodded approval.
'Now, as to the weapon?'
'Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain Hastings. A pair of revolvers
of my husband's were mounted upon the wall. One of them is
missing. I pointed this out to the police, and they took the other one
away with them. When they have extracted the bullet, I suppose
they will know for certain.'
'May I go to the gun-room?'
'Certainly. The police have finished with it. But the body has been
removed.'
She accompanied me to the scene of the crime. At that moment
Havering entered the hall, and with a quick apology his wife ran to
him. I was left to undertake my investigations alone.
I may as well confess at once that they were rather disappointing.
In detective novels clues abound, but here I could find nothing that
struck me as out of the ordinary except a large blood-stain on the
carpet where I judged the dead man had fallen. I examined
everything with painstaking care and took a couple of pictures of
the room with my little camera which I had brought with me. I also
examined the ground outside the window, but it appeared to have
been so heavily trampled underfoot that I judged it was useless to
waste time over it. No, I had seen all that Hunter's Lodge had to
show me. I must go back to Elmer's Dale and get into touch with
Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the Haverings, and was driven off
in the car that had brought us up from the station.
I found Japp at the Matlock Arms and he took me forthwith to see
the body. Harrington Pace was a small, spare, clean-shaven man,
typically American in appearance. He had been shot through the
back of the head, and the revolver had been discharged at close
quarters.
'Turned away for a moment,' remarked Japp, 'and the other fellow
snatched up a revolver and shot him. The one Mrs Havering handed
over to us was fully loaded and I suppose the other one was also.
Curious what darn fool things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded
revolvers hanging up on your wall.'
'What do you think of the case?' I asked, as we left the gruesome
chamber behind us.
'Well, I'd got my eye on Havering to begin with. Oh, yes!' - noting my
exclamation of astonishment. 'Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at Oxford there was some
funny business about the signature on one of his father's cheques.
All hushed up of course. Then, he's pretty heavily in debt now, and
they're the kind of debts he wouldn't like to go to his uncle about,
whereas you may be sure the uncle's will would be in his favour.
Yes, I'd got my eye on him, and that's why I wanted to speak to him
before he saw his wife, but their statements dovetail all right, and
I've been to the station and there's no doubt whatever that he left by
the 6.15. That gets up to London about 10.30. He went straight to
his club, he says, and if that's confirmed all right - why, he couldn't
have been shooting his uncle here at nine o'clock in a black beard!'
'Ah, yes, I was going to ask you what you thought about that beard?'
Japp winked.
'I think it grew pretty fast - grew in the five miles from Elmer's Dale
to Hunter's Lodge. Americans that I've met are mostly cleanshaven.
Yes, it's amongst Mr Pace's American associates that we'll
have to look for the murderer. I questioned the housekeeper first,
and then her mistress, and their stories agree all right, but I'm sorry
Mrs Havering didn't get a look at the fellow. She's a smart woman,
and she might have noticed something that would set us on the
track.'
I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy account to Poirot. I was
able to add various further items of information before I posted the
letter.
The bullet had been extracted and was proved to have been fired
from a revolver identical with the one held by the police.
Furthermore, Mr Havering's movements on the night in question
had been checked and verified, and it was proved beyond doubt
that he had actually arrived in London by the train in question. And,
thirdly, a sensational development had occurred. A city gentleman,
living at Ealing, on crossing Haven Green to get to the District
Railway Station that morning, had observed a brown-paper parcel
stuck between the railings. Opening it, he found that it contained a
revolver. He handed the parcel over to the local police station, and
before night it was proved to be the one we were in search of, the
fellow to that given us by Mrs Havering. One bullet had been fired
from it.
All this I added to my report. A wire from Poirot arrived whilst I was
at breakfast the following morning:
'Of course black-bearded man was not Havering only you or Japp
would have such an idea wire me description of housekeeper and
what clothes she wore this morning same of Mrs Havering do not
waste time taking photographs of interiors they are underexposed
and not in the least artistic.'
It seemed to me that Poirot's style was unnecessarily facetious. I
also fancied he was a shade jealous of my position on the spot with
full facilities for handling the case. His request for a description of
the clothes worn by the two women appeared to me to be simply
ridiculous, but I complied as well as I, a mere man, was able to.
At eleven a reply wire came from Poirot:
'Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is too late.'
Dumbfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He swore softly under his
breath.
'He's the goods, Monsieur Poirot! If he says so, there's something in
it. And I hardly noticed the woman. I don't know that I can go so far
as arresting her, but I'll have her watched. We'll go up right away,
and take another look at her.'
But it was too late. Mrs Middleton, that quiet middle-aged woman,
who had appeared so normal and respectable, had vanished into
thin air. Her box had been left behind. It contained only ordinary
wearing apparel. There was no clue in it to her identity, or as to her
whereabouts.
From Mrs Havering we elicited all the facts we could:
'I engaged her about three weeks ago when Mrs Emery, our former
housekeeper, left. She came to me from Mrs Selbourne's Agency in
Mount Street - a very well-known place. I get all my servants from
there. They sent several women to see me, but this Mrs Middleton
seemed much the nicest, and had splendid references. I engaged
her on the spot, and notified the Agency of the fact. I can't believe
that there was anything wrong with her. She was such a nice quiet
woman.'
The thing was certainly a mystery. Whilst it was clear that the
woman herself could not have committed the crime, since at the
moment the shot was fired Mrs Havering was with her in the hall,
nevertheless she must have some connection with the murder, or
why should she suddenly take to her heels and bolt?
I wired the latest development to Poirot and suggested returning to
London and making inquiries at Selbourne's Agency.
Poirot's reply was prompt:
'Useless to inquire at agency they will never have heard of her find
out what vehicle took her up to hunters lodge when she first arrived
there.'
Though mystified, I was obedient. The means of transport in
Elmer's Dale were limited. The local garage had two battered Ford
cars, and there were two station flies. None of these had been
requisitioned on the date in question. Questioned, Mrs Havering
explained that she had given the woman the money for her fare
down to Derbyshire and sufficient to hire a car or fly to take her up
to Hunter's Lodge. There was usually one of the Fords at the station
on the chance of its being required. Taking into consideration the
further fact that nobody at the station had noticed the arrival of a
stranger, black-bearded or otherwise, on the fatal evening,
everything seemed to point to the conclusion that the murderer had
come to the spot in a car, which had been waiting near at hand to
aid his escape, and that the same car had brought the mysterious
housekeeper to her new post. I may mention that inquiries at the
Agency in London bore out Poirot's prognostication. No such
woman as 'Mrs Middleton' had ever been on their books. They had
received the Hon. Mrs Havering's application for a housekeeper,
and had sent her various applicants for the post. When she sent
them the engagement fee, she omitted to mention which woman
she had selected.
Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London. I found Poirot
established in an arm-chair by the fire in a garish silk dressinggown.
He greeted me with much affection.
'Mon ami Hastings! But how glad I am to see you. Veritably I have
for you a great affection! And you have enjoyed yourself? You have
run to and fro with the good Japp? You have interrogated and
investigated to your heart's content?'
'Poirot,' I cried, 'the thing's a dark mystery! It will never be solved.'
'It is true that we are not likely to cover ourselves with glory over it.'
'No, indeed. It's a hard nut to crack.'
'Oh, as far as that goes, I am very good at cracking the nuts! A
veritable squirrel! It is not that which embarrasses me. I know well
enough who killed Mr Harrington Pace.'
'You know? How did you find out?'
'Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied me with the truth.
See here, Hastings, let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr Harrington Pace is a man with a considerable fortune
which at his death will doubtless pass to his nephew. Point No 1.
His nephew is known to be desperately hard up. Point No 2. His
nephew is also known to be - shall we say a man of rather loose
moral fibre? Point No 3.'
'But Roger Havering is proved to have journeyed straight up to
London.'
'Précisément - and therefore, as Mr Havering left Elmer's Dale at
6.15, and since Mr Pace cannot have been killed before he left, or
the doctor would have spotted the time of the crime as being given
wrongly when he examined the body, we conclude quite rightly,
that Mr Havering did not shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs
Havering, Hastings.'
'Impossible! The housekeeper was with her when the shot was
fired.'
'Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has disappeared.'
'She will be found.'
'I think not. There is something peculiarly elusive about that
housekeeper, don't you think so, Hastings? It struck me at once.'
'She played her part, I suppose, and then got out in the nick of time.'
'And what was her part?'
'Well, presumably to admit her confederate, the black-bearded
man.'
'Oh, no, that was not her part! Her part was what you have just
mentioned, to provide an alibi for Mrs Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her, mon ami, because she
does not exist! "There's no such person," as your so great
Shakespeare says.'
'It was Dickens,' I murmured, unable to suppress a smile. 'But what
do you mean, Poirot?'
'I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress before her marriage, that
you and Japp only saw the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim
middle-aged figure in black with a faint subdued voice, and finally
that neither you nor Japp, nor the local police whom the
housekeeper fetched, ever saw Mrs Middleton and her mistress at
one and the same time. It was child's play for that clever and daring
woman. On the pretext of summoning her mistress, she runs
upstairs, slips on a bright jumper and a hat with black curls
attached which she jams down over the grey transformation. A few
deft touches, and the make-up is removed, a slight dusting of
rouge, and the brilliant Zoe Havering comes down with her clear
ringing voice. Nobody looks particularly at the housekeeper. Why
should they? There is nothing to connect her with the crime. She,
too, has an alibi.'
'But the revolver that was found at Ealing? Mrs Havering could not
have placed it there?'
'No, that was Roger Havering's job - but it was a mistake on their
part. It put me on the right track. A man who has committed murder
with a revolver which he found on the spot would fling it away at
once, he would not carry it up to London with him. No, the motive
was clear, the criminals wished to focus the interest of the police
on a spot far removed from Derbyshire, they were anxious to get
the police away as soon as possible from the vicinity of Hunter's
Lodge. Of course the revolver found at Ealing was not the one with
which Mr Pace was shot. Roger Havering discharged one shot from
it, brought it up to London, went straight to his club to establish his
alibi, then went quickly out to Ealing by the District, a matter of
about twenty minutes only, placed the parcel where it was found
and so back to town. That charming creature, his wife, quietly
shoots Mr Pace after dinner - you remember he was shot from
behind? Another significant point, that! - reloads the revolver and
puts it back in its place, and then starts off with her desperate little
comedy.'
'It's incredible,' I murmured, fascinated, 'and yet - '
'And yet it is true. Bien sur, my friend, it is true. But to bring that
precious pair to justice, that is another matter. Well, Japp must do
what he can - I have written him fully - but I very much fear,
Hastings, that we shall be obliged to leave them to Fate, or le bon
Dieu, whichever you prefer.'
'The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,' I reminded him.
'But at a price, Hastings, always at a price, croyez-moi!'
Poirot's forebodings were confirmed. Japp, though convinced of
the truth of his theory, was unable to get together the necessary
evidence to ensure a conviction.
Mr Pace's huge fortune passed into the hands of his murderers.
Nevertheless, Nemesis did overtake them, and when I read in the
paper that the Hon. Roger and Mrs Havering were amongst those
killed in the crashing of the Air Mail to Paris I knew that Justice was
satisfied.
The Million Dollar Bond Robbery
'What a number of bond robberies there have been lately!' I
observed one morning, laying aside the newspaper. 'Poirot, let us
forsake the science of detection, and take to crime instead!'
'You are on the - how do you say it? - get-rich-quick tack, eh, mon
ami?'
'Well, look at this last coup, the million dollars' worth of Liberty
Bonds which the London and Scottish Bank were sending to New
York, and which disappeared in such a remarkable manner on
board the Olympia.'
'If it were not for the mal de mer, and the difficulty of practising the
so excellent method of Laverguier for a longer time than the few
hours of crossing the Channel, I should delight to voyage myself on
one of these big liners,' murmured Poirot dreamily.
'Yes, indeed,' I said enthusiastically. 'Some of them must be perfect
palaces; the swimming-baths, the lounges, the restaurant, the palm
courts - really, it must be hard to believe that one is on the sea.'
'Me, I always know when I am on the sea,' said Poirot sadly. 'And all
those bagatelles that you enumerate, they say nothing to me; but,
my friend, consider for a moment the geniuses that travel as it were
incognito! On board these floating palaces, as you so justly call
them, one would meet the élite, the haute noblesse of the criminal
world!'
I laughed.
'So that's the way your enthusiasm runs! You would have liked to
cross swords with the man who sneaked the Liberty Bonds?'
The landlady interrupted us.
'A young lady as wants to see you, Mr Poirot. Here's her card.'
The card bore the inscription: Miss Esmée Farquhar, and Poirot,
after diving under the table to retrieve a stray crumb, and putting it
carefully in the waste-paper basket, nodded to the landlady to
admit her.
In another minute one of the most charming girls I have ever seen
was ushered into the room. She was perhaps about five-andtwenty,
with big brown eyes and a perfect figure. She was welldressed
and perfectly composed in manner.
'Sit down, I beg of you, mademoiselle. This is my friend, Captain
Hastings, who aids me in my little problems.'
'I am afraid it is a big problem I have brought you today. Monsieur
Poirot,' said the girl, giving me a pleasant bow as she seated
herself. 'I dare say you have read about it in the papers. I am
referring to the theft of Liberty Bonds on the Olympia.' Some
astonishment must have shown itself on Poirot's face, for she
continued quickly: 'You are doubtless asking yourself what I have to
do with a grave institution like the London and Scottish Bank. In one
sense nothing, in another sense everything. You see. Monsieur
Poirot, I am engaged to Mr Philip Ridgeway.'
'Aha! and Mr Philip Ridgeway - '
'Was in charge of the bonds when they were stolen. Of course no
actual blame can attach to him, it was not his fault in any way.
Nevertheless, he is half distraught over the matter, and his uncle, I
know, insists that he must carelessly have mentioned having them
in his possession. It is a terrible set-back in his career.'
'Who is his uncle?'
'Mr Vavasour, joint general manager of the London and Scottish
Bank.'
'Suppose, Miss Farquhar, that you recount to me the whole story?'
'Very well. As you know, the Bank wished to extend their credits in
America, and for this purpose decided to send over a million dollars
in Liberty Bonds. Mr Vavasour selected his nephew, who had
occupied a position of trust in the Bank for many years and who
was conversant with all the details of the Bank's dealings in New
York, to make the trip. The Olympia sailed from Liverpool on the
23rd, and the bonds were handed over to Philip on the morning of
that day by Mr Vavasour and Mr Shaw, the two joint general
managers of the London and Scottish Bank. They were counted,
enclosed in a package, and sealed in his presence, and he then
locked the package at once in his portmanteau.'
'A portmanteau with an ordinary lock?'
'No, Mr Shaw insisted on a special lock being fitted to it by Hubbs's.
Philip, as I say, placed the package at the bottom of the trunk. It
was stolen just a few hours before reaching New York. A rigorous
search of the whole ship was made, but without result. The bonds
seemed literally to have vanished into thin air.'
Poirot made a grimace.
'But they did not vanish absolutely, since I gather that they were
sold in small parcels within half an hour of the docking of the
Olympia! Well, undoubtedly the next thing is for me to see Mr
Ridgeway.'
'I was about to suggest that you should lunch with me at the
"Cheshire Cheese." Philip will be there. He is meeting me, but does
not yet know that I have been consulting you on his behalf.'
We agreed to this suggestion readily enough, and drove there in a
taxi.
Mr Philip Ridgeway was there before us, and looked somewhat
surprised to see his fiancée arriving with two complete strangers.
He was a nice-looking young fellow, tall and spruce, with a touch of
greying hair at the temples, though he could not have been much
over thirty.
Miss Farquhar went up to him and laid her hand on his arm.
'You must forgive my acting without consulting you, Philip,' she
said. 'Let me introduce you to Monsieur Hercule Poirot, of whom
you must often have heard, and his friend, Captain Hastings.'
Ridgeway looked very astonished.
'Of course I have heard of you, Monsieur Poirot,' he said, as he
shook hands, 'But I had no idea that Esmée was thinking of
consulting you about my - our trouble.'
'I was afraid you would not let me do it, Philip,' said Miss Farquhar
meekly.
'So you took care to be on the safe side,' he observed, with a smile.
'I hope Monsieur Poirot will be able to throw some light on this
extraordinary puzzle, for I confess frankly that I am nearly out of my
mind with worry and anxiety about it.'
Indeed, his face looked drawn and haggard and showed only too
clearly the strain under which he was labouring.
'Well, well,' said Poirot. 'Let us lunch, and over lunch we will put our
heads together and see what can be done. I want to hear Mr
Ridgeway's story from his own lips.'
Whilst we discussed the excellent steak and kidney pudding of the
establishment, Philip Ridgeway narrated the circumstances leading
to the disappearance of the bonds. His story agreed with that of
Miss Farquhar in every particular. When he had finished, Poirot
took up the thread with a question.
'What exactly led you to discover that the bonds had been stolen,
Mr Ridgeway?'
He laughed rather bitterly.
'The thing stared me in the face, Monsieur Poirot. I couldn't have
missed it. My cabin trunk was half out from under the bunk and all
scratched and cut about where they'd tried to force the lock.'
'But I understood that it had been opened with a key?'
'That's so. They tried to force it, but couldn't. And, in the end, they
must have got it unlocked somehow or other.'
'Curious,' said Poirot, his eyes beginning to flicker with the green
light I knew so well. 'Very curious! They waste much, much time
trying to prise it open, and then - sapristi! they find that they have
the key all the time - for each of Hubbs's locks are unique.'
'That's just why they couldn't have had the key. It never left me day
or night.'
'You are sure of that?'
'I can swear to it, and besides, if they had had the key or a
duplicate, why should they waste time trying to force an obviously
unforceable lock?'
'Ah! there is exactly the question we are asking ourselves! I venture
to prophesy that the solution, if we ever find it, will hinge on that
curious fact. I beg of you not to assault me if I ask you one more
question: Are you perfectly certain you did not leave the trunk
unlocked?'
Philip Ridgeway merely looked at him, and Poirot gesticulated
apologetically.
'Ah, but these things can happen, I assure you! Very well, the bonds
were stolen from the trunk. What did the thief do with them? How
did he manage to get ashore with them?'
'Ah!' cried Ridgeway. 'That's just it. How? Word was passed to the
Customs authorities, and every soul that left the ship was gone over
with a toothcomb!'
'And the bonds, I gather, made a bulky package?'
'Certainly they did. They could hardly have been hidden on board -
and anyway we know they weren't, because they were offered for
sale within half an hour of the Olympia's arrival, long before I got
the cables going and the numbers sent out. One broker swears he
bought some of them even before the Olympia got in. But you can't
send bonds by wireless.'
'Not by wireless, but did any tug come alongside?'
'Only the official ones, and that was after the alarm was given when
everyone was on the look-out. I was watching out myself for their
being passed over to someone that way. My God, Monsieur Poirot,
this thing will drive me mad! People are beginning to say I stole
them myself.'
'But you also were searched on landing, weren't you?' asked Poirot
gently.
'Yes.'
The young man stared at him in a puzzled manner.
'You do not catch my meaning, I see,' said Poirot, smiling
enigmatically. 'Now I should like to make a few inquiries at the
Bank.'
Ridgeway produced a card and scribbled a few words on it.
'Send this in and my uncle will see you at once.'
Poirot thanked him, bade farewell to Miss Farquhar, and together
we started out for Threadneedle Street and the head office of the
London and Scottish Bank. On production of Ridgeway's card, we
were led through the labyrinth of counters and desks, skirting
paying-in clerks and paying-out clerks and up to a small office on
the first floor where the joint general managers received us. They
were two grave gentlemen, who had grown grey in the service of
the Bank. Mr Vavasour had a short white beard, Mr Shaw was clean
shaven.
'I understand you are strictly a private inquiry agent?' said Mr
Vavasour. 'Quite so, quite so. We have, of course, placed ourselves
in the hands of Scotland Yard. Inspector McNeil has charge of the
case. A very able officer, I believe.'
'I am sure of it,' said Poirot politely. 'You will permit a few questions,
on your nephew's behalf? About this lock, who ordered it from
Hubbs's?'
'I ordered it myself,' said Mr Shaw. 'I would not trust to any clerk in
the matter. As to the keys, Mr Ridgeway had one, and the other two
are held by my colleague and myself.'
'And no clerk has had access to them?'
Mr Shaw turned inquiringly to Mr Vavasour.
'I think I am correct in saying that they have remained in the safe
where we placed them on the 23rd,' said Mr Vavasour. 'My
colleague was unfortunately taken ill a fortnight ago - in fact on the
very day that Philip left us. He has only just recovered.'
'Severe bronchitis is no joke to a man of my age,' said Mr Shaw
ruefully. 'But I am afraid Mr Vavasour has suffered from the hard
work entailed by my absence, especially with this unexpected
worry coming on top of everything.'
Poirot asked a few more questions. I judged that he was
endeavouring to gauge the exact amount of intimacy between uncle
and nephew. Mr Vavasour's answers were brief and punctilious. His
nephew was a trusted official of the Bank, and had no debts or
money difficulties that he knew of. He had been entrusted with
similar missions in the past. Finally we were politely bowed out.
'I am disappointed,' said Poirot, as we emerged into the street.
'You hoped to discover more? They are such stodgy old men.'
'It is not their stodginess which disappoints me, mon ami. I do not
expect to find in a Bank manager a "keen financier with an eagle
glance," as your favourite works of fiction put it. No, I am
disappointed in the case - it is too easy!'
'Easy?'
'Yes, do you not find it almost childishly simple?'
'You know who stole the bonds?'
'I do.'
'But then - we must - why - '
'Do not confuse and fluster yourself, Hastings. We are not going to
do anything at present.'
'But why? What are you waiting for?'
'For the Olympia. She is due on her return trip from New York on
Tuesday.'
'But if you know who stole the bonds, why wait? He may escape.'
'To a South Sea island where there is no extradition? No, mon ami,
he would find life very uncongenial there. As to why I wait - eh bien,
to the intelligence of Hercule Poirot the case is perfectly clear, but
for the benefit of others, not so greatly gifted by the good God - the
Inspector McNeil, for instance - it would be as well to make a few
inquiries to establish the facts. One must have consideration for
those less gifted than oneself.'
'Good Lord, Poirot! Do you know, I'd give a considerable sum of
money to see you make a thorough ass of yourself - just for once.
You're so confoundedly conceited!'
'Do not enrage yourself, Hastings. In verity, I observe that there are
times when you almost detest me! Alas, I suffer the penalties of
greatness!'
The little man puffed out his chest, and sighed so comically that I
was forced to laugh.
Tuesday saw us speeding to Liverpool in a first-class carriage of
the L and NWR. Poirot had obstinately refused to enlighten me as to
his suspicions - or certainties. He contented himself with
expressing surprise that I, too, was not equally au fait with the
situation. I disdained to argue, and entrenched my curiosity behind
a rampart of pretended indifference.
Once arrived at the quay alongside which lay the big transatlantic
liner, Poirot became brisk and alert. Our proceedings consisted in
interviewing four successive stewards and inquiring after a friend
of Poirot's who had crossed to New York on the 23rd.
'An elderly gentleman, wearing glasses. A great invalid, hardly
moved out of his cabin.'
The description appeared to tally with one Mr Ventnor who had
occupied the cabin C24 which was next to that of Philip Ridgeway.
Although unable to see how Poirot had deduced Mr Ventnor's
existence and personal appearance, I was keenly excited.
'Tell me,' I cried, 'was this gentleman one of the first to land when
you got to New York?'
The steward shook his head.
'No, indeed, sir, he was one of the last off the boat.'
I retired crestfallen, and observed Poirot grinning at me. He
thanked the steward, a note changed hands, and we took our
departure.
'It's all very well,' I remarked heatedly, 'but that last answer must
have damned your precious theory, grin as you please!'
'As usual, you see nothing, Hastings. That last answer is, on the
contrary, the coping-stone of my theory.'
I flung up my hands in despair.
'I give it up.'
II
When we were in the train, speeding towards London, Poirot wrote
busily for a few minutes, sealing up the result in an envelope.
'This is for the good Inspector McNeil. We will leave it at Scotland
Yard in passing, and then to the Rendezvous Restaurant, where I
have asked Miss Esmée Farquhar to do us the honour of dining with
us.'
'What about Ridgeway?'
'What about him?' asked Poirot with a twinkle.
'Why, you surely don't think - you can't - '
'The habit of incoherence is growing upon you, Hastings. As a
matter of fact I did think. If Ridgeway had been the thief - which was
perfectly possible - the case would have been charming; a piece of
neat methodical work.'
'But not so charming for Miss Farquhar.'
'Possibly you are right. Therefore all is for the best. Now, Hastings,
let us review the case. I can see that you are dying to do so. The
sealed package is removed from the trunk and vanishes, as Miss
Farquhar puts it, into thin air. We will dismiss the thin air theory,
which is not practicable at the present stage of science, and
consider what is likely to have become of it. Everyone asserts the
incredulity of its being smuggled ashore - '
'Yes, but we know - '
''You may know, Hastings. I do not. I take the view that, since it
seemed incredible, it was incredible. Two possibilities remain: it
was hidden on board - also rather difficult - or it was thrown
overboard.'
'With a cork on it, do you mean?'
'Without a cork.'
I stared.
'But if the bonds were thrown overboard, they couldn't have been
sold in New York.'
'I admire your logical mind, Hastings. The bonds were sold in New
York, therefore they were not thrown overboard. You see where
that leads us?'
'Where we were when we started.'
'Jamais de la vie! If the package was thrown overboard, and the
bonds were sold in New York, the package could not have
contained the bonds. Is there any evidence that the package did
contain the bonds? Remember, Mr Ridgeway never opened it from
the time it was placed in his hands in London.'
'Yes, but then - '
Poirot waved an impatient hand.
'Permit me to continue. The last moment that the bonds are seen as
bonds is in the office of the London and Scottish Bank on the
morning of the 23rd. They reappear in New York half an hour after
the Olympia gets in, and according to one man, whom nobody
listens to, actually before she gets in. Supposing then, that they
have never been on the Olympia at all? Is there any other way they
could get to New York? Yes. The Gigantic leaves Southampton on
the same day as the Olympia, and she holds the record for the
Atlantic. Mailed by the Gigantic, the bonds would be in New York
the day before the Olympia arrived. All is clear, the case begins to
explain itself. The sealed packet is only a dummy, and the moment
of its substitution must be in the office in the Bank. It would be an
easy matter for any of the three men present to have prepared a
duplicate package which could be substituted for the genuine one.
Très bien, the bonds are mailed to a confederate in New York, with
instructions to sell as soon as the Olympia is in, but someone must
travel on the Olympia to engineer the supposed moment of the
robbery.'
'But why?'
'Because if Ridgeway merely opens the packet and finds it a
dummy, suspicion flies at once to London. No, the man on board in
the cabin next door does his work, pretends to force the lock in an
obvious manner so as to draw immediate attention to the theft,
really unlocks the trunk with a duplicate key, throws the package
overboard and waits until the last to leave the boat. Naturally he
wears glasses to conceal his eyes, and is an invalid since he does
not want to run the risk of meeting Ridgeway. He steps ashore in
New York and returns by the first boat available.'
'But who - which was he?'
'The man who had a duplicate key, the man who ordered the lock,
the man who has not been severely ill with bronchitis at his home in
the country - enfin, the "stodgy" old man, Mr Shaw! There are
criminals in high places sometimes, my friend. Ah, here we are.
Mademoiselle, I have succeeded! You permit?'
And, beaming, Poirot kissed the astonished girl lightly on either
cheek!

The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb
I have always considered that one of the most thrilling and dramatic
of the many adventures I have shared with Poirot was that of our
investigation into the strange series of deaths which followed upon
the discovery and opening of the Tomb of King Men-her-Ra.
Hard upon the discovery of the Tomb of Tutankh-Amen by Lord
Carnarvon, Sir John Willard and Mr Bleibner of New York, pursuing
their excavations not far from Cairo, in the vicinity of the Pyramids
of Gizeh, came unexpectedly on a series of funeral chambers. The
greatest interest was aroused by their discovery. The Tomb
appeared to be that of King Men-her-Ra, one of those shadowy
kings of the Eighth Dynasty, when the Old Kingdom was falling to
decay. Little was known about this period, and the discoveries
were fully reported in the newspapers.
An event soon occurred which took a profound hold on the public
mind. Sir John Willard died quite suddenly of heart failure.
The more sensational newspapers immediately took the
opportunity of reviving all the old superstitious stories connected
with the ill luck of certain Egyptian treasures. The unlucky Mummy
at the British Museum, that hoary old chestnut, was dragged out
with fresh zest, was quietly denied by the Museum, but
nevertheless enjoyed all its usual vogue.
A fortnight later Mr Bleibner died of acute blood poisoning, and a
few days afterwards a nephew of his shot himself in New York. The
'Curse of Men-her-Ra' was the talk of the day, and the magic power
of dead-and-gone Egypt was exalted to a fetish point.
It was then that Poirot received a brief note from Lady Willard,
widow of the dead archaeologist, asking him to go and see her at
her house in Kensington Square. I accompanied him.
Lady Willard was a tall, thin woman, dressed in deep mourning. Her
haggard face bore eloquent testimony to her recent grief.
'It is kind of you to have come so promptly, Monsieur Poirot.'
'I am at your service, Lady Willard. You wished to consult me?'
'You are, I am aware, a detective, but it is not only as a detective
that I wish to consult you. You are a man of original views, I know,
you have imagination, experience of the world; tell me, Monsieur
Poirot, what are your views on the supernatural?'
Poirot hesitated for a moment before he replied. He seemed to be
considering. Finally he said:
'Let us not misunderstand each other, Lady Willard. It is not a
general question that you are asking me there. It has a personal
application, has it not? You are referring obliquely to the death of
your late husband?'
'That is so,' she admitted.
'You want me to investigate the circumstances of his death?'
'I want you to ascertain for me exactly how much is newspaper
chatter, and how much may be said to be founded on fact? Three
deaths, Monsieur Poirot - each one explicable taken by itself, but
taken together surely an almost unbelievable coincidence, and all
within a month of the opening of the tomb! It may be mere
superstition, it may be some potent curse from the past that
operates in ways undreamed of by modern science. The fact
remains - three deaths! And I am afraid, Monsieur Poirot, horribly
afraid. It may not yet be the end.'
'For whom do you fear?'
'For my son. When the news of my husband's death came I was ill.
My son, who has just come down from Oxford, went out there. He
brought the - the body home, but now he has gone out again, in
spite of my prayers and entreaties. He is so fascinated by the work
that he intends to take his father's place and carry on the system of
excavations. You may think me a foolish, credulous woman, but,
Monsieur Poirot, I am afraid. Supposing that the spirit of the dead
King is not yet appeased? Perhaps to you I seem to be talking
nonsense - '
'No, indeed, Lady Willard,' said Poirot quickly. 'I, too, believe in the
force of superstition, one of the greatest forces the world has ever
known.'
I looked at him in surprise. I should never have credited Poirot with
being superstitious. But the little man was obviously in earnest.
'What you really demand is that I shall protect your son? I will do my
utmost to keep him from harm.'
'Yes, in the ordinary way, but against an occult influence?'
'In volumes of the Middle Ages, Lady Willard, you will find many
ways of counteracting black magic. Perhaps they knew more than
we moderns with all our boasted science. Now let us come to facts,
that I may have guidance. Your husband had always been a devoted
Egyptologist, hadn't he?'
'Yes, from his youth upwards. He was one of the greatest living
authorities upon the subject.'
'But Mr Bleibner, I understand, was more or less of an amateur?'
'Oh, quite. He was a very wealthy man who dabbled freely in any
subject that happened to take his fancy. My husband managed to
interest him in Egyptology, and it was his money that was so useful
in financing the expedition.'
'And the nephew? What do you know of his tastes? Was he with the
party at all?'
'I do not think so. In fact I never knew of his existence till I read of
his death in the paper. I do not think he and Mr Bleibner can have
been at all intimate. He never spoke of having any relations.'
'Who are the other members of the party?'
'Well, there's Dr Tosswill, a minor official connected with the British
Museum; Mr Schneider of the Metropolitan Museum in New York; a
young American secretary; Dr Ames, who accompanies the
expedition in his professional capacity; and Hassan, my husband's
devoted native servant.'
'Do you remember the name of the American secretary?'
'Harper, I think, but I cannot be sure. He had not been with Mr
Bleibner very long, I know. He was a very pleasant young fellow.'
'Thank you, Lady Willard.'
'If there is anything else - '
'For the moment, nothing. Leave it now in my hands, and be
assured that I will do all that is humanly possible to protect your
son.'
They were not exactly reassuring words, and I observed Lady
Willard wince as he uttered them. Yet, at the same time, the fact
that he had not pooh-poohed her fears seemed in itself to be a relief
to her.
For my part I had never before suspected that Poirot had so deep a
vein of superstition in his nature. I tackled him on the subject as we
went homewards. His manner was grave and earnest.
'But yes, Hastings. I believe in these things. You must not underrate
the force of superstition.'
'What are we going to do about it?'
'Toujours pratique, the good Hastings! Eh bien, to begin with we are
going to cable to New York for fuller details of young Mr Bleibner's
death.'
He duly sent off his cable. The reply was full and precise. Young
Rupert Bleibner had been in low water for several years. He had
been a beachcomber and a remittance man in several South Sea
islands, but had returned to New York two years ago, where he had
rapidly sunk lower and lower. The most significant thing, to my
mind, was that he had recently managed to borrow enough money
to take him to Egypt. 'I've a good friend there I can borrow from,' he
had declared. Here, however, his plans had gone awry. He had
returned to New York cursing his skinflint of an uncle who cared
more for the bones of dead and gone kings than his own flesh and
blood. It was during his sojourn in Egypt that the death of Sir John
Willard occurred. Rupert had plunged once more into his life of
dissipation in New York, and then, without warning, he had
committed suicide, leaving behind him a letter which contained
some curious phrases. It seemed written in a sudden fit of remorse.
He referred to himself as a leper and an outcast, and the letter
ended by declaring that such as he were better dead.
A shadowy theory leapt into my brain. I had never really believed in
the vengeance of a long dead Egyptian king. I saw here a more
modern crime. Supposing this young man had decided to do away
with his uncle - preferably by poison. By mistake, Sir John Willard
receives the fatal dose. The young man returns to New York,
haunted by his crime. The news of his uncle's death reaches him.
He realizes how unnecessary his crime has been, and stricken with
remorse takes his own life.
I outlined my solution to Poirot. He was interested.
'It is ingenious what you have thought of there - decidedly it is
ingenious. It may even be true. But you leave out of count the fatal
influence of the Tomb.'
I shrugged my shoulders.
'You still think that has something to do with it?'
'So much so, mon ami, that we start for Egypt tomorrow.'
'What?' I cried, astonished.
'I have said it.' An expression of conscious heroism spread over
Poirot's face. Then he groaned. 'But, oh,' he lamented, 'the sea! The
hateful sea!'
II
It was a week later. Beneath our feet was the golden sand of the
desert. The hot sun poured down overhead. Poirot, the picture of
misery, wilted by my side. The little man was not a good traveller.
Our four days' voyage from Marseilles had been one long agony to
him. He had landed at Alexandria the wraith of his former self, even
his usual neatness had deserted him. We had arrived in Cairo and
had driven out at once to the Mena House Hotel, right in the shadow
of the Pyramids.
The charm of Egypt had laid hold of me. Not so Poirot. Dressed
precisely the same as in London, he carried a small clothes-brush
in his pocket and waged an unceasing war on the dust which
accumulated on his dark apparel.
'And my boots,' he wailed. 'Regard them, Hastings. My boots, of the
neat patent leather, usually so smart and shining. See, the sand is
inside them, which is painful, and outside them, which outrages the
eyesight. Also the heat, it causes my moustaches to become limp -
but limp!'
'Look at the Sphinx,' I urged. 'Even I can feel the mystery and the
charm it exhales.'
Poirot looked at it discontentedly.
'It has not the air happy,' he declared. 'How could it, half-buried in
sand in that untidy fashion. Ah, this cursed sand!'
'Come, now, there's a lot of sand in Belgium,' I reminded him,
mindful of a holiday spent at Knocke-sur-mer in the midst of 'Les
dunes impeccables' as the guide-book had phrased it.
'Not in Brussels,' declared Poirot. He gazed at the Pyramids
thoughtfully. 'It is true that they, at least, are of a shape solid and
geometrical, but their surface is of an unevenness most unpleasing.
And the palm-trees I like them not. Not even do they plant them in
rows!'
I cut short his lamentations, by suggesting that we should start for
the camp. We were to ride there on camels, and the beasts were
patiently kneeling, waiting for us to mount, in charge of several
picturesque boys headed by a voluble dragoman.
I pass over the spectacle of Poirot on a camel. He started by groans
and lamentations and ended by shrieks, gesticulations and
invocations to the Virgin Mary and every Saint in the calendar. In
the end, he descended ignominiously and finished the journey on a
diminutive donkey. I must admit that a trotting camel is no joke for
the amateur. I was stiff for several days.
At last we neared the scene of the excavations. A sun-burnt man
with a grey beard, in white clothes and wearing a helmet, came to
meet us.
'Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings? We received your cable.
I'm sorry that there was no one to meet you in Cairo. An unforeseen
event occurred which completely disorganized our plans.'
Poirot paled. His hand, which had stolen to his clothes-brush,
stayed its course.
'Not another death?' he breathed.
'Yes.'
'Sir Guy Willard?' I cried.
'No, Captain Hastings. My American colleague, Mr Schneider.'
'And the cause?' demanded Poirot.
'Tetanus.'
I blanched. All around me I seemed to feel an atmosphere of evil,
subtle and menacing. A horrible thought flashed across me.
Supposing I were the next?
'Mon Dieu,' said Poirot, in a very low voice, 'I do not understand this.
It is horrible. Tell me, monsieur, there is no doubt that it was
tetanus?'
'I believe not. But Dr Ames will tell you more than I can do.'
'Ah, of course, you are not the doctor.'
'My name is Tosswill.'
This, then, was the British expert described by Lady Willard as
being a minor official at the British Museum. There was something
at once grave and steadfast about him that took my fancy.
'If you will come with me,' continued Dr Tosswill, 'I will take you to
Sir Guy Willard. He was most anxious to be informed as soon as you
should arrive.'
We were taken across the camp to a large tent. Dr Tosswill lifted up
the flap and we entered. Three men were sitting inside.
'Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings have arrived, Sir Guy,' said
Tosswill.
The youngest of the three men jumped up and came forward to
greet us. There was a certain impulsiveness in his manner which
reminded me of his mother. He was not nearly so sunburnt as the
others, and that fact, coupled with a certain haggardness round the
eyes, made him look older than his twenty-two years. He was
clearly endeavouring to bear up under a severe mental strain.
He introduced his two companions, Dr Ames, a capable-looking
man of thirty-odd, with a touch of greying hair at the temples, and
Mr Harper, the secretary, a pleasant lean young man wearing the
national insignia of horn-rimmed spectacles.
After a few minutes' desultory conversation the latter went out, and
Dr Tosswill followed him. We were left alone with Sir Guy and Dr
Ames.
'Please ask any questions you want to ask, Monsieur Poirot,' said
Willard. 'We are utterly dumbfounded at this strange series of
disasters, but it isn't - it can't be, anything but coincidence.'
There was a nervousness about his manner which rather belied the
words. I saw that Poirot was studying him keenly.
'Your heart is really in this work, Sir Guy?'
'Rather. No matter what happens, or what comes of it, the work is
going on. Make up your mind to that.'
Poirot wheeled round on the other.
'What have you to say to that, monsieur le docteur?'
'Well,' drawled the doctor, 'I'm not for quitting myself.'
Poirot made one of those expressive grimaces of his.
'Then, évidemment, we must find out just how we stand. When did
Mr Schneider's death take place?'
'Three days ago.'
'You are sure it was tetanus?'
'Dead sure.'
'It couldn't have been a case of strychnine poisoning, for instance?'
'No, Monsieur Poirot. I see what you're getting at. But it was a clear
case of tetanus.'
'Did you not inject anti-serum?'
'Certainly we did,' said the doctor dryly. 'Every conceivable thing
that could be done was tried.'
'Had you the anti-serum with you?'
'No. We procured it from Cairo.'
'Have there been any other cases of tetanus in the camp?'
'No, not one.'
'Are you certain that the death of Mr Bleibner was not due to
tetanus?'
'Absolutely plumb certain. He had a scratch upon his thumb which
became poisoned, and septicaemia set in. It sounds pretty much
the same to a layman, I dare say, but the two things are entirely
different.'
'Then we have four deaths - all totally dissimilar, one heart failure,
one blood poisoning, one suicide and one tetanus.'
'Exactly, Monsieur Poirot.'
'Are you certain that there is nothing which might link the four
together?'
'I don't quite understand you?'
'I will put it plainly. Was any act committed by those four men which
might seem to denote disrespect to the spirit of Men-her-Ra?'
The doctor gazed at Poirot in astonishment.
'You're talking through your hat, Monsieur Poirot. Surely you've not
been guyed into believing all that fool talk?'
'Absolute nonsense,' muttered Willard angrily.
Poirot remained placidly immovable, blinking a little out of his green
cat's eyes.
'So you do not believe it, monsieur le docteur?'
'No, sir, I do not,' declared the doctor emphatically. 'I am a
scientific man, and I believe only what science teaches.'
'Was there no science then in Ancient Egypt?' asked Poirot softly.
He did not wait for a reply, and indeed Dr Ames seemed rather at a
loss for the moment. 'No, no, do not answer me, but tell me this.
What do the native workmen think?'
'I guess,' said Dr Ames, 'that, where white folk lose their heads,
natives aren't going to be far behind. I'll admit that they're getting
what you might call scared - but they've no cause to be.'
'I wonder,' said Poirot non-committally.
Sir Guy leant forward.
'Surely,' he cried incredulously, 'you cannot believe in - oh, but the
thing's absurd! You can know nothing of Ancient Egypt if you think
that.'
For answer Poirot produced a little book from his pocket - an
ancient tattered volume. As he held it out I saw its title, The Magic
of the Egyptians and Chaldeans. Then, wheeling round, he strode
out of the tent. The doctor stared at me.
'What is his little idea?'
The phrase, so familiar on Poirot's lips, made me smile as it came
from another.
'I don't know exactly,' I confessed. 'He's got some plan of exorcizing
the evil spirits, I believe.'
I went in search of Poirot, and found him talking to the lean-faced
young man who had been the late Mr Bleibner's secretary.
'No,' Mr Harper was saying, 'I've only been six months with the
expedition. Yes, I knew Mr Bleibner's affairs pretty well.'
'Can you recount to me anything concerning his nephew?'
'He turned up here one day, not a bad-looking fellow. I'd never met
him before, but some of the others had - Ames, I think, and
Schneider. The old man wasn't at all pleased to see him. They were
at it in no time, hammer and tongs. "Not a cent," the old man
shouted. "Not one cent now or when I'm dead. I intend to leave my
money to the furtherance of my life's work. I've been talking it over
with Mr Schneider today." And a bit more of the same. Young
Bleibner lit out for Cairo right away.'
'Was he in perfectly good health at the time?'
'The old man?'
'No, the young one.'
'I believe he did mention there was something wrong with him. But
it couldn't have been anything serious, or I should have
remembered.'
'One thing more, has Mr Bleibner left a will?'
'So far as we know, he has not.'
'Are you remaining with the expedition, Mr Harper?'
'No, sir, I am not. I'm for New York as soon as I can square up things
here. You may laugh if you like, but I'm not going to be this blasted
old Men-her-Ra's next victim. He'll get me if I stop here.'
The young man wiped the perspiration from his brow.
Poirot turned away. Over his shoulder he said with a peculiar smile:
'Remember, he got one of his victims in New York.'
'Oh, hell!' said Mr Harper forcibly.
'That young man is nervous,' said Poirot thoughtfully. 'He is on the
edge, but absolutely on the edge.'
I glanced at Poirot curiously, but his enigmatical smile told me
nothing. In company with Sir Guy Willard and Dr Tosswill we were
taken round the excavations. The principal finds had been removed
to Cairo, but some of the tomb furniture was extremely interesting.
The enthusiasm of the young baronet was obvious, but I fancied
that I detected a shade of nervousness in his manner as though he
could not quite escape from the feeling of menace in the air. As we
entered the tent which had been assigned to us, for a wash before
joining the evening meal, a tall dark figure in white robes stood
aside to let us pass with a graceful gesture and a murmured
greeting in Arabic. Poirot stopped.
'You are Hassan, the late Sir John Willard's servant?'
'I served my Lord Sir John, now I serve his son.' He took a step
nearer to us and lowered his voice. 'You are a wise one, they say,
learned in dealing with evil spirits. Let the young master depart
from here. There is evil in the air around us.'
And with an abrupt gesture, not waiting for a reply, he strode away.
'Evil in the air,' muttered Poirot. 'Yes, I feel it.'
Our meal was hardly a cheerful one. The floor was left to Dr
Tosswill, who discoursed at length upon Egyptian antiquities. Just
as we were preparing to retire to rest, Sir Guy caught Poirot by the
arm and pointed. A shadowy figure was moving amidst the tents. It
was no human one: I recognized distinctly the dog-headed figure I
had seen carved on the walls of the tomb.
My blood froze at the sight.
'Mon Dieu!' murmured Poirot, crossing himself vigorously. 'Anubis,
the jackal-headed, the god of departing souls.'
'Someone is hoaxing us,' cried Dr Tosswill, rising indignantly to his
feet.
'It went into your tent, Harper,' muttered Sir Guy, his face dreadfully
pale.
'No,' said Poirot, shaking his head, 'into that of Dr Ames.'
The doctor stared at him incredulously, then, repeating Dr
Tosswill's words, he cried:
'Someone is hoaxing us. Come, we'll soon catch the fellow.'
He dashed energetically in pursuit of the shadowy apparition. I
followed him, but, search as we would, we could find no trace of
any living soul having passed that way. We returned, somewhat
disturbed in mind, to find Poirot taking energetic measures, in his
own way, to ensure his personal safety. He was busily surrounding
our tent with various diagrams and inscriptions which he was
drawing in the sand. I recognized the five-pointed star or Pentagon
many times repeated. As was his wont, Poirot was at the same time
delivering an impromptu lecture on witchcraft and magic in
general. White Magic as opposed to Black, with various references
to the Ka and the Book of the Dead thrown in.
It appeared to excite the liveliest contempt in Dr Tosswill, who drew
me aside, literally snorting with rage.
'Balderdash, sir,' he exclaimed angrily. 'Pure balderdash. The
man's an impostor. He doesn't know the difference between the
superstitions of the Middle Ages and the beliefs of Ancient Egypt.
Never have I heard such a hotch-potch of ignorance and credulity.'
I calmed the excited expert, and joined Poirot in the tent. My little
friend was beaming cheerfully.
'We can now sleep in peace,' he declared happily. 'And I can do
with some sleep. My head, it aches abominably. Ah, for a good
tisane!'
As though in answer to prayer, the flap of the tent was lifted and
Hassan appeared, bearing a steaming cup which he offered to
Poirot. It proved to be camomile tea, a beverage of which he is
inordinately fond. Having thanked Hassan and refused his offer of
another cup for myself, we were left alone once more. I stood at the
door of the tent some time after undressing, looking out over the
desert.
'A wonderful place,' I said aloud, 'and a wonderful work. I can feel
the fascination. This desert life, this probing into the heart of a
vanished civilization. Surely, Poirot, you, too, must feel the charm?'
I got no answer, and I turned, a little annoyed. My annoyance was
quickly changed to concern. Poirot was lying back across the rude
couch, his face horribly convulsed. Beside him was the empty cup. I
rushed to his side, then dashed out and across the camp to Dr
Ames's tent.
'Dr Ames!' I cried. 'Come at once.'
'What's the matter?' said the doctor, appearing in pyjamas.
'My friend. He's ill. Dying. The camomile tea. Don't let Hassan leave
the camp.'
Like a flash the doctor ran to our tent. Poirot was lying as I left him.
'Extraordinary,' cried Ames. 'Looks like a seizure - or - what did you
say about something he drank?' He picked up the empty cup.
'Only I did not drink it!' said a placid voice.
We turned in amazement. Poirot was sitting up on the bed. He was
smiling.
'No,' he said gently. 'I did not drink it. While my good friend Hastings
was apostrophising the night, I took the opportunity of pouring it,
not down my throat, but into a little bottle. That little bottle will go to
the analytical chemist. No' - as the doctor made a sudden
movement - 'as a sensible man, you will understand that violence
will be of no avail. During Hastings' brief absence to fetch you, I
have had time to put the bottle in safe keeping. Ah, quick, Hastings,
hold him!'
I misunderstood Poirot's anxiety. Eager to save my friend, I flung
myself in front of him. But the doctor's swift movement had another
meaning. His hand went to his mouth, a smell of bitter almonds
filled the air, and he swayed forward and fell.
'Another victim,' said Poirot gravely, 'but the last. Perhaps it is the
best way. He has three deaths on his head.'
'Dr Ames?' I cried, stupefied. 'But I thought you believed in some
occult influence?'
'You misunderstood me, Hastings. What I meant was that I believe
in the terrific force of superstition. Once get it firmly established
that a series of deaths are supernatural, and you might almost stab
a man in broad daylight, and it would still be put down to the curse,
so strongly is the instinct of the supernatural implanted in the
human race. I suspected from the first that a man was taking
advantage of that instinct. The idea came to him, I imagine, with the
death of Sir John Willard. A fury of superstition arose at once. As
far as I could see, nobody could derive any particular profit from Sir
John's death. Mr Bleibner was a different case. He was a man of
great wealth. The information I received from New York contained
several suggestive points. To begin with, young Bleibner was
reported to have said he had a good friend in Egypt from whom he
could borrow. It was tacitly understood that he meant his uncle, but
it seemed to me that in that case he would have said so outright.
The words suggest some boon companion of his own. Another
thing, he scraped up enough money to take him to Egypt, his uncle
refused outright to advance him a penny, yet he was able to pay the
return passage to New York. Someone must have lent him the
money.'
'All that was very thin,' I objected.
'But there was more. Hastings, there occur often enough words
spoken metaphorically which are taken literally. The opposite can
happen too. In this case, words which were meant literally were
taken metaphorically. Young Bleibner wrote plainly enough: 'I am a
leper,' but nobody realized that he shot himself because he
believed that he had contracted the dread disease of leprosy.'
'What?' I ejaculated.
'It was the clever invention of a diabolical mind. Young Bleibner was
suffering from some minor skin trouble; he had lived in the South
Sea Islands, where the disease is common enough. Ames was a
former friend of his, and a well-known medical man, he would never
dream of doubting his word. When I arrived here, my suspicions
were divided between Harper and Dr Ames, but I soon realized that
only the doctor could have perpetrated and concealed the crimes,
and I learnt from Harper that he was previously acquainted with
young Bleibner. Doubtless the latter at some time or another had
made a will or had insured his life in favour of the doctor. The latter
saw his chance of acquiring wealth. It was easy for him to inoculate
Mr Bleibner with the deadly germs. Then the nephew, overcome
with despair at the dread news his friend had conveyed to him, shot
himself. Mr Bleibner, whatever his intentions, had made no will. His
fortune would pass to his nephew and from him to the doctor.'
'And Mr Schneider?'
'We cannot be sure. He knew young Bleibner too, remember, and
may have suspected something, or, again, the doctor may have
thought that a further death motiveless and purposeless would
strengthen the coils of superstition. Furthermore, I will tell you an
interesting psychological fact, Hastings. A murderer has always a
strong desire to repeat his successful crime, the performance of it
grows upon him. Hence my fears for young Willard. The figure of
Anubis you saw to-night was Hassan, dressed up by my orders. I
wanted to see if I could frighten the doctor. But it would take more
than the supernatural to frighten him. I could see that he was not
entirely taken in by my pretences of belief in the occult. The little
comedy I played for him did not deceive him. I suspected that he
would endeavour to make me the next victim. Ah, but in spite of la
mer maudite, the heat abominable, and the annoyances of the sand,
the little grey cells still functioned!'
Poirot proved to be perfectly right in his premises. Young Bleibner,
some years ago, in a fit of drunken merriment, had made a jocular
will, leaving 'my cigarette-case you admire so much and everything
else of which I die possessed which will be principally debts to my
good friend Robert Ames who once saved my life from drowning.'
The case was hushed up as far as possible, and, to this day, people
talk of the remarkable series of deaths in connection with the Tomb
of Men-her-Ra as a triumphal proof of the vengeance of a bygone
king upon the desecrators of his tomb - a belief which, as Poirot
pointed out to me, is contrary to all Egyptian belief and thought.