9. THE CASE OF THE MISSING LADY
The buzzer on Mr. Blunt's desk (International Detective Agency,
Manager, Theodore Blunt) uttered its warning call. Tommy and
Tuppence both flew to their respective peepholes which commanded a
view of the outer office. There it was Albert's business to delay the
prospective clients with various artistic devices.
"I will see, sir," he was saying. "But I'm afraid Mr. Blunt is very busy
just at present. He is engaged with Scotland Yard on the phone just
now."
"I'll wait," said the visitor. "I haven't got a card with me, but my name is
Gabriel Stavansson."
The client was a magnificent specimen of manhood, standing over six
feet high. His face was bronzed and weather beaten, and the
extraordinary blue of his eyes made an almost startling contrast to the
brown skin.
Tommy swiftly made up his mind. He put on his hat, picked up some
gloves, and opened the door. He paused on the threshold.
"This gentleman is waiting to see you, Mr. Blunt," said Albert.
A quick frown passed over Tommy's face. He took out his watch.
"I am due at the Duke's at a quarter to eleven," he said. Then he looked
keenly at the visitor. "I can give you a few minutes if you will come this
way."
The latter followed him obediently into the inner office where
Tuppence was sitting demurely with pad and pencil.
"My confidential secretary, Miss Robinson," said Tommy. "Now, sir,
perhaps you will state your business? Beyond the fact that it is urgent,
that you came here in a taxi, and that you have lately been in the
Arctic-or possibly the Antarctic, I know nothing."
The visitor stared at him in amazement.
"But this is marvellous," he cried. "I thought detectives only did such
things in books! Your office boy did not even give you my name!"
Tommy sighed deprecatingly.
"Tut tut, all that was very easy," he said. "The rays of the midnight sun
within the Arctic circle have a peculiar action upon the skin-the actinic
rays have certain properties. I am writing a little monograph on the
subject shortly. But all this is wide of the point. What is it that has
brought you to me in such distress of mind?"
"To begin with, Mr. Blunt, my name is Gabriel Stavansson-',
"Ah! of course " said Tommy. "The well known explorer. You have
recently returned from the region of the North Pole, I believe?"
"I landed in England three days ago. A friend who was cruising in
Northern waters brought me back on his yacht. Otherwise I should not
have got back for another fortnight. Now I must tell you, Mr. Blunt, that
before I started on this last expedition two years ago, I had the great
good fortune to become engaged to Mrs. Maurice Leigh Gordon-"
Tommy interrupted.
"Mrs. Leigh Gordon was, before her marriage-"
"The Honorable Hermione Crane, second daughter of Lord
Lanchester," reeled off Tuppence glibly.
Tommy threw her a glance of admiration.
"Her first husband was killed in the War," added Tuppence.
Gabriel Stavansson nodded.
"That is quite correct. As I was saying, Hermione and I became
engaged. I offered, of course, to give up this expedition, but she
wouldn't hear of such a thing-bless her! She's the right kind of woman
for an explorer's wife. Well, my first thought on landing was to see
Hermione. I sent a telegram from Southampton, and rushed up to town
by the first train. I knew that she was living for the time being with an
aunt of hers, Lady Susan Clonray, in Pont Street, and I went straight
there. To my great disappointment, I found that Hermy was away
visiting some friends in Northumberland. Lady Susan was quite nice
about it, after getting over her first surprise at seeing me. As I told you,
I wasn't expected for another fortnight. She said Hermy would be
returning in a few days' time. Then I asked for her address, but the old
woman hummed and hawed-said Hermy was staying at one of two
different places, and that she wasn't quite sure what order she was
taking them in. I may as well tell you, Mr. Blunt, that Lady Susan and I
have never got on very well. She's one of those fat women with double
chins. I loathe fat women-always have-fat women and fat dogs are an
abomination unto the Lord-and unfortunately they so often go
together! It's an idiosyncracy of mine, I know-but there it is-I never can
get on with a fat woman."
"Fashion agrees with you, Mr. Stavansson," said Tommy drily. "And
everyone has their own pet aversion-that of the late Lord Roberts was
cats."
"Mind you, I'm not saying that Lady Susan isn't a perfectly charming
woman-she may be, but I've never taken to her. I've always felt, deep
down, that she disapproved of our engagement, and I feel sure that
she would influence Hermy against me if that were possible. I'm telling
you this for what it's worth. Count it out as prejudice, if you like. Well,
to go on with my story, I'm the kind of obstinate brute who likes his own
way. I didn't leave Pont Street until I'd got out of her the names and
addresses of the people Hermy was likely to be staying with. Then I
took the mail train North."
"You are, I perceive, a man of action, Mr. Stavansson," said Tommy,
smiling.
"The thing came upon me like a bombshell. Mr. Blunt, none of these
people had seen a sign of Hermy. Of the three houses, only one had
been expecting her-Lady Susan must have made a bloomer over the
other two-and she had put off her visit there at the last moment by
telegram. I returned post haste to London, of course, and went
straight to Lady Susan. I will do her the justice to say that she seemed
upset. She admitted that she had no idea where Hermy could be. All
the same, she strongly negatived any idea of going to the police. She
pointed out that Hermy was not a silly young girl, but an independent
woman who had always been in the habit of making her own plans. She
was probably carrying out some idea of her own.
"I thought it quite likely that Hermy didn't want to report all her
movements to Lady Susan. But I was still worried. I had that queer
feeling one gets when something is wrong. I was just leaving when a
telegram was brought to Lady Susan. She read it with an expression of
relief and handed it to me. It ran as follows: "Changed my plans Just
off to Monte Carlo for a week Hermy."
Tommy held out his hand.
"You have got the telegram with you?"
"No, I haven't. But it was handed in at Maldon, Surrey. I noticed that at
the time, because it struck me as odd. What should Hermy be doing at
Maldon? She'd no friends there that I had ever heard of."
"You didn't think of rushing off to Monte Carlo in the same way that you
had rushed North?"
"I thought of it, of course. But I decided against it. You see, Mr. Blunt,
whilst Lady Susan seemed quite satisfied by that telegram, I wasn't. It
struck me as odd that she should always telegraph, not write. A line or
two in her own handwriting would have set all my fears at rest. But
anyone can sign a telegram 'Hermy.' The more I thought it over, the
more uneasy I got. In the end I went down to Maldon. That was
yesterday afternoon. It's a fair sized place-good links there and all
that-two hotels. I inquired everywhere I could think of, but there wasn't
a sign that Hermy had ever been there. Coming back in the train I read
your advertisement, and I thought I'd put it up to you. If Hermy has
really gone off to Monte Carlo, I don't want to set the police on her
track and make a scandal, but I'm not going to be sent off on a wild
goose chase myself. I stay here in London, in case- in case there's
been foul play of any kind."
Tommy nodded thoughtfully.
"What do you suspect exactly?"
"I don't know. But I feel there's something wrong."
With a quick movement, Stavansson took a case from his pocket and
laid it open before them.
“That is Hermione," he said. "I will leave it with you."
The photograph represented a tan willowy woman, no longer in her
first youth, but with a charming frank smile and lovely eyes.
"Now, Mr. Stavansson," said Tommy. “There is nothing you have
omitted to tell me?"
"Nothing whatever."
"No detail, however small?"
"I don't think so."
Tommy sighed.
"That makes the task harder," he observed. "You must often have
noticed, Mr. Stavansson, in reading of crime, how one small detail is all
the great detective needs to set him on the track. I may say that this
case presents some unusual features. I have, I think, practically solved
it already, but time will show."
He picked up a violin which lay on the table, and drew the bow once or
twice across the strings. Tuppence ground her teeth and even the
explorer blenched. The performer laid the instrument down again.
"A few chords from Mosgovskensky," he murmured. "Leave me your
address, Mr. Stavansson, and I will report progress to you."
As the visitor left the office, Tuppence grabbed the violin and putting it
in the cupboard turned the key in the lock.
"If you must be Sherlock Holmes," she observed, "I'll get you a nice
little syringe and a bottle labelled Cocaine, but for God's sake leave
that violin alone. If that nice explorer man hadn't been as simple as a
child, he'd have seen through you. Are you going on with the Sherlock
Holmes touch?"
"I flatter myself that I have carried it through very well so far," said
Tommy with some complacence. "The deductions were good, weren't
they? I had to risk the taxi. After all, it's the only sensible way of getting
to this place."
"It's lucky I had just read the bit about his engagement in this
morning's Daily Mirror," remarked Tuppence.
"Yes, that looked well for the efficiency of Blunt's Brilliant Detectives.
This is decidedly a Sherlock Holmes case. Even you cannot have failed
to notice the similarity between it and the disappearance of Lady
Frances Carfax."
"Do you expect to find Mrs. Leigh Gordon's body in a coffin?"
"Logically, history should repeat itself. Actually-well, what do you
think?"
"Well," said Tuppence. "The most obvious explanation seems to be
that for some reason or other Hermy, as he calls her, is afraid to meet
her fiancé, and that Lady Susan is backing her up. In fact, to put it
bluntly, she's come a cropper of some kind, and has got the wind up
about it."
"That occurred to me also," said Tommy. "But I thought we'd better
make pretty certain before suggesting that explanation to a man like
Stavansson. What about a run down to Maldon, old thing? And it would
do no harm to take some golf clubs with us."
Tuppence agreeing, the International Detective Agency was left in the
charge of Albert.
Maldon, though a well known residential place, did not cover a large
area. Tommy and Tuppence, making every possible inquiry that
ingenuity could suggest, nevertheless drew a complete blank. It was
as they were returning to London that a brilliant idea occurred to
Tuppence.
"Tommy, why did they put Maldon Surrey on the telegram?"
"Because Maldon is in Surrey, idiot."
"Idiot yourself-I don't mean that. If you get a telegram from-Hastings,
say, or Torquay, they don't put the county after it. But from Richmond,
they do put Richmond Surrey. That's because there are two
Richmonds."
Tommy, who was driving, slowed up.
"Tuppence," he said affectionately. "Your idea is not so dusty. Let us
make inquiries at yonder post office."
They drew up before a small building in the middle of a village street. A
very few minutes sufficed to elicit the information that there were two
Maldons. Maldon, Surrey, and Maldon, Sussex, the latter a tiny hamlet
but possessed of a telegraph office.
"That's it," said Tuppence excitedly. "Stavansson knew Maldon was in
Surrey, so he hardly looked at the word beginning with S. after
Maldon."
"Tomorrow," said Tommy. "We'll have a look at Maldon, Sussex."
Maldon, Sussex, was a very different proposition to its Surrey
namesake. It was four miles from a railway station, possessed two
public houses, two small shops, a post and telegraph office combined
with a sweet and picture postcard business, and about seven small
cottages. Tuppence took on the shops whilst Tommy betook himself to
the Cock and Sparrow. They met half an hour later.
"Well?" said Tuppence.
"Quite good beer," said Tommy, "but no information."
"You'd better try the King's Head," said Tuppence. "I'm going back to
the post office. There's a sour old woman there, but I heard them yell
to her that dinner was ready."
She returned to the place, and began examining postcards. A freshfaced
girl, still munching, came out of the back room.
"I'd like these, please," said Tuppence. "And do you mind waiting
whilst I just look over these comic ones?"
She sorted through a packet, talking as she did so.
"I'm ever so disappointed you couldn't tell me my sister's address.
She's staying near here and I've lost her letter. Leigh Wood, her name
if."
The girl shook her head.
"I don't remember it. And we don't get many letters through here
either-so I probably should if I'd seen it on a letter. Apart from the
Grange, there isn't many big houses round about."
"What is the Grange?" asked Tuppence. "Who does it belong to?"
"Doctor Horriston has it. It's turned into a Nursing Home now. Nerve
cases mostly, I believe. Ladies that come down for rest cures, and all
that sort of thing. Well, it's quiet enough down here, Heaven knows."
She giggled.
Tuppence hastily selected a few cards and paid for them.
"That's Doctor Horriston's car coming along now," exclaimed the girl.
Tuppence hurried to the shop door. A small two seater was passing. At
the wheel was a tall dark man with a neat black beard and a powerful,
unpleasant face. The car went straight on down the street. Tuppence
saw Tommy crossing the road towards her.
"Tommy, I believe I've got it. Doctor Horriston's Nursing Home."
"I heard about it at the King's Head, and I thought there might be
something in it. But if she's had a nervous breakdown or anything of
that sort, her aunt and her friends would know about it surely."
"Ye-es. I didn't mean that. Tommy, did you see that man in the two
seater?"
"Unpleasant looking brute, yes."
"That was Doctor Horriston."
Tommy whistled.
"Shifty looking beggar. What do you say about it, Tuppence? Shall we
go and have a look at the Grange?"
They found the place at last, a big rambling house, surrounded by
deserted grounds, with a swift mill stream running behind the house.
"Dismal sort of abode," said Tommy. "It gives me the creeps,
Tuppence. You know, I've a feeling this is going to turn out a far more
serious matter than we thought at first."
"Oh! don't. If only we are in time. That woman's in some awful danger, I
feel it in my bones."
"Don't let your imagination run away with you."
"I can't help it. I mistrust that man. What shall we do? I think it would be
a good plan if I went and rang the bell alone first, and asked boldly for
Mrs. Leigh Gordon just to see what answer I get. Because, after all, it
may be perfectly fair and above board."
Tuppence carried out her plan. The door was opened almost
immediately by a man servant with an impassive face.
"I want to see Mrs. Leigh Gordon if she is well enough to see me."
She fancied that there was a momentary flicker of the man's
eyelashes, but he answered readily enough.
"There is no one of that name here, Madam."
"Oh! surely. This is Doctor Horriston's place, The Grange, is it not?"
"Yes, Madam, but there is nobody of the name of Mrs. Leigh Gordon
here."
Baffled, Tuppence was forced to withdraw and hold a further
consultation with Tommy outside the gate.
"Perhaps he was speaking the truth. After all, we don't know."
"He wasn't. He was lying. I'm sure of it."
"Wait until the doctor comes back," said Tommy. "Then I'll pass myself
off as a journalist anxious to discuss his new system of rest cure with
him. That will give me a chance of getting inside and studying the
geography of the place."
The doctor returned about half an hour later. Tommy gave him about
five minutes then he in turn marched up to the front door. But he too
returned baffled.
"The doctor was engaged and couldn't be disturbed. And he never
sees journalists. Tuppence, you're right. There's something fishy about
this place. It's ideally situated-miles from anywhere. Any mortal thing
could go on here, and no one would ever know."
"Come on," said Tuppence with determination.
"What are you going to do?"
"I'm going to climb over the wall and see if I can't get up to the house
quietly without being seen."
"Right. I'm with you."
The garden was somewhat overgrown, and afforded a multitude of
cover. Tommy and Tuppence managed to reach the back of the house
unobserved.
Here there was a wide terrace, with some crumbling steps leading
down from it. In the middle some French windows opened onto the
terrace, but they dared not step out into the open, and the windows
where they were crouching were too high for them to be able to look
in. It did not seem as though their reconnaissance would be much use
when suddenly Tuppence tightened her grasp of Tommy's arm.
Someone was speaking in the room close to them. The window was
open and the fragment of conversation came clearly to their ears.
"Come in, come in, and shut the door," said a man's voice irritably "A
lady came about an hour ago, you said, and asked for Mrs. Leigh
Gordon?"
Tuppence recognised the answering voice as that of the impassive
man servant.
"Yes, sir."
"You said she wasn't here, of course?"
"Of course, sir."
"And now this journalist fellow," fumed the other.
He came suddenly to the window, throwing up the sash, and the two
outside, peering through a screen of bushes, recognised Dr.
Horriston.
"It's the woman I mind most about," continued the doctor. "What did
she look like?"
"Young, good-looking, and very smartly dressed, sir."
Tommy nudged Tuppence in the ribs.
"Exactly," said the doctor between his teeth. "As I feared. Some friend
of the Leigh Gordon woman's. It's getting very difficult. I shall have to
take steps-"
He left the sentence unfinished. Tommy and Tuppence heard the door
close. There was silence.
Gingerly, Tommy led the retreat. When they had reached a little
clearing not far away, but out of earshot from the house, he spoke.
"Tuppence, old thing, this is getting serious. They mean mischief. I
think we ought to get back to town at once and see Stavansson."
To his surprise Tuppence shook her head.
"We must stay down here. Didn't you hear him say he was going to
take steps? That might mean anything."
"The worst of it is we've hardly got a case to go to the police on."
"Listen, Tommy. Why not ring up Stavansson from the village? I'll stay
around here."
"Perhaps that is the best plan," agreed her husband. "But, I say-
Tuppence-"
"Well?"
"Take care of yourself-won't you?"
"Of course I shall, you silly old thing. Cut along."
It was some two hours later that Tommy returned. He found Tuppence
awaiting him near the gate.
"Well?"
"I couldn't get on to Stavansson. Then I tried Lady Susan.
She was out too. Then I thought of ringing up old Brady. I asked him to
look up Horriston in the Medical Directory or whatever the thing calls
itself."
"Well, what did Dr. Brady say?"
"Oh! he knew the name at once. Horriston was once a bona fide
doctor, but he came a cropper of some kind. Brady called him a most
unscrupulous quack, and said he, personally, wouldn't be surprised at
anything. The question is, what are we to do now?"
"We must stay here," said Tuppence instantly. "I've a feeling they
mean something to happen tonight. By the way, a gardener has been
clipping ivy round the house. Tommy, I saw where he put the ladder."
"Good for you, Tuppence," said her husband appreciatively. "Then
tonight-"
"As soon as it's dark-"
"We shall see-"
"What we shall see."
Tommy took his turn at watching the house whilst Tuppence went to
the village and had some food.
Then she returned and they took up the vigil together. At nine o'clock,
they decided that it was dark enough to commence operations. They
were now able to circle round the house in perfect freedom. Suddenly
Tuppence clutched Tommy by the arm.
"Listen."
The sound she had heard came again, borne faintly on the night air. It
was the moan of a woman in pain. Tuppence pointed upward to a
window on the first floor.
"It came from that room," she whispered.
Again that low moan rent the stillness of the night.
The two listeners decided to put their original plan into action.
Tuppence led the way to where she had seen the gardener put the
ladder. Between them they carried it to the side of the house from
which they had heard the moaning. All the blinds of the ground floor
rooms were drawn, but this particular window upstairs was
unshuttered.
Tommy put the ladder as noiselessly as possible against the side of the
house.
"I'll go up," whispered Tuppence. "You stay below. I don't mind
climbing ladders and you can steady it better than I could. And in case
the doctor should come round the corner you'd be able to deal with
him and I shouldn't."
Nimbly Tuppence swarmed up the ladder, and raised her head
cautiously to look in at the window. Then she ducked it swiftly, but
after a minute or two brought it very slowly up again. She stayed there
for about five minutes. Then she descended again.
"It's her," she said breathlessly and ungrammatically, "But oh! Tommy,
it's horrible. She's lying there in bed, moaning and turning to and froand
just as I got there a woman dressed as a nurse came in. She bent
over her and injected something in her arm and then went away again.
What shall we do?"
"Is she conscious?"
"I think so. I'm almost sure she is. I fancy she may be strapped to the
bed. I'm going up again, and if I can, I'm going to get into that room."
"I say, Tuppence-"
"If I'm in any sort of danger I'll yell for you. So long."
Avoiding further argument Tuppence hurried up the ladder again.
Tommy saw her try the window, then noiselessly push up the sash.
Another second, and she had disappeared inside.
And now an agonising time came for Tommy. He could hear nothing at
first. Tuppence and Mrs. Leigh Gordon must be talking in whispers if
they were talking at all. Presently he did hear a low murmur of voices
and drew a breath of relief. But suddenly the voices stopped. Dead
silence.
Tommy strained his ears. Nothing. What could they be doing?
Suddenly a hand fell on his shoulder.
"Come on," said Tuppence's voice out of the darkness.
“Tuppence! How did you get here?"
“Through the front door. Let's get out of this."
"Get out of this?"
"That's what I said."
"But-Mrs. Leigh Gordon?"
In a tone of indescribable bitterness Tuppence replied.
"Getting thin!"
Tommy looked at her, suspecting irony.
“What do you mean?"
“What I say. Getting thin. Slinkiness. Reduction of weight. Didn't you
hear Stavansson say he hated fat women? In the two years he's been
away, his Hermy has put on weight. Got a panic when she knew he was
coming back, and rushed off to do this new treatment of Dr.
Horriston's. It's injections of some sort, and he makes a deadly secret
of it, and charges through the nose. I daresay he is a quack-but he's a
damned successful one! Stavansson comes home a fortnight too soon
when she's only beginning the treatment. Lady Susan has been sworn
to secrecy, and plays up. And we come down here and make blithering
idiots of ourselves!"
Tommy drew a deep breath.
"I believe, Watson," he said with dignity, "that there is a very good
Concert at the Queen's Hall tomorrow. We shall be in plenty of time for
it. And you will oblige me by not placing this case upon your records. It
has absolutely no distinctive features."
10. BLINDMAN'S BUFF
"Right," said Tommy, and replaced the receiver on its hoof`.
Then he turned to Tuppence.
"That was the Chief. Seems to have got the wind up about us. It
appears that the parties we're after have got wise to the fact that I'm
not the genuine Mr. Theodore Blunt. We're to expect excitements at
any minute. The Chief begs you as a favor to go home and stay at
home, and not mix yourself up in it any more. Apparently the hornet's
nest we've stirred up is bigger than anyone imagined."
"All that about my going home is nonsense," said Tuppence decidedly.
"Who is going to look after you if I go home? Besides, I like excitement.
Business hasn't been very brisk just lately."
"Well, one can't have murders and robberies every day," said Tommy.
"Be reasonable. Now my idea is this. When business is slack, we ought
to do a certain amount of home exercises every day."
"Lie on our backs and wave our feet in the air? That sort of thing?"
"Don't be so literal in your interpretation. When I say exercises, I mean
exercises in the detective art. Reproductions of the Great Masters. For
instance-"
From the drawer beside him, Tommy took out a formidable dark green
eyeshade covering both eyes. This he adjusted with some care. Then
he drew a watch from his pocket.
"I broke the glass this morning," he remarked. "That paved the way for
its being the crystalless watch which my sensitive fingers touch so
lightly."
"Be careful," said Tuppence. "You nearly had the short hand off then."
"Give me your hand," said Tommy. He held it, one finger feeling for the
pulse. "Ah! the keyboard of silence. This woman has not got heart
disease."
“I suppose," said Tuppence, "that you are Thornley Colton?"
"Just so," said Tommy. "The blind Problemist. And you're
thingumrnybob, the black-haired apple-cheeked secretary-"
"The bundle of baby clothes picked up on the banks of the English
river," finished Tuppence.
"And Albert is the Fee, alias Shrimp."
"We must teach him to say 'Gee,' " said Tuppence. "And his voice isn't
shrill. It's dreadfully hoarse."
"Against the wall by the door,' said Tommy, "you perceive the slim
hollow cane which held in my sensitive hand tells me so much."
He rose and cannoned into a chair.
"Damn!" said Tommy. "I forgot that chair was there."
"It must be beastly to be blind," said Tuppence with feeling.
"Rather," agreed Tommy heartily. "I'm sorrier for all those poor devils
who lost their eyesight in the War than for anyone else. But they say
that when you live in the dark you really do develop special senses.
That's what I want to try and see if one couldn't do. It would be jolly
handy to train oneself to be some good in the dark. Now, Tuppence, be
a good Sydney Thames. How many steps to that cane?"
Tuppence made a desperate guess.
"Three straight, five left," she hazarded.
Tommy paced it uncertainly, Tuppence interrupting with a cry of
warning as she realised that the fourth step left would take him slap
against the wall.
"There's a lot in this," said Tuppence. "You've no idea how difficult it is
to judge how many steps are needed."
"It's jolly interesting," said Tommy. "Call Albert in. I'm going to shake
hands with you both, and see if I know which is which."
"All right," said Tuppence, "but Albert must wash his hands first.
They're sure to be sticky from those beastly acid drops he's always
eating."
Albert, introduced to the game, was full of interest.
Tommy, the hand shakes completed, smiled complacently.
“The keyboard of silence cannot lie," he murmured. 'The first was
Albert, the second, you, Tuppence."
"Wrong!" shrieked Tuppence. "Keyboard of silence indeed! You went
by my wedding ring. And I put that on Albert's finger."
Various other experiments were carried out, with indifferent success.
"But it's coming," declared Tommy. "One can't expect to be infallible
straight away. I tell you what. It's just lunch time. You and I will go to
the Blitz, Tuppence. Blind man and his keeper. Some jolly useful tips to
be picked up there."
"I say, Tommy, we shall get into trouble."
"No, we shan't. I shall behave quite like the little gentleman. But I bet
you that by the end of luncheon I shall be startling you."
All protests being thus overborne, a quarter of an hour later saw
Tommy and Tuppence comfortably ensconced at a corner table in the
Gold Room of the Blitz.
Tommy ran his fingers lightly over the Menu.
"Pilaff de Homard and Grilled Chicken for me," he murmured.
Tuppence also made her selection, and the waiter moved away.
"So far, so good," said Tommy. "Now for a more ambitious venture.
What beautiful legs that girl in the short skirt has-the one who has just
come in."
"How was that done, Thorn?"
"Beautiful legs impart a particular vibration to the floor which is
received by my hollow cane. Or, to be honest, in a big Restaurant there
is nearly always a girl with beautiful legs standing in the doorway
looking for her friends, and with short skirts going about, she'd be sure
to take advantage of them."
The meal proceeded.
"The man two tables from us is a very wealthy profiteer, I fancy," said
Tommy carelessly.
"Pretty good," said Tuppence appreciatively. "I don't follow that one."
"I shan't tell you how it's done every time. It spoils my show. The head
waiter is serving champagne three tables off to thee right. A stout
woman in black is about to pass our table."
“Tommy, how can you-"
"Aha! You're beginning to see what I can do. That's a nice girl in brown
just getting up at the table behind you."
"Snoo!" said Tuppence. "It's a young man in grey."
"Oh!" said Tommy, momentarily disconcerted.
And at that moment two men who had been sitting at a table not far
away, and who had been watching the young pair with keen interest,
got up and came across to the corner table.
"Excuse me," said the elder of the two, a tall well dressed man with an
eyeglass and a small grey moustache. "But you have been pointed out
to me as Mr. Theodore Blunt. May I ask if that is so?"
Tommy hesitated a minute, feeling somewhat at a disadvantage. Then
he bowed his head.
“That is so. I am Mr. Blunt."
"What an unexpected piece of good fortune! Mr. Blunt, I was going to
call at your offices after lunch. I am in trouble-very grave trouble. Butexcuse
me-you have had some accident to your eyes?"
"My dear sir," said Tommy in a melancholy voice. "I am blindcompletely
blind."
"What?"
"You are astonished. But surely you have heard of blind detectives?"
"In fiction. Never in real life. And I have certainly never heard that you
were blind."
"Many people are not aware of the fact," murmured Tommy. "I am
wearing an eyeshade today to save my eyeballs from glare. But
without it, quite a host of people have never suspected my infirmity-if
you call it that. You see, my eyes cannot mislead me. But enough of all
this. Shall we go at once to my office, or will you give me the facts of
the case here? The latter would be best, I think."
A waiter brought up two extra chairs, and the two men sat down. The
second man, who had not yet spoken, was shorter, sturdy in build and
very dark.
"It is a matter of great delicacy," said the older man dropping his voice
confidentially. He looked uncertainly at Tuppence. Mr. Blunt seemed to
feel the glance.
"Let me introduce my confidential secretary," he said. "Miss Ganges.
Found on the banks of the Indian river-a mere bundle of baby clothes.
Very sad history. Miss Ganges is my eyes. She accompanies me
everywhere."
The stranger acknowledged the introduction with a bow.
"Then I can speak out. Mr. Blunt, my daughter, a girl of sixteen, has
been abducted under somewhat peculiar circumstances. I discovered
this half an hour ago. The circumstances of the case were such that I
dared not call in the police. Instead I rang up your office. They told me
you were out to lunch, but would be back by half past two. I came in
here with my friend Captain Harker-"
The short man jerked his head and muttered something.
"By the greatest good fortune you happened to be lunching here also.
We must lose no time. You must return with me to my house
immediately."
Tommy demurred cautiously.
"I can be with you in half an hour. I must return to my office first."
Captain Harker, turning to glance at Tuppence, may have been
surprised to see a half smile lurking for a moment at the corners of her
mouth.
"No, no, that will not do. You must return with me." The grey haired
man took a card from his pocket and handed it across the table. "That
is my name."
Tommy fingered it.
"My fingers are hardly sensitive enough for that," he said with a smile,
and handed it to Tuppence, who read out in a low voice: "The Duke of
Blairgowrie."
She looked with great interest at their client. The Duke of Blairgowrie
was well known to be a most haughty and inaccessible nobleman who
had married as a wife the daughter of a Chicago pork butcher, many
years younger than himself, and of a lively temperament that augured
ill for their future together. There had been rumors of disaccord lately.
"You will come at once, Mr. Blunt?" said the Duke, with a tinge of
acerbity in his manner.
Tommy yielded to the inevitable.
"Miss Ganges and I will come with you," he said quietly. "You will
excuse my just stopping to drink a large cup of black coffee? They will
serve it immediately. I am subject to very distressing headaches, the
result of my eye trouble, and the coffee steadies my nerves."
He called a waiter and gave the order. Then he spoke to Tuppence.
"Miss Ganges-I am lunching here tomorrow with the French Prefect of
Police. Just note down the luncheon, and give it to the head waiter
with instructions to reserve me my usual table. I am assisting the
French Police in an important case. The fee-" he paused-"is
considerable. Are you ready, Miss Ganges?"
"Quite ready," said Tuppence, her stylo poised.
"We win start with that special salad of Shrimps that they have here.
Then to follow-let me see, to follow-Yes. Omelette Blitz, and perhaps a
couple of Toundedos á l’Etranger."
He looked up, catching the Duke's eye.
"You will forgive me, I hope," he murmured. "Ah! yes, Soufflé en
surprise. That will conclude the repast. A most interesting man, the
French prefect. You know him, perhaps?"
The other replied in the negative, as Tuppence rose and went to speak
to the head waiter. Presently she returned, just as the coffee was
brought.
Tommy drank a large cup of it, sipping it slowly, then rose.
"My cane, Miss Ganges? Thank you. Directions, please?"
It was a moment of agony for Tuppence.
"One right, eighteen straight. About the fifth step, there is a waiter
serving the table on your left."
Swinging his cane jauntily, Tommy set out. Tuppence kept close
beside him, and endeavored unobtrusively to steer him. All went well
until they were just passing out through the doorway. A man entered
rather hurriedly, and before Tuppence could warn the blind Mr. Blunt,
he had barged right into the newcomer. Explanations and apologies
ensued.
At the door of the Blitz a smart landaulette was waiting. The Duke
himself aided Mr. Blunt to get in.
"Your car here, Harker?" he asked over his shoulder.
"Yes. Just round the corner."
“Take Miss Ganges in it, will you."
Before another word could be said, he had jumped in beside Tommy,
and the car rolled smoothly away.
"A very delicate matter," murmured the Duke. "I can soon acquaint
you with all the details."
Tommy raised his hand to his head.
"I can remove my eyeshade now," he observed pleasantly. "It was only
the glare of artificial light in the Restaurant necessitated its use.
But his arm was jerked down sharply. At the same time he felt
something hard and round being poked between his ribs. "No, my dear
Mr. Blunt," said the Duke's voice-but a voice that seemed suddenly
different. "You will not remove that eyeshade. You will sit perfectly still
and not move in any way. You understand? I don't want this pistol of
mine to go off. You see, I happen not to be the Duke of Blairgowrie at
all. I borrowed his name for the occasion, knowing that you would not
refuse to accompany such a celebrated client. I am something much
more prosaic-a ham merchant who has lost his wife."
He felt the start the other gave.
“That tells you something," he laughed. "My dear young man, you have
been incredibly foolish. I'm afraid-I'm very much afraid that your
activities will be curtailed in future."
He spoke the last words with a sinister relish.
Tommy sat motionless. He did not reply to the other's taunts.
Presently the car slackened its pace and drew up.
"Just a minute," said the pseudo Duke. He twisted a handkerchief
deftly into Tommy's mouth, and drew up his scarf over it.
"In case you should be foolish enough to think of calling for help," he
explained suavely.
The door of the car opened and the chauffeur stood ready. He and his
master took Tommy between them and propelled him rapidly up some
steps and in at the door of a house.
The door closed behind them. There was a rich oriental smell in the air.
Tommy's feet sank deep into velvet pile. He was propelled in the same
fashion up a flight of stairs and into a room which he judged to be at
the back of the house. Here the two men bound his hands together.
The chauffeur went out again, and the other removed the gag.
"You may speak freely now," he announced pleasantly. "What have
you to say for yourself, young man?"
Tommy cleared his throat and eased the aching corners of his mouth.
"I hope you haven't lost my hollow cane," he said mildly. "It cost me a
lot to have that made."
"You have nerve," said the other, after a minute's pause. "Or else you
are just a fool. Don't you understand that I have got you-got you in the
hollow of my hand? That you're absolutely in my power? That no one
who knows you is ever likely to see you again?"
"Can't we cut out the melodrama?" asked Tommy plaintively. "Have I
got to say 'You villain, I'll foil you yet?' That' sort of thing is so very
much out of date."
"What about the girl?" said the other, watching him, "Doesn't that
move you?"
"Putting two and two together during my enforced silence just now,"
said Tommy, "I have come to the inevitable conclusion that that chatty
lad Harker is another of the doers of desperate deeds, and that
therefore my unfortunate secretary will shortly join this little tea
party."
"Right as to one point, but wrong on the other. Mrs. Beresford-you see
I know all about you-Mrs. Beresford will not be brought here. That is a
little precaution I took. It occurred to me that just probably your
friends in high places might be keeping you shadowed. In that case, by
dividing the pursuit, you could not both be trailed. I should still keep
one in my hands. I am waiting now-"
He broke off, as the door opened. The chauffeur spoke.
"We've not been followed, sir. It's all clear."
"Good. You can go, Gregory."
The door closed again.
"So far, so good," said the 'Duke.' "And now what are we to do with
you, Mr. Beresford Blunt?"
"I wish you'd take this confounded eyeshade off me," said Tommy.
"I think not. With it on, you are truly blind-without it you would see as
well as I do-and that would not suit my little plan. For I have a plan. You
are fond of sensational fiction, Mr. Blunt. This little game that you and
your wife were playing today proves that. Now I too have arranged a
little game something rather ingenious, as I am sure you will admit
when I explain it to you.
"You see, this floor on which you are standing is made of metal, and
here and there on its surface are little projections. I touch a switchso."
A sharp click sounded. "Now the electric current is switched on.
To tread on one of those little knobs now means-death! You
understand? If you could see . . . but you cannot see. You are in the
dark. That is the game-Blindman's Buff with death. If you can reach the
door in safety-freedom! But I think that long before you reach it you will
have trodden on one of the danger spots. And that will be very
amusing-for me!"
He came forward and unbound Tommy's hands. Then he handed him
his cane with a little ironical bow.
"The blind Problemist. Let us see if he will solve this problem. I shall
stand here with my pistol ready. If you raise your hands to your head to
remove that eyeshade, I shoot. Is that clear?"
"Perfectly clear," said Tommy. He was rather pale, but determined. "I
haven't got a dog's chance, I suppose?"
"Oh! that-" the other shrugged his shoulders.
"Damned ingenious devil, aren't you?" said Tommy. "But you've
forgotten one thing. May I light a cigarette, by the way? My poor little
heart's going pit a pat."
"You may light a cigarette-but no tricks. I am watching you, remember,
with the pistol ready."
"I'm not a performing dog," said Tommy. "I don't do tricks." He
extracted a cigarette from his case, then felt for a match box. "It's all
right. I'm not feeling for a revolver. But you know well enough that I'm
not armed. All the same, as I said before, you've forgotten one thing."
"What is that?"
Tommy took a match from the box, and held it ready to strike.
"I'm blind and you can see. That's admitted. The advantage is with you.
But supposing we were both in the dark- eh? Where's your advantage
then?"
He struck the match.
The 'Duke' laughed contemptuously.
"Thinking of shooting at the switch of the lights? Plunging the room
into darkness? It can't be done."
"Just so," said Tommy. "I can't give you darkness. But extremes meet,
you know. What about light?"
As he spoke, he touched the match to something he held in his hand,
and threw it down upon the table.
A blinding glare filled the room.
Just for a minute, blinded by the intense white light, the 'Duke' blinked
and fell back, his pistol hand lowered.
He opened his eyes again to feel something sharp pricking his breast.
"Drop that pistol," ordered Tommy. "Drop it quick. I agree with you
that a hollow cane is a pretty rotten affair. So I didn't get one. A good
sword stick is a very useful weapon, though. Don't you think so?
Almost as useful as magnesium wire. Drop that pistol."
Obedient to the necessity of that sharp point, the man dropped it.
Then, with a laugh, he sprang back.
"But I still have the advantage," he mocked. "For I can see, and you
cannot."
"That's where you're wrong," said Tommy. "I can see perfectly. This
eyeshade's a fake. I was going to put one over on Tuppence. Make one
or two bloomers to begin with, and then put in some perfectly
marvellous stuff towards the end of the lunch. Why, bless you, I could
have walked to the door and avoided all the knobs with perfect ease.
But I didn't trust you to play a sporting game. You'd never have let me
get out of this alive. Careful now-"
For, with his face distorted with rage, the 'Duke' sprang forward,
forgetting in his fury to look where he put his feet.
There was a sudden blue crackle of flame, and he swayed for a minute,
then fell like a log. A faint odor of singed flesh filled the room, mingling
with a stronger smell of ozone.
“Whew," said Tommy.
He wiped his face.
Then, moving gingerly, and with every precaution, he reached the walk
and touched the switch he had seen the other manipulate.
He crossed the room to the door, opened it carefully, and looked out.
There was no one about. He went down the stairs and out through the
front door.
Safe in the street, he looked up at the house with a shudder, noting the
number. Then he hurried to the nearest telephone box.
There was a moment of agonising anxiety, and then a well known voice
spoke.
"Tuppence, thank goodness!"
"Yes, I'm all right. I got all your points. The Fee, Shrimp Come to the
Blitz and follow the two strangers. Albert got there in time, and when
we went off in separate cars, followed me in a taxi, saw where they
took me, and rang up the police."
"Albert's a good lad," said Tommy. "Chivalrous. I was pretty sure he'd
choose to follow you. But I've been worried, all the same. I've got lots
to tell you. I'm coming straight back now. And the first thing I shall do
when I get back is to write a thumping big cheque for St. Dunstan's.
Lord, it must be awful not to be able to see."
11. THE MAN IN THE MIST
Tommy was not pleased with life. Blunt's Brilliant Detectives had met
with a reverse, distressing to their pride if not to their pockets. Called
in professionally to elucidate the mystery of a stolen pearl necklace at
Adlington Hall, Adlington, Blunt's Brilliant Detectives had failed to
make good. Whilst Tommy, hard on the track of a gambling Countess,
was tracking her in the disguise of a Roman Catholic Priest, and
Tuppence was 'getting off' with a nephew of the house on the golf
links, the local Inspector of Police had unemotionally arrested the
second footman who proved to be a thief well known at headquarters
and who admitted his guilt without making any bones about it.
Tommy and Tuppence, therefore, had withdrawn with what dignity
they could muster, and were at the present moment solacing
themselves with cocktails at the Grand Adlington Hotel. Tommy still
wore his clerical disguise.
"Hardly a Father Brown touch, that," he remarked gloomily. "And yet
I've got just the right kind of umbrella."
"It wasn't a Father Brown problem," said Tuppence. "One needs a
certain atmosphere from the start. One must be doing something quite
ordinary, and then bizarre things begin to happen. That's the idea."
"Unfortunately," said Tommy, "we have to return to town. Perhaps
something bizarre will happen on the way to the station."
He raised the glass he was holding to his lips, but the liquid in it was
suddenly spilled, as a heavy hand smacked him on the shoulder, and a
voice to match the hand boomed out words of greeting.
"Upon my soul, it is! Old Tommy! And Mrs. Tommy too. Where did you
blow in from? Haven't seen or heard anything of you for years."
"Why, it's Bulger!" said Tommy, setting down what was left of the
cocktail, and turning to look at the intruder, a big square-shouldered
man of thirty years of age, with a round red beaming face, and dressed
in golfing kit. "Good old Bulger!"
"But I say, old chap," said Bulger (whose real name by the way, was
Mervyn Estcourt), "I never knew you'd taken orders. Fancy you a
blinking parson."
Tuppence burst out laughing, and Tommy looked embarrassed. And
then they suddenly became conscious of a fourth person.
A tall slender creature, with very golden hair and very round blue eyes,
almost impossibly beautiful, with an effect of really expensive black
topped by wonderful ermines, and very large pearl earrings. She was
smiling. And her smile said many things. It asserted, for instance, that
she knew perfectly well that she herself was the thing best worth
looking at certainly in England, and possibly in the whole world. She
was not vain about it in any way, but she just knew, with certainty and
confidence, that it was so.
Both Tommy and Tuppence recognised her immediately. They had
seen her three times in "The Secret of the Heart," and an equal
number of times in that other great success, "Pillars of Fire," and in
innumerable other plays. There was, perhaps, no other actress in
England who had so firm a hold on the British public, as Miss Gilda
Glen. She was reported to be the most beautiful woman in England. It
was also rumored that she was the stupidest.
"Old friends of mine, Miss Glen," said Estcourt, with a tinge of apology
in his voice for having presumed, even for a moment, to forget such a
radiant creature. "Tommy, and Mrs. Tommy, let me introduce you to
Miss Gilda Glen."
The ring of pride in his voice was unmistakable. By merely being seen
in his company, Miss Glen had conferred great glory upon him.
The actress was staring with frank interest at Tommy.
"Are you really a Priest?" she asked. "A Roman Catholic Priest, I
mean? Because I thought they didn't have wives."
Estcourt went off in a boom of laughter again.
"That's good," he exploded. "You sly dog, Tommy. Glad he hasn't
renounced you, Mrs. Tommy, with all the rest of the pomps and
vanities."
Gilda Glen took not the faintest notice of him. She continued to stare at
Tommy with puzzled eyes.
"Are you a Priest?" she demanded.
"Very few of us are what we seem to be," said Tommy gently. "My
profession is not unlike that of a Priest. I don't give Absolution-but I
listen to Confessions-I-"
"Don't you listen to him," interrupted Estcourt. "He's pulling your leg."
"If you're not a clergyman, I don't see why you're dressed up like one,"
she puzzled. "That is, unless-"
"Not a criminal flying from justice," said Tommy. "The other thing."
"Oh!" she frowned, and looked at him with beautiful bewildered eyes.
"I wonder if she'll ever get that," thought Tommy to himself. "Not
unless I put it in words of one syllable for her, I should say."
Aloud he said:
"Know anything about the trains back to town, Bulger? We've got to be
pushing for home. How far is it to the station?"
"Ten minutes' walk. But no hurry. Next train up is the 6.35 and it's only
about twenty to six now. You've just missed one."
"Which way is it to the station from here?"
"Sharp to the left when you turn out of the Hotel. Then- let me seedown
Morgan's Avenue would be the best way, wouldn't it?"
"Morgan's Avenue?" Miss Glen started violently, and stared at him with
startled eyes.
"I know what you're thinking of," said Estcourt, laughing "The Ghost.
Morgan's Avenue is bounded by the cemetery on one side, and
tradition has it that a policeman who met his death by violence gets up
and walks on his old beat up and down Morgan's Avenue. A spook
policeman! Can you beat it? But lots of people swear to having seen
him."
"A policeman?" said Miss Glen. She shivered a little. "But there aren't
really any ghosts, are there? I mean-there aren't such things?"
She got up, folding her wrap tighter round her.
"Good bye," she said vaguely.
She had ignored Tuppence completely throughout, and now she did
not even glance in her direction. But over her shoulder she threw one
puzzled questioning glance at Tommy.
Just as she got to the door, she encountered a tall man with grey hair
and a puffy red face who uttered an exclamation of surprise. His hand
on her arm, he led her through the doorway, talking in an animated
fashion.
"Beautiful creature, isn't she?" said Estcourt. "Brains of a rabbit.
Rumor has it that she's going to marry Lord Leconbury. That was
Leconbury in the doorway."
"He doesn't look a very nice sort of man to marry," remarked
Tuppence.
Estcourt shrugged his shoulders.
"A title has a kind of glamor still, I suppose," he said. "And Leconbury
is not an impoverished peer by any means. She'll be in clover. Nobody
knows where she sprang from. Pretty near the gutter, I daresay.
There's something deuced mysterious about her being down here
anyway. She's not staying at the Hotel. And when I tried to find out
where she was staying, she snubbed me-snubbed me quite crudely, in
the only way she knows. Blessed if I know what it's all about."
He glanced at his watch and uttered an exclamation.
"I must be off. Jolly glad to have seen you two again. We must have a
bust in town together some night. So long."
He hurried away, and as he did so, a page approached with a note on a
salver. The note was unaddressed.
"But it's for you, sir," he said to Tommy. "From Miss Gilda Glen."
Tommy tore it open and read it with some curiosity. Inside were a few
lines written in a straggling untidy hand.
I'm not sure, but I think you might be able to help
me. And you'll be going that way to the station. Could
you be at The White House, Morgan's Avenue, at ten
minutes past six?
Yours sincerely,
Gilda Glen.
Tommy nodded to the page who departed, and then handed the note to
Tuppence.
"Extraordinary," said Tuppence. "Is it because she still thinks you're a
Priest?"
"No," said Tommy thoughtfully. "I should say it's because she's at last
taken in that I'm not one. Hullo! what's this?"
"This" was a young man with flaming red hair, a pugnacious jaw and
appallingly shabby clothes. He had walked into the room and was now
striding up and down muttering to himself.
"Hell!" said the red haired man, loudly and forcibly. "That's what I say-
Hell!"
He dropped into a chair near the young couple and stared at them
moodily.
"Damn all women, that's what I say," said the young man, eyeing
Tuppence ferociously. "Oh! all right, kick up a row if you like. Have me
turned out of the Hotel! It won't be for the first time. Why shouldn't we
say what we think? Why should we go about bottling up our feelings,
and smirking, and saying things exactly like everyone else? I don't feel
pleasant and polite. I feel like getting hold of someone round the throat
and gradually choking them to death."
He paused.
"Any particular person?" asked Tuppence. "Or just anybody?"
"One particular person," said the young man grimly.
"This is very interesting," said Tuppence. "Won't you tell us some
more?"
"My name's Reilly," said the red haired man. "James Reilly. You may
have heard it. I wrote a little volume of Pacifist poems-good stuff,
although I say so."
"Pacifist Poems?" said Tuppence.
"Yes-why not?" demanded Mr. Reilly belligerently.
"Oh! nothing," said Tuppence hastily.
"I'm for peace all the time," said Mr. Reilly fiercely. “To Hell with war.
And women! Women! Did you see that creature who was trailing
around here just now? Gilda Glen, she calls herself. Gilda Glen! God!
how I've worshipped that woman. And I'll tell you this-if she's got a
heart at all, it's on my side. She cared once for me, and I could make
her care again. And if she sells herself to that muck heap Leconburywell,
God help her. I'd as soon kill her with my own hands."
And on this, suddenly, he rose and rushed from the room.
Tommy raised his eyebrows.
"A somewhat excitable gentleman," he murmured. "Well, Tuppence,
shall we start?"
A fine mist was coming up as they emerged from the Hotel into the cool
outer air. Obeying Estcourt's directions, they turned sharp to the left,
and in a few minutes they came to a turning labelled Morgan's Avenue.
The mist had increased. It was soft and white, and hurried past them in
little eddying drifts. To their left was the high wall of the Cemetery, on
their right a row of small houses. Presently these ceased, and a high
hedge took their place.
"Tommy," said Tuppence. "I'm beginning to feel jumpy. The mist-and
the silence. As though we were miles from anywhere."
"One does feel like that," agreed Tommy. "All alone in the world. It's
the effect of the mist, and not being able to see ahead of one."
Tuppence nodded. "Just our footsteps echoing on the pavement.
What's that?"
"What's what?"
"I thought I heard other footsteps behind us."
"You'll be seeing the ghost in a minute if you work yourself up like
this," said Tommy kindly. "Don't be so nervy. Are you afraid the spook
policeman will lay his hand on your shoulder?"
Tuppence emitted a shrill squeal.
"Don't, Tommy. Now you've put it into my head."
She craned her head back over her shoulder, trying to peer into the
white veil that was wrapped all round them.
“There they are again," she whispered. "No, they're in front now. Oh!
Tommy, don't say you can't hear them?"
"I do hear something. Yes, it's footsteps behind us. Somebody else
walking this way to catch the train. I wonder-"
He stopped suddenly, and stood still, and Tuppence gave a gasp.
For the curtain of mist in front of them suddenly parted in the most
artificial manner, and there, not twenty feet away a gigantic policeman
suddenly appeared, as though materialized out of the fog. One minute
he was not there, the next minute he was-so at least it seemed to the
rather superheated imaginations of the two watchers. Then as the mist
rolled back still more, a little scene appeared, as though set on a
stage.
The big blue policeman, a scarlet pillar box, and on the right of the
road the outlines of a white house.
"Red, white, and blue," said Tommy. "It's damned pictorial. Come on,
Tuppence, there's nothing to be afraid of."
For, as he had already seen, the policeman was a real policeman. And
moreover, he was not nearly so gigantic as he had at first seemed
looming up out of the mist.
But as they started forward, footsteps came from behind them. A man
passed them, hurrying along. He turned in at the gate of the white
house, ascended the steps, and beat a deafening tattoo upon the
knocker. He was admitted just as they reached the spot where the
policeman was standing staring after him.
"There's a gentleman seems to be in a hurry," commented the
policeman.
He spoke in a slow reflective voice, as of one whose thoughts took
some time to mature.
"He's the sort of gentleman always would be in a hurry," remarked
Tommy.
The policeman's stare, slow and rather suspicious, came round to rest
on his face.
"Friend of yours?" he demanded, and there was distinct suspicion now
in his voice.
"No," said Tommy. "He's not a friend of mine, but I happen to know
who he is. Name of Reilly."
"Ah!" said the policeman. 'Well, I'd better be getting along."
"Can you tell me where the White House is?" asked Tommy.
The constable jerked his head sideways.
"This is it. Mrs. Honeycott's." He paused, and added evidently with the
idea of giving them valuable information: "Nervous party. Always
suspecting burglars is around. Always asking me to have a look
around the place. Middle-aged women get like that."
"Middle aged, eh?" said Tommy. "Do you happen to know if there's a
young lady staying there?"
"A young lady," said the policeman, ruminating. "A young lady. No, I
can't say I know anything about that."
"She mayn't be staying here, Tommy," said Tuppence. "And anyway,
she mayn't be here yet. She could only have started just before we
did."
"Ah!" said the policeman suddenly. "Now that I call it to mind, a young
lady did go in at this gate. I saw her as I was coming up the road. About
three or four minutes ago it might be."
"With ermine furs on?" asked Tuppence eagerly.
"She had some kind of white rabbit round her throat," admitted the
policeman.
Tuppence smiled. The policeman went on in the direction from which
they had just come, and they prepared to enter the gate of the White
House.
Suddenly a faint muffled cry sounded from inside the house, and
almost immediately afterwards the front door opened and James Reilly
came rushing down the steps. His face was white and twisted, and his
eyes glared in front of him unseeingly. He staggered like a drunken
man.
He passed Tommy and Tuppence as though he did not see them,
muttering to himself with a kind of dreadful repetition.
"My God! My God! Oh, my God!"
He clutched at the gate post, as though to steady himself, and then, as
though animated by sudden panic, he raced off down the road as hard
as he could go in the opposite direction to that taken by the policeman.