Utopia
-------------------------------------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION
Sir Thomas More, son of Sir John More, a justice of
the King’s Bench, was born in 1478, in Milk Street, in the
city of London. After his earlier education at St. Anthony’s
School, in Threadneedle Street, he was placed, as a boy, in
the household of Cardinal John Morton, Archbishop of
Canterbury and Lord Chancellor. It was not unusual for
persons of wealth or influence and sons of good families to
be so established together in a relation of patron and
client. The youth wore his patron’s livery, and added to
his state. The patron used, afterwards, his wealth or
influence in helping his young client forward in the world.
Cardinal Morton had been in earlier days that Bishop of
Ely whom Richard III. sent to the Tower; was busy
afterwards in hostility to Richard; and was a chief adviser
of Henry VII., who in 1486 made him Archbishop of
Canterbury, and nine months afterwards Lord Chancellor.
Cardinal Morton—of talk at whose table there are
recollections in ‘’delighted in the quick wit of
young Thomas More. He once said, ‘Whoever shall live
to try it, shall see this child here waiting at table prove a
notable and rare man.’

3 of 183
At the age of about nineteen, Thomas More was sent
to Canterbury College, Oxford, by his patron, where he
learnt Greek of the first men who brought Greek studies
from Italy to England—William Grocyn and Thomas
Linacre. Linacre, a physician, who afterwards took orders,
was also the founder of the College of Physicians. In 1499,
More left Oxford to study law in London, at Lincoln’s
Inn, and in the next year Archbishop Morton died.
More’s earnest character caused him while studying law
to aim at the subduing of the flesh, by wearing a hair shirt,
taking a log for a pillow, and whipping himself on Fridays.
At the age of twenty-one he entered Parliament, and soon
after he had been called to the bar he was made Under-
Sheriff of London. In 1503 he opposed in the House of
Commons Henry VII.’s proposal for a subsidy on account
of the marriage portion of his daughter Margaret; and he
opposed with so much energy that the House refused to
grant it. One went and told the king that a beardless boy
had disappointed all his expectations. During the last years,
therefore, of Henry VII. More was under the displeasure
of the king, and had thoughts of leaving the country.
Henry VII. died in April, 1509, when More’s age was a
little over thirty. In the first years of the reign of Henry
VIII. he rose to large practice in the law courts, where it is
eBook brought to you by


4 of 183
said he refused to plead in cases which he thought unjust,
and took no fees from widows, orphans, or the poor. He
would have preferred marrying the second daughter of
John Colt, of New Hall, in Essex, but chose her elder
sister, that he might not subject her to the discredit of
being passed over.
In 1513 Thomas More, still Under-Sheriff of London,
is said to have written his ‘History of the Life and Death of
King Edward V., and of the Usurpation of Richard III.’
The book, which seems to contain the knowledge and
opinions of More’s patron, Morton, was not printed until
1557, when its writer had been twenty-two years dead. It
was then printed from a MS. in More’s handwriting.
In the year 1515 Wolsey, Archbishop of York, was
made Cardinal by Leo X.; Henry VIII. made him Lord
Chancellor, and from that year until 1523 the King and
the Cardinal ruled England with absolute authority, and
called no parliament. In May of the year 1515 Thomas
More—not knighted yet—was joined in a commission to
the Low Countries with Cuthbert Tunstal and others to
confer with the ambassadors of Charles V., then only
Archduke of Austria, upon a renewal of alliance. On that
embassy More, aged about thirty- seven, was absent from
England for six months, and while at Antwerp he

5 of 183
established friendship with Peter Giles (Latinised
AEgidius), a scholarly and courteous young man, who was
secretary to the municipality of Antwerp.
Cuthbert Tunstal was a rising churchman, chancellor to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, who in that year (1515)
was made Archdeacon of Chester, and in May of the next
year (1516) Master of the Rolls. In 1516 he was sent again
to the Low Countries, and More then went with him to
Brussels, where they were in close companionship with
Erasmus.
More’s ‘’ was written in Latin, and is in two
parts, of which the second, describing the place ([Greek
text]—or Nusquama, as he called it sometimes in his
letters—‘Nowhere’), was probably written towards the
close of 1515; the first part, introductory, early in 1516.
The book was first printed at Louvain, late in 1516, under
the editorship of Erasmus, Peter Giles, and other of More’s
friends in Flanders. It was then revised by More, and
printed by Frobenius at Basle in November, 1518. It was
reprinted at Paris and Vienna, but was not printed in
England during More’s lifetime. Its first publication in this
country was in the English translation, made in Edward’s
VI.’s reign (1551) by Ralph Robinson. It was translated
with more literary skill by Gilbert Burnet, in 1684, soon

6 of 183
after he had conducted the defence of his friend Lord
William Russell, attended his execution, vindicated his
memory, and been spitefully deprived by James II. of his
lectureship at St. Clement’s. Burnet was drawn to the
translation of ‘’ by the same sense of unreason in
high places that caused More to write the book. Burnet’s
is the translation given in this volume.
The name of the book has given an adjective to our
language—we call an impracticable scheme n. Yet,
under the veil of a playful fiction, the talk is intensely
earnest, and abounds in practical suggestion. It is the work
of a scholarly and witty Englishman, who attacks in his
own way the chief political and social evils of his time.
Beginning with fact, More tells how he was sent into
Flanders with Cuthbert Tunstal, ‘whom the king’s majesty
of late, to the great rejoicing of all men, did prefer to the
office of Master of the Rolls;’ how the commissioners of
Charles met them at Bruges, and presently returned to
Brussels for instructions; and how More then went to
Antwerp, where he found a pleasure in the society of
Peter Giles which soothed his desire to see again his wife
and children, from whom he had been four months away.
Then fact slides into fiction with the finding of Raphael
Hythloday (whose name, made of two Greek words

7 of 183
[Greek text] and [Greek text], means ‘knowing in trifles’),
a man who had been with Amerigo Vespucci in the three
last of the voyages to the new world lately discovered, of
which the account had been first printed in 1507, only
nine years before  was written.
Designedly fantastic in suggestion of details, ‘’ is
the work of a scholar who had read Plato’s ‘Republic,’ and
had his fancy quickened after reading Plutarch’s account of
Spartan life under Lycurgus. Beneath the veil of an ideal
communism, into which there has been worked some
witty extravagance, there lies a noble English argument.
Sometimes More puts the case as of France when he
means England. Sometimes there is ironical praise of the
good faith of Christian kings, saving the book from
censure as a political attack on the policy of Henry VIII.
Erasmus wrote to a friend in 1517 that he should send for
More’s ‘,’ if he had not read it, and ‘wished to see
the true source of all political evils.’ And to More Erasmus
wrote of his book, ‘A burgomaster of Antwerp is so
pleased with it that he knows it all by heart.’
H. M.

8 of 183
DISCOURSES OF RAPHAEL
HYTHLODAY, OF THE BEST STATE OF
A COMMONWEALTH
Henry VIII., the unconquered King of England, a
prince adorned with all the virtues that become a great
monarch, having some differences of no small
consequence with Charles the most serene Prince of
Castile, sent me into Flanders, as his ambassador, for
treating and composing matters between them. I was
colleague and companion to that incomparable man
Cuthbert Tonstal, whom the King, with such universal
applause, lately made Master of the Rolls; but of whom I
will say nothing; not because I fear that the testimony of a
friend will be suspected, but rather because his learning
and virtues are too great for me to do them justice, and so
well known, that they need not my commendations,
unless I would, according to the proverb, ‘Show the sun
with a lantern.’ Those that were appointed by the Prince
to treat with us, met us at Bruges, according to agreement;
they were all worthy men. The Margrave of Bruges was
their head, and the chief man among them; but he that
was esteemed the wisest, and that spoke for the rest, was
George Temse, the Provost of Casselsee: both art and

9 of 183
nature had concurred to make him eloquent: he was very
learned in the law; and, as he had a great capacity, so, by a
long practice in affairs, he was very dexterous at
unravelling them. After we had several times met, without
coming to an agreement, they went to Brussels for some
days, to know the Prince’s pleasure; and, since our
business would admit it, I went to Antwerp. While I was
there, among many that visited me, there was one that was
more acceptable to me than any other, Peter Giles, born at
Antwerp, who is a man of great honour, and of a good
rank in his town, though less than he deserves; for I do
not know if there be anywhere to be found a more
learned and a better bred young man; for as he is both a
very worthy and a very knowing person, so he is so civil
to all men, so particularly kind to his friends, and so full of
candour and affection, that there is not, perhaps, above
one or two anywhere to be found, that is in all respects so
perfect a friend: he is extraordinarily modest, there is no
artifice in him, and yet no man has more of a prudent
simplicity. His conversation was so pleasant and so
innocently cheerful, that his company in a great measure
lessened any longings to go back to my country, and to
my wife and children, which an absence of four months
had quickened very much. One day, as I was returning

10 of 183
home from mass at St. Mary’s, which is the chief church,
and the most frequented of any in Antwerp, I saw him, by
accident, talking with a stranger, who seemed past the
flower of his age; his face was tanned, he had a long beard,
and his cloak was hanging carelessly about him, so that, by
his looks and habit, I concluded he was a seaman. As soon
as Peter saw me, he came and saluted me, and as I was
returning his civility, he took me aside, and pointing to
him with whom he had been discoursing, he said, ‘Do
you see that man? I was just thinking to bring him to you.’
I answered, ‘He should have been very welcome on your
account.’ ‘And on his own too,’ replied he, ‘if you knew
the man, for there is none alive that can give so copious an
account of unknown nations and countries as he can do,
which I know you very much desire.’ ‘Then,’ said I, ‘I did
not guess amiss, for at first sight I took him for a seaman.’
‘But you are much mistaken,’ said he, ‘for he has not
sailed as a seaman, but as a traveller, or rather a
philosopher. This Raphael, who from his family carries
the name of Hythloday, is not ignorant of the Latin
tongue, but is eminently learned in the Greek, having
applied himself more particularly to that than to the
former, because he had given himself much to philosophy,
in which he knew that the Romans have left us nothing

11 of 183
that is valuable, except what is to be found in Seneca and
Cicero. He is a Portuguese by birth, and was so desirous of
seeing the world, that he divided his estate among his
brothers, ran the same hazard as Americus Vesputius, and
bore a share in three of his four voyages that are now
published; only he did not return with him in his last, but
obtained leave of him, almost by force, that he might be
one of those twenty-four who were left at the farthest
place at which they touched in their last voyage to New
Castile. The leaving him thus did not a little gratify one
that was more fond of travelling than of returning home to
be buried in his own country; for he used often to say,
that the way to heaven was the same from all places, and
he that had no grave had the heavens still over him. Yet
this disposition of mind had cost him dear, if God had not
been very gracious to him; for after he, with five
Castalians, had travelled over many countries, at last, by
strange good fortune, he got to Ceylon, and from thence
to Calicut, where he, very happily, found some
Portuguese ships; and, beyond all men’s expectations,
returned to his native country.’ When Peter had said this
to me, I thanked him for his kindness in intending to give
me the acquaintance of a man whose conversation he
knew would be so acceptable; and upon that Raphael and

12 of 183
I embraced each other. After those civilities were past
which are usual with strangers upon their first meeting, we
all went to my house, and entering into the garden, sat
down on a green bank and entertained one another in
discourse. He told us that when Vesputius had sailed away,
he, and his companions that stayed behind in New Castile,
by degrees insinuated themselves into the affections of the
people of the country, meeting often with them and
treating them gently; and at last they not only lived among
them without danger, but conversed familiarly with them,
and got so far into the heart of a prince, whose name and
country I have forgot, that he both furnished them
plentifully with all things necessary, and also with the
conveniences of travelling, both boats when they went by
water, and waggons when they trained over land: he sent
with them a very faithful guide, who was to introduce and
recommend them to such other princes as they had a mind
to see: and after many days’ journey, they came to towns,
and cities, and to commonwealths, that were both happily
governed and well peopled. Under the equator, and as far
on both sides of it as the sun moves, there lay vast deserts
that were parched with the perpetual heat of the sun; the
soil was withered, all things looked dismally, and all places
were either quite uninhabited, or abounded with wild

13 of 183
beasts and serpents, and some few men, that were neither
less wild nor less cruel than the beasts themselves. But, as
they went farther, a new scene opened, all things grew
milder, the air less burning, the soil more verdant, and
even the beasts were less wild: and, at last, there were
nations, towns, and cities, that had not only mutual
commerce among themselves and with their neighbours,
but traded, both by sea and land, to very remote countries.
There they found the conveniencies of seeing many
countries on all hands, for no ship went any voyage into
which he and his companions were not very welcome.
The first vessels that they saw were flat-bottomed, their
sails were made of reeds and wicker, woven close
together, only some were of leather; but, afterwards, they
found ships made with round keels and canvas sails, and in
all respects like our ships, and the seamen understood both
astronomy and navigation. He got wonderfully into their
favour by showing them the use of the needle, of which
till then they were utterly ignorant. They sailed before
with great caution, and only in summer time; but now
they count all seasons alike, trusting wholly to the
loadstone, in which they are, perhaps, more secure than
safe; so that there is reason to fear that this discovery,
which was thought would prove so much to their

14 of 183
advantage, may, by their imprudence, become an occasion
of much mischief to them. But it were too long to dwell
on all that he told us he had observed in every place, it
would be too great a digression from our present purpose:
whatever is necessary to be told concerning those wise and
prudent institutions which he observed among civilised
nations, may perhaps be related by us on a more proper
occasion. We asked him many questions concerning all
these things, to which he answered very willingly; we
made no inquiries after monsters, than which nothing is
more common; for everywhere one may hear of ravenous
dogs and wolves, and cruel men- eaters, but it is not so
easy to find states that are well and wisely governed.
As he told us of many things that were amiss in those
new- discovered countries, so he reckoned up not a few
things, from which patterns might be taken for correcting
the errors of these nations among whom we live; of which
an account may be given, as I have already promised, at
some other time; for, at present, I intend only to relate
those particulars that he told us, of the manners and laws
of the ns: but I will begin with the occasion that led
us to speak of that commonwealth. After Raphael had
discoursed with great judgment on the many errors that
were both among us and these nations, had treated of the

15 of 183
wise institutions both here and there, and had spoken as
distinctly of the customs and government of every nation
through which he had past, as if he had spent his whole
life in it, Peter, being struck with admiration, said, ‘I
wonder, Raphael, how it comes that you enter into no
king’s service, for I am sure there are none to whom you
would not be very acceptable; for your learning and
knowledge, both of men and things, is such, that you
would not only entertain them very pleasantly, but be of
great use to them, by the examples you could set before
them, and the advices you could give them; and by this
means you would both serve your own interest, and be of
great use to all your friends.’ ‘As for my friends,’ answered
he, ‘I need not be much concerned, having already done
for them all that was incumbent on me; for when I was
not only in good health, but fresh and young, I distributed
that among my kindred and friends which other people do
not part with till they are old and sick: when they then
unwillingly give that which they can enjoy no longer
themselves. I think my friends ought to rest contented
with this, and not to expect that for their sakes I should
enslave myself to any king whatsoever.’ ‘Soft and fair!’ said
Peter; ‘I do not mean that you should be a slave to any
king, but only that you should assist them and be useful to
eBook brought to you by


16 of 183
them.’ ‘The change of the word,’ said he, ‘does not alter
the matter.’ ‘But term it as you will,’ replied Peter, ‘I do
not see any other way in which you can be so useful, both
in private to your friends and to the public, and by which
you can make your own condition happier.’ ‘Happier?’
answered Raphael, ‘is that to be compassed in a way so
abhorrent to my genius? Now I live as I will, to which I
believe, few courtiers can pretend; and there are so many
that court the favour of great men, that there will be no
great loss if they are not troubled either with me or with
others of my temper.’ Upon this, said I, ‘I perceive,
Raphael, that you neither desire wealth nor greatness; and,
indeed, I value and admire such a man much more than I
do any of the great men in the world. Yet I think you
would do what would well become so generous and
philosophical a soul as yours is, if you would apply your
time and thoughts to public affairs, even though you may
happen to find it a little uneasy to yourself; and this you
can never do with so much advantage as by being taken
into the council of some great prince and putting him on
noble and worthy actions, which I know you would do if
you were in such a post; for the springs both of good and
evil flow from the prince over a whole nation, as from a
lasting fountain. So much learning as you have, even

17 of 183
without practice in affairs, or so great a practice as you
have had, without any other learning, would render you a
very fit counsellor to any king whatsoever.’ ‘You are
doubly mistaken,’ said he, ‘Mr. More, both in your
opinion of me and in the judgment you make of things:
for as I have not that capacity that you fancy I have, so if I
had it, the public would not be one jot the better when I
had sacrificed my quiet to it. For most princes apply
themselves more to affairs of war than to the useful arts of
peace; and in these I neither have any knowledge, nor do
I much desire it; they are generally more set on acquiring
new kingdoms, right or wrong, than on governing well
those they possess: and, among the ministers of princes,
there are none that are not so wise as to need no
assistance, or at least, that do not think themselves so wise
that they imagine they need none; and if they court any, it
is only those for whom the prince has much personal
favour, whom by their fawning and flatteries they
endeavour to fix to their own interests; and, indeed,
nature has so made us, that we all love to be flattered and
to please ourselves with our own notions: the old crow
loves his young, and the ape her cubs. Now if in such a
court, made up of persons who envy all others and only
admire themselves, a person should but propose anything

18 of 183
that he had either read in history or observed in his travels,
the rest would think that the reputation of their wisdom
would sink, and that their interests would be much
depressed if they could not run it down: and, if all other
things failed, then they would fly to this, that such or such
things pleased our ancestors, and it were well for us if we
could but match them. They would set up their rest on
such an answer, as a sufficient confutation of all that could
be said, as if it were a great misfortune that any should be
found wiser than his ancestors. But though they willingly
let go all the good things that were among those of former
ages, yet, if better things are proposed, they cover
themselves obstinately with this excuse of reverence to
past times. I have met with these proud, morose, and
absurd judgments of things in many places, particularly
once in England.’ ‘Were you ever there?’ said I. ‘Yes, I
was,’ answered he, ‘and stayed some months there, not
long after the rebellion in the West was suppressed, with a
great slaughter of the poor people that were engaged in it.
‘I was then much obliged to that reverend prelate, John
Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal, and
Chancellor of England; a man,’ said he, ‘Peter (for Mr.
More knows well what he was), that was not less
venerable for his wisdom and virtues than for the high

19 of 183
character he bore: he was of a middle stature, not broken
with age; his looks begot reverence rather than fear; his
conversation was easy, but serious and grave; he
sometimes took pleasure to try the force of those that
came as suitors to him upon business by speaking sharply,
though decently, to them, and by that he discovered their
spirit and presence of mind; with which he was much
delighted when it did not grow up to impudence, as
bearing a great resemblance to his own temper, and he
looked on such persons as the fittest men for affairs. He
spoke both gracefully and weightily; he was eminently
skilled in the law, had a vast understanding, and a
prodigious memory; and those excellent talents with
which nature had furnished him were improved by study
and experience. When I was in England the King
depended much on his counsels, and the Government
seemed to be chiefly supported by him; for from his youth
he had been all along practised in affairs; and, having
passed through many traverses of fortune, he had, with
great cost, acquired a vast stock of wisdom, which is not
soon lost when it is purchased so dear. One day, when I
was dining with him, there happened to be at table one of
the English lawyers, who took occasion to run out in a
high commendation of the severe execution of justice

20 of 183
upon thieves, ‘who,’ as he said, ‘were then hanged so fast
that there were sometimes twenty on one gibbet!’ and,
upon that, he said, ‘he could not wonder enough how it
came to pass that, since so few escaped, there were yet so
many thieves left, who were still robbing in all places.’
Upon this, I (who took the boldness to speak freely before
the Cardinal) said, ‘There was no reason to wonder at the
matter, since this way of punishing thieves was neither just
in itself nor good for the public; for, as the severity was
too great, so the remedy was not effectual; simple theft not
being so great a crime that it ought to cost a man his life;
no punishment, how severe soever, being able to restrain
those from robbing who can find out no other way of
livelihood. In this,’ said I, ‘not only you in England, but a
great part of the world, imitate some ill masters, that are
readier to chastise their scholars than to teach them. There
are dreadful punishments enacted against thieves, but it
were much better to make such good provisions by which
every man might be put in a method how to live, and so
be preserved from the fatal necessity of stealing and of
dying for it.’ ‘There has been care enough taken for that,’
said he; ‘there are many handicrafts, and there is
husbandry, by which they may make a shift to live, unless
they have a greater mind to follow ill courses.’ ‘That will

21 of 183
not serve your turn,’ said I, ‘for many lose their limbs in
civil or foreign wars, as lately in the Cornish rebellion, and
some time ago in your wars with France, who, being thus
mutilated in the service of their king and country, can no
more follow their old trades, and are too old to learn new
ones; but since wars are only accidental things, and have
intervals, let us consider those things that fall out every
day. There is a great number of noblemen among you that
are themselves as idle as drones, that subsist on other men’s
labour, on the labour of their tenants, whom, to raise their
revenues, they pare to the quick. This, indeed, is the only
instance of their frugality, for in all other things they are
prodigal, even to the beggaring of themselves; but, besides
this, they carry about with them a great number of idle
fellows, who never learned any art by which they may
gain their living; and these, as soon as either their lord
dies, or they themselves fall sick, are turned out of doors;
for your lords are readier to feed idle people than to take
care of the sick; and often the heir is not able to keep
together so great a family as his predecessor did. Now,
when the stomachs of those that are thus turned out of
doors grow keen, they rob no less keenly; and what else
can they do? For when, by wandering about, they have
worn out both their health and their clothes, and are

22 of 183
tattered, and look ghastly, men of quality will not
entertain them, and poor men dare not do it, knowing
that one who has been bred up in idleness and pleasure,
and who was used to walk about with his sword and
buckler, despising all the neighbourhood with an insolent
scorn as far below him, is not fit for the spade and
mattock; nor will he serve a poor man for so small a hire
and in so low a diet as he can afford to give him.’ To this
he answered, ‘This sort of men ought to be particularly
cherished, for in them consists the force of the armies for
which we have occasion; since their birth inspires them
with a nobler sense of honour than is to be found among
tradesmen or ploughmen.’ ‘You may as well say,’ replied
I, ‘that you must cherish thieves on the account of wars,
for you will never want the one as long as you have the
other; and as robbers prove sometimes gallant soldiers, so
soldiers often prove brave robbers, so near an alliance
there is between those two sorts of life. But this bad
custom, so common among you, of keeping many
servants, is not peculiar to this nation. In France there is
yet a more pestiferous sort of people, for the whole
country is full of soldiers, still kept up in time of peace (if
such a state of a nation can be called a peace); and these
are kept in pay upon the same account that you plead for

23 of 183
those idle retainers about noblemen: this being a maxim of
those pretended statesmen, that it is necessary for the
public safety to have a good body of veteran soldiers ever
in readiness. They think raw men are not to be depended
on, and they sometimes seek occasions for making war,
that they may train up their soldiers in the art of cutting
throats, or, as Sallust observed, ‘for keeping their hands in
use, that they may not grow dull by too long an
intermission.’ But France has learned to its cost how
dangerous it is to feed such beasts. The fate of the
Romans, Carthaginians, and Syrians, and many other
nations and cities, which were both overturned and quite
ruined by those standing armies, should make others wiser;
and the folly of this maxim of the French appears plainly
even from this, that their trained soldiers often find your
raw men prove too hard for them, of which I will not say
much, lest you may think I flatter the English. Every day’s
experience shows that the mechanics in the towns or the
clowns in the country are not afraid of fighting with those
idle gentlemen, if they are not disabled by some
misfortune in their body or dispirited by extreme want; so
that you need not fear that those well-shaped and strong
men (for it is only such that noblemen love to keep about
them till they spoil them), who now grow feeble with ease

24 of 183
and are softened with their effeminate manner of life,
would be less fit for action if they were well bred and well
employed. And it seems very unreasonable that, for the
prospect of a war, which you need never have but when
you please, you should maintain so many idle men, as will
always disturb you in time of peace, which is ever to be
more considered than war. But I do not think that this
necessity of stealing arises only from hence; there is
another cause of it, more peculiar to England.’ ‘What is
that?’ said the Cardinal: ‘The increase of pasture,’ said I,
‘by which your sheep, which are naturally mild, and easily
kept in order, may be said now to devour men and
unpeople, not only villages, but towns; for wherever it is
found that the sheep of any soil yield a softer and richer
wool than ordinary, there the nobility and gentry, and
even those holy men, the dobots! not contented with the
old rents which their farms yielded, nor thinking it
enough that they, living at their ease, do no good to the
public, resolve to do it hurt instead of good. They stop the
course of agriculture, destroying houses and towns,
reserving only the churches, and enclose grounds that they
may lodge their sheep in them. As if forests and parks had
swallowed up too little of the land, those worthy
countrymen turn the best inhabited places into solitudes;

25 of 183
for when an insatiable wretch, who is a plague to his
country, resolves to enclose many thousand acres of
ground, the owners, as well as tenants, are turned out of
their possessions by trick or by main force, or, being
wearied out by ill usage, they are forced to sell them; by
which means those miserable people, both men and
women, married and unmarried, old and young, with
their poor but numerous families (since country business
requires many hands), are all forced to change their seats,
not knowing whither to go; and they must sell, almost for
nothing, their household stuff, which could not bring
them much money, even though they might stay for a
buyer. When that little money is at an end (for it will be
soon spent), what is left for them to do but either to steal,
and so to be hanged (God knows how justly!), or to go
about and beg? and if they do this they are put in prison as
idle vagabonds, while they would willingly work but can
find none that will hire them; for there is no more
occasion for country labour, to which they have been
bred, when there is no arable ground left. One shepherd
can look after a flock, which will stock an extent of
ground that would require many hands if it were to be
ploughed and reaped. This, likewise, in many places raises
the price of corn. The price of wool is also so risen that

26 of 183
the poor people, who were wont to make cloth, are no
more able to buy it; and this, likewise, makes many of
them idle: for since the increase of pasture God has
punished the avarice of the owners by a rot among the
sheep, which has destroyed vast numbers of them—to us it
might have seemed more just had it fell on the owners
themselves. But, suppose the sheep should increase ever so
much, their price is not likely to fall; since, though they
cannot be called a monopoly, because they are not
engrossed by one person, yet they are in so few hands, and
these are so rich, that, as they are not pressed to sell them
sooner than they have a mind to it, so they never do it till
they have raised the price as high as possible. And on the
same account it is that the other kinds of cattle are so dear,
because many villages being pulled down, and all country
labour being much neglected, there are none who make it
their business to breed them. The rich do not breed cattle
as they do sheep, but buy them lean and at low prices;
and, after they have fattened them on their grounds, sell
them again at high rates. And I do not think that all the
inconveniences this will produce are yet observed; for, as
they sell the cattle dear, so, if they are consumed faster
than the breeding countries from which they are brought
can afford them, then the stock must decrease, and this

27 of 183
must needs end in great scarcity; and by these means, this
your island, which seemed as to this particular the happiest
in the world, will suffer much by the cursed avarice of a
few persons: besides this, the rising of corn makes all
people lessen their families as much as they can; and what
can those who are dismissed by them do but either beg or
rob? And to this last a man of a great mind is much sooner
drawn than to the former. Luxury likewise breaks in apace
upon you to set forward your poverty and misery; there is
an excessive vanity in apparel, and great cost in diet, and
that not only in noblemen’s families, but even among
tradesmen, among the farmers themselves, and among all
ranks of persons. You have also many infamous houses,
and, besides those that are known, the taverns and alehouses
are no better; add to these dice, cards, tables,
football, tennis, and quoits, in which money runs fast
away; and those that are initiated into them must, in the
conclusion, betake themselves to robbing for a supply.
Banish these plagues, and give orders that those who have
dispeopled so much soil may either rebuild the villages
they have pulled down or let out their grounds to such as
will do it; restrain those engrossings of the rich, that are as
bad almost as monopolies; leave fewer occasions to
idleness; let agriculture be set up again, and the
eBook brought to you by


28 of 183
manufacture of the wool be regulated, that so there may
be work found for those companies of idle people whom
want forces to be thieves, or who now, being idle
vagabonds or useless servants, will certainly grow thieves at
last. If you do not find a remedy to these evils it is a vain
thing to boast of your severity in punishing theft, which,
though it may have the appearance of justice, yet in itself
is neither just nor convenient; for if you suffer your people
to be ill-educated, and their manners to be corrupted from
their infancy, and then punish them for those crimes to
which their first education disposed them, what else is to
be concluded from this but that you first make thieves and
then punish them?’
‘While I was talking thus, the Counsellor, who was
present, had prepared an answer, and had resolved to
resume all I had said, according to the formality of a
debate, in which things are generally repeated more
faithfully than they are answered, as if the chief trial to be
made were of men’s memories. ‘You have talked prettily,
for a stranger,’ said he, ‘having heard of many things
among us which you have not been able to consider well;
but I will make the whole matter plain to you, and will
first repeat in order all that you have said; then I will show
how much your ignorance of our affairs has misled you;

29 of 183
and will, in the last place, answer all your arguments. And,
that I may begin where I promised, there were four
things—’ ‘Hold your peace!’ said the Cardinal; ‘this will
take up too much time; therefore we will, at present, ease
you of the trouble of answering, and reserve it to our next
meeting, which shall be to-morrow, if Raphael’s affairs
and yours can admit of it. But, Raphael,’ said he to me, ‘I
would gladly know upon what reason it is that you think
theft ought not to be punished by death: would you give
way to it? or do you propose any other punishment that
will be more useful to the public? for, since death does not
restrain theft, if men thought their lives would be safe,
what fear or force could restrain ill men? On the contrary,
they would look on the mitigation of the punishment as
an invitation to commit more crimes.’ I answered, ‘It
seems to me a very unjust thing to take away a man’s life
for a little money, for nothing in the world can be of equal
value with a man’s life: and if it be said, ‘that it is not for
the money that one suffers, but for his breaking the law,’ I
must say, extreme justice is an extreme injury: for we
ought not to approve of those terrible laws that make the
smallest offences capital, nor of that opinion of the Stoics
that makes all crimes equal; as if there were no difference
to be made between the killing a man and the taking his

30 of 183
purse, between which, if we examine things impartially,
there is no likeness nor proportion. God has commanded
us not to kill, and shall we kill so easily for a little money?
But if one shall say, that by that law we are only forbid to
kill any except when the laws of the land allow of it, upon
the same grounds, laws may be made, in some cases, to
allow of adultery and perjury: for God having taken from
us the right of disposing either of our own or of other
people’s lives, if it is pretended that the mutual consent of
men in making laws can authorise man-slaughter in cases
in which God has given us no example, that it frees people
from the obligation of the divine law, and so makes
murder a lawful action, what is this, but to give a
preference to human laws before the divine? and, if this is
once admitted, by the same rule men may, in all other
things, put what restrictions they please upon the laws of
God. If, by the Mosaical law, though it was rough and
severe, as being a yoke laid on an obstinate and servile
nation, men were only fined, and not put to death for
theft, we cannot imagine, that in this new law of mercy,
in which God treats us with the tenderness of a father, He
has given us a greater licence to cruelty than He did to the
Jews. Upon these reasons it is, that I think putting thieves
to death is not lawful; and it is plain and obvious that it is

31 of 183
absurd and of ill consequence to the commonwealth that a
thief and a murderer should be equally punished; for if a
robber sees that his danger is the same if he is convicted of
theft as if he were guilty of murder, this will naturally
incite him to kill the person whom otherwise he would
only have robbed; since, if the punishment is the same,
there is more security, and less danger of discovery, when
he that can best make it is put out of the way; so that
terrifying thieves too much provokes them to cruelty.
‘But as to the question, ‘What more convenient way of
punishment can be found?’ I think it much easier to find
out that than to invent anything that is worse; why should
we doubt but the way that was so long in use among the
old Romans, who understood so well the arts of
government, was very proper for their punishment? They
condemned such as they found guilty of great crimes to
work their whole lives in quarries, or to dig in mines with
chains about them. But the method that I liked best was
that which I observed in my travels in Persia, among the
Polylerits, who are a considerable and well-governed
people: they pay a yearly tribute to the King of Persia, but
in all other respects they are a free nation, and governed
by their own laws: they lie far from the sea, and are
environed with hills; and, being contented with the

32 of 183
productions of their own country, which is very fruitful,
they have little commerce with any other nation; and as
they, according to the genius of their country, have no
inclination to enlarge their borders, so their mountains and
the pension they pay to the Persian, secure them from all
invasions. Thus they have no wars among them; they live
rather conveniently than with splendour, and may be
rather called a happy nation than either eminent or
famous; for I do not think that they are known, so much
as by name, to any but their next neighbours. Those that
are found guilty of theft among them are bound to make
restitution to the owner, and not, as it is in other places, to
the prince, for they reckon that the prince has no more
right to the stolen goods than the thief; but if that which
was stolen is no more in being, then the goods of the
thieves are estimated, and restitution being made out of
them, the remainder is given to their wives and children;
and they themselves are condemned to serve in the public
works, but are neither imprisoned nor chained, unless
there happens to be some extraordinary circumstance in
their crimes. They go about loose and free, working for
the public: if they are idle or backward to work they are
whipped, but if they work hard they are well used and
treated without any mark of reproach; only the lists of

33 of 183
them are called always at night, and then they are shut up.
They suffer no other uneasiness but this of constant
labour; for, as they work for the public, so they are well
entertained out of the public stock, which is done
differently in different places: in some places whatever is
bestowed on them is raised by a charitable contribution;
and, though this way may seem uncertain, yet so merciful
are the inclinations of that people, that they are plentifully
supplied by it; but in other places public revenues are set
aside for them, or there is a constant tax or poll-money
raised for their maintenance. In some places they are set to
no public work, but every private man that has occasion
to hire workmen goes to the market-places and hires them
of the public, a little lower than he would do a freeman. If
they go lazily about their task he may quicken them with
the whip. By this means there is always some piece of
work or other to be done by them; and, besides their
livelihood, they earn somewhat still to the public. They all
wear a peculiar habit, of one certain colour, and their hair
is cropped a little above their ears, and a piece of one of
their ears is cut off. Their friends are allowed to give them
either meat, drink, or clothes, so they are of their proper
colour; but it is death, both to the giver and taker, if they
give them money; nor is it less penal for any freeman to

34 of 183
take money from them upon any account whatsoever: and
it is also death for any of these slaves (so they are called) to
handle arms. Those of every division of the country are
distinguished by a peculiar mark, which it is capital for
them to lay aside, to go out of their bounds, or to talk
with a slave of another jurisdiction, and the very attempt
of an escape is no less penal than an escape itself. It is death
for any other slave to be accessory to it; and if a freeman
engages in it he is condemned to slavery. Those that
discover it are rewarded—if freemen, in money; and if
slaves, with liberty, together with a pardon for being
accessory to it; that so they might find their account rather
in repenting of their engaging in such a design than in
persisting in it.
‘These are their laws and rules in relation to robbery,
and it is obvious that they are as advantageous as they are
mild and gentle; since vice is not only destroyed and men
preserved, but they are treated in such a manner as to
make them see the necessity of being honest and of
employing the rest of their lives in repairing the injuries
they had formerly done to society. Nor is there any hazard
of their falling back to their old customs; and so little do
travellers apprehend mischief from them that they
generally make use of them for guides from one

35 of 183
jurisdiction to another; for there is nothing left them by
which they can rob or be the better for it, since, as they
are disarmed, so the very having of money is a sufficient
conviction: and as they are certainly punished if
discovered, so they cannot hope to escape; for their habit
being in all the parts of it different from what is commonly
worn, they cannot fly away, unless they would go naked,
and even then their cropped ear would betray them. The
only danger to be feared from them is their conspiring
against the government; but those of one division and
neighbourhood can do nothing to any purpose unless a
general conspiracy were laid amongst all the slaves of the
several jurisdictions, which cannot be done, since they
cannot meet or talk together; nor will any venture on a
design where the concealment would be so dangerous and
the discovery so profitable. None are quite hopeless of
recovering their freedom, since by their obedience and
patience, and by giving good grounds to believe that they
will change their manner of life for the future, they may
expect at last to obtain their liberty, and some are every
year restored to it upon the good character that is given of
them. When I had related all this, I added that I did not
see why such a method might not be followed with more
advantage than could ever be expected from that severe

36 of 183
justice which the Counsellor magnified so much. To this
he answered, ‘That it could never take place in England
without endangering the whole nation.’ As he said this he
shook his head, made some grimaces, and held his peace,
while all the company seemed of his opinion, except the
Cardinal, who said, ‘That it was not easy to form a
judgment of its success, since it was a method that never
yet had been tried; but if,’ said he, ‘when sentence of
death were passed upon a thief, the prince would reprieve
him for a while, and make the experiment upon him,
denying him the privilege of a sanctuary; and then, if it
had a good effect upon him, it might take place; and, if it
did not succeed, the worst would be to execute the
sentence on the condemned persons at last; and I do not
see,’ added he, ‘why it would be either unjust,
inconvenient, or at all dangerous to admit of such a delay;
in my opinion the vagabonds ought to be treated in the
same manner, against whom, though we have made many
laws, yet we have not been able to gain our end.’ When
the Cardinal had done, they all commended the motion,
though they had despised it when it came from me, but
more particularly commended what related to the
vagabonds, because it was his own observation

37 of 183
‘I do not know whether it be worth while to tell what
followed, for it was very ridiculous; but I shall venture at
it, for as it is not foreign to this matter, so some good use
may be made of it. There was a Jester standing by, that
counterfeited the fool so naturally that he seemed to be
really one; the jests which he offered were so cold and dull
that we laughed more at him than at them, yet sometimes
he said, as it were by chance, things that were not
unpleasant, so as to justify the old proverb, ‘That he who
throws the dice often, will sometimes have a lucky hit.’
When one of the company had said that I had taken care
of the thieves, and the Cardinal had taken care of the
vagabonds, so that there remained nothing but that some
public provision might be made for the poor whom
sickness or old age had disabled from labour, ‘Leave that to
me,’ said the Fool, ‘and I shall take care of them, for there
is no sort of people whose sight I abhor more, having been
so often vexed with them and with their sad complaints;
but as dolefully soever as they have told their tale, they
could never prevail so far as to draw one penny from me;
for either I had no mind to give them anything, or, when
I had a mind to do it, I had nothing to give them; and
they now know me so well that they will not lose their
labour, but let me pass without giving me any trouble,

38 of 183
because they hope for nothing—no more, in faith, than if
I were a priest; but I would have a law made for sending
all these beggars to monasteries, the men to the
Benedictines, to be made lay-brothers, and the women to
be nuns.’ The Cardinal smiled, and approved of it in jest,
but the rest liked it in earnest. There was a divine present,
who, though he was a grave morose man, yet he was so
pleased with this reflection that was made on the priests
and the monks that he began to play with the Fool, and
said to him, ‘This will not deliver you from all beggars,
except you take care of us Friars.’ ‘That is done already,’
answered the Fool, ‘for the Cardinal has provided for you
by what he proposed for restraining vagabonds and setting
them to work, for I know no vagabonds like you.’ This
was well entertained by the whole company, who, looking
at the Cardinal, perceived that he was not ill-pleased at it;
only the Friar himself was vexed, as may be easily
imagined, and fell into such a passion that he could not
forbear railing at the Fool, and calling him knave,
slanderer, backbiter, and son of perdition, and then cited
some dreadful threatenings out of the Scriptures against
him. Now the Jester thought he was in his element, and
laid about him freely. ‘Good Friar,’ said he, ‘be not angry,
for it is written, ‘In patience possess your soul.‘‘ The Friar

39 of 183
answered (for I shall give you his own words), ‘I am not
angry, you hangman; at least, I do not sin in it, for the
Psalmist says, ‘Be ye angry and sin not.‘‘ Upon this the
Cardinal admonished him gently, and wished him to
govern his passions. ‘No, my lord,’ said he, ‘I speak not
but from a good zeal, which I ought to have, for holy men
have had a good zeal, as it is said, ‘The zeal of thy house
hath eaten me up;’ and we sing in our church that those
who mocked Elisha as he went up to the house of God
felt the effects of his zeal, which that mocker, that rogue,
that scoundrel, will perhaps feel.’ ‘You do this, perhaps,
with a good intention,’ said the Cardinal, ‘but, in my
opinion, it were wiser in you, and perhaps better for you,
not to engage in so ridiculous a contest with a Fool.’ ‘No,
my lord,’ answered he, ‘that were not wisely done, for
Solomon, the wisest of men, said, ‘Answer a Fool
according to his folly,’ which I now do, and show him the
ditch into which he will fall, if he is not aware of it; for if
the many mockers of Elisha, who was but one bald man,
felt the effect of his zeal, what will become of the mocker
of so many Friars, among whom there are so many bald
men? We have, likewise, a bull, by which all that jeer us
are excommunicated.’ When the Cardinal saw that there
was no end of this matter he made a sign to the Fool to
eBook brought to you by


40 of 183
withdraw, turned the discourse another way, and soon
after rose from the table, and, dismissing us, went to hear
causes.
‘Thus, Mr. More, I have run out into a tedious story,
of the length of which I had been ashamed, if (as you
earnestly begged it of me) I had not observed you to
hearken to it as if you had no mind to lose any part of it. I
might have contracted it, but I resolved to give it you at
large, that you might observe how those that despised
what I had proposed, no sooner perceived that the
Cardinal did not dislike it but presently approved of it,
fawned so on him and flattered him to such a degree, that
they in good earnest applauded those things that he only
liked in jest; and from hence you may gather how little
courtiers would value either me or my counsels.’
To this I answered, ‘You have done me a great
kindness in this relation; for as everything has been related
by you both wisely and pleasantly, so you have made me
imagine that I was in my own country and grown young
again, by recalling that good Cardinal to my thoughts, in
whose family I was bred from my childhood; and though
you are, upon other accounts, very dear to me, yet you are
the dearer because you honour his memory so much; but,
after all this, I cannot change my opinion, for I still think

41 of 183
that if you could overcome that aversion which you have
to the courts of princes, you might, by the advice which it
is in your power to give, do a great deal of good to
mankind, and this is the chief design that every good man
ought to propose to himself in living; for your friend Plato
thinks that nations will be happy when either philosophers
become kings or kings become philosophers. It is no
wonder if we are so far from that happiness while
philosophers will not think it their duty to assist kings with
their counsels.’ ‘They are not so base-minded,’ said he,
‘but that they would willingly do it; many of them have
already done it by their books, if those that are in power
would but hearken to their good advice. But Plato judged
right, that except kings themselves became philosophers,
they who from their childhood are corrupted with false
notions would never fall in entirely with the counsels of
philosophers, and this he himself found to be true in the
person of Dionysius.
‘Do not you think that if I were about any king,
proposing good laws to him, and endeavouring to root out
all the cursed seeds of evil that I found in him, I should
either be turned out of his court, or, at least, be laughed at
for my pains? For instance, what could I signify if I were
about the King of France, and were called into his cabinet

42 of 183
council, where several wise men, in his hearing, were
proposing many expedients; as, by what arts and practices
Milan may be kept, and Naples, that has so often slipped
out of their hands, recovered; how the Venetians, and
after them the rest of Italy, may be subdued; and then how
Flanders, Brabant, and all Burgundy, and some other
kingdoms which he has swallowed already in his designs,
may be added to his empire? One proposes a league with
the Venetians, to be kept as long as he finds his account in
it, and that he ought to communicate counsels with them,
and give them some share of the spoil till his success makes
him need or fear them less, and then it will be easily taken
out of their hands; another proposes the hiring the
Germans and the securing the Switzers by pensions;
another proposes the gaining the Emperor by money,
which is omnipotent with him; another proposes a peace
with the King of Arragon, and, in order to cement it, the
yielding up the King of Navarre’s pretensions; another
thinks that the Prince of Castile is to be wrought on by
the hope of an alliance, and that some of his courtiers are
to be gained to the French faction by pensions. The
hardest point of all is, what to do with England; a treaty of
peace is to be set on foot, and, if their alliance is not to be
depended on, yet it is to be made as firm as possible, and

43 of 183
they are to be called friends, but suspected as enemies:
therefore the Scots are to be kept in readiness to be let
loose upon England on every occasion; and some banished
nobleman is to be supported underhand (for by the League
it cannot be done avowedly) who has a pretension to the
crown, by which means that suspected prince may be kept
in awe. Now when things are in so great a fermentation,
and so many gallant men are joining counsels how to carry
on the war, if so mean a man as I should stand up and
wish them to change all their counsels—to let Italy alone
and stay at home, since the kingdom of France was indeed
greater than could be well governed by one man; that
therefore he ought not to think of adding others to it; and
if, after this, I should propose to them the resolutions of
the Achorians, a people that lie on the south-east of
, who long ago engaged in war in order to add to
the dominions of their prince another kingdom, to which
he had some pretensions by an ancient alliance: this they
conquered, but found that the trouble of keeping it was
equal to that by which it was gained; that the conquered
people were always either in rebellion or exposed to
foreign invasions, while they were obliged to be
incessantly at war, either for or against them, and
consequently could never disband their army; that in the

44 of 183
meantime they were oppressed with taxes, their money
went out of the kingdom, their blood was spilt for the
glory of their king without procuring the least advantage
to the people, who received not the smallest benefit from
it even in time of peace; and that, their manners being
corrupted by a long war, robbery and murders everywhere
abounded, and their laws fell into contempt; while their
king, distracted with the care of two kingdoms, was the
less able to apply his mind to the interest of either. When
they saw this, and that there would be no end to these
evils, they by joint counsels made an humble address to
their king, desiring him to choose which of the two
kingdoms he had the greatest mind to keep, since he could
not hold both; for they were too great a people to be
governed by a divided king, since no man would willingly
have a groom that should be in common between him
and another. Upon which the good prince was forced to
quit his new kingdom to one of his friends (who was not
long after dethroned), and to be contented with his old
one. To this I would add that after all those warlike
attempts, the vast confusions, and the consumption both
of treasure and of people that must follow them, perhaps
upon some misfortune they might be forced to throw up
all at last; therefore it seemed much more eligible that the

45 of 183
king should improve his ancient kingdom all he could,
and make it flourish as much as possible; that he should
love his people, and be beloved of them; that he should
live among them, govern them gently and let other
kingdoms alone, since that which had fallen to his share
was big enough, if not too big, for him:- pray, how do
you think would such a speech as this be heard?’
‘I confess,’ said I, ‘I think not very well.’
‘But what,’ said he, ‘if I should sort with another kind
of ministers, whose chief contrivances and consultations
were by what art the prince’s treasures might be increased?
where one proposes raising the value of specie when the
king’s debts are large, and lowering it when his revenues
were to come in, that so he might both pay much with a
little, and in a little receive a great deal. Another proposes
a pretence of a war, that money might be raised in order
to carry it on, and that a peace be concluded as soon as
that was done; and this with such appearances of religion
as might work on the people, and make them impute it to
the piety of their prince, and to his tenderness for the lives
of his subjects. A third offers some old musty laws that
have been antiquated by a long disuse (and which, as they
had been forgotten by all the subjects, so they had also
been broken by them), and proposes the levying the

46 of 183
penalties of these laws, that, as it would bring in a vast
treasure, so there might be a very good pretence for it,
since it would look like the executing a law and the doing
of justice. A fourth proposes the prohibiting of many
things under severe penalties, especially such as were
against the interest of the people, and then the dispensing
with these prohibitions, upon great compositions, to those
who might find their advantage in breaking them. This
would serve two ends, both of them acceptable to many;
for as those whose avarice led them to transgress would be
severely fined, so the selling licences dear would look as if
a prince were tender of his people, and would not easily,
or at low rates, dispense with anything that might be
against the public good. Another proposes that the judges
must be made sure, that they may declare always in favour
of the prerogative; that they must be often sent for to
court, that the king may hear them argue those points in
which he is concerned; since, how unjust soever any of his
pretensions may be, yet still some one or other of them,
either out of contradiction to others, or the pride of
singularity, or to make their court, would find out some
pretence or other to give the king a fair colour to carry the
point. For if the judges but differ in opinion, the clearest
thing in the world is made by that means disputable, and

47 of 183
truth being once brought in question, the king may then
take advantage to expound the law for his own profit;
while the judges that stand out will be brought over,
either through fear or modesty; and they being thus
gained, all of them may be sent to the Bench to give
sentence boldly as the king would have it; for fair
pretences will never be wanting when sentence is to be
given in the prince’s favour. It will either be said that
equity lies of his side, or some words in the law will be
found sounding that way, or some forced sense will be put
on them; and, when all other things fail, the king’s
undoubted prerogative will be pretended, as that which is
above all law, and to which a religious judge ought to
have a special regard. Thus all consent to that maxim of
Crassus, that a prince cannot have treasure enough, since
he must maintain his armies out of it; that a king, even
though he would, can do nothing unjustly; that all
property is in him, not excepting the very persons of his
subjects; and that no man has any other property but that
which the king, out of his goodness, thinks fit to leave
him. And they think it is the prince’s interest that there be
as little of this left as may be, as if it were his advantage
that his people should have neither riches nor liberty, since
these things make them less easy and willing to submit to a

48 of 183
cruel and unjust government. Whereas necessity and
poverty blunts them, makes them patient, beats them
down, and breaks that height of spirit that might otherwise
dispose them to rebel. Now what if, after all these
propositions were made, I should rise up and assert that
such counsels were both unbecoming a king and
mischievous to him; and that not only his honour, but his
safety, consisted more in his people’s wealth than in his
own; if I should show that they choose a king for their
own sake, and not for his; that, by his care and
endeavours, they may be both easy and safe; and that,
therefore, a prince ought to take more care of his people’s
happiness than of his own, as a shepherd is to take more
care of his flock than of himself? It is also certain that they
are much mistaken that think the poverty of a nation is a
mean of the public safety. Who quarrel more than
beggars? who does more earnestly long for a change than
he that is uneasy in his present circumstances? and who
run to create confusions with so desperate a boldness as
those who, having nothing to lose, hope to gain by them?
If a king should fall under such contempt or envy that he
could not keep his subjects in their duty but by oppression
and ill usage, and by rendering them poor and miserable, it
were certainly better for him to quit his kingdom than to

49 of 183
retain it by such methods as make him, while he keeps the
name of authority, lose the majesty due to it. Nor is it so
becoming the dignity of a king to reign over beggars as
over rich and happy subjects. And therefore Fabricius, a
man of a noble and exalted temper, said ‘he would rather
govern rich men than be rich himself; since for one man
to abound in wealth and pleasure when all about him are
mourning and groaning, is to be a gaoler and not a king.’
He is an unskilful physician that cannot cure one disease
without casting his patient into another. So he that can
find no other way for correcting the errors of his people
but by taking from them the conveniences of life, shows
that he knows not what it is to govern a free nation. He
himself ought rather to shake off his sloth, or to lay down
his pride, for the contempt or hatred that his people have
for him takes its rise from the vices in himself. Let him live
upon what belongs to him without wronging others, and
accommodate his expense to his revenue. Let him punish
crimes, and, by his wise conduct, let him endeavour to
prevent them, rather than be severe when he has suffered
them to be too common. Let him not rashly revive laws
that are abrogated by disuse, especially if they have been
long forgotten and never wanted. And let him never take
any penalty for the breach of them to which a judge

50 of 183
would not give way in a private man, but would look on
him as a crafty and unjust person for pretending to it. To
these things I would add that law among the Macarians—a
people that live not far from —by which their king,
on the day on which he began to reign, is tied by an oath,
confirmed by solemn sacrifices, never to have at once
above a thousand pounds of gold in his treasures, or so
much silver as is equal to that in value. This law, they tell
us, was made by an excellent king who had more regard
to the riches of his country than to his own wealth, and
therefore provided against the heaping up of so much
treasure as might impoverish the people. He thought that
moderate sum might be sufficient for any accident, if
either the king had occasion for it against the rebels, or the
kingdom against the invasion of an enemy; but that it was
not enough to encourage a prince to invade other men’s
rights—a circumstance that was the chief cause of his
making that law. He also thought that it was a good
provision for that free circulation of money so necessary
for the course of commerce and exchange. And when a
king must distribute all those extraordinary accessions that
increase treasure beyond the due pitch, it makes him less
disposed to oppress his subjects. Such a king as this will be
the terror of ill men, and will be beloved by all the good.