The Million Dollar Bond Robbery
'What a number of bond robberies there have been lately!' I
observed one morning, laying aside the newspaper. 'Poirot, let us
forsake the science of detection, and take to crime instead!'
'You are on the - how do you say it? - get-rich-quick tack, eh, mon
ami?'
'Well, look at this last coup, the million dollars' worth of Liberty
Bonds which the London and Scottish Bank were sending to New
York, and which disappeared in such a remarkable manner on
board the Olympia.'
'If it were not for the mal de mer, and the difficulty of practising the
so excellent method of Laverguier for a longer time than the few
hours of crossing the Channel, I should delight to voyage myself on
one of these big liners,' murmured Poirot dreamily.
'Yes, indeed,' I said enthusiastically. 'Some of them must be perfect
palaces; the swimming-baths, the lounges, the restaurant, the palm
courts - really, it must be hard to believe that one is on the sea.'
'Me, I always know when I am on the sea,' said Poirot sadly. 'And all
those bagatelles that you enumerate, they say nothing to me; but,
my friend, consider for a moment the geniuses that travel as it were
incognito! On board these floating palaces, as you so justly call
them, one would meet the élite, the haute noblesse of the criminal
world!'
I laughed.
'So that's the way your enthusiasm runs! You would have liked to
cross swords with the man who sneaked the Liberty Bonds?'
The landlady interrupted us.
'A young lady as wants to see you, Mr Poirot. Here's her card.'
The card bore the inscription: Miss Esmée Farquhar, and Poirot,
after diving under the table to retrieve a stray crumb, and putting it
carefully in the waste-paper basket, nodded to the landlady to
admit her.
In another minute one of the most charming girls I have ever seen
was ushered into the room. She was perhaps about five-andtwenty,
with big brown eyes and a perfect figure. She was welldressed
and perfectly composed in manner.
'Sit down, I beg of you, mademoiselle. This is my friend, Captain
Hastings, who aids me in my little problems.'
'I am afraid it is a big problem I have brought you today. Monsieur
Poirot,' said the girl, giving me a pleasant bow as she seated
herself. 'I dare say you have read about it in the papers. I am
referring to the theft of Liberty Bonds on the Olympia.' Some
astonishment must have shown itself on Poirot's face, for she
continued quickly: 'You are doubtless asking yourself what I have to
do with a grave institution like the London and Scottish Bank. In one
sense nothing, in another sense everything. You see. Monsieur
Poirot, I am engaged to Mr Philip Ridgeway.'
'Aha! and Mr Philip Ridgeway - '
'Was in charge of the bonds when they were stolen. Of course no
actual blame can attach to him, it was not his fault in any way.
Nevertheless, he is half distraught over the matter, and his uncle, I
know, insists that he must carelessly have mentioned having them
in his possession. It is a terrible set-back in his career.'
'Who is his uncle?'
'Mr Vavasour, joint general manager of the London and Scottish
Bank.'
'Suppose, Miss Farquhar, that you recount to me the whole story?'
'Very well. As you know, the Bank wished to extend their credits in
America, and for this purpose decided to send over a million dollars
in Liberty Bonds. Mr Vavasour selected his nephew, who had
occupied a position of trust in the Bank for many years and who
was conversant with all the details of the Bank's dealings in New
York, to make the trip. The Olympia sailed from Liverpool on the
23rd, and the bonds were handed over to Philip on the morning of
that day by Mr Vavasour and Mr Shaw, the two joint general
managers of the London and Scottish Bank. They were counted,
enclosed in a package, and sealed in his presence, and he then
locked the package at once in his portmanteau.'
'A portmanteau with an ordinary lock?'
'No, Mr Shaw insisted on a special lock being fitted to it by Hubbs's.
Philip, as I say, placed the package at the bottom of the trunk. It
was stolen just a few hours before reaching New York. A rigorous
search of the whole ship was made, but without result. The bonds
seemed literally to have vanished into thin air.'
Poirot made a grimace.
'But they did not vanish absolutely, since I gather that they were
sold in small parcels within half an hour of the docking of the
Olympia! Well, undoubtedly the next thing is for me to see Mr
Ridgeway.'
'I was about to suggest that you should lunch with me at the
"Cheshire Cheese." Philip will be there. He is meeting me, but does
not yet know that I have been consulting you on his behalf.'
We agreed to this suggestion readily enough, and drove there in a
taxi.
Mr Philip Ridgeway was there before us, and looked somewhat
surprised to see his fiancée arriving with two complete strangers.
He was a nice-looking young fellow, tall and spruce, with a touch of
greying hair at the temples, though he could not have been much
over thirty.
Miss Farquhar went up to him and laid her hand on his arm.
'You must forgive my acting without consulting you, Philip,' she
said. 'Let me introduce you to Monsieur Hercule Poirot, of whom
you must often have heard, and his friend, Captain Hastings.'
Ridgeway looked very astonished.
'Of course I have heard of you, Monsieur Poirot,' he said, as he
shook hands, 'But I had no idea that Esmée was thinking of
consulting you about my - our trouble.'
'I was afraid you would not let me do it, Philip,' said Miss Farquhar
meekly.
'So you took care to be on the safe side,' he observed, with a smile.
'I hope Monsieur Poirot will be able to throw some light on this
extraordinary puzzle, for I confess frankly that I am nearly out of my
mind with worry and anxiety about it.'
Indeed, his face looked drawn and haggard and showed only too
clearly the strain under which he was labouring.
'Well, well,' said Poirot. 'Let us lunch, and over lunch we will put our
heads together and see what can be done. I want to hear Mr
Ridgeway's story from his own lips.'
Whilst we discussed the excellent steak and kidney pudding of the
establishment, Philip Ridgeway narrated the circumstances leading
to the disappearance of the bonds. His story agreed with that of
Miss Farquhar in every particular. When he had finished, Poirot
took up the thread with a question.
'What exactly led you to discover that the bonds had been stolen,
Mr Ridgeway?'
He laughed rather bitterly.
'The thing stared me in the face, Monsieur Poirot. I couldn't have
missed it. My cabin trunk was half out from under the bunk and all
scratched and cut about where they'd tried to force the lock.'
'But I understood that it had been opened with a key?'
'That's so. They tried to force it, but couldn't. And, in the end, they
must have got it unlocked somehow or other.'
'Curious,' said Poirot, his eyes beginning to flicker with the green
light I knew so well. 'Very curious! They waste much, much time
trying to prise it open, and then - sapristi! they find that they have
the key all the time - for each of Hubbs's locks are unique.'
'That's just why they couldn't have had the key. It never left me day
or night.'
'You are sure of that?'
'I can swear to it, and besides, if they had had the key or a
duplicate, why should they waste time trying to force an obviously
unforceable lock?'
'Ah! there is exactly the question we are asking ourselves! I venture
to prophesy that the solution, if we ever find it, will hinge on that
curious fact. I beg of you not to assault me if I ask you one more
question: Are you perfectly certain you did not leave the trunk
unlocked?'
Philip Ridgeway merely looked at him, and Poirot gesticulated
apologetically.
'Ah, but these things can happen, I assure you! Very well, the bonds
were stolen from the trunk. What did the thief do with them? How
did he manage to get ashore with them?'
'Ah!' cried Ridgeway. 'That's just it. How? Word was passed to the
Customs authorities, and every soul that left the ship was gone over
with a toothcomb!'
'And the bonds, I gather, made a bulky package?'
'Certainly they did. They could hardly have been hidden on board -
and anyway we know they weren't, because they were offered for
sale within half an hour of the Olympia's arrival, long before I got
the cables going and the numbers sent out. One broker swears he
bought some of them even before the Olympia got in. But you can't
send bonds by wireless.'
'Not by wireless, but did any tug come alongside?'
'Only the official ones, and that was after the alarm was given when
everyone was on the look-out. I was watching out myself for their
being passed over to someone that way. My God, Monsieur Poirot,
this thing will drive me mad! People are beginning to say I stole
them myself.'
'But you also were searched on landing, weren't you?' asked Poirot
gently.
'Yes.'
The young man stared at him in a puzzled manner.
'You do not catch my meaning, I see,' said Poirot, smiling
enigmatically. 'Now I should like to make a few inquiries at the
Bank.'
Ridgeway produced a card and scribbled a few words on it.
'Send this in and my uncle will see you at once.'
Poirot thanked him, bade farewell to Miss Farquhar, and together
we started out for Threadneedle Street and the head office of the
London and Scottish Bank. On production of Ridgeway's card, we
were led through the labyrinth of counters and desks, skirting
paying-in clerks and paying-out clerks and up to a small office on
the first floor where the joint general managers received us. They
were two grave gentlemen, who had grown grey in the service of
the Bank. Mr Vavasour had a short white beard, Mr Shaw was clean
shaven.
'I understand you are strictly a private inquiry agent?' said Mr
Vavasour. 'Quite so, quite so. We have, of course, placed ourselves
in the hands of Scotland Yard. Inspector McNeil has charge of the
case. A very able officer, I believe.'
'I am sure of it,' said Poirot politely. 'You will permit a few questions,
on your nephew's behalf? About this lock, who ordered it from
Hubbs's?'
'I ordered it myself,' said Mr Shaw. 'I would not trust to any clerk in
the matter. As to the keys, Mr Ridgeway had one, and the other two
are held by my colleague and myself.'
'And no clerk has had access to them?'
Mr Shaw turned inquiringly to Mr Vavasour.
'I think I am correct in saying that they have remained in the safe
where we placed them on the 23rd,' said Mr Vavasour. 'My
colleague was unfortunately taken ill a fortnight ago - in fact on the
very day that Philip left us. He has only just recovered.'
'Severe bronchitis is no joke to a man of my age,' said Mr Shaw
ruefully. 'But I am afraid Mr Vavasour has suffered from the hard
work entailed by my absence, especially with this unexpected
worry coming on top of everything.'
Poirot asked a few more questions. I judged that he was
endeavouring to gauge the exact amount of intimacy between uncle
and nephew. Mr Vavasour's answers were brief and punctilious. His
nephew was a trusted official of the Bank, and had no debts or
money difficulties that he knew of. He had been entrusted with
similar missions in the past. Finally we were politely bowed out.
'I am disappointed,' said Poirot, as we emerged into the street.
'You hoped to discover more? They are such stodgy old men.'
'It is not their stodginess which disappoints me, mon ami. I do not
expect to find in a Bank manager a "keen financier with an eagle
glance," as your favourite works of fiction put it. No, I am
disappointed in the case - it is too easy!'
'Easy?'
'Yes, do you not find it almost childishly simple?'
'You know who stole the bonds?'
'I do.'
'But then - we must - why - '
'Do not confuse and fluster yourself, Hastings. We are not going to
do anything at present.'
'But why? What are you waiting for?'
'For the Olympia. She is due on her return trip from New York on
Tuesday.'
'But if you know who stole the bonds, why wait? He may escape.'
'To a South Sea island where there is no extradition? No, mon ami,
he would find life very uncongenial there. As to why I wait - eh bien,
to the intelligence of Hercule Poirot the case is perfectly clear, but
for the benefit of others, not so greatly gifted by the good God - the
Inspector McNeil, for instance - it would be as well to make a few
inquiries to establish the facts. One must have consideration for
those less gifted than oneself.'
'Good Lord, Poirot! Do you know, I'd give a considerable sum of
money to see you make a thorough ass of yourself - just for once.
You're so confoundedly conceited!'
'Do not enrage yourself, Hastings. In verity, I observe that there are
times when you almost detest me! Alas, I suffer the penalties of
greatness!'
The little man puffed out his chest, and sighed so comically that I
was forced to laugh.
Tuesday saw us speeding to Liverpool in a first-class carriage of
the L and NWR. Poirot had obstinately refused to enlighten me as to
his suspicions - or certainties. He contented himself with
expressing surprise that I, too, was not equally au fait with the
situation. I disdained to argue, and entrenched my curiosity behind
a rampart of pretended indifference.
Once arrived at the quay alongside which lay the big transatlantic
liner, Poirot became brisk and alert. Our proceedings consisted in
interviewing four successive stewards and inquiring after a friend
of Poirot's who had crossed to New York on the 23rd.
'An elderly gentleman, wearing glasses. A great invalid, hardly
moved out of his cabin.'
The description appeared to tally with one Mr Ventnor who had
occupied the cabin C24 which was next to that of Philip Ridgeway.
Although unable to see how Poirot had deduced Mr Ventnor's
existence and personal appearance, I was keenly excited.
'Tell me,' I cried, 'was this gentleman one of the first to land when
you got to New York?'
The steward shook his head.
'No, indeed, sir, he was one of the last off the boat.'
I retired crestfallen, and observed Poirot grinning at me. He
thanked the steward, a note changed hands, and we took our
departure.
'It's all very well,' I remarked heatedly, 'but that last answer must
have damned your precious theory, grin as you please!'
'As usual, you see nothing, Hastings. That last answer is, on the
contrary, the coping-stone of my theory.'
I flung up my hands in despair.
'I give it up.'
II
When we were in the train, speeding towards London, Poirot wrote
busily for a few minutes, sealing up the result in an envelope.
'This is for the good Inspector McNeil. We will leave it at Scotland
Yard in passing, and then to the Rendezvous Restaurant, where I
have asked Miss Esmée Farquhar to do us the honour of dining with
us.'
'What about Ridgeway?'
'What about him?' asked Poirot with a twinkle.
'Why, you surely don't think - you can't - '
'The habit of incoherence is growing upon you, Hastings. As a
matter of fact I did think. If Ridgeway had been the thief - which was
perfectly possible - the case would have been charming; a piece of
neat methodical work.'
'But not so charming for Miss Farquhar.'
'Possibly you are right. Therefore all is for the best. Now, Hastings,
let us review the case. I can see that you are dying to do so. The
sealed package is removed from the trunk and vanishes, as Miss
Farquhar puts it, into thin air. We will dismiss the thin air theory,
which is not practicable at the present stage of science, and
consider what is likely to have become of it. Everyone asserts the
incredulity of its being smuggled ashore - '
'Yes, but we know - '
''You may know, Hastings. I do not. I take the view that, since it
seemed incredible, it was incredible. Two possibilities remain: it
was hidden on board - also rather difficult - or it was thrown
overboard.'
'With a cork on it, do you mean?'
'Without a cork.'
I stared.
'But if the bonds were thrown overboard, they couldn't have been
sold in New York.'
'I admire your logical mind, Hastings. The bonds were sold in New
York, therefore they were not thrown overboard. You see where
that leads us?'
'Where we were when we started.'
'Jamais de la vie! If the package was thrown overboard, and the
bonds were sold in New York, the package could not have
contained the bonds. Is there any evidence that the package did
contain the bonds? Remember, Mr Ridgeway never opened it from
the time it was placed in his hands in London.'
'Yes, but then - '
Poirot waved an impatient hand.
'Permit me to continue. The last moment that the bonds are seen as
bonds is in the office of the London and Scottish Bank on the
morning of the 23rd. They reappear in New York half an hour after
the Olympia gets in, and according to one man, whom nobody
listens to, actually before she gets in. Supposing then, that they
have never been on the Olympia at all? Is there any other way they
could get to New York? Yes. The Gigantic leaves Southampton on
the same day as the Olympia, and she holds the record for the
Atlantic. Mailed by the Gigantic, the bonds would be in New York
the day before the Olympia arrived. All is clear, the case begins to
explain itself. The sealed packet is only a dummy, and the moment
of its substitution must be in the office in the Bank. It would be an
easy matter for any of the three men present to have prepared a
duplicate package which could be substituted for the genuine one.
Très bien, the bonds are mailed to a confederate in New York, with
instructions to sell as soon as the Olympia is in, but someone must
travel on the Olympia to engineer the supposed moment of the
robbery.'
'But why?'
'Because if Ridgeway merely opens the packet and finds it a
dummy, suspicion flies at once to London. No, the man on board in
the cabin next door does his work, pretends to force the lock in an
obvious manner so as to draw immediate attention to the theft,
really unlocks the trunk with a duplicate key, throws the package
overboard and waits until the last to leave the boat. Naturally he
wears glasses to conceal his eyes, and is an invalid since he does
not want to run the risk of meeting Ridgeway. He steps ashore in
New York and returns by the first boat available.'
'But who - which was he?'
'The man who had a duplicate key, the man who ordered the lock,
the man who has not been severely ill with bronchitis at his home in
the country - enfin, the "stodgy" old man, Mr Shaw! There are
criminals in high places sometimes, my friend. Ah, here we are.
Mademoiselle, I have succeeded! You permit?'
And, beaming, Poirot kissed the astonished girl lightly on either
cheek!
The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb
I have always considered that one of the most thrilling and dramatic
of the many adventures I have shared with Poirot was that of our
investigation into the strange series of deaths which followed upon
the discovery and opening of the Tomb of King Men-her-Ra.
Hard upon the discovery of the Tomb of Tutankh-Amen by Lord
Carnarvon, Sir John Willard and Mr Bleibner of New York, pursuing
their excavations not far from Cairo, in the vicinity of the Pyramids
of Gizeh, came unexpectedly on a series of funeral chambers. The
greatest interest was aroused by their discovery. The Tomb
appeared to be that of King Men-her-Ra, one of those shadowy
kings of the Eighth Dynasty, when the Old Kingdom was falling to
decay. Little was known about this period, and the discoveries
were fully reported in the newspapers.
An event soon occurred which took a profound hold on the public
mind. Sir John Willard died quite suddenly of heart failure.
The more sensational newspapers immediately took the
opportunity of reviving all the old superstitious stories connected
with the ill luck of certain Egyptian treasures. The unlucky Mummy
at the British Museum, that hoary old chestnut, was dragged out
with fresh zest, was quietly denied by the Museum, but
nevertheless enjoyed all its usual vogue.
A fortnight later Mr Bleibner died of acute blood poisoning, and a
few days afterwards a nephew of his shot himself in New York. The
'Curse of Men-her-Ra' was the talk of the day, and the magic power
of dead-and-gone Egypt was exalted to a fetish point.
It was then that Poirot received a brief note from Lady Willard,
widow of the dead archaeologist, asking him to go and see her at
her house in Kensington Square. I accompanied him.
Lady Willard was a tall, thin woman, dressed in deep mourning. Her
haggard face bore eloquent testimony to her recent grief.
'It is kind of you to have come so promptly, Monsieur Poirot.'
'I am at your service, Lady Willard. You wished to consult me?'
'You are, I am aware, a detective, but it is not only as a detective
that I wish to consult you. You are a man of original views, I know,
you have imagination, experience of the world; tell me, Monsieur
Poirot, what are your views on the supernatural?'
Poirot hesitated for a moment before he replied. He seemed to be
considering. Finally he said:
'Let us not misunderstand each other, Lady Willard. It is not a
general question that you are asking me there. It has a personal
application, has it not? You are referring obliquely to the death of
your late husband?'
'That is so,' she admitted.
'You want me to investigate the circumstances of his death?'
'I want you to ascertain for me exactly how much is newspaper
chatter, and how much may be said to be founded on fact? Three
deaths, Monsieur Poirot - each one explicable taken by itself, but
taken together surely an almost unbelievable coincidence, and all
within a month of the opening of the tomb! It may be mere
superstition, it may be some potent curse from the past that
operates in ways undreamed of by modern science. The fact
remains - three deaths! And I am afraid, Monsieur Poirot, horribly
afraid. It may not yet be the end.'
'For whom do you fear?'
'For my son. When the news of my husband's death came I was ill.
My son, who has just come down from Oxford, went out there. He
brought the - the body home, but now he has gone out again, in
spite of my prayers and entreaties. He is so fascinated by the work
that he intends to take his father's place and carry on the system of
excavations. You may think me a foolish, credulous woman, but,
Monsieur Poirot, I am afraid. Supposing that the spirit of the dead
King is not yet appeased? Perhaps to you I seem to be talking
nonsense - '
'No, indeed, Lady Willard,' said Poirot quickly. 'I, too, believe in the
force of superstition, one of the greatest forces the world has ever
known.'
I looked at him in surprise. I should never have credited Poirot with
being superstitious. But the little man was obviously in earnest.
'What you really demand is that I shall protect your son? I will do my
utmost to keep him from harm.'
'Yes, in the ordinary way, but against an occult influence?'
'In volumes of the Middle Ages, Lady Willard, you will find many
ways of counteracting black magic. Perhaps they knew more than
we moderns with all our boasted science. Now let us come to facts,
that I may have guidance. Your husband had always been a devoted
Egyptologist, hadn't he?'
'Yes, from his youth upwards. He was one of the greatest living
authorities upon the subject.'
'But Mr Bleibner, I understand, was more or less of an amateur?'
'Oh, quite. He was a very wealthy man who dabbled freely in any
subject that happened to take his fancy. My husband managed to
interest him in Egyptology, and it was his money that was so useful
in financing the expedition.'
'And the nephew? What do you know of his tastes? Was he with the
party at all?'
'I do not think so. In fact I never knew of his existence till I read of
his death in the paper. I do not think he and Mr Bleibner can have
been at all intimate. He never spoke of having any relations.'
'Who are the other members of the party?'
'Well, there's Dr Tosswill, a minor official connected with the British
Museum; Mr Schneider of the Metropolitan Museum in New York; a
young American secretary; Dr Ames, who accompanies the
expedition in his professional capacity; and Hassan, my husband's
devoted native servant.'
'Do you remember the name of the American secretary?'
'Harper, I think, but I cannot be sure. He had not been with Mr
Bleibner very long, I know. He was a very pleasant young fellow.'
'Thank you, Lady Willard.'
'If there is anything else - '
'For the moment, nothing. Leave it now in my hands, and be
assured that I will do all that is humanly possible to protect your
son.'
They were not exactly reassuring words, and I observed Lady
Willard wince as he uttered them. Yet, at the same time, the fact
that he had not pooh-poohed her fears seemed in itself to be a relief
to her.
For my part I had never before suspected that Poirot had so deep a
vein of superstition in his nature. I tackled him on the subject as we
went homewards. His manner was grave and earnest.
'But yes, Hastings. I believe in these things. You must not underrate
the force of superstition.'
'What are we going to do about it?'
'Toujours pratique, the good Hastings! Eh bien, to begin with we are
going to cable to New York for fuller details of young Mr Bleibner's
death.'
He duly sent off his cable. The reply was full and precise. Young
Rupert Bleibner had been in low water for several years. He had
been a beachcomber and a remittance man in several South Sea
islands, but had returned to New York two years ago, where he had
rapidly sunk lower and lower. The most significant thing, to my
mind, was that he had recently managed to borrow enough money
to take him to Egypt. 'I've a good friend there I can borrow from,' he
had declared. Here, however, his plans had gone awry. He had
returned to New York cursing his skinflint of an uncle who cared
more for the bones of dead and gone kings than his own flesh and
blood. It was during his sojourn in Egypt that the death of Sir John
Willard occurred. Rupert had plunged once more into his life of
dissipation in New York, and then, without warning, he had
committed suicide, leaving behind him a letter which contained
some curious phrases. It seemed written in a sudden fit of remorse.
He referred to himself as a leper and an outcast, and the letter
ended by declaring that such as he were better dead.
A shadowy theory leapt into my brain. I had never really believed in
the vengeance of a long dead Egyptian king. I saw here a more
modern crime. Supposing this young man had decided to do away
with his uncle - preferably by poison. By mistake, Sir John Willard
receives the fatal dose. The young man returns to New York,
haunted by his crime. The news of his uncle's death reaches him.
He realizes how unnecessary his crime has been, and stricken with
remorse takes his own life.
I outlined my solution to Poirot. He was interested.
'It is ingenious what you have thought of there - decidedly it is
ingenious. It may even be true. But you leave out of count the fatal
influence of the Tomb.'
I shrugged my shoulders.
'You still think that has something to do with it?'
'So much so, mon ami, that we start for Egypt tomorrow.'
'What?' I cried, astonished.
'I have said it.' An expression of conscious heroism spread over
Poirot's face. Then he groaned. 'But, oh,' he lamented, 'the sea! The
hateful sea!'
II
It was a week later. Beneath our feet was the golden sand of the
desert. The hot sun poured down overhead. Poirot, the picture of
misery, wilted by my side. The little man was not a good traveller.
Our four days' voyage from Marseilles had been one long agony to
him. He had landed at Alexandria the wraith of his former self, even
his usual neatness had deserted him. We had arrived in Cairo and
had driven out at once to the Mena House Hotel, right in the shadow
of the Pyramids.
The charm of Egypt had laid hold of me. Not so Poirot. Dressed
precisely the same as in London, he carried a small clothes-brush
in his pocket and waged an unceasing war on the dust which
accumulated on his dark apparel.
'And my boots,' he wailed. 'Regard them, Hastings. My boots, of the
neat patent leather, usually so smart and shining. See, the sand is
inside them, which is painful, and outside them, which outrages the
eyesight. Also the heat, it causes my moustaches to become limp -
but limp!'
'Look at the Sphinx,' I urged. 'Even I can feel the mystery and the
charm it exhales.'
Poirot looked at it discontentedly.
'It has not the air happy,' he declared. 'How could it, half-buried in
sand in that untidy fashion. Ah, this cursed sand!'
'Come, now, there's a lot of sand in Belgium,' I reminded him,
mindful of a holiday spent at Knocke-sur-mer in the midst of 'Les
dunes impeccables' as the guide-book had phrased it.
'Not in Brussels,' declared Poirot. He gazed at the Pyramids
thoughtfully. 'It is true that they, at least, are of a shape solid and
geometrical, but their surface is of an unevenness most unpleasing.
And the palm-trees I like them not. Not even do they plant them in
rows!'
I cut short his lamentations, by suggesting that we should start for
the camp. We were to ride there on camels, and the beasts were
patiently kneeling, waiting for us to mount, in charge of several
picturesque boys headed by a voluble dragoman.
I pass over the spectacle of Poirot on a camel. He started by groans
and lamentations and ended by shrieks, gesticulations and
invocations to the Virgin Mary and every Saint in the calendar. In
the end, he descended ignominiously and finished the journey on a
diminutive donkey. I must admit that a trotting camel is no joke for
the amateur. I was stiff for several days.
At last we neared the scene of the excavations. A sun-burnt man
with a grey beard, in white clothes and wearing a helmet, came to
meet us.
'Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings? We received your cable.
I'm sorry that there was no one to meet you in Cairo. An unforeseen
event occurred which completely disorganized our plans.'
Poirot paled. His hand, which had stolen to his clothes-brush,
stayed its course.
'Not another death?' he breathed.
'Yes.'
'Sir Guy Willard?' I cried.
'No, Captain Hastings. My American colleague, Mr Schneider.'
'And the cause?' demanded Poirot.
'Tetanus.'
I blanched. All around me I seemed to feel an atmosphere of evil,
subtle and menacing. A horrible thought flashed across me.
Supposing I were the next?
'Mon Dieu,' said Poirot, in a very low voice, 'I do not understand this.
It is horrible. Tell me, monsieur, there is no doubt that it was
tetanus?'
'I believe not. But Dr Ames will tell you more than I can do.'
'Ah, of course, you are not the doctor.'
'My name is Tosswill.'
This, then, was the British expert described by Lady Willard as
being a minor official at the British Museum. There was something
at once grave and steadfast about him that took my fancy.
'If you will come with me,' continued Dr Tosswill, 'I will take you to
Sir Guy Willard. He was most anxious to be informed as soon as you
should arrive.'
We were taken across the camp to a large tent. Dr Tosswill lifted up
the flap and we entered. Three men were sitting inside.
'Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings have arrived, Sir Guy,' said
Tosswill.
The youngest of the three men jumped up and came forward to
greet us. There was a certain impulsiveness in his manner which
reminded me of his mother. He was not nearly so sunburnt as the
others, and that fact, coupled with a certain haggardness round the
eyes, made him look older than his twenty-two years. He was
clearly endeavouring to bear up under a severe mental strain.
He introduced his two companions, Dr Ames, a capable-looking
man of thirty-odd, with a touch of greying hair at the temples, and
Mr Harper, the secretary, a pleasant lean young man wearing the
national insignia of horn-rimmed spectacles.
After a few minutes' desultory conversation the latter went out, and
Dr Tosswill followed him. We were left alone with Sir Guy and Dr
Ames.
'Please ask any questions you want to ask, Monsieur Poirot,' said
Willard. 'We are utterly dumbfounded at this strange series of
disasters, but it isn't - it can't be, anything but coincidence.'
There was a nervousness about his manner which rather belied the
words. I saw that Poirot was studying him keenly.
'Your heart is really in this work, Sir Guy?'
'Rather. No matter what happens, or what comes of it, the work is
going on. Make up your mind to that.'
Poirot wheeled round on the other.
'What have you to say to that, monsieur le docteur?'
'Well,' drawled the doctor, 'I'm not for quitting myself.'
Poirot made one of those expressive grimaces of his.
'Then, évidemment, we must find out just how we stand. When did
Mr Schneider's death take place?'
'Three days ago.'
'You are sure it was tetanus?'
'Dead sure.'
'It couldn't have been a case of strychnine poisoning, for instance?'
'No, Monsieur Poirot. I see what you're getting at. But it was a clear
case of tetanus.'
'Did you not inject anti-serum?'
'Certainly we did,' said the doctor dryly. 'Every conceivable thing
that could be done was tried.'
'Had you the anti-serum with you?'
'No. We procured it from Cairo.'
'Have there been any other cases of tetanus in the camp?'
'No, not one.'
'Are you certain that the death of Mr Bleibner was not due to
tetanus?'
'Absolutely plumb certain. He had a scratch upon his thumb which
became poisoned, and septicaemia set in. It sounds pretty much
the same to a layman, I dare say, but the two things are entirely
different.'
'Then we have four deaths - all totally dissimilar, one heart failure,
one blood poisoning, one suicide and one tetanus.'
'Exactly, Monsieur Poirot.'
'Are you certain that there is nothing which might link the four
together?'
'I don't quite understand you?'
'I will put it plainly. Was any act committed by those four men which
might seem to denote disrespect to the spirit of Men-her-Ra?'
The doctor gazed at Poirot in astonishment.
'You're talking through your hat, Monsieur Poirot. Surely you've not
been guyed into believing all that fool talk?'
'Absolute nonsense,' muttered Willard angrily.
Poirot remained placidly immovable, blinking a little out of his green
cat's eyes.
'So you do not believe it, monsieur le docteur?'
'No, sir, I do not,' declared the doctor emphatically. 'I am a
scientific man, and I believe only what science teaches.'
'Was there no science then in Ancient Egypt?' asked Poirot softly.
He did not wait for a reply, and indeed Dr Ames seemed rather at a
loss for the moment. 'No, no, do not answer me, but tell me this.
What do the native workmen think?'
'I guess,' said Dr Ames, 'that, where white folk lose their heads,
natives aren't going to be far behind. I'll admit that they're getting
what you might call scared - but they've no cause to be.'
'I wonder,' said Poirot non-committally.
Sir Guy leant forward.
'Surely,' he cried incredulously, 'you cannot believe in - oh, but the
thing's absurd! You can know nothing of Ancient Egypt if you think
that.'
For answer Poirot produced a little book from his pocket - an
ancient tattered volume. As he held it out I saw its title, The Magic
of the Egyptians and Chaldeans. Then, wheeling round, he strode
out of the tent. The doctor stared at me.
'What is his little idea?'
The phrase, so familiar on Poirot's lips, made me smile as it came
from another.
'I don't know exactly,' I confessed. 'He's got some plan of exorcizing
the evil spirits, I believe.'
I went in search of Poirot, and found him talking to the lean-faced
young man who had been the late Mr Bleibner's secretary.
'No,' Mr Harper was saying, 'I've only been six months with the
expedition. Yes, I knew Mr Bleibner's affairs pretty well.'
'Can you recount to me anything concerning his nephew?'
'He turned up here one day, not a bad-looking fellow. I'd never met
him before, but some of the others had - Ames, I think, and
Schneider. The old man wasn't at all pleased to see him. They were
at it in no time, hammer and tongs. "Not a cent," the old man
shouted. "Not one cent now or when I'm dead. I intend to leave my
money to the furtherance of my life's work. I've been talking it over
with Mr Schneider today." And a bit more of the same. Young
Bleibner lit out for Cairo right away.'
'Was he in perfectly good health at the time?'
'The old man?'
'No, the young one.'
'I believe he did mention there was something wrong with him. But
it couldn't have been anything serious, or I should have
remembered.'
'One thing more, has Mr Bleibner left a will?'
'So far as we know, he has not.'
'Are you remaining with the expedition, Mr Harper?'
'No, sir, I am not. I'm for New York as soon as I can square up things
here. You may laugh if you like, but I'm not going to be this blasted
old Men-her-Ra's next victim. He'll get me if I stop here.'
The young man wiped the perspiration from his brow.
Poirot turned away. Over his shoulder he said with a peculiar smile:
'Remember, he got one of his victims in New York.'
'Oh, hell!' said Mr Harper forcibly.
'That young man is nervous,' said Poirot thoughtfully. 'He is on the
edge, but absolutely on the edge.'
I glanced at Poirot curiously, but his enigmatical smile told me
nothing. In company with Sir Guy Willard and Dr Tosswill we were
taken round the excavations. The principal finds had been removed
to Cairo, but some of the tomb furniture was extremely interesting.
The enthusiasm of the young baronet was obvious, but I fancied
that I detected a shade of nervousness in his manner as though he
could not quite escape from the feeling of menace in the air. As we
entered the tent which had been assigned to us, for a wash before
joining the evening meal, a tall dark figure in white robes stood
aside to let us pass with a graceful gesture and a murmured
greeting in Arabic. Poirot stopped.
'You are Hassan, the late Sir John Willard's servant?'
'I served my Lord Sir John, now I serve his son.' He took a step
nearer to us and lowered his voice. 'You are a wise one, they say,
learned in dealing with evil spirits. Let the young master depart
from here. There is evil in the air around us.'
And with an abrupt gesture, not waiting for a reply, he strode away.
'Evil in the air,' muttered Poirot. 'Yes, I feel it.'
Our meal was hardly a cheerful one. The floor was left to Dr
Tosswill, who discoursed at length upon Egyptian antiquities. Just
as we were preparing to retire to rest, Sir Guy caught Poirot by the
arm and pointed. A shadowy figure was moving amidst the tents. It
was no human one: I recognized distinctly the dog-headed figure I
had seen carved on the walls of the tomb.
My blood froze at the sight.
'Mon Dieu!' murmured Poirot, crossing himself vigorously. 'Anubis,
the jackal-headed, the god of departing souls.'
'Someone is hoaxing us,' cried Dr Tosswill, rising indignantly to his
feet.
'It went into your tent, Harper,' muttered Sir Guy, his face dreadfully
pale.
'No,' said Poirot, shaking his head, 'into that of Dr Ames.'
The doctor stared at him incredulously, then, repeating Dr
Tosswill's words, he cried:
'Someone is hoaxing us. Come, we'll soon catch the fellow.'
He dashed energetically in pursuit of the shadowy apparition. I
followed him, but, search as we would, we could find no trace of
any living soul having passed that way. We returned, somewhat
disturbed in mind, to find Poirot taking energetic measures, in his
own way, to ensure his personal safety. He was busily surrounding
our tent with various diagrams and inscriptions which he was
drawing in the sand. I recognized the five-pointed star or Pentagon
many times repeated. As was his wont, Poirot was at the same time
delivering an impromptu lecture on witchcraft and magic in
general. White Magic as opposed to Black, with various references
to the Ka and the Book of the Dead thrown in.
It appeared to excite the liveliest contempt in Dr Tosswill, who drew
me aside, literally snorting with rage.
'Balderdash, sir,' he exclaimed angrily. 'Pure balderdash. The
man's an impostor. He doesn't know the difference between the
superstitions of the Middle Ages and the beliefs of Ancient Egypt.
Never have I heard such a hotch-potch of ignorance and credulity.'
I calmed the excited expert, and joined Poirot in the tent. My little
friend was beaming cheerfully.
'We can now sleep in peace,' he declared happily. 'And I can do
with some sleep. My head, it aches abominably. Ah, for a good
tisane!'
As though in answer to prayer, the flap of the tent was lifted and
Hassan appeared, bearing a steaming cup which he offered to
Poirot. It proved to be camomile tea, a beverage of which he is
inordinately fond. Having thanked Hassan and refused his offer of
another cup for myself, we were left alone once more. I stood at the
door of the tent some time after undressing, looking out over the
desert.
'A wonderful place,' I said aloud, 'and a wonderful work. I can feel
the fascination. This desert life, this probing into the heart of a
vanished civilization. Surely, Poirot, you, too, must feel the charm?'
I got no answer, and I turned, a little annoyed. My annoyance was
quickly changed to concern. Poirot was lying back across the rude
couch, his face horribly convulsed. Beside him was the empty cup. I
rushed to his side, then dashed out and across the camp to Dr
Ames's tent.
'Dr Ames!' I cried. 'Come at once.'
'What's the matter?' said the doctor, appearing in pyjamas.
'My friend. He's ill. Dying. The camomile tea. Don't let Hassan leave
the camp.'
Like a flash the doctor ran to our tent. Poirot was lying as I left him.
'Extraordinary,' cried Ames. 'Looks like a seizure - or - what did you
say about something he drank?' He picked up the empty cup.
'Only I did not drink it!' said a placid voice.
We turned in amazement. Poirot was sitting up on the bed. He was
smiling.
'No,' he said gently. 'I did not drink it. While my good friend Hastings
was apostrophising the night, I took the opportunity of pouring it,
not down my throat, but into a little bottle. That little bottle will go to
the analytical chemist. No' - as the doctor made a sudden
movement - 'as a sensible man, you will understand that violence
will be of no avail. During Hastings' brief absence to fetch you, I
have had time to put the bottle in safe keeping. Ah, quick, Hastings,
hold him!'
I misunderstood Poirot's anxiety. Eager to save my friend, I flung
myself in front of him. But the doctor's swift movement had another
meaning. His hand went to his mouth, a smell of bitter almonds
filled the air, and he swayed forward and fell.
'Another victim,' said Poirot gravely, 'but the last. Perhaps it is the
best way. He has three deaths on his head.'
'Dr Ames?' I cried, stupefied. 'But I thought you believed in some
occult influence?'
'You misunderstood me, Hastings. What I meant was that I believe
in the terrific force of superstition. Once get it firmly established
that a series of deaths are supernatural, and you might almost stab
a man in broad daylight, and it would still be put down to the curse,
so strongly is the instinct of the supernatural implanted in the
human race. I suspected from the first that a man was taking
advantage of that instinct. The idea came to him, I imagine, with the
death of Sir John Willard. A fury of superstition arose at once. As
far as I could see, nobody could derive any particular profit from Sir
John's death. Mr Bleibner was a different case. He was a man of
great wealth. The information I received from New York contained
several suggestive points. To begin with, young Bleibner was
reported to have said he had a good friend in Egypt from whom he
could borrow. It was tacitly understood that he meant his uncle, but
it seemed to me that in that case he would have said so outright.
The words suggest some boon companion of his own. Another
thing, he scraped up enough money to take him to Egypt, his uncle
refused outright to advance him a penny, yet he was able to pay the
return passage to New York. Someone must have lent him the
money.'
'All that was very thin,' I objected.
'But there was more. Hastings, there occur often enough words
spoken metaphorically which are taken literally. The opposite can
happen too. In this case, words which were meant literally were
taken metaphorically. Young Bleibner wrote plainly enough: 'I am a
leper,' but nobody realized that he shot himself because he
believed that he had contracted the dread disease of leprosy.'
'What?' I ejaculated.
'It was the clever invention of a diabolical mind. Young Bleibner was
suffering from some minor skin trouble; he had lived in the South
Sea Islands, where the disease is common enough. Ames was a
former friend of his, and a well-known medical man, he would never
dream of doubting his word. When I arrived here, my suspicions
were divided between Harper and Dr Ames, but I soon realized that
only the doctor could have perpetrated and concealed the crimes,
and I learnt from Harper that he was previously acquainted with
young Bleibner. Doubtless the latter at some time or another had
made a will or had insured his life in favour of the doctor. The latter
saw his chance of acquiring wealth. It was easy for him to inoculate
Mr Bleibner with the deadly germs. Then the nephew, overcome
with despair at the dread news his friend had conveyed to him, shot
himself. Mr Bleibner, whatever his intentions, had made no will. His
fortune would pass to his nephew and from him to the doctor.'
'And Mr Schneider?'
'We cannot be sure. He knew young Bleibner too, remember, and
may have suspected something, or, again, the doctor may have
thought that a further death motiveless and purposeless would
strengthen the coils of superstition. Furthermore, I will tell you an
interesting psychological fact, Hastings. A murderer has always a
strong desire to repeat his successful crime, the performance of it
grows upon him. Hence my fears for young Willard. The figure of
Anubis you saw to-night was Hassan, dressed up by my orders. I
wanted to see if I could frighten the doctor. But it would take more
than the supernatural to frighten him. I could see that he was not
entirely taken in by my pretences of belief in the occult. The little
comedy I played for him did not deceive him. I suspected that he
would endeavour to make me the next victim. Ah, but in spite of la
mer maudite, the heat abominable, and the annoyances of the sand,
the little grey cells still functioned!'
Poirot proved to be perfectly right in his premises. Young Bleibner,
some years ago, in a fit of drunken merriment, had made a jocular
will, leaving 'my cigarette-case you admire so much and everything
else of which I die possessed which will be principally debts to my
good friend Robert Ames who once saved my life from drowning.'
The case was hushed up as far as possible, and, to this day, people
talk of the remarkable series of deaths in connection with the Tomb
of Men-her-Ra as a triumphal proof of the vengeance of a bygone
king upon the desecrators of his tomb - a belief which, as Poirot
pointed out to me, is contrary to all Egyptian belief and thought.
The Jewel Robbery at the Grand Metropolitan
'Poirot,' I said, 'a change of air would do you good.'
'You think so, mon ami?'
'I am sure of it.'
'Eh - eh?' said my friend, smiling, 'It is all arranged, then?'
'You will come?'
'Where do you propose to take me?'
'Brighton. As a matter of fact, a friend of mine in the City put me on
to a very good thing, and - well, I have money to burn, as the saying
goes. I think a weekend at the Grand Metropolitan would do us all
the good in the world.'
'Thank you, I accept most gratefully. You have the good heart to
think of an old man. And the good heart, it is in the end worth all the
little grey cells. Yes, yes, I who speak to you am in danger of
forgetting that sometimes.'
I did not quite relish the implication. I fancy that Poirot is sometimes
a little inclined to underestimate my mental capacities. But his
pleasure was so evident that I put my slight annoyance aside.
'Then, that's all right,' I said hastily.
Saturday evening saw us dining at the Grand Metropolitan in the
midst of a gay throng. All the world and his wife seemed to be at
Brighton. The dresses were marvellous, and the jewels - worn
sometimes with more love of display than good taste - were
something magnificent.
'Hein, it is a sight, this!' murmured Poirot. 'This is the home of the
Profiteer, is it not so, Hastings?'
'Supposed to be,' I replied. 'But we'll hope they aren't all tarred with
the Profiteering brush.'
Poirot gazed round him placidly.
'The sight of so many jewels makes me wish I had turned my brains
to crime, instead of to its detection. What a magnificent opportunity
for some thief of distinction! Regard, Hastings, that stout woman by
the pillar. She is, as you would say, plastered with gems.'
I followed his eyes.
'Why,' I exclaimed, 'it's Mrs Opalsen.'
'You know her?'
'Slightly. Her husband is a rich stockbroker who made a fortune in
the recent Oil boom.'
After dinner we ran across the Opalsens in the lounge, and I
introduced Poirot to them. We chatted for a few minutes, and ended
by having our coffee together.
Poirot said a few words in praise of some of the costlier gems
displayed on the lady's ample bosom, and she brightened up at
once.
'It's a perfect hobby of mine, Mr Poirot. I just love jewellery. Ed
knows my weakness, and every time things go well he brings me
something new. You are interested in precious stones?'
'I have had a good deal to do with them one time and another,
madame. My profession has brought me into contact with some of
the most famous jewels in the world.'
He went on to narrate, with discreet pseudonyms, the story of the
historic jewels of a reigning house, and Mrs Opalsen listened with
bated breath.
'There now,' she exclaimed, as he ended. 'If it isn't just like a play!
You know, I've got some pearls of my own that have a history
attached to them. I believe it's supposed to be one of the finest
necklaces in the world - the pearls are so beautifully matched and
so perfect in colour. I declare I really must run up and get it!'
'Oh, madame,' protested Poirot, 'you are too amiable. Pray do not
derange yourself!'
'Oh, but I'd like to show it to you.'
The buxom dame waddled across to the lift briskly enough. Her
husband, who had been talking to me, looked at Poirot inquiringly.
'Madame your wife is so amiable as to insist on showing me her
pearl necklace,' explained the latter.
'Oh, the pearls!' Opalsen smiled in a satisfied fashion. 'Well, they
are worth seeing. Cost a pretty penny too! Still, the money's there
all right; I could get what I paid for them any day - perhaps more.
May have to, too, if things go on as they are now. Money's
confoundedly tight in the City. All this infernal EPD.' He rambled on,
launching into technicalities where I could not follow him.
He was interrupted by a small page-boy who approached and
murmured something in his ear.
'Eh - what? I'll come at once. Not taken ill, is she? Excuse me,
gentlemen.'
He left us abruptly. Poirot leaned back and lit one of his tiny
Russian cigarettes. Then, carefully and meticulously, he arranged
the empty coffee-cups in a neat row, and beamed happily on the
result.
The minutes passed. The Opalsens did not return.
'Curious,' I remarked, at length. 'I wonder when they will come
back.'
Poirot watched the ascending spirals of smoke, and then said
thoughtfully:
'They will not come back.'
'Why?'
'Because, my friend, something has happened.'
'What sort of thing? How do you know?' I asked curiously.
Poirot smiled.
'A few moments ago the manager came hurriedly out of his office
and ran upstairs. He was much agitated. The lift-boy is deep in talk
with one of the pages. The lift-bell has rung three times, but he
heeds it not. Thirdly, even the waiters are distrait; and to make a
waiter distrait - ' Poirot shook his head with an air of finality. 'The
affair must indeed be of the first magnitude. Ah, it is as I thought!
Here come the police.'
Two men had just entered the hotel - one in uniform, the other in
plain clothes. They spoke to a page, and were immediately ushered
upstairs. A few minutes later, the same boy descended and came
up to where we were sitting.
'Mr Opalsen's compliments, and would you step upstairs?'
Poirot sprang nimbly to his feet. One would have said that he
awaited the summons. I followed with no less alacrity.
The Opalsens' apartments were situated on the first floor. After
knocking on the door, the page-boy retired, and we answered the
summons, 'Come in!' A strange scene met our eyes. The room was
Mrs Opalsen's bedroom, and in the centre of it, lying back in an
armchair, was the lady herself, weeping violently. She presented an
extraordinary spectacle, with the tears making great furrows in the
powder with which her complexion was liberally coated. Mr
Opalsen was striding up and down angrily. The two police officials
stood in the middle of the room, one with a notebook in hand. An
hotel chambermaid, looking frightened to death, stood by the
fireplace; and on the other side of the room a Frenchwoman,
obviously Mrs Opalsen's maid, was weeping and wringing her
hands, with an intensity of grief that rivalled that of her mistress.
Into this pandemonium stepped Poirot, neat and smiling.
Immediately, with an energy surprising in one of her bulk, Mrs
Opalsen sprang from her chair towards him.
'There now; Ed may say what he likes, but I believe in luck, I do. It
was fated I should meet you the way I did this evening, and I've a
feeling that if you can't get my pearls back for me nobody can.'
'Calm yourself, I pray of you, madame.' Poirot patted her hand
soothingly. 'Reassure yourself. All will be well. Hercule Poirot will
aid you!'
Mr Opalsen turned to the police inspector.
'There will be no objection to my - er - calling in this gentleman, I
suppose?'
'None at all, sir,' replied the man civilly, but with complete
indifference. 'Perhaps now your lady's feeling better she'll just let
us have the facts?'
Mrs Opalsen looked helplessly at Poirot. He led her back to her
chair.
'Seat yourself, madame, and recount to us the whole history
without agitating yourself.'
Thus abjured, Mrs Opalsen dried her eyes gingerly, and began.
'I came upstairs after dinner to fetch my pearls for Mr Poirot here to
see. The chambermaid and Célestine were both in the room as
usual - '
'Excuse me, madame, but what do you mean by "as usual"?'
Mr Opalsen explained.
'I make it a rule that no one is to come into this room unless
Célestine, the maid, is there also. The chambermaid does the room
in the morning while Célestine is present, and comes in after dinner
to turn down the beds under the same conditions; otherwise she
never enters the room.'
'Well, as I was saying,' continued Mrs Opalsen, 'I came up. I went to
the drawer here' - she indicated the bottom right-hand drawer of
the knee-hole dressing-table - 'took out my jewel-case and unlocked
it. It seemed quite as usual - but the pearls were not there!'
The inspector had been busy with his notebook. 'When had you last
seen them?' he asked.
'They were there when I went down to dinner.'
'You are sure?'
'Quite sure. I was uncertain whether to wear them or not, but in the
end I decided on the emeralds, and put them back in the jewelcase.'
'Who locked up the jewel-case?'
'I did. I wear the key on a chain round my neck.' She held it up as
she spoke.
The inspector examined it, and shrugged his shoulders.
'The thief must have had a duplicate key. No difficult matter. The
lock is quite a simple one. What did you do after you'd locked the
jewel-case?'
'I put it back in the bottom drawer where I always keep it.'
'You didn't lock the drawer?'
'No, I never do. My maid remains in the room till I come up, so
there's no need.'
The inspector's face grew graver.
'Am I to understand that the jewels were there when you went down
to dinner, and that since then the maid has not left the room?'
Suddenly, as though the horror of her own situation for the first
time burst upon her, Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and,
flinging herself upon Poirot, poured out a torrent of incoherent
French.
The suggestion was infamous! That she should be suspected of
robbing Madame! The police were well known to be of a stupidity
incredible! But Monsieur, who was a Frenchman -
'A Belgian,' interjected Poirot, but Célestine paid no attention to the
correction.
Monsieur would not stand by and see her falsely accused, while
that infamous chambermaid was allowed to go scot-free. She had
never liked her - a bold, red-faced thing - a born thief. She had said
from the first that she was not honest. And had kept a sharp watch
over her too, when she was doing Madame's room! Let those idiots
of policemen search her, and if they did not find Madame's pearls
on her it would be very surprising!
Although this harangue was uttered in rapid and virulent French,
Célestine had interlarded it with a wealth of gesture, and the
chambermaid realized at least a part of her meaning. She reddened
angrily.
'If that foreign woman's saying I took the pearls, it's a lie!' she
declared heatedly. 'I never so much as saw them.'
'Search her!' screamed the other. 'You will find it is as I say.'
'You're a liar - do you hear?' said the chambermaid, advancing upon
her. 'Stole 'em yourself, and want to put it on me. Why, I was only in
the room about three minutes before the lady come up, and then
you were sitting here the whole time, as you always do, like a cat
watching a mouse.'
The inspector looked across inquiringly at Célestine. 'Is that true?
Didn't you leave the room at all?'
'I did not actually leave her alone,' admitted Célestine reluctantly,
'but I went into my own room through the door here twice - once to
fetch a reel of cotton, and once for my scissors. She must have
done it then.'
'You wasn't gone a minute,' retorted the chambermaid angrily. 'Just
popped out and in again. I'd be glad if the police would search me.
I’ve nothing to be afraid of.'
At this moment there was a tap at the door. The inspector went to it.
His face brightened when he saw who it was.
'Ah!' he said. 'That's rather fortunate. I sent for one of our female
searchers, and she's just arrived. Perhaps if you wouldn't mind
going into the room next door.'
He looked at the chambermaid, who stepped across the threshold
with a toss of her head, the searcher following her closely.
The French girl had sunk sobbing into a chair. Poirot was looking
round the room, the main features of which I have made clear by a
sketch.
'Where does that door lead?' he inquired, nodding his head
towards the one by the window.
'Into the next apartment, I believe,' said the inspector. 'It's bolted,
anyway, on this side.'
Poirot walked across to it, tried it, then drew back the bolt and tried
it again.
'And on the other side as well,' he remarked. 'Well, that seems to
rule out that.'
He walked over to the windows, examining each of them in turn.
'And again - nothing. Not even a balcony outside.'
'Even if there were,' said the inspector impatiently, 'I don't see how
that would help us, if the maid never left the room.'
'Évidemment,' said Poirot, not disconcerted. 'As Mademoiselle is
positive she did not leave the room - '
He was interrupted by the reappearance of the chamber-maid and
the police searcher.
'Nothing,' said the latter laconically.
'I should hope not, indeed,' said the chambermaid virtuously. 'And
that French hussy ought to be ashamed of herself taking away an
honest girl's character!'
'There, there, my girl; that's all right,' said the inspector, opening
the door. 'Nobody suspects you. You go along and get on with your
work.'
The chambermaid went unwillingly.
'Going to search her?' she demanded, pointing at Célestine.
'Yes, yes!' He shut the door on her and turned the key.
Célestine accompanied the searcher into the small room in her
turn. A few minutes later she also returned. Nothing had been found
on her.
The inspector's face grew graver.
'I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to come along with me all the same,
miss.' He turned to Mrs Opalsen. 'I'm sorry, madam, but all the
evidence points that way. If she's not got them on her, they're
hidden somewhere about the room.'
Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and clung to Poirot's arm. The
latter bent and whispered something in the girl's ear. She looked up
at him doubtfully.
'Si, si, mon enfant - I assure you it is better not to resist.' Then he
turned to the inspector. 'You permit, monsieur? A little experiment -
purely for my own satisfaction.'
'Depends on what it is,' replied the police officer non-committally.
Poirot addressed Célestine once more.
'You have told us that you went into your room to fetch a reel of
cotton. Whereabouts was it?'
'On top of the chest of drawers, monsieur.'
'And the scissors?'
'They also.'
'Would it be troubling you too much, mademoiselle, to ask you to
repeat those two actions? You were sitting here with your work,
you say?'
Célestine sat down, and then, at a sign from Poirot, rose, passed
into the adjoining room, took up an object from the chest of
drawers, and returned.
Poirot divided his attention between her movements and a large
turnip of a watch which he held in the palm of his hand.
'Again, if you please, mademoiselle.'
At the conclusion of the second performance, he made a note in his
pocket-book, and returned the watch to his pocket.
'Thank you, mademoiselle. And you, monsieur' - he bowed to the
inspector - 'for your courtesy.'
The inspector seemed somewhat entertained by this excessive
politeness. Célestine departed in a flood of tears, accompanied by
the woman and the plain-clothes official.
Then, with a brief apology to Mrs Opalsen, the inspector set to work
to ransack the room. He pulled out drawers, opened cupboards,
completely unmade the bed, and tapped the floor. Mr Opalsen
looked on sceptically.
'You really think you will find them?'
'Yes, sir. It stands to reason. She hadn't time to take them out of the
room. The lady's discovering the robbery so soon upset her plans.
No, they're here right enough. One of the two must have hidden
them - and it's very unlikely for the chambermaid to have done so.'
'More than unlikely - impossible!'' said Poirot quietly.
'Eh?' The inspector stared.
Poirot smiled modestly.
'I will demonstrate. Hastings, my good friend, take my watch in your
hand - with care. It is a family heirloom! Just now I timed
Mademoiselle's movements - her first absence from the room was
of twelve seconds, her second of fifteen. Now observe my actions.
Madame will have the kindness to give me the key of the jewel-case.
I thank you. My friend Hastings will have the kindness to say "Go!"'
'Go! 'I said.
With almost incredible swiftness, Poirot wrenched open the drawer
of the dressing-table, extracted the jewel-case, fitted the key in the
lock, opened the case, selected a piece of jewellery, shut and
locked the case, and returned it to the drawer, which he pushed to
again. His movements were like lightning.
'Well, mon ami?' he demanded of me breathlessly.
'Forty-six seconds,' I replied.
'You see?' He looked round. 'There would not have been time for
the chambermaid even to take the necklace out, far less hide it.'
'Then that settles it on the maid,' said the inspector with
satisfaction, and returned to his search. He passed into the maid's
bedroom next door.
Poirot was frowning thoughtfully. Suddenly he shot a question at Mr
Opalsen.
'This necklace - it was, without doubt, insured?'
Mr Opalsen looked a trifle surprised at the question.
'Yes,' he said hesitatingly, 'that is so.'
'But what does that matter?' broke in Mrs Opalsen tearfully. 'It's my
necklace I want. It was unique. No money could be the same.'
'I comprehend, madame,' said Poirot soothingly. 'I comprehend
perfectly. To la femme sentiment is everything - is it not so? But,
monsieur, who has not the so fine susceptibility, will doubtless find
some slight consolation in the fact.'
'Of course, of course,' said Mr Opalsen rather uncertainly. 'Still - '
He was interrupted by a shout of triumph from the inspector. He
came in dangling something from his fingers.
With a cry, Mrs Opalsen heaved herself up from her chair. She was
a changed woman.
'Oh, oh, my necklace!'
She clasped it to her breast with both hands. We crowded round.
'Where was it?' demanded Opalsen.
'Maid's bed. In among the springs of the wire mattress. She must
have stolen it and hidden it there before the chambermaid arrived
on the scene.'
'You permit, madame?' said Poirot gently. He took the necklace
from her and examined it closely; then handed it back with a bow.
'I'm afraid, madam, you'll have to hand it over to us for the time
being,' said the inspector. 'We shall want it for the charge. But it
shall be returned to you as soon as possible.'
Mr Opalsen frowned.
'Is that necessary?'
'I'm afraid so, sir. Just a formality.'
'Oh, let him take it, Ed!' cried his wife. 'I'd feel safer if he did. I
shouldn't sleep a wink thinking someone else might try and get hold
of it. That wretched girl! And I would never have believed it of her.'
'There, there, my dear, don't take on so.'
I felt a gentle pressure on my arm. It was Poirot.
'Shall we slip away, my friend? I think our services are no longer
needed.'
Once outside, however, he hesitated, and then, much to my
surprise, he remarked:
'I should rather like to see the room next door.'
The door was not locked, and we entered. The room, which was a
large double one, was unoccupied. Dust lay about rather
noticeably, and my sensitive friend gave a characteristic grimace
as he ran his finger round a rectangular mark on a table near the
window.
'The service leaves to be desired,' he observed dryly.
He was staring thoughtfully out of the window, and seemed to have
fallen into a brown study.
'Well?' I demanded impatiently. 'What did we come in here for?'
He started.
'Je vous demande pardon, mon ami. I wished to see if the door was
really bolted on this side also.'
'Well,' I said, glancing at the door which communicated with the
room we had just left, 'it is bolted.'
Poirot nodded. He still seemed to be thinking.
'And anyway,' I continued, 'what does it matter? The case is over. I
wish you'd had more chance of distinguishing yourself. But it was
the kind of case that even a stiff-backed idiot like that inspector
couldn't go wrong over.'
Poirot shook his head.
'The case is not over, my friend. It will not be over until we find out
who stole the pearls.'
'But the maid did!'
'Why do you say that? '
'Why,' I stammered, 'they were found - actually in her mattress.'
'Ta, ta, ta!' said Poirot impatiently. 'Those were not the pearls.'
'What?'
'Imitation, mon ami.'
The statement took my breath away. Poirot was smiling placidly.
'The good inspector obviously knows nothing of jewels. But
presently there will be a fine hullabaloo!'
'Come!' I cried, dragging at his arm.
'Where?'
'We must tell the Opalsens at once.'
'I think not.'
'But that poor woman - '
'Eh bien; that poor woman, as you call her, will have a much better
night believing the jewels to be safe.'
'But the thief may escape with them!'
'As usual, my friend, you speak without reflection. How do you
know that the pearls Mrs Opalsen locked up so carefully tonight
were not the false ones, and that the real robbery did not take place
at a much earlier date?'
'Oh! 'I said, bewildered.
'Exactly,' said Poirot, beaming. 'We start again.'
He led the way out of the room, paused a moment as though
considering, and then walked down to the end of the corridor,
stopping outside the small den where the chambermaids and valets
of the respective floors congregated. Our particular chambermaid
appeared to be holding a small court there, and to be retailing her
late experiences to an appreciative audience. She stopped in the
middle of a sentence. Poirot bowed with his usual politeness.
'Excuse that I derange you, but I shall be obliged if you will unlock
for me the door of Mr Opalsen's room.'
The woman rose willingly, and we accompanied her down the
passage again. Mr Opalsen's room was on the other side of the
corridor, its door facing that of his wife's room. The chambermaid
unlocked it with her pass-key, and we entered.
As she was about to depart Poirot detained her.
'One moment; have you ever seen among the effects of Mr Opalsen
a card like this?'
He held out a plain white card, rather highly glazed and uncommon
in appearance. The maid took it and scrutinized it carefully.
'No, sir, I can't say I have. But, anyway, the valet has most to do
with the gentlemen's rooms.'
'I see. Thank you.'
Poirot took back the card. The woman departed. Poirot appeared to
reflect a little. Then he gave a short, sharp nod of the head.
'Ring the bell, I pray of you, Hastings. Three times, for the valet.'
I obeyed, devoured with curiosity. Meanwhile Poirot had emptied
the waste-paper basket on the floor, and was swiftly going through
its contents.
In a few moments the valet answered the bell. To him Poirot put the
same question, and handed him the card to examine. But the
response was the same. The valet had never seen a card of that
particular quality among Mr Opalsen's belongings. Poirot thanked
him, and he withdrew, somewhat unwillingly, with an inquisitive
glance at the overturned waste-paper basket and the litter on the
floor. He could hardly have helped overhearing Poirot's thoughtful
remark as he bundled the torn papers back again:
'And the necklace was heavily insured ... '
'Poirot,' I cried, 'I see - '
'You see nothing, my friend,' he replied quickly. 'As usual, nothing
at all! It is incredible - but there it is. Let us return to our own
apartments.'
We did so in silence. Once there, to my intense surprise, Poirot
effected a rapid change of clothing.
'I go to London tonight,' he explained. 'It is imperative.'
'What?'
'Absolutely. The real work, that of the brain (ah, those brave little
grey cells), it is done. I go to seek the confirmation. I shall find it!
Impossible to deceive Hercule Poirot!'
'You'll come a cropper one of these days,' I observed, rather
disgusted by his vanity.
'Do not be enraged, I beg of you, mon ami. I count on you to do me a
service - of your friendship.'
'Of course,' I said eagerly, rather ashamed of my moroseness.
'What is it?'
'The sleeve of my coat that I have taken off - will you brush it? See
you, a little white powder has clung to it. You without doubt
observed me run my finger round the drawer of the dressing-table?'
'No, I didn't.'
'You should observe my actions, my friend. Thus I obtained the
powder on my finger, and, being a little overexcited, I rubbed it on
my sleeve; an action without method which I deplore - false to all my
principles.'
'But what was the powder?' I asked, not particularly interested in
Poirot's principles.
'Not the poison of the Borgias,' replied Poirot, with a twinkle. 'I see
your imagination mounting. I should say it was French chalk.'
'French chalk?'
'Yes, cabinet-makers use it to make drawers run smoothly.
I laughed.
'You old sinner! I thought you were working up to something
exciting.'
'Au revoir, my friend. I save myself. I fly!'
The door shut behind him. With a smile, half of derision, half of
affection, I picked up the coat and stretched out my hand for the
clothes brush.
II
The next morning, hearing nothing from Poirot, I went out for a
stroll, met some old friends, and lunched with them at their hotel. In
the afternoon we went for a spin. A punctured tyre delayed us, and
it was past eight when I got back to the Grand Metropolitan.
The first sight that met my eyes was Poirot, looking even more
diminutive than usual, sandwiched between the Opalsens, beaming
in a state of placid satisfaction.
'Mon ami Hastings!' he cried, and sprang to meet me. 'Embrace me,
my friend; all has marched to a marvel!'
Luckily, the embrace was merely figurative - not a thing one is
always sure of with Poirot.
'Do you mean - ' I began.
'Just wonderful, I call it!' said Mrs Opalsen, smiling all over her fat
face. 'Didn't I tell you, Ed, that if he couldn't get back my pearls
nobody would?'
'You did, my dear, you did. And you were right.'
I looked helplessly at Poirot, and he answered the glance.
'My friend Hastings is, as you say in England, all at the seaside.
Seat yourself, and I will recount to you all the affair that has so
happily ended.'
'Ended?'
'But yes. They are arrested.'
'Who are arrested?'
'The chambermaid and the valet, parbleu! You did not suspect? Not
with my parting hint about the French chalk?'
'You said cabinet-makers used it.'
'Certainly they do - to make drawers slide easily. Somebody wanted
that drawer to slide in and out without any noise. Who could that
be? Obviously, only the chambermaid. The plan was so ingenious
that it did not at once leap to the eye - not even to the eye of
Hercule Poirot.
'Listen, this was how it was done. The valet was in the empty room
next door, waiting. The French maid leaves the room. Quick as a
flash the chambermaid whips open the drawer, takes out the jewelcase
and, slipping back the bolt, passes it through the door. The
valet opens it at his leisure with the duplicate key with which he has
provided himself, extracts the necklace, and waits his time.
Célestine leaves the room again, and - pst! - in a flash the case is
passed back again and replaced in the drawer.
'Madame arrives, the theft is discovered. The chambermaid
demands to be searched, with a good deal of righteous indignation,
and leaves the room without a stain on her character. The imitation
necklace with which they have provided themselves has been
concealed in the French girl's bed that morning by the
chambermaid—a master stroke, ça!'
'But what did you go to London for?'
'You remember the card?'
'Certainly. It puzzled me - and puzzles me still. I thought - '
I hesitated delicately, glancing at Mr Opalsen.
Poirot laughed heartily.
'Une blague! For the benefit of the valet. The card was one with a
specially prepared surface - for fingerprints. I went straight to
Scotland Yard, asked for our old friend Inspector Japp, and laid the
facts before him. As I had suspected, the fingerprints proved to be
those of two well-known jewel thieves who have been "wanted" for
some time. Japp came down with me, the thieves were arrested,
and the necklace was discovered in the valet's possession. A clever
pair, but they failed in method. Have I not told you, Hastings, at
least thirty-six times, that without method - '
'At least thirty-six thousand times!' I interrupted. 'But where did
their "method" break down?'
'Mon ami, it is a good plan to take a place as chambermaid or valet -
but you must not shirk your work. They left an empty room
undusted; and therefore, when the man put down the jewel-case on
the little table near the communicating door, it left a square mark - '
'I remember,' I cried.
'Before, I was undecided. Then - I knew!'
There was a moment's silence.
'And I've got my pearls,' said Mrs Opalsen as a sort of Greek
chorus.
'Well,' I said, 'I'd better have some dinner.'
Poirot accompanied me.
'This ought to mean kudos for you,' I observed.
'Pas du tout,' replied Poirot tranquilly. 'Japp and the local inspector
will divide the credit between them. But' - he tapped his pocket - 'I
have a cheque here, from Mr Opalsen, and, how say you, my friend?
This weekend has not gone according to plan. Shall we return here
next weekend - at my expense this time?'