Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it;--
till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she
had rather be without a confidante.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter
as soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it
than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be
happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a
denial.
“Gracechurch street, Sept. 6.
“MY DEAR NIECE,
“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
morning to answering it, as I foresee that a LITTLE writing will not
comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by
your application; I did not expect it from YOU. Don't think me angry,
however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such
inquiries to be necessary on YOUR side.
“If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence.
Your uncle is as much surprised as I am--and nothing but the belief of
your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has
done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more
explicit.
“On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle
had a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with
him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was
not so dreadfully racked as YOUR'S seems to have been. He came to tell
Mr. Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham
were, and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham
repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only
one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting
for them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to
make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide
in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and
confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private
actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He called
it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil
which had been brought on by himself.
“If he HAD ANOTHER motive, I am sure it would never disgrace
him. He had been some days in town, before he was able to discover
them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than
WE had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his
resolving to follow us.
“There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago
governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some
cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a
large house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting
lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with
Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to
town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and
corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found.
Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and
had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken
up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the
wished-for direction. They were in ---- street. He saw Wickham, and
afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he
acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on
to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go.
“But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she
was. She cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she
would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be
married some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since
such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and
expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham,
he easily learnt had never been HIS design. He confessed himself
obliged to leave the regiment, on account of some debts of honour,
which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the illconsequences
of Lydia's flight on her own folly alone. He meant to
resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he
could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he did
not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on.
“Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once.
Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have
been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been
benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that
Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune
by marriage in some other country. Under such circumstances, however,
he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
“They met several times, for there was much to be discussed.
Wickham of course wanted more than he could get; but at length was
reduced to be reasonable.
“Every thing being settled between THEM, Mr. Darcy's next step
was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in
Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner
could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your
father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did
not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult
as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day
it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.
“On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at
home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.
“They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all
settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to
Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been
accused of many faults at different times, but THIS is the true one.
Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure
(and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your
uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
“They battled it together for a long time, which was more than
either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your
uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to
his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,
which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this
morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that
would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was
due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most.
“You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the
young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to
considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition
to her own settled upon HER, and his commission purchased. The
reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have
given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper
consideration, that Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and
consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps
there was some truth in THIS; though I doubt whether HIS reserve, or
ANYBODY'S reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of
all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that
your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for
ANOTHER INTEREST in the affair.
“When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends,
who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be
in London once more when the wedding took place, and all money
matters were then to receive the last finish.
“I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which
you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not afford
you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant
admission to the house. HE was exactly what he had been, when I knew
him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied
with her behaviour while she staid with us, if I had not perceived, by
Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was
exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you
no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner,
representing to her all the wickedness of what she had done, and all the
unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it was by
good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite
provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for
their sakes had patience with her.
“Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you,
attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave
town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me,
my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never
bold enough to say before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us
has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire.
His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a
little more liveliness, and THAT, if he marry PRUDENTLY, his wife
may teach him. I thought him very sly;--he hardly ever mentioned your
name. But slyness seems the fashion.
“Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not
punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy
till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little pair
of ponies, would be the very thing.
“But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me
this half hour.
“Yours, very sincerely,
“M. GARDINER.”
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty
had produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her
sister's match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of
goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be
just, from the pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest
extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken
on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research;
in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must
abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently
meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always
most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to
pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard
nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was
a hope shortly checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that
even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his
affection for her --for a woman who had already refused him--as able to
overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with
Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt
from the connection.
He had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how
much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no
extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he
had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it;
and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she
could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality for her might assist his
endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially
concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were
under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They
owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh!
how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever
encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For
herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a
cause of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of
himself. She read over her aunt's commendation of him again and again.
It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some
pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she
and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence
subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.
She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's
approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was
overtaken byWickham.
“I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?” said
he, as he joined her.
“You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not
follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.”
“I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends;
and now we are better.”
“True. Are the others coming out?”
“I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley.”
She replied in the affirmative.
“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too
much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you
saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always
very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”
“Yes, she did.”
“And what did she say?”
“That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had --not
turned out well. At such a distance as THAT, you know, things are
strangely misrepresented.”
“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:
“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each
other several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”
“Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,” said
Elizabeth. “It must be something particular, to take him there at this time
of year.”
“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I
thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had.”
“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”
“And do you like her?”
“Very much.”
“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within
this year or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am
very glad you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.”
“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”
“Did you go by the village of Kympton?”
“I do not recollect that we did.”
“I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A
most delightful place!--Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited
me in every respect.”
“How should you have liked making sermons?”
“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty,
and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to
repine;--but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The
quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas of
happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance, when you were in Kent?”
“I have heard from authority, which I thought AS GOOD, that it
was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”
“You have. Yes, there was something in THAT; I told you so from
the first, you may remember.”
“I DID hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was
not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly.”
“You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may
remember what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.”
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked
fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke
him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:
“Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not
let us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind.”
She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry,
Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that
he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had
said enough to keep him quiet.
The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet
was forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.
“Oh! my dear Lydia,” she cried, “when shall we meet again?”
“Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”
“Write to me very often, my dear.”
“As often as I can. But you know married women have never much
time for writing. My sisters may write to ME. They will have nothing
else to do.”
Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his
wife's. He smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.
“He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out
of the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to
us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”
The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several
days.
“I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting
with one's friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”
“This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a
daughter,” said Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your
other four are single.”
“It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is
married, but only because her husband's regiment happens to be so far
off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”
But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was
shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by
an article of news which then began to be in circulation. The
housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival
of her master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for
several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane,
and smiled and shook her head by turns.
“Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for Mrs.
Phillips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not that I
care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I
never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come
to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what MAY happen? But
that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to
mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?”
“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nicholls was
in Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on
purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true.
He comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday.
She was going to the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some
meat on Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be
killed.”
Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without
changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name
to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:
“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the
present report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don't imagine it
was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I
felt that I SHOULD be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not
affect me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he
comes alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid
of MYSELF, but I dread other people's remarks.”
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with
no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him
partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his
coming there WITH his friend's permission, or being bold enough to
come without it.
“Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man cannot
come to a house which he has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation! IWILL leave him to himself.”
In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive
that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more
unequal, than she had often seen them.
The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their
parents, about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.
“As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet,
“you will wait on him of course.”
“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised,
if I went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended
in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again.”
His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an
attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning
to Netherfield.
“'Tis an etiquette I despise,” said he. “If he wants our society, let
him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend my hours in
running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
again.”
“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not
wait on him. But, however, that shan't prevent my asking him to dine
here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings
soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room
at table for him.”
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
husband's incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before
THEY did. As the day of his arrival drew near:
“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. “It
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what
she says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!”
“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth;
“but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual
satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you
have always so much.”
Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of
servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of
anxiety and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She
counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be
sent; hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his
arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him, from her dressing-room window,
enter the paddock and ride towards the house.
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane
resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her
mother, went to the window--she looked,--she saw Mr. Darcy with him,
and sat down again by her sister.
“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it
be?”
“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do
not know.”
“La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be with
him before. Mr. what's-his-name. That tall, proud man.”
“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any
friend of Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else
I must say that I hate the very sight of him.”
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but
little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the
awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the
first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were
uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for
themselves; and their mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and
her resolution to be civil to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without
being heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness
which could not be suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had
courage to shew Mrs. Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own change of
sentiment towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose
proposals she had refused, and whose merit she had undervalued; but to
her own more extensive information, he was the person to whom the
whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she
regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as
reasonable and just as what Jane felt for Bingley.
Her astonishment at his coming--at his coming to Netherfield, to
Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what
she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in Derbyshire.
The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half
a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure.
“Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be early
enough for expectation.”
She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without
daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face
of her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the
gentlemen's appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat
down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often
command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked
serious, as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in
Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he
could not in her mother's presence be what he was before her uncle and
aunt. It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.
Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short
period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received
by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters
ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious
politeness of her curtsey and address to his friend.
Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the
latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable
infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction
so ill applied.
Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a
question which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely
anything. He was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his
silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her
friends, when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed
without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable
to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised he eyes to his face, she as
often found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no
object but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please,
than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed,
and angry with herself for being so.
“Could I expect it to be otherwise!” said she. “Yet why did he
come?”
She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself;
and to him she had hardly courage to speak.
She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.
“It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,” said Mrs.
Bennet. He readily agreed to it.
“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People
DID say you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but,
however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have happened in
the neighbourhood, since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and
settled. And one of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it;
indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The
Courier, I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only
said, 'Lately, George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without
there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or
anything. It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder
how he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations.
Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore,
she could not tell.
“It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well
married,” continued her mother, “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is
very hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay I
do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have
heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the regulars.
Thank Heaven! he has SOME friends, though perhaps not so many as he
deserves.”
Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such
misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her,
however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually
done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay
in the country at present. A few weeks, he believed.
“When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,” said her
mother, “I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on
Mr. Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the covies for you.”
Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had flattered
them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be hastening to
the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt that years of
happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such
painful confusion.
“The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to
be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either one
or the other again!”
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her
former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little; but
every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He
found her as handsome as she had been last year; as good natured, and as
unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
that she talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged,
that she did not always know when she was silent.
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of
her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days time.
“You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,” she added, “for
when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner
with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure
you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep
your engagement.”
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and
dine there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she
did not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a
man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and
pride of one who had ten thousand a year.
As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her
spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects
that must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and
vexed her.
“Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said
she, “did he come at all?”
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
“He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt,
when he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come
hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I
will think no more about him.”
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the
approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which
showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.
“Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again
by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be
publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and
indifferent acquaintance.”
“Yes, very indifferent indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh,
Jane, take care.”
“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger
now?”
“I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in
love with you as ever.”
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs.
Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes,
which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an
hour's visit, had revived.
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and
the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their
punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to
the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley
would take the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to
him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas,
forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed
to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it
was decided. He placed himself by her.
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend.
He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm.
His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as
showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than
formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's
happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared
not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from
observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits
could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost
as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her
mother.
She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either,
or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any
of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each
other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did.
Her mother's ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him
more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and she would, at times, have given
anything to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither
unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity
of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass
away without enabling them to enter into something more of
conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his
entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawingroom,
before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree
that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the
point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
“If he does not come to me, THEN,” said she, “I shall give him up
for ever.”
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would
have answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the
table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the
coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near
her which would admit of a chair.
And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of the girls moved closer
to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:
“The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none
of them; do we?”
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed
him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely
patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against
herself for being so silly!
“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish
enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who
would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the
same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!”
She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee
cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:
“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”
“Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.”
“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?”
“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to
Scarborough, these three weeks.”
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to
converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her,
however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's
whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.
When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the
ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him,
when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen
to supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.
“Well girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves,
“What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off
uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I
ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said they
never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we
had at the Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that
the partridges were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or
three French cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in
greater beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did
not. And what do you think she said besides? 'Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall
have her at Netherfield at last.'
“She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good a creature as ever
lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all
handsome: I like them prodigiously.”
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen
enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would
get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in
a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite
disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his
proposals.
“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth.
“The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I
hope we may often meet again.”
Elizabeth smiled.
“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies
me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I
am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing,
than any other man.”
“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile,
and are provoking me to it every moment.”
“How hard it is in some cases to be believed!”
“And how impossible in others!”
“But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?”
“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all
love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing.
Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your
confidante.”
A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.
“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.”
He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she
would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on
them.
“Can you come to-morrow?”
Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation
was accepted with alacrity.
He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of
them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter's room, in her dressing
gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:
“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr.
Bingley is come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah,
come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown.
Never mind Miss Lizzy's hair.”
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
- 361 -
“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say
Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour
ago.”
“Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be
quick!Where is your sash, my dear?”
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to
go down without one of her sisters.
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in
the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter mamma? What
do you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?”
“Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, “Come here, my love, I want to
speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at
Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her
entreaty that SHE would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet
half-opened the door and called out:
“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”
Elizabeth was forced to go.
“We may as well leave them by themselves you know;” said her
mother, as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to
sit in my dressing-room.”
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into
the drawing-room.
Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was
every thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her
daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable
addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged
officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a
forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the
daughter.
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he
went away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and
Mrs. Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her
husband.
After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word
passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to
bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr.
Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt
tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that
gentleman's concurrence.
Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet
spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much
more agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of
presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or
disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less
eccentric, than the other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned
with him to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was
again at work to get every body away from him and her daughter.
Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfast room for that
purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to
cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother's schemes.
But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was
finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that
her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she
perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if
engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the
faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each
other, would have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but
HER'S she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either;
and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who
as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
words to her sister, ran out of the room.
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence
would give pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with
the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.
“'Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it.
Oh! why is not everybody as happy?”
Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth,
a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said
for the present.
“I must go instantly to my mother;” she cried. “I would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! how shall I bear so much happiness!”
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken
up the card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and
ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so
many previous months of suspense and vexation.
“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend's anxious
circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the
happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!”
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference
with her father had been short and to the purpose.
“Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.
“With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare
say.”
He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good
wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily
expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship.
They shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister
came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness,
and of Jane's perfections; and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth
really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded,
because they had for basis the excellent understanding, and superexcellent
disposition of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste
between her and himself.
It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the
satisfaction of Miss Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation
to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and
smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not
give her consent or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to
satisfy her feelings, though she talked to Bingley of nothing else for half
an hour; and when Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and
manner plainly showed how really happy he was.
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned
to his daughter, and said:
“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.”
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness.
“You are a good girl;” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your doing
very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each
of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so easy, that
every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always
exceed your income.”
“I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters
would be unpardonable in me.”
“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what
are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very
likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I
am so happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how
it would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that
you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!”
Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition
her favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense.
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at
Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining
till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not
be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he
thought himself obliged to accept.
Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister;
for while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone
else; but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those
hours of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane,
he always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means
of relief.
“He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me
that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not
believed it possible.”
“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account
for it?”
“It must have been his sister's doing. They were certainly no
friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he
might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects.
“But when they see, as I trust they will, that their brother is happy
with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms
again; though we can never be what we once were to each other.”
“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the
dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard.”
“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last
November, he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of MY
being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!”
“He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty.”
This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence,
and the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was
pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend;
for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world,
she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.
“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried
Jane. “Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all! If I could but see YOU as happy! If there WERE but
such another man for you!”
“If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy
as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have
your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have
very good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”
The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long
a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips, and
she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton.
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in
the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run
away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.
One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane
had been formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting
together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the
window, by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four
driving up the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and
besides, the equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours.
The horses were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the
servant who preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain,
however, that somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on
Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk
away with him into the shrubbery.
They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open
and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious,
made no other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of
the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned
her name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.
Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of
such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After
sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,
“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother.”
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
“And THAT I suppose is one of your sisters.”
“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady
Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately
married, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a
young man who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.”
“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine after a
short silence.
“It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I
assure you it is much larger than SirWilliam Lucas's.”
“This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in
summer; the windows are full west.”
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and
then added:
“May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left
Mr. and Mrs. Collins well.”
“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her
from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling.
But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,
“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little
wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it,
if you will favour me with your company.”
“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the hall,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawingroom,
and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent looking
rooms, walked on.
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel
walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort
for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent
and disagreeable.
“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she
looked in her face.
As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the
following manner:--
“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of
my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you
why I come.”
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
“Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to
account for the honour of seeing you here.”
“Miss Bennet,” replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought
to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere YOU
may choose to be, you shall not find ME so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such moment
as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming
nature reached me two days ago. I was told that not only your sister was
on the point of being most advantageously married, but that you, that
Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards
united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I KNOW it
must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him so much
as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off
for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”
“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of
coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?”
“At once to insist upon having such a report universally
contradicted.”
“Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said
Elizabeth coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a
report is in existence.”
“If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?”
“I never heard that it was.”
“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?”
“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
You may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.”
“This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied.
Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”
“Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.” “It ought to be
so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But your arts and
allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what
he owes to himself and to all his family. You may have drawn him in.”
“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”
“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been
accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he
has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”
“But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as
this, ever induce me to be explicit.”
“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is
engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?”
“Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he
will make an offer to me.”
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:
“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their
infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite
wish of HIS mother, as well as of her's. While in their cradles, we
planned the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both
sisters would be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a
young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and
wholly unallied to the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his
friends? To his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to
every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that
from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”
“Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is
no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be
kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry
Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by
honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”
“Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes,
Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be
censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your
alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by
any of us.”
“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife of
Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness
necessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole,
have no cause to repine.”
“Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your
gratitude for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on
that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I
came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor
will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any
person's whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking
disappointment.”
“THAT will make your ladyship's situation at present more
pitiable; but it will have no effect on me.”
“I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient--though untitled--families. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid.
“They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of
their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart
pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune.
Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible
of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you
have been brought up.”
“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting
that sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we
are equal.”
“True. You ARE a gentleman's daughter. But who was your
mother? Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of
their condition.”
“Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your
nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to YOU.”
“Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?”
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging
Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after
a moment's deliberation:
“I am not.”
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
“And will you promise me, never to enter into such an
engagement?”
“I will make no promise of the kind.”
“Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a
more reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief
that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require.”
“And I certainly NEVER shall give it. I am not to be intimidated
into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to
marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise
make their marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached
to me, would my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it
on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with
which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken
my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as
these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his
affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself
in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the
subject.”
“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am no
stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous elopement.
I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a patched-up
business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is such a girl to
be my nephew's sister?
“Is her husband, is the son of his late father's steward, to be his
brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are you thinking? Are the shades of
Pemberley to be thus polluted?”
“You can now have nothing further to say,” she resentfully
answered. “You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg
to return to the house.”
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they
turned back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.
“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my
nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection
with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”
“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my
sentiments.”
“You are then resolved to have him?”
“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that
manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness,
without reference to YOU, or to any person so wholly unconnected with
me.”
“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”
“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “have
any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to
the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the
former WERE excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one
moment's concern--and the world in general would have too much sense
to join in the scorn.” “And this is your real opinion! This is your final
resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss
Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I
hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my
point.”
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door
of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, “I take no leave
of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You
deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
“She did not choose it,” said her daughter, “she would go.”
“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was
prodigiously civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses
were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing
through Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she
had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”
Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.
The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till
she recollected that HIS being the intimate friend of Bingley, and HER
being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of
one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She
had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring
them more frequently together.
And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their
communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had
reached lady Catherine), had only set that down as almost certain and
immediate, which she had looked forward to as possible at some future
time.
In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not
help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her
persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution
to prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate
an application to her nephew; and how HE might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
