The Case of the Missing Will
The problem presented to us by Miss Violet Marsh made rather a
pleasant change from our usual routine work. Poirot had received a
brisk and businesslike note from the lady asking for an
appointment, and he had replied asking her to call upon him at
eleven o'clock the following day.
She arrived punctually - a tall, handsome young woman, plainly but
neatly dressed, with an assured and business-like manner. Clearly
a young woman who meant to get on in the world. I am not a great
admirer of the so-called New Woman myself, and, in spite of her
good looks, I was not particularly prepossessed in her favour.
'My business is of a somewhat unusual nature, Monsieur Poirot,'
she began, after she had accepted a chair. 'I had better begin at the
beginning and tell you the whole story.'
'If you please, mademoiselle.'
'I am an orphan. My father was one of two brothers, sons of a small
yeoman farmer in Devonshire. The farm was a poor one, and the
elder brother, Andrew, emigrated to Australia, where he did very
well indeed, and by means of successful speculation in land
became a very rich man. The younger brother, Roger (my father),
had no leanings towards the agricultural life. He managed to
educate himself a little, and obtained a post as a clerk with a small
firm. He married slightly above him; my mother was the daughter of
a poor artist. My father died when I was six years old. When I was
fourteen, my mother followed him to the grave. My only living
relation then was my Uncle Andrew, who had recently returned
from Australia and bought a small place, Crabtree Manor, in his
native county. He was exceedingly kind to his brother's orphan
child, took me to live with him, and treated me in every way as
though I was his own daughter.
'Crabtree Manor, in spite of its name, is really only an old
farmhouse. Farming was in my uncle's blood, and he was intensely
interested in various modern farming experiments. Although
kindness itself to me, he had certain peculiar and deeply-rooted
ideas as to the upbringing of women. Himself a man of little or no
education, though possessing remarkable shrewdness, he placed
little value on what he called "book knowledge". He was especially
opposed to the education of women. In his opinion, girls should
learn practical housework and dairy-work, be useful about the
home, and have as little to do with book learning as possible. He
proposed to bring me up on these lines, to my bitter disappointment
and annoyance. I rebelled frankly. I knew that I possessed a good
brain, and had absolutely no talent for domestic duties. My uncle
and I had many bitter arguments on the subject, for, though much
attached to each other, we were both self-willed. I was lucky
enough to win a scholarship, and up to a certain point was
successful in getting my own way. The crisis arose when I resolved
to go to Girton. I had a little money of my own, left me by my mother,
and I was quite determined to make the best use of the gifts God
had given me. I had one long final argument with my uncle. He put
the facts plainly before me. He had no other relations, and he had
intended me to be his sole heiress. As I have told you, he was a very
rich man. If I persisted in these "new-fangled notions" of mine,
however, I need look for nothing from him. I remained polite, but
firm. I should always be deeply attached to him, I told him, but I
must lead my own life. We parted on that note. "You fancy your
brains, my girl," were his last words. "I've no book learning, but, for
all that, I'll pit mine against yours any day. We'll see what we shall
see."'
'That was nine years ago. I have stayed with him for a week-end
occasionally, and our relations were perfectly amicable, though his
views remained unaltered. He never referred to my having
matriculated, nor to my BSc. For the last three years his health had
been failing, and a month ago he died.
'I am now coming to the point of my visit. My uncle left a most
extraordinary will. By its terms, Crabtree Manor and its contents
are to be at my disposal for a year from his death - "during which
time my clever niece may prove her wits", the actual words run. At
the end of that period, "my wits having proved better than hers",
the house and all my uncle's large fortune pass to various
charitable institutions.'
'That is a little hard on you, mademoiselle, seeing that you were Mr
Marsh's only blood relation.'
'I do not look on it in that way. Uncle Andrew warned me fairly, and I
chose my own path. Since I would not fall in with his wishes, he was
at perfect liberty to leave his money to whom he pleased.'
'Was the will drawn up by a lawyer?'
'No; it was written on a printed will-form and witnessed by the man
and his wife who live in the house and do for my uncle.'
'There might be a possibility of upsetting such a will?'
'I would not even attempt to do such a thing.'
'You regard it, then, as a sporting challenge on the part of your
uncle?'
'That is exactly how I look upon it.'
'It bears that interpretation, certainly,' said Poirot thoughtfully.
'Somewhere in this rambling old manor-house your uncle has
concealed either a sum of money in notes or possibly a second will,
and has given you a year in which to exercise your ingenuity to find
it.'
'Exactly, Monsieur Poirot; and I am paying you the compliment of
assuming that your ingenuity will be greater than mine.'
'Eh, eh! but that is very charming of you. My grey cells are at your
disposal. You have made no search yourself?'
'Only a cursory one; but I have too much respect for my uncle's
undoubted abilities to fancy that the task will be an easy one.'
'Have you the will or a copy of it with you?'
Miss Marsh handed a document across the table. Poirot ran
through it, nodding to himself.
'Made three years ago. Dated March 25; and the time is given also -
11 A.M.- that is very suggestive. It narrows the field of search.
Assuredly it is another will we have to seek for. A will made even
half an hour later would upset this. Eh bien, mademoiselle, it is a
problem charming and ingenious that you have presented to me
here. I shall have all the pleasure in the world in solving it for you.
Granted that your uncle was a man of ability, his grey cells cannot
have been of the quality of Hercule Poirot's!'
(Really, Poirot's vanity is blatant!)
'Fortunately, I have nothing of moment on hand at the minute.
Hastings and I will go down to Crabtree Manor to-night. The man
and wife who attended on your uncle are still there, I presume?'
'Yes, their name is Baker.'
II
The following morning saw us started on the hunt proper. We had
arrived late the night before. Mr and Mrs Baker, having received a
telegram from Miss Marsh, were expecting us. They were a
pleasant couple, the man gnarled and pink-cheeked, like a
shrivelled pippin, and his wife a woman of vast proportions and true
Devonshire calm.
Tired with our journey and the eight-mile drive from the station, we
had retired at once to bed after a supper of roast chicken, apple
pie, and Devonshire cream. We had now disposed of an excellent
breakfast, and were sitting in a small panelled room which had
been the late Mr Marsh's study and living-room. A roll-top desk
stuffed with papers, all neatly docketed, stood against the wall, and
a big leather armchair showed plainly that it had been its owner's
constant resting-place. A big chintz-covered settee ran along the
opposite wall, and the deep low window seats were covered with
the same faded chintz of an old-fashioned pattern.
'Eh bien, mon ami,' said Poirot, lighting one of his tiny cigarettes,
'we must map out our plan of campaign. Already I have made a
rough survey of the house, but I am of opinion that any clue will be
found in this room. We shall have to go through the documents in
the desk with meticulous care. Naturally, I do not expect to find the
will amongst them; but it is likely that some apparently innocent
paper may conceal the clue to its hiding-place. But first we must
have a little information. Ring the bell, I pray of you.'
I did so. While we were waiting for it to be answered, Poirot walked
up and down, looking about him approvingly.
'A man of method this Mr Marsh. See how neatly the packets of
papers are docketed; then the key to each drawer has its ivory
label - so has the key of the china cabinet on the wall; and see with
what precision the china within is arranged. It rejoices the heart.
Nothing here offends the eye - '
He came to an abrupt pause, as his eye was caught by the key of
the desk itself, to which a dirty envelope was affixed. Poirot
frowned at it and withdrew it from the lock. On it were scrawled the
words: 'Key of Roll Top Desk,' in a crabbed handwriting, quite
unlike the neat superscriptions on the other keys.
'An alien note,' said Poirot, frowning. 'I could swear that here we
have no longer the personality of Mr Marsh. But who else has been
in the house? Only Miss Marsh, and she, if I mistake not, is also a
young lady of method and order.'
Baker came in answer to the bell.
'Will you fetch madame your wife, and answer a few questions?'
Baker departed, and in a few moments returned with Mrs Baker,
wiping her hands on her apron and beaming all over her face.
In a few clear words Poirot set forth the object of his mission. The
Bakers were immediately sympathetic.
'Us don't want to see Miss Violet done out of what's hers,' declared
the woman. 'Cruel hard 'twould be for hospitals to get it all.'
Poirot proceeded with his questions. Yes, Mr and Mrs Baker
remembered perfectly witnessing the will. Baker had previously
been sent into the neighbouring town to get two printed will-forms.
'Two?' said Poirot sharply.
'Yes, sir, for safety like, I suppose, in case he should spoil one - and
sure enough, so he did do. Us had signed one - '
'What time of day was that?'
Baker scratched his head, but his wife was quicker.
'Why, to be sure, I'd just put the milk on for the cocoa at eleven.
Don't ee remember? It had all boiled over on the stove when us got
back to kitchen.'
'And afterwards?'
''Twould be about an hour later. Us had to go in again. "I’ve made a
mistake," says old master, "had to tear the whole thing up. I'll
trouble you to sign again," and us did. And afterwards master give
us a tidy sum of money each. "I've left you nothing in my will," says
he, "but each year I live you'll have this to be a nest-egg when I'm
gone": and sure enough, so he did.'
Poirot reflected.
'After you had signed the second time, what did Mr Marsh do? Do
you know?'
'Went out to the village to pay tradesmen's books.'
That did not seem very promising. Poirot tried another tack. He
held out the key of the desk.
'Is that your master's writing?'
I may have imagined it, but I fancied that a moment or two elapsed
before Baker replied: 'Yes, sir, it is.'
'He's lying,' I thought. 'But why?'
'Has your master let the house? - have there been any strangers in
it during the last three years?'
'No, sir.'
'No visitors?'
'Only Miss Violet.'
'No strangers of any kind been inside this room?'
'No, sir.'
'You forget the workmen, Jim,' his wife reminded him.
'Workmen?' Poirot wheeled round on her. 'What workmen?'
The woman explained that about two years and a half ago workmen
had been in the house to do certain repairs. She was quite vague as
to what the repairs were. Her view seemed to be that the whole
thing was a fad of her master's and quite unnecessary. Part of the
time the workmen had been in the study, but what they had done
there she could not say, as her master had not let either of them
into the room whilst the work was in progress. Unfortunately, they
could not remember the name of the firm employed, beyond the fact
that it was a Plymouth one.
'We progress, Hastings,' said Poirot, rubbing his hands as the
Bakers left the room. 'Clearly he made a second will and then had
workmen from Plymouth in to make a suitable hiding-place. Instead
of wasting time taking up the floor and tapping the walls, we will go
to Plymouth.'
With a little trouble, we were able to get the information we wanted.
After one or two essays we found the firm employed by Mr Marsh.
Their employees had all been with them many years, and it was
easy to find the two men who had worked under Mr Marsh's orders.
They remembered the job perfectly. Amongst various other minor
jobs, they had taken up one of the bricks of the old-fashioned
fireplace, made a cavity beneath, and so cut the brick that it was
impossible to see the join. By pressing on the second brick from the
end, the whole thing was raised. It had been quite a complicated
piece of work, and the old gentleman had been very fussy about it.
Our informant was a man called Coghan, a big, gaunt man with a
grizzled moustache. He seemed an intelligent fellow.
We returned to Crabtree Manor in high spirits, and, locking the
study door, proceeded to put our newly acquired knowledge into
effect. It was impossible to see any sign on the bricks, but when we
pressed in the manner indicated, a deep cavity was at once
disclosed.
Eagerly Poirot plunged in his hand. Suddenly his face fell from
complacent elation to consternation. All he held was a charred
fragment of stiff paper. But for it, the cavity was empty.
'Sacré!' cried Poirot angrily. 'Someone has been before us.'
We examined the scrap of paper anxiously. Clearly it was a
fragment of what we sought. A portion of Baker's signature
remained, but no indication of what the terms of the will had been.
Poirot sat back on his heels. His expression would have been
comical if we had not been so overcome. 'I understand it not,' he
growled. 'Who destroyed this? And what was their object?'
'The Bakers?' I suggested.
'Pourquoi? Neither will makes any provision for them, and they are
more likely to be kept on with Miss Marsh than if the place became
the property of a hospital. How could it be to anyone's advantage to
destroy the will? The hospitals benefit - yes; but one cannot suspect
institutions.'
'Perhaps the old man changed his mind and destroyed it himself,' I
suggested.
Poirot rose to his feet, dusting his knees with his usual care.
'That may be,' he admitted. 'One of your more sensible
observations, Hastings. Well, we can do no more here. We have
done all that mortal man can do. We have successfully pitted our
wits against the late Andrew Marsh's; but, unfortunately, his niece
is no better off for our success.'
By driving to the station at once, we were just able to catch a train
to London, though not the principal express. Poirot was sad and
dissatisfied. For my part, I was tired and dozed in a corner.
Suddenly, as we were just moving out of Taunton, Poirot uttered a
piercing squeal.
'Vite, Hastings! Awake and jump! But jump I say!'
Before I knew where I was we were standing on the platform,
bareheaded and minus our valises, whilst the train disappeared
into the night. I was furious. But Poirot paid no attention.
'Imbecile that I have been!' he cried. 'Triple imbecile! Not again will
I vaunt my little grey cells!'
'That's a good job at any rate,' I said grumpily. 'But what is this all
about?'
As usual, when following out his own ideas, Poirot paid absolutely
no attention to me.
'The tradesmen's books - I have left them entirely out of account!
Yes, but where? Where? Never mind, I cannot be mistaken. We
must return at once.'
Easier said than done. We managed to get a slow train to Exeter,
and there Poirot hired a car. We arrived back at Crabtree Manor in
the small hours of the morning. I pass over the bewilderment of the
Bakers when we had at last aroused them. Paying no attention to
anybody, Poirot strode at once to the study.
'I have been, not a triple imbecile, but thirty-six times one, my
friend,' he deigned to remark. 'Now, behold!'
Going straight to the desk he drew out the key, and detached the
envelope from it. I stared at him stupidly. How could he possibly
hope to find a big will-form in that tiny envelope? With great care he
cut open the envelope, laying it out flat. Then he lighted the fire and
held the plain inside surface of the envelope to the flame. In a few
minutes faint characters began to appear.
'Look, mon ami!' cried Poirot in triumph.
I looked. There were just a few lines of faint writing stating briefly
that he left everything to his niece, Violet Marsh. It was dated March
25, 12.30 P.M., and witnessed by Albert Pike, confectioner, and
Jessie Pike, married woman.
'But is it legal?' I gasped.
'As far as I know, there is no law against writing your will in a blend
of disappearing and sympathetic ink. The intention of the testator is
clear, and the beneficiary is his only living relation. But the
cleverness of him! He foresaw every step that a searcher would
take - that I, miserable imbecile, took. He gets two will-forms,
makes the servants sign twice, then sallies out with his will written
on the inside of a dirty envelope and a fountain-pen containing his
little ink mixture. On some excuse he gets the confectioner and his
wife to sign their names under his own signature, then he ties it to
the key of his desk and chuckles to himself. If his niece sees
through his little ruse, she will have justified her choice of life and
elaborate education, and be thoroughly welcome to his money.'
'She didn't see through it, did she?' I said slowly. 'It seems rather
unfair. The old man really won.'
'But no, Hastings. It is your wits that go astray. Miss Marsh proved
the astuteness of her wits and the value of the higher education for
women by at once putting the matter in my hands. Always employ
the expert. She has amply proved her right to the money.'
I wonder - I very much wonder - what old Andrew Marsh would have
thought!
Contents
A Fairy in the Flat
A Pot of Tea
The Affair of the Pink Pearl
The Affair of the Sinister Stranger
Finessing the King
The Gentleman Dressed in Newspaper
The Case of the Missing Lady
Blindman's Bluff
The Man in the Mist
The Crackler
The Sunningdale Mystery
The House of the Lurking Death
The Unbreorble Alibi
The Clergyman's Daughter
The Red House
The Ambassador's Boots
The Man Who Was Number 16
1. A FAIRY IN THE FLAT
Mrs. Thomas Beresford shifted her position on the divan and looked
gloomily out of the window of the flat. The prospect was not an
extended one, consisting solely of a small block of flats on the other
side of the road. Mrs. Beresford sighed and then yawned.
"I wish," she said, "something would happen."
Her husband looked up reprovingly.
"Be careful, Tuppence, this craving for vulgar sensation alarms me."
Tuppence sighed and closed her eyes dreamily.
"So Tommy and Tuppence were married," she chanted, "and lived
happily ever afterwards. And six years later they were still living
together happily ever afterwards. It is extraordinary," she said, "how
different everything always is from what you think it is going to be."
"A very profound statement, Tuppence. But not original. Eminent
poets and still more eminent divines have said it before-and, if you will
excuse me saying so, have said it better."
"Six years ago," continued Tuppence, "I would have sworn that with
sufficient money to buy things with, and with you for a husband, all life
would have been one grand sweet song, as one of the poets you seem
to know so much about puts it."
"Is it me or the money that palls upon you?" inquired Tommy coldly.
"Palls isn't exactly the word," said Tuppence kindly. "I'm used to my
blessings, that's all. Just as one never thinks what a boon it is to be
able to breathe through one's nose until one has a cold in the head."
"Shall I neglect you a little?" suggested Tommy. "Take other women
about to night clubs. That sort of thing."
"Useless," said Tuppence. "You would only meet me there with other
men. And I should know perfectly well that you didn't care for the other
women, whereas you would never be quite sure that I didn't care for
the other men. Women are so much more thorough."
"It's only in modesty that men score top marks," murmured her
husband. "But what is the matter with you, Tuppence? Why this
yearning discontent?"
"I don't know. I want things to happen. Exciting things. Wouldn't you
like to go chasing German spies again, Tommy? Think of the wild days
of peril we went through once. Of course I know you're more or less in
the Secret Service now, but it's pure office work."
"You mean you'd like them to send me into darkest Russia disguised as
a Bolshevik bootlegger, or something of that
"That wouldn't be any good," said Tuppence. "They wouldn't let me go
with you and I'm the person who wants something to do so badly.
Something to do. That is what I keep saying all day long."
"Woman's sphere," suggested Tommy waving his hand.
"Twenty minutes' work after breakfast every morning keeps the flat
going to perfection. You have nothing to complain of, have you?"
"Your housekeeping is so perfect, Tuppence, as to be almost
monotonous."
"I do like gratitude," said Tuppence.
"You, of course, have got your work," she continued, "but tell me,
Tommy, don't you ever have a secret yearning for excitement, for
things to happen?"
"No," said Tommy, "at least I don't think so. It is all very well to want
things to happen-they might not be pleasant things."
"How prudent men are," sighed Tuppence. "Don't you ever have a wild
secret yearning for romance-adventure- life?"
"What have you been reading, Tuppence?" asked Tommy.
"Think how exciting it would be," went on Tuppence, "if we heard a
wild rapping at the door and went to open it and in staggered a dead
man."
"If he was dead he couldn't stagger," said Tommy critically.
"You know what I mean," said Tuppence. "They always stagger in just
before they die and fall at your feet just gasping out a few enigmatic
words. 'The Spotted Leopard' or something like that."
"I advise a course of Schopenhauer or Emmanuel Kant," said Tommy.
"That sort of thing would be good for you," said Tuppence. "You are
getting fat and comfortable."
"I am not," said Tommy indignantly. "Anyway, you do slimming
exercises yourself."
"Everybody does," said Tuppence. "When I said you were getting fat I
was really speaking metaphorically, you are getting prosperous and
sleek and comfortable."
"I don't know what has come over you," said her husband.
"The spirit of adventure," murmured Tuppence. "It is better than a
longing for romance anyway. I have that sometimes, too. I think of
meeting a man, a really handsome man-"
"You have met me," said Tommy. "Isn't that enough for you?"
"A brown lean man, terrifically strong, the kind of man who can ride
anything and lassoos wild horses-"
"Complete with sheepskin trousers and a cowboy hat," interpolated
Tommy sarcastically.
"-and has lived in the Wilds," continued Tuppence.
"I should like him to fall simply madly in love with me. I should, of
course, rebuff him virtuously and be true to my marriage vows but my
heart would secretly go out to him."
"Well," said Tommy, "I often wish that I may meet a really beautiful girl.
A girl with corn-colored hair who will fall desperately in love with me.
Only I don't think I rebuff her-in fact I am quite sure I don't."
"That," said Tuppence, "is naughty temper."
"What," said Tommy, "is really the matter with you, Tuppence? You
have never talked like this before."
"No, but I have been boiling up inside for a long time," said Tuppence.
"You see it is very dangerous to have everything you want-including
enough money to buy things. Of course there are always hats."
"You have got about forty hats already," said Tommy “and they all look
alike."
"Hats are like that," said Tuppence. "They are not really alike. There
are nuances in them. I saw rather a nice one in Violette's this
morning."
"If you haven't anything better to do than going on buying hats you
don't need-"
"That's it," said Tuppence. "That's exactly it. If I had something better
to do. I suppose I ought to take up good works. Oh, Tommy, I do wish
something exciting would happen. I feel-I really do feel it would be
good for us. If we could find a fairy-"
"Ah!" said Tommy. "It is curious your saying that."
He got up and crossed the room. Opening a drawer of the writing table
he took out a small snapshot print and brought it to Tuppence.
"Oh!" said Tuppence, "So you have got them developed. Which is this,
the one you took of this room or the one I took?"
"The one I took. Yours didn't come out. You under exposed it. You
always do."
"It is nice for you," said Tuppence, "to think that there is one thing you
can do better than me."
"A foolish remark," said Tommy, "but I will let it pass for the moment.
What I wanted to show you was this."
He pointed to a small white speck on the photograph.
“That is a scratch on the film," said Tuppence.
"Not at all," said Tommy. "That, Tuppence, is a fairy."
"Tommy, you idiot."
"Look for yourself."
He handed her a magnifying glass. Tuppence studied the print
attentively through it. Seen thus by a slight stretch of fancy the scratch
on the film could be imagined to represent a small winged creature
perched on the fender
"It has got wings!" cried Tuppence. "What fun, a real live fairy in our
flat. Shall we write to Conan Doyle about it? Oh, Tommy. Do you think
she'll give us wishes?"
"You will soon know," said Tommy. "You have been wishing hard
enough for something to happen all the afternoon."
At that minute the door opened, and a tall lad of fifteen who seemed
undecided as to whether he was a footman or a page boy inquired in a
truly magnificent manner:
"Are you at Home, Madam? The front door bell has just rung."
"I wish Albert wouldn't go to the Pictures," sighed Tuppence after she
had signified her assent, and Albert had withdrawn. "He's copying a
Long Island butler now. Thank goodness I've cured him of asking for
people's cards and bringing them to me on a salver."
The door opened again, and Albert announced: "Mr. Carter," much as
though it were a Royal title.
"The Chief," muttered Tommy, in great surprise.
Tuppence jumped up with a glad exclamation, and greeted a tall grayhaired
man with piercing eyes and a tired smile.
"Mr. Carter, I am glad to see you."
"That's good, Mrs. Tommy. Now answer me a question. How's life
generally?"
"Satisfactory, but dull," replied Tuppence with a twinkle.
"Better and better," said Mr. Carter. "I'm evidently going to find you in
the right mood."
"This," said Tuppence, "sounds exciting."
Albert, still copying the Long Island butler, brought in tea. When this
operation was completed without mishap and the door had closed
behind him Tuppence burst out once more.
"You did mean something, didn't you Mr. Carter? Are you going to send
us on a mission into darkest Russia?"
"Not exactly that," said Mr. Carter.
"But there is something."
"Yes-there is something. I don't think you are the kind who shrinks
from risks, are you, Mrs. Tommy?"
Tuppence's eyes sparkled with excitement.
"There is certain work to be done for the Department-and I fancied-I
just fancied-that it might suit you two."
"Go on," said Tuppence.
"I see that you take the Daily Leader," continued Mr. Carter, picking up
that journal from the table.
He turned to the advertisement column and indicating a certain
advertisement with his finger pushed the paper across to Tommy.
"Read that out," he said.
Tommy complied.
"The International Detective Agency. Theodore Blunt, Manager.
Private Inquiries. Large staff of confidential and highly skilled Inquiry
Agents. Utmost discretion. Consultations free. 118 Haleham St. W.C."
He looked inquiringly at Mr. Carter. The latter nodded.
"That detective agency has been on its last legs for some time," he
murmured. "Friend of mine acquired it for a mere song. We're thinking
of setting it going again-say, for a six months' trial. And during that
time, of course, it will have to have a Manager."
"What about Mr. Theodore Blunt?" asked Tommy.
"Mr. Blunt has been rather indiscreet, I'm afraid. In fact, Scotland Yard
have had to interfere. Mr. Blunt is being detained at His Majesty's
expense, and he won't tell us half of what we'd like to know."
"I see, sir," said Tommy. "At least, I think I see."
"I suggest that you have six months' leave from the office. III health.
And of course if you like to run a detective agency under the name of
Theodore Blunt, it's nothing to do with me."
Tommy eyed his Chief steadily.
"Any instructions, sir?"
"Mr. Blunt did some foreign business, I believe. Look out for blue
letters with a Russian stamp on them. From a ham merchant anxious to
find his wife who came as a Refugee to this country some years ago.
Moisten the stamp and you'll find the number 16 written underneath.
Make a copy of these letters and send the originals on to me. Also if
anyone comes to the office and makes a reference to the number 16,
inform me immediately."
"I understand, sir," said Tommy. "And apart from these instructions?"
Mr. Carter picked up his gloves from the table and prepared to depart.
"You can run the Agency as you please. I fancied-" his eyes twinkled a
little-"that it might amuse Mrs. Tommy to try her hand at a little
detective work."
2. A POT OF TEA
Mr. and Mrs. Beresford took possession of the offices of the
International Detective Agency a few days later. They were on the
second floor of a somewhat dilapidated building in Bloomsbury. In the
small outer office, Albert relinquished the role of a Long Island butler,
and took up that of office boy, a part which he played to perfection. A
paper bag of sweets, inky hands, and a tousled head was his
conception of the character.
From the outer office, two doors led into inner offices. On one door
was painted the legend "Clerks." On the other "Private." Behind the
latter was a small comfortable room furnished with an immense
business like desk, a lot of artistically labeled files, all empty, and
some solid leather-seated chairs. Behind the desk sat the pseudo Mr.
Blunt trying to look as though he had run a detective agency all his life.
A telephone, of course, stood at his elbow. Tuppence and he had
rehearsed several good telephone effects, and Albert also had his
instructions.
In the adjoining room was Tuppence, a typewriter, the necessary
tables and chairs of an inferior type to those in the room of the great
Chief, and a gas ring for making tea.
Nothing was wanting, in fact, save clients.
Tuppence, in the first ecstasies of initiation, had a few bright hopes.
"It will be too marvelous," she declared. "We will hunt down
murderers, and discover the missing family jewels, and find people
who've disappeared and detect embezzlers."
At this point Tommy felt it his duty to strike a more discouraging note.
"Calm yourself, Tuppence, and try and forget the cheap fiction you are
in the habit of reading. Our clientele, if we have any clientele at all-will
consist solely of husbands who want their wives shadowed, and wives
who want their husbands shadowed. Evidence for divorce is the sole
prop of private inquiry agents."
"Ugh!" said Tuppence wrinkling a fastidious nose. "We shan't touch
divorce cases. We must raise the tone of our new profession."
"Ye-es," said Tommy doubtfully.
And now a week after installation they compare notes rather ruefully.
"Three idiotic women whose husbands go away for weekends," sighed
Tommy. "Anyone come whilst I was out at lunch?"
"A fat old man with a flighty wife," sighed Tuppence sadly. "I've read in
the papers for years that the divorce evil was growing, but somehow I
never seemed to realize it until this last week. I'm sick and tired of
saying 'We don't undertake divorce cases.' "
"We've put it in the advertisements now," Tommy reminded her. "So it
won't be so bad."
"I'm sure we advertise in the most tempting way too," said Tuppence,
in a melancholy voice. "All the same, I'm not going to be beaten. If
necessary, I shall commit a crime myself, and you will detect it."
"And what good would that do? Think of my feelings when I bid you a
tender farewell at Bow Street-or is it Vine Street?"
"You are thinking of your bachelor days," said Tuppence pointedly.
"The Old Bailey, that is what I mean," said Tommy.
"Well," said Tuppence, "something has got to be done about it. Here
we are bursting with talent and no chance of exercising it."
"I always like your cheery optimism, Tuppence. You seem to have no
doubt whatever that you have talent to exercise."
"Of course," said Tuppence opening her eyes very wide.
"And yet you have no expert knowledge whatever."
"Well, I have read every detective novel that has been published in the
last ten years."
"So have I," said Tommy, "but I have a sort of feeling that that wouldn't
really help us much."
"You always were a pessimist, Tommy. Belief in oneself-that is the
great thing."
"Well, you have got it all right," said her husband.
"Of course it is all right in detective stories," said Tuppence
thoughtfully, "because one works backwards. I mean if one knows the
solution one can arrange the clues. I wonder now-"
She paused, wrinkling her brows.
"Yes?" said Tommy, inquiringly.
"I have got a sort of an idea," said Tuppence. "It hasn't quite come yet
but it's coming." She rose resolutely. "I think I shall go and buy that hat
I told you about."
"Oh God!" said Tommy. "Another hat!"
"It's a very nice one," said Tuppence with dignity.
She went out with a resolute look on her face.
Once or twice in the following days Tommy inquired curiously about
the idea. Tuppence merely shook her head and told him to give her
time.
And then, one glorious morning, the first client arrived, and all else
was forgotten.
There was a knock on the outer door of the office Albert, who had just
placed an acid drop between his lips, roared out an indistinct 'come
in.' He then swallowed the acid drop whole in his surprise and delight.
For this looked like the Real Thing.
A tall young man, exquisitely and beautifully dressed, stood hesitating
in the doorway.
"A toff, if ever there was one," said Albert to himself. His judgment in
such matters was good.
The young man was about twenty-four years of age, had beautifully
slicked-back hair, a tendency to pink rims round the eyes, and
practically no chin to speak of.
In an ecstasy, Albert pressed a button under his desk, and almost
immediately a perfect fusilade of typing broke out from the direction of
"Clerks." Tuppence had rushed to the post of duty. The effect of this
hum of industry was to overawe the young man still further.
“I say,” he remarked. “Is this the whatnot-detective agency-Blunt's
Brilliant Detectives? All that sort of stuff, you know? Eh?"
"Did you want, sir, to speak to Mr. Blunt himself?" inquired Albert, with
an air of doubt as to whether such a thing could be managed.
"Well-yes, laddie, that was the jolly old idea. Can it be done?"
"You haven't an appointment, I suppose?"
The visitor became more and more apologetic.
"Afraid I haven't."
"It's always wise, sir, to ring up on the phone first. Mr. Blunt is so
terribly busy. He's engaged on the telephone at the moment. Called
into consultation by Scotland Yard."
The young man seemed suitably impressed.
Albert lowered his voice, and imported information in a friendly
fashion.
"Important theft of documents from a Government Office. They want
Mr. Blunt to take up the case."
"Oh! really. I say. He must be no end of a fellow."
"The Boss, sir," said Albert, "is It."
The young man sat down on a hard chair, completely unconscious of
the fact that he was being subjected to keen scrutiny by two pairs of
eyes looking through cunningly contrived peep holes-those of
Tuppence, in the intervals of frenzied typing, and those of Tommy
awaiting the suitable moment.
Presently a bell rang with violence on Albert's desk.
"The Boss is free now. I will find out whether he can see you," said
Albert, and disappeared through the door marked "Private."
He reappeared immediately.
"Will you come this way, sir?"
The visitor was ushered into the private office, and a pleasant faced
young man with red hair and an air of brisk capability rose to greet
him.
"Sit down. You wished to consult me? I am Mr. Blunt."
"Oh! Really. I say, you're awfully young, aren't you?"
"The day of the Old Men is over," said Tommy waving his hand. "Who
caused the War? The Old Men. Who is responsible for the present state
of unemployment? The Old Men. Who is responsible for every single
rotten thing that has happened? Again I say, the Old Men!"
"I expect you are right," said the client. "I know a fellow who is a poetat
least he says he is a poet-and he always talks like that."
"Let me tell you this, sir, not a person on my highly trained staff is a
day over twenty-five. That is the truth."
Since the highly trained staff consisted of Tuppence and Albert, the
statement was truth itself.
"And now-the facts," said Mr. Blunt.
"I want you to find someone that's missing," blurted out the young
man.
"Quite so. Will you give me the details?"
"Well, you see, it's rather difficult. I mean, it's a frightfully delicate
business and all that. She might be frightfully waxy about it. I meanwell,
it's so dashed difficult to explain."
He looked helplessly at Tommy. Tommy felt annoyed. He had been on
the point of going out to lunch, but he foresaw that getting the facts out
of this client would be a long and tedious business.
"Did she disappear of her own free will, or do you suspect abduction?"
he demanded crisply.
"I don't know," said the young man. "I don't know anything."
Tommy reached for a pad and pencil.
"First of all," he said, "will you give me your name? My office boy is
trained never to ask names. In that way consultations can remain
completely confidential."
"Oh! rather," said the young man. "Jolly good idea. My name-er-my
name's Smith."
"Oh! no," said Tommy. "The real one, please."
His visitor looked at him in awe.
"Er-St. Vincent," he said. "Lawrence St. Vincent."
"It's a curious thing," said Tommy, "how very few people there are
whose real name is Smith. Personally, I don't know anyone called
Smith. But nine men out of ten who wish to conceal their real name
give that of Smith. I am writing a monograph upon the subject."
At that moment a buzzer purred discreetly on his desk. That meant
that Tuppence was requesting to take hold. Tommy, who wanted his
lunch, and who felt profoundly unsympathetic towards Mr. St. Vincent,
was only too pleased to relinquish the helm.
"Excuse me," he said, and picked up the telephone.
Across his face there shot rapid changes-surprise, consternation,
slight elation.
"You don't say so," he said into the phone. "The Prime Minister
himself? Of course, in that case, I will come round at once."
He replaced the receiver on the hook, and turned to his client.
"My dear sir, I must ask you to excuse me. A most urgent summons. If
you will give the facts of the case to my confidential secretary, she will
deal with them."
He strode to the adjoining door.
"Miss Robinson."
Tuppence, very neat and demure with smooth black head and dainty
collar and cuffs, tripped in. Tommy made the necessary introductions
and departed.
"A lady you take an interest in has disappeared, I understand, Mr. St.
Vincent," said Tuppence, in her soft voice, as she sat down and took
up Mr. Blunt's pad and pencil. "A young lady?"
"Oh! rather," said Mr. St. Vincent. "Young-and-and-awfully goodlooking
and all that sort of thing."
Tuppence's face grew grave.
"Dear me," she murmured. "I hope that-"
"You don't think anything's really happened to her?" demanded Mr. St.
Vincent, in lively concern.
"Oh! we must hope for the best," said Tuppence, with a kind of false
cheerfulness which depressed Mr. St. Vincent horribly.
"Oh! look here, Miss Robinson. I say, you must do something. Spare no
expense. I wouldn't have anything happen to her for the world. You
seem awfully sympathetic, and I don't mind telling you in confidence
that I simply worship the ground that girl walks on. She's a topper, an
absolute topper."
“Please tell me her name and all about her.”
"Her name's Janet-I don't know her second name. She works in a hat
shop-Madame Violette's in Brook Street-but she's as straight as they
make them. Has ticked me off no end of times-I went round there
yesterday-waiting for her to come out-all the others came, but not her.
Then I found that she'd never turned up that morning to work at allsent
no message either-old Madame was furious about it. I got the
address of her lodgings, and I went round there. She hadn't come
home the night before, and they didn't know where she was. I was
simply frantic. I thought of going to the police. But I knew that Janet
would be absolutely furious with me for doing that if she were really all
right and had gone off on her own. Then I remembered that she herself
had pointed out your advertisement to me one day in the paper and
told me that one of the women who'd been in buying hats had simply
raved about your ability and discretion and all that sort of thing. So I
toddled along here right away."
"I see," said Tuppence. "What is the address of her lodgings?"
The young man gave it to her.
"That's all, I think," said Tuppence reflectively. "That is to say-am I to
understand that you are engaged to this young lady?"
Mr. St. Vincent turned a brick red.
"Well, no-not exactly. I never said anything. But I can tell you this, I
mean to ask her to marry me as soon as ever I see her-if I ever do see
her again."
Tuppence laid aside her pad.
"Do you wish for our special twenty-four hour service?" she asked, in
business like tones.
"What's that?"
"The fees are doubled, but we put all our available staff on to the case.
Mr. St. Vincent, if the lady is alive, I shall be able to tell you where she
is by this time to-morrow."
"What? I say, that's wonderful."
"We only employ experts-and we guarantee results," said Tuppence
crisply.
"But I say, you know. You must have the most topping staff.”
"Oh! we have," said Tuppence. "By the way, you haven't given me a
description of the young lady."
"She's got the most marvelous hair-sort of golden, but very deep, like a
jolly old sunset-that's it, a, jolly old sunset. You know, I never noticed
things like sunsets until lately. Poetry too, there's a lot more in poetry
than I ever thought."
"Red hair," said Tuppence unemotionally, writing it down. "What
height should you say the lady was?"
"Oh! tallish, and she's got ripping eyes, dark blue, I think. And a sort of
decided manner with her-takes a fellow up short sometimes."
Tuppence wrote down a few words more, then closed her note book
and rose.
"If you will call here to-morrow at two o'clock, I think we shall have
news of some kind for you," she said. "Good morning, Mr. St. Vincent."
When Tommy returned Tuppence was just consulting a page of
Debrett.
"I've got all the details," she said succinctly. "Lawrence St. Vincent is
the nephew and heir of the Earl of Cheriton. If we pull this through we
shall get publicity in the highest places."
Tommy read through the notes on the pad.
"What do you really think has happened to the girl?" he asked.
"I think," said Tuppence, "that she has fled at the dictates of her heart,
feeling that she loves this young man too well for her peace of mind."
Tommy looked at her doubtfully.
"I know they do it in books," he said, "but I've never known any girl
who did it in real life."
"No?" said Tuppence. "Well, perhaps you're right. But I daresay
Lawrence St. Vincent will swallow that sort of slush. He's full of
romantic notions just now. By the way, I guaranteed results in twentyfour
hours-our special service."
"Tuppence-you congenital idiot, what made you do that?"
"The idea just came into my head. I thought it sounded rather well.
Don't you worry. Leave it to Mother. Mother knows best."
She went out, leaving Tommy profoundly dissatisfied.
Presently he rose, sighed, and went out to do what could be done,
cursing Tuppence's over fervent imagination.
When he returned weary and jaded at half past four, he found
Tuppence extracting a bag of biscuits from their place of concealment
in one of the files.
"You look hot and bothered," she remarked. "What have you been
doing?"
Tommy groaned.
"Making a round of the Hospitals with that girl's description."
"Didn't I tell you to leave it to me?" demanded Tuppence.
"You can't find that girl single handed before two o'clock tomorrow."
"I can-and what's more, I have!"
"You have? What do you mean?"
"A simple problem, Watson, very simple indeed."
"Where is she now?"
Tuppence pointed a hand over her shoulder
"She's in my office next door."
"What is she doing there?"
Tuppence began to laugh.
"Well," she said, "early training will tell, and with a kettle, a gas ring,
and half a pound of tea staring her in the face, the result is a foregone
conclusion."
"You see," continued Tuppence gently. "Madame Violette's is where I
go for my hats, and the other day I ran across an old pal of Hospital
days amongst the girls there. She gave up nursing after the War and
started a hat shop, failed, and took this job at Madame Violette's. We
fixed up the whole thing between us. She was to rub the advertisement
well into young St. Vincent, and then disappear. Wonderful efficiency
of Blunt's Brilliant Detectives. Publicity for us and the necessary fillip
to young St. Vincent to bring him to the point of proposing. Janet was
in despair about it."
"Tuppence," said Tommy, "you take my breath away! The whole thing
is the most immoral business I ever heard of. You aid and abet this
young man to marry out of his class-"
"Stuff," said Tuppence. "Janet is a splendid girl-and the queer thing is
that she really adores that weak kneed young man. You can see with
half a glance what his family needs. Some good red blood in it. Janet
will be the making of him. She'll look after him like a mother, ease
down the cocktails and the night clubs and make him lead a good
healthy country gentleman's life. Come and meet her."
Tuppence opened the door of the adjoining office and Tommy followed
her.
A tall girl with lovely auburn hair, and a pleasant face, put down the
steaming kettle in her hand, and turned with a smile that disclosed an
even row of white teeth.
"I hope you'll forgive me, Nurse Cowley-Mrs. Beresford, I mean. I
thought that very likely you'd be quite ready for a cup of tea yourself.
Many's the pot of tea you've made for me in the Hospital at three
o'clock in the morning."
"Tommy," said Tuppence. "Let me introduce you to my old friend,
Nurse Smith."
"Smith, did you say? How curious!" said Tommy, shaking hands. "Eh?
Oh! nothing-a little monograph that I was thinking of Writing."
"Pull yourself together, Tommy," said Tuppence.
She poured him out a cup of tea.
"Now, then, let's all drink together. Here's to the success of the
International Detective Agency. Blunt's Brilliant Detectives! May they
never know failure!"
3. THE AFFAIR OF THE PINK PEARL
"What on earth are you doing?" demanded Tuppence, as she entered
the inner sanctum of the International Detective Agency-(Slogan-
Blunt's Brilliant Detectives) and discovered her lord and master prone
on the floor in a sea of books.
Tommy struggled to his feet.
"I was trying to arrange these books on the top shelf of that
cupboard," he complained. "And the damned chair gave way."
"What are they, anyway?" asked Tuppence, picking up a volume. “’The
Hound of the Baskervilles.' I wouldn't mind reading that again some
time."
"You see the idea?" said Tommy, dusting himself with care. "Half
hours with the Great Masters-that sort of thing. You see, Tuppence, I
can't help feeling that we are more or less amateurs at this business-of
course amateurs in one sense we cannot help being, but it would do no
harm to acquire the technique, so to speak. These books are detective
stories by the leading masters of the art. I intend to try different styles,
and compare results."
"H'm," said Tuppence. "I often wonder how those detectives would
have got on in real life." She picked up another volume. "You'll find a
difficulty in being a Thorndyke. You've no medical experience, and less
legal, and I never heard that science was your strong point."
"Perhaps not," said Tommy. "But at any rate I've bought a very good
camera, and I shall photograph footprints and enlarge the negatives
and all that sort of thing. Now, mon ami, use your little grey cells-what
does this convey to you?"
He pointed to the bottom shelf of the cupboard. On it lay a somewhat
futuristic dressing gown, a turkish slipper, and a violin.
"Obvious, my dear Watson," said Tuppence.
"Exactly," said Tommy. "The Sherlock Holmes touch."
He took up the violin and drew the bow idly across the strings, causing
Tuppence to give a wail of agony.
At that moment the buzzer rang on the desk, a sign that a client had
arrived in the outer office and was being held in parley by Albert, the
office boy.
Tommy hastily replaced the violin in the cupboard and kicked the
books behind the desk.
"Not that there's any great hurry," he remarked. "Albert will be
handing them out the stuff about my being engaged with Scotland Yard
on the phone. Get into your office and start typing, Tuppence. It makes
the office sound busy and active. No, on second thoughts, you shall be
taking notes in shorthand from my dictation. Let's have a look before
we get Albert to send the victim in."
They approached the peephole which had been artistically contrived
so as to command a view of the outer office.
The client was a girl of about Tuppence's age, tall and dark with a
rather haggard face and scornful eyes.
"Clothes cheap and striking," remarked Tuppence. "Have her in,
Tommy."
In another minute the girl was shaking hands with the celebrated Mr.
Blunt, whilst Tuppence sat by with eyes demurely downcast, and pad
and pencil in hand.
"My confidential secretary, Miss Robinson," said Mr. Blunt with a wave
of the hand. "You may speak freely before her." Then he lay back for a
minute, half closed his eyes and remarked in a tired tone: "You must
find traveling in a bus very crowded at this time of day."
"I came in a taxi," said the girl.
"Oh!" said Tommy aggrieved. His eyes rested reproachfully on a blue
bus ticket protruding from her glove. The girl's eyes followed his
glance, and she smiled and drew it out.
"You mean this? I picked it up on the pavement. A little neighbor of
ours collects them."
Tuppence coughed, and Tommy threw a baleful glare at her.
"We must get to business," he said briskly. "You are in need of our
services, Miss-?"
"Kingston Bruce is my name," said the girl. "We live at Wimbledon.
Last night a lady who is staying with us lost a valuable pink pearl. Mr.
St. Vincent was also dining with us, and during dinner he happened to
mention your firm. My mother sent me off to you this morning to ask
you if you would look into the matter for us."
The girl spoke sullenly, almost disagreeably. It was clear as daylight
that she and her mother had not agreed over the matter. She was here
under protest.
"I see," said Tommy, a little puzzled. "You have not called in the
police?"
"No," said Miss Kingston Bruce, "we haven't. It would be idiotic to call
in the police and then find that the silly thing had rolled under the
fireplace, or something like that."
"Oh!" said Tommy. "Then the jewel may only be lost after all?"
Miss Kingston Bruce shrugged her shoulders.
"People make such a fuss about things," she murmured.
Tommy cleared his throat.
"Of course," he said doubtfully. "I am extremely busy just now-"
"I quite understand," said the girl rising to her feet. There was a quick
gleam of satisfaction in her eyes which Tuppence, for one, did not
miss.
"Nevertheless," continued Tommy, "I think I can manage to run down
to Wimbledon. Will you give me the address, please?"
"The Laurels, Edgeworth Road."
"Make a note of it, please, Miss Robinson."
Miss Kingston Bruce hesitated, then said rather ungraciously:
"We'll expect you then. Good morning."
"Funny girl," said Tommy. "I couldn't quite make her out."
"I wonder if she stole the thing herself," remarked Tuppence
meditatively. "Come on, Tommy, let's put away these books and take
the car and go down there. By the way, who are you going to be,
Sherlock Holmes still?"
"I think I need practice for that," said Tommy. "I came rather a cropper
over that bus ticket, didn't I?"
"You did," said Tuppence. "If I were you I shouldn't try too much on
that girl-she's as sharp as a needle. She's unhappy too, poor devil."
“I suppose you know all about her already," said Tommy with sarcasm,
"simply from looking at the shape of her nose!"
"I'll tell you my idea of what we shall find at The Laurels," said
Tuppence, quite unmoved. "A household of snobs, very keen to move
in the best society; the father, if there is a father, is sure to have a
military title. The girl falls in with their way of life and despises herself
for doing so."
Tommy took a last look at the books now neatly ranged upon a shelf.
"I think," he said thoughtfully, "that I shall be Thorndyke to-day."
"I shouldn't have thought there was anything medico-legal about this
case," remarked Tuppence.
"Perhaps not," said Tommy. "But I'm simply dying to use that new
camera of mine! It's supposed to have the most marvelous lens that
ever was or ever could be."
"I know those kind of lenses," said Tuppence. "By the time you've
adjusted the shutter and stopped down and calculated the exposure
and kept your eyes on the spirit level, your brain gives out, and you
yearn for the simple Brownie."
"Only an unambitious soul is content with the simple Brownie."
"Well, I bet I shall get better results with it than you will."
Tommy ignored this challenge.
"I ought to have a 'Smoker's Companion,' " he said regretfully. "I
wonder where one buys them?"
"There's always the patent corkscrew Aunt Araminta gave you last
Xmas," said Tuppence helpfully.
"That's true," said Tommy. "A curious looking engine of destruction I
thought it at the time, and rather a humorous present to get from a
strictly teetotal aunt."
"I," said Tuppence, "shall be Polton."
Tommy looked at her scornfully.
"Polton indeed. You couldn't begin to do one of the things that he
does."
"Yes, I can," said Tuppence. “I can rub my hands together when I'm
pleased. That's quite enough to get on with. I hope you're going to take
plaster casts of footprints?"
Tommy was reduced to silence. Having collected the corkscrew they
went round to the garage, got out the car and started for Wimbledon.
The Laurels was a big house. It ran somewhat to gables and turrets,
had an air of being very newly painted, and was surrounded with neat
flower beds filled with scarlet geraniums.
A tall man with a close cropped white moustache, and an
exaggeratedly martial bearing opened the door before Tommy had
time to ring.
"I've been looking out for you," he explained fussily. "Mr. Blunt, is it
not? I am Colonel Kingston Bruce. Will you come into my study?"
He led them into a small room at the back of the house.
"Young St. Vincent was telling me wonderful things about your firm.
I've noticed your advertisements myself. This guaranteed twenty-four
hours service of yours-a marvelous notion. That's exactly what I need."
Inwardly anathematizing Tuppence for her irresponsibility in inventing
this brilliant detail, Tommy replied: "Just so Colonel."
“The whole thing is most distressing, sir, most distressing."
"Perhaps you would kindly give me the facts," said Tommy, with a hint
of impatience.
"Certainly I will-at once. We have at the present moment staying with
us a very old and dear friend of ours, Lady Laura Barton. Daughter of
the late Earl of Carrowway. The present Earl, her brother, made a
striking speech in the House of Lords the other day. As I say, she is an
old and dear friend of ours. Some American friends of mine who have
just come over, the Hamilton Betts, were most anxious to meet her.
'Nothing easier,' I said. 'She is staying with me now. Come down for the
week-end.' You know what Americans are about titles, Mr. Blunt."
"And others besides Americans sometimes, Colonel Kingston Bruce."
"Alas! only too true, my dear sir. Nothing I hate more than a snob. Well,
as I was saying, the Betts came down for the week-end. Last night-we
were playing Bridge at the time-the clasp of a pendant Mrs. Hamilton
Betts was wearing broke, so she took it off and laid it down on a small
table, meaning to take it upstairs with her when she went. This,
however, she forgot to do. I must explain, Mr. Blunt, that the pendant
consisted of two small diamond wings, and a big pink pearl depending
from them. The pendant was found this morning lying where Mrs. Betts
had left it, but the pearl, a pearl of enormous value, had been
wrenched off."
"Who found the pendant?"
”The parlormaid-Gladys Hill."
"Any reason to suspect her?"
"She has been with us some years, and we have always found her
perfectly honest. But, of course, one never knows-"
"Exactly. Will you describe your staff, and also tell me who was
present at dinner last night?"
"There is the cook-she has been with us only two months, but then she
would have no occasion to go near the drawingroom-the same applies
to the kitchen maid. Then there is the housemaid, Alice Cummings.
She also has been with us for some years. And Lady Laura's maid, of
course. She is French."
Colonel Kingston Bruce looked very impressive as he said this.
Tommy, unaffected by the revelation of the maid's nationality, said:
"Exactly. And the party at dinner?"
"Mr. and Mrs. Betts, ourselves-(my wife and daughter)-and Lady Laura.
Young St. Vincent was dining with us, and Mr. Rennie looked in after
dinner for a while."
"Who is Mr. Rennie?"
"A most pestilential fellow-an arrant socialist. Good looking, of course,
and with a certain specious power of argument. But a man, I don't
mind telling you, whom I wouldn't trust a yard. A dangerous sort of
fellow."
"In fact," said Tommy drily, "it is Mr. Rennie whom you suspect?"
“I do, Mr. Blunt. I'm sure, holding the views he does, that he can have
no principles whatsoever. What could have been easier for him than to
have quietly wrenched off the pearl at a moment when we were all
absorbed in our game? There were several absorbing moments-a
redoubled No Trump hand, I remember, and also a painful argument
when my wife had the misfortune to revoke."
"Quite so," said Tommy. "I should just like to know one thing-what is
Mrs. Bett's attitude in all this?"
"She wanted me to call in the police," said Colonel Kingston Bruce
reluctantly. "That is, when we had searched everywhere in case the
pearl had only dropped off."
"But you dissuaded her?"
"I was very averse to the idea of publicity and my wife and daughter
backed me up. Then my wife remembered young St. Vincent speaking
about your firm at dinner last night-and the twenty-four hours special
service."
"Yes," said Tommy with a heavy heart.
"You see, in any case no harm will be done. If we call in the police tomorrow,
it can be supposed that we thought the jewel merely lost and
were hunting for it. By the way, nobody has been allowed to leave the
house this morning."
"Except your daughter, of course," said Tuppence, speaking for the
first time.
"Except my daughter," agreed the Colonel. "She volunteered at once
to go and put the case before you."
Tommy rose.
"We will do our best to give you satisfaction, Colonel," he said. "I
should like to see the drawing-room, and the table on which the
pendant was laid down. I should also like to ask Mrs. Betts a few
questions. After that, I will interview the servants-or rather my
assistant, Miss Robinson, will do so."
He felt his nerve quailing before the terrors of questioning the
servants.
Colonel Kingston Bruce threw open the door, and led them across the
hall. As he did so, a remark came to them clearly through the open
door of the room they were approaching, and the voice that uttered it
was that of the girl who had come to see them that morning.
"You know perfectly well, mother," she was saying, "that she did bring
home a teaspoon in her muff."
In another minute they were being introduced to Mrs. Kingston Bruce,
a plaintive lady with a languid manner. Miss Kingston Bruce
acknowledged their presence with a short inclination of the head. Her
face was more sullen than ever.
Mrs. Kingston Bruce was voluble.
"-but I know who I think took it," she ended. "That dreadful socialist
young man. He loves the Russians and the Germans and hates the
English-what else can you expect?"
"He never touched it," said Miss Kingston Bruce fiercely. "I was
watching him-all the time. I couldn't have failed to see if he had."
She looked at them defiantly with her chin up.
Tommy created a diversion by asking for an interview with Mrs. Betts.
When Mrs. Kingston Bruce had departed accompanied by her husband
and daughter to find Mrs. Betts, he whistled thoughtfully.
"I wonder," he said gently, "who it was who had a teaspoon in her
muff?"
"Just what I was thinking," replied Tuppence.
Mrs. Betts, followed by her husband, burst into the room. She was a
big woman with a determined voice. Mr. Hamilton Betts looked
dyspeptic and subdued.
"I understand, Mr. Blunt, that you are a private inquiry agent, and one
who hustles things through at a great rate?"
"Hustle," said Tommy, "is my middle name, Mrs. Betts. Let me ask you
a few questions."
Thereafter things proceeded rapidly. Tommy was shown the damaged
pendant, the table on which it had lain, and Mr. Betts emerged from his
taciturnity to mention the value, in dollars, of the stolen pearl.
And withal, Tommy felt an irritating certainty that he was not getting
on.
"I think that will do," he said at length. "Miss Robinson, will you kindly
fetch the special photographic apparatus from the hall?"
Miss Robinson complied.
"A little invention of my own," said Tommy. "In appearance, you see, it
is just like an ordinary camera."
He had some slight satisfaction in seeing that the Betts were
impressed.
He photographed the pendant, the table on which it had lain, and took
several general views of the apartment. Then "Miss Robinson" was
delegated to interview the servants, and in view of the eager
expectancy on the faces of Colonel Kingston Bruce and Mrs. Betts,
Tommy felt called upon to say a few authoritative words.
"The position amounts to this," he said. "Either the pearl is still in the
house, or it is not still in the house."
"Quite so," said the Colonel with more respect than was, perhaps,
quite justified by the nature of the remark.
"If it is not in the house, it may be anywhere-but if it is in the house, it
must necessarily be concealed somewhere-"
"And a search must be made," broke in Colonel Kingston Bruce.
"Quite so. I give you carte Blanche, Mr. Blunt. Search the house from
attic to cellar."
"Oh! Charles," murmured Mrs. Kingston Bruce tearfully. "Do you think
that is wise? The servants won't like it. I'm sure they'll leave."
"We will search their quarters last," said Tommy soothingly. ”The thief
is sure to have hidden the gem in the most unlikely place."
"I seem to have read something of the kind," agreed the Colonel.
"Quite so," said Tommy. "You probably remember the case of Rex. v.
Bailey which created a precedent."
"Oh-er-yes," said the Colonel looking puzzled.
"Now, the most unlikely place is in the apartments of Mrs. Betts,"
continued Tommy.
"My! Wouldn't that be too cute?" said Mrs. Betts admiringly.
Without more ado, she took him up to her room where Tommy once
more made use of the special photographic apparatus.
Presently Tuppence joined him there.
"You have no objection, I hope, Mrs. Betts, to my assistant's looking
through your wardrobe?"
"Why, not at all. Do you need me here any longer?"
Tommy assured her that there was no need to detain her, and Mrs.
Betts departed.
"We might as well go on bluffing it out," said Tommy. "But personally I
don't believe we've a dog's chance of finding the thing. Curse you and
your twenty-four hours stunt, Tuppence."
"Listen," said Tuppence. "The servants are all right, I'm sure, but I
managed to get something out of the French maid. It seems that when
Lady Laura was staying here a year ago, she went out to tea with some
friends of the Kingston Bruces', and when she got home a teaspoon
fell out of her muff. Everyone thought it must have fallen in by accident.
But, talking about similar robberies, I got hold of a lot more. Lady
Laura is always staying about with people. She hasn't got a bean, I
gather, and she's out for comfortable quarters with people to whom a
title still means something. It may be a coincidence-or it may be
something more, but five distinct thefts have taken place whilst she
has been staying in various houses, sometimes trivial things,
sometimes valuable jewels."
"Whew!" said Tommy, and gave vent to a prolonged whistle. "Where's
the old bird's room, do you know?"
"Just across the passage."
"Then I think, I rather think, that we'll just slip across and investigate."
The room opposite stood with its door ajar. It was a spacious
apartment, with white enameled fitments and rose pink curtains. An
inner door led to a bathroom. At the door of this appeared a slim dark
girl, very neatly dressed.
Tuppence checked the exclamation of astonishment on the girl's lips.
"This is Elise, Mr. Blunt," she said primly. "Lady Laura's maid."
Tommy stepped across the threshold of the bathroom, and approved
inwardly its sumptuous and up to date fittings. He set to work to dispel
the wide stare of suspicion on the French girl's face.
"You are busy with your duties, eh, Mademoiselle Elise?"
"Yes, Monsieur, I clean Milady's bath."
"Well, perhaps you'll help me with some photography instead. I have a
special kind of camera here, and I am photographing the interiors of all
the rooms in this house."
He was interrupted by the communicating door to the bedroom
banging suddenly behind him. Elise jumped at the sound.
"What did that?"
"It must have been the wind," said Tuppence.
"We will come into the other room," said Tommy.
Elise went to open the door for them, but the door knob rattled
aimlessly.
"What's the matter?" said Tommy sharply.
"Ah, Monsieur, but somebody must have locked it on the other side."
She caught up a towel and tried again. But this time the door handle
turned easily enough, and the door swung open.
"Voila ce qui est curieux. It must have stuck," said Elise.
There was no one in the bedroom.
Tommy fetched his apparatus. Tuppence and Elise worked under his
orders. But again and again his glance went back to the
communicating door.
"I wonder," he said between his teeth. "I wonder why that door stuck?"
He examined it minutely, shutting and opening it. It fitted perfectly.
"One picture more," he said with a sigh. "Will you loop back that rose
curtain, Mademoiselle Elise? Thank you. Just hold it so."
The familiar click occurred. He handed a glass slide to Elise to hold,
relinquished the tripod to Tuppence, and carefully readjusted and
closed the camera.
He made some easy excuse to get rid of Elise, and as soon as she was
out of the room, he caught hold of Tuppence and spoke rapidly.
"Look here, I've got an idea. Can you hang on here? Search all the
rooms-that will take some time. Try and get an interview with the old
bird-Lady Laura-but don't alarm her. Tell her you suspect the
parlormaid. But whatever you do, don't let her leave the house. I'm
going off in the car. I'll be back as soon as I can."
"All right," said Tuppence. "But don't be too cocksure. You've
forgotten one thing."
"What's that?"
"The girl. There's something funny about that girl. Listen, I've found out
the time she started from the house this morning. It took her two hours
to get to our office. That's nonsense. Where did she go before she
came to us?"
"There's something in that," admitted her husband. "Well, follow up
any old clue you like, but don't let Lady Laura leave the house. What's
that?"
His quick ear had caught a faint rustle outside on the landing. He
strode across to the door, but there was no one to be seen.
"Well, so long," he said. "I'll be back as soon as I can."