The Disappearance of Mr Davenheim
Poirot and I were expecting our old friend Inspector Japp of
Scotland Yard to tea. We were sitting round the tea-table awaiting
his arrival. Poirot had just finished carefully straightening the cups
and saucers which our landlady was in the habit of throwing, rather
than placing, on the table. He had also breathed heavily on the
metal teapot, and polished it with a silk handkerchief. The kettle
was on the boil, and a small enamel saucepan beside it contained
some thick, sweet chocolate which was more to Poirot's palate than
what he described as 'your English poison.'
A sharp 'rat-tat' sounded below, and a few minutes afterwards Japp
entered briskly.
'Hope I'm not late,' he said as he greeted us. 'To tell the truth, I was
yarning with Miller, the man who's in charge of the Davenheim
case.'
I pricked up my ears. For the last three days the papers had been
full of the strange disappearance of Mr Davenheim, senior partner
of Davenheim and Salmon, the well-known bankers and financiers.
On Saturday last he had walked out of his house, and had never
been seen since. I looked forward to extracting some interesting
details from Japp.
'I should have thought,' I remarked, 'that it would be almost
impossible for anyone to "disappear" nowadays.'
Poirot moved a plate of bread and butter the eighth of an inch, and
said sharply:
'Be exact, my friend. What do you mean by "disappear"? To which
class of disappearance are you referring?'
'Are disappearances classified and labelled, then?' I laughed.
Japp smiled also. Poirot frowned at us both.
'But certainly they are! They fall into three categories: First, and
most common, the voluntary disappearance. Second, the much
abused "loss of memory" case - rare, but occasionally genuine.
Third, murder, and a more or less successful disposal of the body.
Do you refer to all three as impossible of execution?'
'Very nearly so, I should think. You might lose your own memory,
but someone would be sure to recognize you - especially in the
case of a well-known man like Davenheim. Then "bodies" can't be
made to vanish into thin air. Sooner or later they turn up, concealed
in lonely places, or in trunks. Murder will out. In the same way, the
absconding clerk, or the domestic defaulter, is bound to be run
down in these days of wireless telegraphy. He can be headed off
from foreign countries; ports and railway stations are watched;
and, as for concealment in this country, his features and
appearance will be known to everyone who reads a daily
newspaper. He's up against civilization.'
'Mon ami,' said Poirot, 'you make one error. You do not allow for the
fact that a man who had decided to make away with another man -
or with himself in a figurative sense - might be that rare machine, a
man of method. He might bring intelligence, talent, a careful
calculation of detail to the task; and then I do not see why he should
not be successful in baffling the police force.'
'But not you, I suppose?' said Japp good-humouredly, winking at
me. 'He couldn't baffle you, eh, Monsieur Poirot?'
Poirot endeavoured, with a marked lack of success, to look modest.
'Me, also! Why not? It is true that I approach such problems with as
exact science, a mathematical precision, which seems, alas, only
too rare in the new generation of detectives!'
Japp grinned more widely.
'I don't know,' he said. 'Miller, the man who's on this case, is a smart
chap. You may be very sure he won't overlook a footprint, or a
cigar-ash, or a crumb even. He's got eyes that see everything.'
'So, mon ami,' said Poirot, 'has the London sparrow. But all the
same, I should not ask the little brown bird to solve the problem of
Mr Davenheim.'
'Come now, monsieur, you're not going to run down the value of
details as clues?'
'By no means. These things are all good in their way. The danger is
they may assume undue importance. Most details are insignificant;
one or two are vital. It is the brain, the little grey cells' - he tapped
his forehead - 'on which one must rely. The senses mislead. One
must seek the truth within - not without.'
'You don't mean to say, Monsieur Poirot, that you would undertake
to solve a case without moving from your chair, do you?'
'That is exactly what I do mean - granted the facts were placed
before me. I regard myself as a consulting specialist.'
Japp slapped his knee. 'Hanged if I don't take you at your word. Bet
you a fiver that you can't lay your hand - or rather tell me where to
lay my hand - on Mr Davenheim, dead or alive, before a week is out.'
Poirot considered. 'Eh bien, mon ami, I accept. Le sport, it is the
passion of you English. Now - the facts.'
'On Saturday last, as is his usual custom, Mr Davenheim took the
12.40 train from Victoria to Chingside, where his palatial country
place, The Cedars, is situated. After lunch, he strolled round the
grounds, and gave various directions to the gardeners. Everybody
agrees that his manner was absolutely normal and as usual. After
tea he put his head into his wife's boudoir; saying that he was going
to stroll down to the village and post some letters. He added that he
was expecting a Mr Lowen, on business. If he should come before
he himself returned, he was to be shown into the study and asked to
wait. Mr Davenheim then left the house by the front door, passed
leisurely down the drive, and out at the gate, and - was never seen
again. From that hour, he vanished completely.'
'Pretty - very pretty - altogether a charming little problem,'
murmured Poirot. 'Proceed, my good friend.'
'About a quarter of an hour later a tall, dark man with a thick black
moustache rang the front-door bell, and explained that he had an
appointment with Mr Davenheim. He gave the name of Lowen, and
in accordance with the banker's instructions was shown into the
study. Nearly an hour passed. Mr Davenheim did not return. Finally
Mr Lowen rang the bell, and explained that he was unable to wait
any longer, as he must catch his train back to town.
'Mrs Davenheim apologized for her husband's absence, which
seemed unaccountable, as she knew him to have been expecting
the visitor. Mr Lowen reiterated his regrets and took his departure.
'Well, as everyone knows, Mr Davenheim did not return. Early on
Sunday morning the police were communicated with, but could
make neither head nor tail of the matter. Mr Davenheim seemed
literally to have vanished into thin air. He had not been to the post
office; nor had he been seen passing through the village. At the
station they were positive he had not departed by any train. His own
motor had not left the garage. If he had hired a car to meet him in
some lonely spot, it seems almost certain that by this time, in view
of the large reward offered for information, the driver of it would
have come forward to tell what he knew. True, there was a small
race-meeting at Entfield, five miles away, and if he had walked to
that station he might have passed unnoticed in the crowd. But since
then his photograph and a full description of him have been
circulated in every newspaper, and nobody has been able to give
any news of him. We have, of course, received many letters from all
over England, but each clue, so far, has ended in disappointment.
'On Monday morning a further sensational discovery came to light.
Behind a portière in Mr Davenheim's study stands a safe, and that
safe had been broken into and rifled. The windows were fastened
securely on the inside, which seems to put an ordinary burglary out
of court, unless, of course, an accomplice within the house
fastened them again afterwards. On the other hand, Sunday having
intervened, and the household being in a state of chaos, it is likely
that the burglary was committed on the Saturday, and remained
undetected until Monday.'
'Précisément,' said Poirot dryly. 'Well, is he arrested, ce pauvre M.
Lowen?'
Japp grinned. 'Not yet. But he's under pretty close supervision.'
Poirot nodded. 'What was taken from the safe? Have you any idea?'
'We've been going into that with the junior partner of the firm and
Mrs Davenheim. Apparently there was a considerable amount in
bearer bonds, and a very large sum in notes, owing to some large
transaction having been just carried through. There was also a
small fortune in jewellery. All Mrs Davenheim's jewels were kept in
the safe. The purchasing of them had become a passion with her
husband of late years, and hardly a month passed that he did not
make her a present of some rare and costly gem.'
'Altogether a good haul,' said Poirot thoughtfully. 'Now, what about
Lowen? Is it known what his business was with Davenheim that
evening? '
'Well, the two men were apparently not on very good terms. Lowen
is a speculator in quite small way. Nevertheless, he has been able
once or twice to score a coup off Davenheim in the market, though
it seems they seldom or never actually met. It was a matter
concerning some South American shares which led the banker to
make his appointment.'
'Had Davenheim interests in South America, then?'
'I believe so. Mrs Davenheim happened to mention that he spent all
last autumn in Buenos Aires.'
'Any trouble in his home life? Were the husband and wife on good
terms?'
'I should say his domestic life was quite peaceful and uneventful.
Mrs Davenheim is a pleasant, rather unintelligent woman. Quite a
nonentity, I think.'
'Then we must not look for the solution of the mystery there. Had he
any enemies?'
'He had plenty of financial rivals, and no doubt there are many
people whom he has got the better of who bear him no particular
goodwill. But there was no one likely to make away with him - and, if
they had, where is the body?'
'Exactly. As Hastings says, bodies have a habit of coming to light
with fatal persistency.'
'By the way, one of the gardeners says he saw a figure going round
to the side of the house towards the rose-garden. The long french
window of the study opens on to the rose-garden, and Mr
Davenheim frequently entered and left the house that way. But the
man was a good way off, at work on some cucumber frames, and
cannot even say whether it was the figure of his master or not. Also,
he cannot fix the time with any accuracy. It must have been before
six, as the gardeners cease work at that time.'
'And Mr Davenheim left the house?'
'About half-past five or thereabouts.'
'What lies beyond the rose-garden?'
'A lake.'
'With a boathouse?'
'Yes, a couple of punts are kept there. I suppose you're thinking of
suicide, Monsieur Poirot? Well, I don't mind telling you that Miller's
going down tomorrow expressly to see that piece of water dragged.
That's the kind of man he is!'
Poirot smiled faintly, and turned to me. 'Hastings, I pray you, hand
me that copy of Daily Megaphone. If I remember rightly, there is an
unusually clear photograph there of the missing man.'
I rose, and found the sheet required. Poirot studied the features
attentively.
'H'm!' he murmured. 'Wears his hair rather long and wavy, full
moustache and pointed beard, bushy eyebrows. Eyes dark?'
'Yes.'
'Hair and beard turning grey?'
The detective nodded. 'Well, Monsieur Poirot, what have you got to
say to it all? Clear as daylight, eh?'
'On the contrary, most obscure.'
The Scotland Yard man looked pleased.
'Which gives me great hopes of solving it,' finished Poirot placidly.
'Eh?'
'I find it a good sign when a case is obscure. If a thing is clear as
daylight - eh bien, mistrust it! Someone has made it so.'
Japp shook his head almost pityingly. 'Well, each to their fancy. But
it's not a bad thing to see your way clear ahead.'
'I do not see,' murmured Poirot. 'I shut my eyes - and think.'
Japp sighed. 'Well, you've got a clear week to think in.'
'And you will bring me any fresh developments that arise - the result
of the labours of the hard-working and lynx-eyed Inspector Miller,
for instance?'
'Certainly. That's in the bargain.'
'Seems a shame, doesn't it?' said Japp to me as I accompanied him
to the door. 'Like robbing a child!'
I could not help agreeing with a smile. I was still smiling as I reentered
the room.
'Eh bien!' said Poirot immediately. To make fun of Papa Poirot, is it
not so?' He shook his finger at me. 'You do not trust his grey cells?
Ah, do not be confused! Let us discuss this little problem -
incomplete as yet, I admit, but already showing one or two points of
interest.'
'The lake!' I said significantly.
'And even more than the lake, the boathouse!'
I looked sidewise at Poirot. He was smiling in his most inscrutable
fashion. I felt that, for the moment, it would be quite useless to
question him further.
We heard nothing of Japp until the following evening, when he
walked in about nine o'clock. I saw at once by his expression that
he was bursting with news of some kind.
'Eh bien, my friend,' remarked Poirot. 'All goes well? But do not tell
me that you have discovered the body of Mr Davenheim in your
lake, because I shall not believe you.'
'We haven't found the body, but we did find his clothes - the
identical clothes he was wearing that day. What do you say to that?'
'Any other clothes missing from the house?'
'No, his valet is quite positive on that point. The rest of his wardrobe
is intact. There's more. We've arrested Lowen. One of the maids,
whose business it is to fasten the bedroom windows, declares that
she saw Lowen coming towards the study through the rose-garden
about a quarter past six. That would be about ten minutes before he
left the house.'
'What does he himself say to that? '
'Denied first of all that he had ever left the study. But the maid was
positive, and he pretended afterwards that he had forgotten just
stepping out of the window to examine an unusual species of rose.
Rather a weak story ! And there's fresh evidence against him come
to light. Mr Davenheim always wore a thick gold ring set with a
solitaire diamond on the little finger of his right hand. Well, that ring
was pawned in London on Saturday night by a man called Billy
Kellett ! He's already known to the police - did three months last
autumn for lifting an old gentleman's watch. It seems he tried to
pawn the ring at no less than five different places, succeeded at the
last one, got gloriously drunk on the proceeds, assaulted a
policeman, and was run in in consequence. I went to Bow Street
with Miller and saw him. He's sober enough now, and I don't mind
admitting we pretty well frightened the life out of him, hinting he
might be charged with murder. This is his yarn, and a very queer
one it is.
'He was at Entfield races on Saturday, though I dare say scarfpins
was his line of business, rather than betting. Anyway, he had a bad
day, and was down on his luck. He was tramping along the road to
Chingside, and sat down in a ditch to rest just before he got into the
village. A few minutes later he noticed a man coming along the road
to the village, "dark-complexioned gent, with a big moustache, one
of them city toffs," is his description of the man.
'Kellett was half concealed from the road by a heap of stones. Just
before he got abreast of him, the man looked quickly up and down
the road, and seeing it apparently deserted he took a small object
from his pocket and threw it over the hedge. Then he went on
towards the station. Now, the object he had thrown over the hedge
had fallen with a slight "chink" which aroused the curiosity of the
human derelict in the ditch. He investigated and, after a short
search, discovered the ring! That is Kellett's story. It's only fair to
say that Lowen denies it utterly, and of course the word of a man
like Kellett can't be relied upon in the slightest. It's within the
bounds of possibility that he met Davenheim in the lane and robbed
and murdered him.'
Poirot shook his head.
'Very improbable, mon ami. He had no means of disposing of the
body. It would have been found by now. Secondly, the open way in
which he pawned the ring makes it unlikely that he did murder to
get it. Thirdly, your sneak-thief is rarely a murderer. Fourthly, as he
has been in prison since Saturday, it would be too much of a
coincidence that he is able to give so accurate a description of
Lowen.'
Japp nodded. 'I don't say you're not right. But all the same, you
won't get a jury to take much note of a jailbird's evidence. What
seems odd to me is that Lowen couldn't find a cleverer way of
disposing of the ring.'
Poirot shrugged his shoulders. 'Well, after all, if it were found in the
neighbourhood, it might be argued that Davenheim himself had
dropped it.'
'But why remove it from the body at all?' I cried.
'There might be a reason for that,' said Japp. 'Do you know that just
beyond the lake, a little gate leads out on to the hill, and not three
minutes' walk brings you to - what do you think? - a lime kiln.'
'Good heavens!' I cried. 'You mean that the lime which destroyed
the body would be powerless to affect the metal of the ring?'
'Exactly.'
'It seems to me,' I said, 'that that explains everything. What a
horrible crime!'
By common consent we both turned and looked at Poirot. He
seemed lost in reflection, his brow knitted, as though with some
supreme mental effort. I felt that at last his keen intellect was
asserting itself. What would his first words be? We were not long
left in doubt. With a sigh, the tension of his attitude relaxed and
turning to Japp, he asked:
'Have you any idea, my friend, whether Mr and Mrs Davenheim
occupied the same bedroom?'
The question seemed so ludicrously inappropriate that for a
moment we both stared in silence. Then Japp burst into a laugh.
'Good Lord, Monsieur Poirot, I thought you were coming out with
something startling. As to your question, I'm sure I don't know.'
'You could find out?' asked Poirot with curious persistence.
'Oh, certainly - if you really want to know.'
'Merci, mon ami. I should be obliged if you would make a point of it.'
Japp stared at him a few minutes longer, but Poirot seemed to have
forgotten us both. The detective shook his head sadly at me, and
murmuring, 'Poor old fellow! War's been too much for him!' gently
withdrew from the room.
As Poirot still seemed sunk in a daydream, I took a sheet of paper,
and amused myself by scribbling notes upon it. My friend's voice
aroused me. He had come out of his reverie, and was looking brisk
and alert.
'Que faites vous là, mon ami?'
'I was jotting down what occurred to me as the main points of
interest in this affair.'
'You become methodical - at last!' said Poirot approvingly.
I concealed my pleasure. 'Shall I read them to you?'
'By all means.'
I cleared my throat.
'"One: All the evidence points to Lowen having been the man who
forced the safe.
'"Two: He had a grudge against Davenheim.
'"Three: He lied in his first statement that he had never left the
study.
'"Four: If you accept Billy Kellett's story as true, Lowen is
unmistakably implicated."'
I paused. 'Well?' I asked, for I felt that I had put my finger on all the
vital facts.
Poirot looked at me pityingly, shaking his head very gently. 'Mon
pauvre ami! But it is that you have not the gift! The important detail,
you appreciate him never! Also, your reasoning is false.'
'How?'
'Let me take your four points.
'One: Mr Lowen could not possibly know that he would have the
chance to open the safe. He came for a business interview. He
could not know beforehand that Mr Davenheim would be absent
posting a letter, and that he would consequently be alone in the
study!'
'He might have seized his opportunity,' I suggested.
'And the tools? City gentlemen do not carry round housebreaker's
tools on the off chance! And one could not cut into that safe with a
penknife, bien entendu!'
'Well, what about Number Two?'
'You say Lowen had a grudge against Mr Davenheim. What you
mean is that he had once or twice got the better of him. And
presumably those transactions were entered into with the view of
benefiting himself. In any case you do not as a rule bear a grudge
against a man you have got the better of - it is more likely to be the
other way about. Whatever grudge there might have been would
have been on Mr Davenheim's side.'
'Well, you can't deny that he lied about never having left the study?'
'No. But he may have been frightened. Remember, the missing
man's clothes had just been discovered in the lake. Of course, as
usual, he would have done better to speak the truth.'
'And the fourth point?'
'I grant you that. If Kellett's story is true, Lowen is undeniably
implicated. That is what makes the affair so very interesting.'
'Then I did appreciate one vital fact?'
'Perhaps - but you have entirely overlooked the two most important
points, the ones which undoubtedly hold the clue to the whole
matter.'
'And pray, what are they?'
'One, the passion which has grown upon Mr Davenheim in the last
few years for buying jewellery. Two, his trip to Buenos Aires last
autumn.'
'Poirot, you are joking!'
'I am most serious. Ah, sacred thunder, but I hope Japp will not
forget my little commission.'
But the detective, entering into the spirit of the joke, had
remembered it so well that a telegram was handed to Poirot about
eleven o'clock the next day. At his request I opened it and read it
out:
'"Husband and wife have occupied separate rooms since last
winter."'
'Aha!' cried Poirot, 'And now we are in mid June! All is solved!'
I stared at him.
'You have no money in the bank of Davenheim and Salmon, mon
ami?'
'No,' I said, wondering. 'Why?'
'Because I should advise you to withdraw it - before it is too late.'
'Why, what do you expect?'
'I expect a big smash in a few days - perhaps sooner. Which
reminds me, we will return the compliment of a dépêche to Japp. A
pencil, I pray you, and a form. Voilà! 'Advise you to withdraw any
money deposited with firm in question.' That will intrigue him, the
good Japp! His eyes will open wide - wide! He will not comprehend
in the slightest - until to-morrow, or the next day!'
I remained sceptical, but the morrow forced me to render tribute to
my friend's remarkable powers. In every paper was a huge headline
telling of the sensational future of the Davenheim bank. The
disappearance of the famous financier took on a totally different
aspect in the light of the revelation of the financial affairs of the
bank.
Before we were half-way through breakfast, the door flew open and
Japp rushed in. In his left hand was a paper; in his right was
Poirot's telegram, which he banged down on the table in front of my
friend.
'How did you know, Monsieur Poirot? How the blazes could you
know?'
Poirot smiled placidly at him. 'Ah, mon ami, after your wire, it was a
certainty! From the commencement, see you, it struck me that the
safe burglary was somewhat remarkable. Jewels, ready money,
bearer bonds - all so conveniently arranged for - whom? Well, the
good Monsieur Davenheim was of those who "look after Number
One" as your saying goes! It seemed almost certain that it was
arranged for - himself! Then his passion of late years for buying
jewellery! How simple! The funds he embezzled, he converted into
jewels, very likely replacing them in turn with paste duplicates, and
so he put away in a safe place, under another name, a considerable
fortune to be enjoyed all in good time when everyone has been
thrown off the track. His arrangements completed, he makes an
appointment with Mr Lowen (who has been imprudent enough in the
past to cross the great man once or twice), drills a hole in the safe,
leaves orders that the guest is to be shown into the study, and
walks out of the house - where?' Poirot stopped, and stretched out
his hand for another boiled egg. He frowned. 'It is really
insupportable,' he murmured, 'that every hen lays an egg of a
different size! What symmetry can there be on the breakfast table?
At least they should sort them in dozens at the shop!'
'Never mind the eggs,' said Japp impatiently. 'Let 'em lay 'em
square if they like. Tell us where our customer went to when he left
The Cedars - that is, if you know!'
'Eh bien, he went to his hiding-place. Ah, this Monsieur Davenheim,
there may be some malformation in his grey cells, but they are of
the first quality!'
'Do you know where he is hiding?'
'Certainly! It is most ingenious.'
'For the Lord's sake, tell us, then!'
Poirot gently collected every fragment of shell from his plate,
placed them in the egg-cup, and reversed the empty egg-shell on
top of them. This little operation concluded, he smiled on the neat
effect, and then beamed affectionately on us both.
'Come, my friends, you are men of intelligence. Ask yourself the
question which I asked myself. "If I were this man, where should I
hide?" Hastings, what do you say?'
'Well,' I said, 'I'm rather inclined to think I'd not do a bolt at all. I'd
stay in London - in the heart of things, travel by tubes and buses;
ten to one I'd never be recognized. There's safety in a crowd.'
Poirot turned inquiringly to Japp.
'I don't agree. Get clear away at once - that's the only chance. I
would have had plenty of time to prepare things beforehand. I'd
have a yacht waiting, with steam up, and I'd be off to one of the
most out-of-the-way corners of the world before the hue and cry
began!'
We both looked at Poirot. 'What do you say, monsieur?'
For a moment he remained silent. Then a very curious smile flitted
across his face.
'My friends, if I were hiding from the police, do you know where I
should hide? In a prison!'
'What?'
'You are seeking Monsieur Davenheim in order to put him in prison,
so you never dream of looking to see if he may not be already
there!'
'What do you mean?'
'You tell me Madame Davenheim is not a very intelligent woman.
Nevertheless I think that if you took her to Bow Street and
confronted her with the man Billy Kellett, she would recognize him!
In spite of the fact that he has shaved his beard and moustache and
those bushy eyebrows, and has cropped his hair close. A woman
nearly always knows her husband, though the rest of the world may
be deceived!'
'Billy Kellett? But he's known to the police!'
'Did I not tell you Davenheim was a clever man? He prepared his
alibi long beforehand. He was not in Buenos Aires last autumn - he
was creating the character of Billy Kellett, "doing three months," so
that the police should have no suspicions when the time came. He
was playing, remember, for a large fortune, as well as liberty. It was
worth while doing the thing thoroughly. Only - '
'Yes?'
'Eh bien, afterwards he had to wear a false beard and wig, had to
make up as himself again, and to sleep with a false beard is not
easy - it invites detection! He cannot risk continuing to share the
chamber of madame his wife. You found out for me that for the last
six months, or ever since his supposed return from Buenos Aires,
he and Mrs Davenheim occupied separate rooms. Then I was sure!
Everything fitted in. The gardener who fancied he saw his master
going round to the side of the house was quite right. He went to the
boathouse, donned his "tramp" clothes, which you may be sure had
been safety hidden from the eyes of his valet, dropped the others in
the lake, and proceeded to carry out his plan by pawning the ring in
an obvious manner, and then assaulting a policeman, getting
himself safely into the haven of Bow Street, where nobody would
ever dream of looking for him!'
'It's impossible,' murmured Japp.
'Ask Madame,' said my friend, smiling. The next day a registered
letter lay beside Poirot's plate.
He opened it, and a five-pound note fluttered out. My friend's brow
puckered.
'Ah, sacré! But what shall I do with it? I have much remorse! Ce
pauvre Japp? Ah, an idea! We will have a little dinner, we three!
That consoles me. It was really too easy. I am ashamed. I, who
would not rob a child - mille tonnerres! Mon ami, what have you,
that you laugh so heartily?'
The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman
Poirot and I had many friends and acquaintances of an informal
nature. Amongst these was to be numbered Dr Hawker, a near
neighbour of ours, and a member of the medical profession. It was
the genial doctor's habit to drop in sometimes of an evening and
have a chat with Poirot, of whose genius he was an ardent admirer.
The doctor himself, frank and unsuspicious to the last degree,
admired the talents so far removed from his own.
On one particular evening in early June, he arrived about half past
eight and settled down to a comfortable discussion on the cheery
topic of the prevalence of arsenical poisoning in crimes. It must
have been about a quarter of an hour later when the door of our
sitting-room flew open, and a distracted female precipitated herself
into the room.
'Oh, doctor, you're wanted! Such a terrible voice. It gave me a turn,
it did indeed.'
I recognized in our new visitor Dr Hawker's house-keeper, Miss
Rider. The doctor was a bachelor, and lived in a gloomy old house a
few streets away. The usually placid Miss Rider was now in a state
bordering on incoherence.
'What terrible voice? Who is it, and what's the trouble?'
'It was the telephone, doctor. I answered it - and a voice spoke.
"Help," it said. "Doctor - help. They've killed me!" Then it sort of
tailed away. "Who's speaking?" I said. "Who's speaking?" Then I
got a reply, just a whisper, it seemed, "Foscatine" - something like
that - "Regent's Court".'
The doctor uttered an exclamation.
'Count Foscatini. He has a flat in Regent's Court. I must go at once.
What can have happened?'
'A patient of yours?' asked Poirot.
'I attended him for some slight ailment a few weeks ago. An Italian,
but he speaks English perfectly. Well, I must wish you good night.
Monsieur Poirot, unless - ' He hesitated.
'I perceive the thought in your mind,' said Poirot, smiling. 'I shall be
delighted to accompany you. Hastings, run down and get hold of a
taxi.'
Taxis always make themselves sought for when one is particularly
pressed for time, but I captured one at last, and we were soon
bowling along in the direction of Regent's Park. Regent's Court was
a new block of flats, situated just off St John's Wood Road. They
had only recently been built, and contained the latest service
devices.
There was no one in the hall. The doctor pressed the lift-bell
impatiently, and when the lift arrived questioned the uniformed
attendant sharply.
'Flat 11. Count Foscatini. There's been an accident there, I
understand.'
The man stared at him.
'First I've heard of it. Mr Graves - that's Count Foscatini's man -
went out about half an hour ago, and he said nothing.'
'Is the Count alone in the flat?'
'No, sir, he's got two gentlemen dining with him.'
'What are they like?' I asked eagerly.
We were in the lift now, ascending rapidly to the second floor, on
which Flat 11 was situated.
'I didn't see them myself, sir, but I understand that they were
foreign gentlemen.'
He pulled back the iron door, and we stepped out on the landing.
No 11 was opposite to us. The doctor rang the bell. There was no
reply, and we could hear no sound from within. The doctor rang
again and again; we could hear the bell trilling within, but no sign of
life rewarded us.
'This is getting serious,' muttered the doctor. He turned to the lift
attendant.
'Is there any pass-key to this door?'
'There is one in the porter's office downstairs.'
'Get it, then, and, look here, I think you'd better send for the police.'
Poirot approved with a nod of the head.
The man returned shortly; with him came the manager.
'Will you tell me, gentlemen, what is the meaning of all this?'
'Certainly. I received a telephone message from Count Foscatini
stating that he had been attacked and was dying. You can
understand that we must lose no time - if we are not already too
late.'
The manager produced the key without more ado, and we all
entered the flat.
We passed first into a small square lounge hall. A door on the right
of it was half open. The manager indicated it with a nod.
'The dining room.'
Dr Hawker led the way. We followed close on his heels. As we
entered the room I gave a gasp. The round table in the centre bore
the remains of a meal; three chairs were pushed back, as though
their occupants had just risen. In the corner, to the right of the
fireplace, was a big writing-table, and sitting at it was a man - or
what had been a man. His right hand still grasped the base of the
telephone, but he had fallen forward, struck down by a terrific blow
on the head from behind. The weapon was not far to seek. A marble
statue stood where it had been hurriedly put down, the base of it
stained with blood.
The doctor's examination did not take a minute. 'Stone dead. Must
have been almost instantaneous. I wonder he even managed to
telephone. It will be better not to move him until the police arrive.'
On the manager's suggestion we searched the flat, but the result
was a foregone conclusion. It was not likely that the murderers
would be concealed there when all they had to do was to walk out.
We came back to the dining room. Poirot had not accompanied us
in our tour. I found him studying the centre table with close
attention. I joined him. It was a well-polished round mahogany
table. A bowl of roses decorated the centre, and white lace mats
reposed on the gleaming surface. There was a dish of fruit, but the
three dessert plates were untouched. There were three coffeecups
with remains of coffee in them - two black, one with milk. All
three men had taken port, and the decanter, half-full, stood before
the centre plate. One of the men had smoked a cigar, the other two
cigarettes. A tortoiseshell-and-silver box, holding cigars and
cigarettes, stood open upon the table.
I enumerated all these facts to myself, but I was forced to admit that
they did not shed any brilliant light on the situation. I wondered
what Poirot saw in them to make him so intent. I asked him.
'Mon ami,' he replied, 'you miss the point. I am looking for
something that I do not see.'
'What is that?'
'A mistake - even a little mistake - on the part of the murderer.'
He stepped swiftly to the small adjoining kitchen, looked in, and
shook his head.
'Monsieur,' he said to the manager, 'explain to me, I pray, your
system of serving meals here.'
The manager stepped to a small hatch in the wall.
'This is the service lift,' be explained. 'It runs to the kitchens at the
top of the building. You order through the telephone, and the dishes
are sent down in the lift, one course at a time. The dirty plates and
dishes are sent up in the same manner. No domestic worries, you
understand, and at the same time you avoid the wearying publicity
of always dining in a restaurant.'
Poirot nodded.
'Then the plates and dishes that were used tonight are on high in
the kitchen. You permit that I mount there?'
'Oh, certainly, if you like! Roberts, the lift man, will take you up and
introduce you; but I'm afraid you won't find anything that's of any
use. They're handling hundreds of plates and dishes, and they'll be
all lumped together.'
Poirot remained firm, however, and together we visited the
kitchens and questioned the man who had taken the order from Flat
11.
'The order was given from the à la carte menu - for three,' he
explained. 'Soup julienne, filet de sole normande, tournedos of
beef, and a rice soufflé. What time? Just about eight o'clock, I
should say. No, I'm afraid the plates and dishes have been all
washed up by now. Unfortunate. You were thinking of fingerprints, I
suppose?'
'Not exactly,' said Poirot, with an enigmatical smile. 'I am more
interested in Count Foscatini's appetite. Did he partake of every
dish?'
'Yes; but of course I can't say how much of each he ate. The plates
were all soiled, and the dishes empty - that is to say, with the
exception of the rice soufflé. There was a fair amount of that left.'
'Ah!' said Poirot, and seemed satisfied with the fact.
As we descended to the flat again he remarked in a low tone:
'We have decidedly to do with a man of method.'
'Do you mean the murderer, or Count Foscatini?'
'The latter was undoubtedly an orderly gentleman. After imploring
help and announcing his approaching demise, he carefully hung up
the telephone receiver.'
I stared at Poirot. His words now and his recent inquiries gave me
the glimmering of an idea.
'You suspect poison?' I breathed. 'The blow on the head was a
blind.'
Poirot merely smiled.
We re-entered the flat to find the local inspector of police had
arrived with two constables. He was inclined to resent our
appearance, but Poirot calmed him with the mention of our
Scotland Yard friend, Inspector Japp, and we were accorded a
grudging permission to remain. It was a lucky thing we were, for we
had not been back five minutes before an agitated middle-aged
man came rushing into the room with every appearance of grief and
agitation.
This was Graves, valet-butler to the late Count Foscatini. The story
he had to tell was a sensational one.
On the previous morning, two gentlemen had called to see his
master. They were Italians, and the elder of the two, a man of about
forty, gave his name as Signer Ascanio. The younger was a welldressed
lad of about twenty-four.
Count Foscatini was evidently prepared for their visit and
immediately sent Graves out upon some trivial errand. Here the
man paused and hesitated in his story. In the end, however, he
admitted that, curious as to the purport of the interview, he had not
obeyed immediately, but had lingered about endeavouring to hear
something of what was going on.
The conversation was carried on in so low a tone that he was not as
successful as he had hoped; but he gathered enough to make it
clear that some kind of monetary proposition was being discussed,
and that the basis of it was a threat. The discussion was anything
but amicable. In the end, Count Foscatini raised his voice slightly,
and the listener heard these words clearly:
'I have no time to argue further now, gentlemen. If you will dine with
me tomorrow night at eight o’clock, we will resume the discussion.'
Afraid of being discovered listening, Graves had then hurried out to
do his master's errand. This evening the two men had arrived
punctually at eight. During dinner they had talked of indifferent
matters - politics, the weather, and the theatrical world. When
Graves had placed the port upon the table and brought in the
coffee his master told him that he might have the evening off.
'Was that a usual proceeding of his when he had guests?' asked the
inspector.
'No, sir; it wasn't. That's what made me think it must be some
business of a very unusual kind that he was going to discuss with
these gentlemen.'
That finished Graves' story. He had gone out about 8.30, and,
meeting a friend, had accompanied him to the Metropolitan Music
Hall in Edgware Road.
Nobody had seen the two men leave, but the time of the murder was
fixed clearly enough at 8.47. A small clock on the writing-table had
been swept off by Foscatini's arm, and had stopped at that hour,
which agreed with Miss Rider's telephone summons.
The police surgeon had made his examination of the body, and it
was now lying on the couch. I saw the face for the first time - the
olive complexion, the long nose, the luxuriant black moustache, and
the full red lips drawn back from the dazzlingly white teeth. Not
altogether a pleasant face.
'Well,' said the inspector, refastening his notebook. 'The case
seems clear enough. The only difficulty will be to lay our hands on
this Signer Ascanio. I suppose his address is not in the dead man's
pocket-book by any chance?'
As Poirot had said, the late Foscatini was an orderly man. Neatly
written in small, precise handwriting was the inscription, 'Signer
Paolo Ascanio, Grosvenor Hotel.'
The inspector busied himself with the telephone, then turned to us
with a grin.
'Just in time. Our fine gentleman was off to catch the boat train to
the Continong. Well, gentlemen, that's about all we can do here. It's
a bad business, but straightforward enough. One of these Italian
vendetta things, as likely as not.'
Thus airily dismissed, we found our way downstairs. Dr Hawker
was full of excitement.
'Like the beginning of a novel, eh? Real exciting stuff. Wouldn't
believe it if you read about it.'
Poirot did not speak. He was very thoughtful. All the evening he had
hardly opened his lips.
'What says the master detective, eh?' asked Hawker, clapping him
on the back. 'Nothing to work your grey cells over this time.'
'You think not?'
'What could there be?'
'Well, for example, there is the window.'
'The window? But it was fastened. Nobody could have got out or in
that way. I noticed it specially.'
'And why were you able to notice it?'
The doctor looked puzzled. Poirot hastened to explain.
'It is to the curtains I refer. They were not drawn. A little odd, that.
And then there was the coffee. It was very black coffee.'
'Well, what of it?'
'Very black,' repeated Poirot. 'In conjunction with that let us
remember that very little of the rice soufflé was eaten, and we get -
what?'
'Moonshine,' laughed the doctor. 'You're pulling my leg.'
'Never do I pull the leg. Hastings here knows that I am perfectly
serious.'
'I don't know what you are getting at, the same,' I confessed. 'You
don't suspect the manservant, do you? He might have been in with
the gang, and put some dope in the coffee. I suppose they'll test his
alibi?'
'Without doubt, my friend; but it is the alibi of Signor Ascanio that
interests me.'
'You think he has an alibi?'
'That is just what worries me. I have no doubt that we shall soon be
enlightened on that point.'
The Daily Newsmonger enabled us to become conversant with
succeeding events.
Signer Ascanio was arrested and charged with the murder of Count
Foscatini. When arrested, he denied knowing the Count, and
declared he had never been near Regent's Court either on the
evening of the crime or on the previous morning. The younger man
had disappeared entirely. Signer Ascanio had arrived alone at the
Grosvenor Hotel from the Continent two days before the murder. All
efforts to trace the second man failed.
Ascanio, however, was not sent for trial. No less a personage than
the Italian Ambassador himself came forward and testified at the
police-court proceedings that Ascanio had been with him at the
Embassy from eight till nine that evening. The prisoner was
discharged. Naturally, a lot of people thought that the crime was a
political one, and was being deliberately hushed up.
Poirot had taken a keen interest in all these points. Nevertheless, I
was somewhat surprised when he suddenly informed me one
morning that he was expecting a visitor at eleven o'clock, and that
the visitor was none other than Ascanio himself.
'He wishes to consult you?'
'Du tout, Hastings. I wish to consult him.'
'What about?'
'The Regent's Court murder.'
'You are going to prove that he did it?'
'A man cannot be tried twice for murder, Hastings. Endeavour to
have the common sense. Ah, that is our friend's ring.'
A few minutes later Signer Ascanio was ushered in - a small, thin
man with a secretive and furtive glance in his eyes. He remained
standing, darting suspicious glances from one to the other of us.
'Monsieur Poirot?'
My little friend tapped himself gently on the chest.
'Be seated, signor. You received my note. I am determined to get to
the bottom of this mystery. In some small measure you can aid me.
Let us commence. You - in company with a friend - visited the late
Count Foscatini on the morning of Tuesday the 9th - '
The Italian made an angry gesture.
'I did nothing of the sort. I have sworn in court - '
'Précisément - and I have a little idea that you have sworn falsely.'
'You threaten me? Bah! I have nothing to fear from you. I have been
acquitted.'
'Exactly; and as I am not an imbecile, it is not with the gallows I
threaten you - but with publicity. Publicity! I see that you do not like
the word. I had an idea that you would not. My little ideas, you
know, they are very valuable to me. Come, signer, your only chance
is to be frank with me. I do not ask to know whose indiscretions
brought you to England. I know this much, you came for the special
purpose of seeing Count Foscatini.'
'He was not a count,' growled the Italian.
'I have already noted the fact that his name does not appear in the
Almanach de Gotha. Never mind, the title of count is often useful in
the profession of blackmailing.'
'I suppose I might as well be frank. You seem to know a good deal.'
'I have employed my grey cells to some advantage. Come, Signer
Ascanio, you visited the dead man on the Tuesday morning - that is
so, is it not?'
'Yes; but I never went there on the following evening. There was no
need. I will tell you all. Certain information concerning a man of
great position in Italy had come into this scoundrel's possession.
He demanded a big sum of money in return for the papers. I came
over to England to arrange the matter. I called upon him by
appointment that morning. One of the young secretaries of the
Embassy was with me. The Count was more reasonable than I had
hoped, although even then the sum of money I paid him was a huge
one.'
'Pardon, how was it paid?'
'In Italian notes of comparatively small denomination. I paid over
the money then and there. He handed me the incriminating papers.
I never saw him again.'
'Why did you not say all this when you were arrested?'
'In my delicate position I was forced to deny any association with
the man.'
'And how do you account for the events of the evening, then?'
'I can only think that someone must have deliberately impersonated
me. I understand that no money was found in the flat.'
Poirot looked at him and shook his head.
'Strange,' he murmured. 'We all have the little grey cells. And so few
of us know how to use them. Good morning, Signor Ascanio. I
believe your story. It is very much as I had imagined. But I had to
make sure.'
After bowing his guest out, Poirot returned to his armchair and
smiled at me.
'Let us hear M. le Capitaine Hastings on the case.'
'Well, I suppose Ascanio is right - somebody impersonated him.'
'Never, never will you use the brains the good God has given you.
Recall to yourself some words I uttered after leaving the flat that
night. I referred to the window-curtains not being drawn. We are in
the month of June. It is still light at eight o'clock. The light is failing
by half-past. Ça vous dit quelque chose? I perceive a struggling
impression that you will arrive some day. Now let us continue. The
coffee was, as I said, very black. Count Foscatini's teeth were
magnificently white. Coffee stains the teeth. We reason from that
that Count Foscatini did not drink any coffee. Yet there was coffee
in all three cups. Why should anyone pretend Count Foscatini had
drunk coffee when he had not done so?'
I shook my head, utterly bewildered.
'Come, I will help you. What evidence have we that Ascanio and his
friend, or two men posing as them, ever came to the flat that night?
Nobody saw them go in; nobody saw them go out. We have the
evidence of one man and of a host of inanimate objects.'
'You mean?'
'I mean knives and forks and plates and empty dishes. Ah, but it
was a clever idea! Graves is a thief and a scoundrel, but what a
man of method! He overhears a portion of the conversation in the
morning, enough to realize that Ascanio will be in awkward position
to defend himself. The following evening, about eight o'clock, he
tells his master he is wanted at the telephone. Foscatini sits down,
stretches out his hand to the telephone, and from behind Graves
strikes him down with the marble figure. Then quickly to the service
telephone - dinner for three! It comes, he lays the table, dirties the
plates, knives, and forks, etc. But he has to get rid of the food too.
Not only is he a man of brain; he has a resolute and capacious
stomach! But after eating three tournedos, the rice soufflé is too
much for him! He even smokes a cigar and two cigarettes to carry
out the illusion. Ah, but it was magnificently thorough! Then, having
moved on the hands of the clock to 8.47, he smashes it and stops it.
The one thing he does not do is to draw the curtains. But if there
had been a real dinner party the curtains would have been drawn
as soon as the light began to fail. Then he hurries out, mentioning
the guests to the lift man in passing. He hurries to a telephone box,
and as near as possible to 8.47 rings up the doctor with his
master's dying cry. So successful is his idea that no one ever
inquires if a call was put through from Flat 11 at that time.'
'Except Hercule Poirot, I suppose?' I said sarcastically.
'Not even Hercule Poirot,' said my friend, with a smile. 'I am about
to inquire now. I had to prove my point to you first. But you will see,
I shall be right; and then Japp, to whom I have already given a hint,
will be able to arrest the respectable Graves. I wonder how much of
the money he has spent.'
Poirot was right. He always is, confound him!

THE LISTERDALE MYSTERY
Mrs St Vincent was adding up figures. Once or twice she sighed,
and her hand stole to her aching forehead. She had always
disliked arithmetic. It was unfortunate that nowadays her life
should seem to be composed entirely of one particular kind of
sum, the ceaseless adding together of small necessary items of
expenditure making a total that never failed to surprise and alarm
her.
Surely it couldn't come to that! She went back over the figures.
She had made a trifling error in the pence, but otherwise the
figures were correct.
Mrs St Vincent sighed again. Her headache by now was very bad
indeed. She looked up as the door opened and her daughter
Barbara came into the room. Barbara St Vincent was a very pretty
girl; she had her mother's delicate features, and the same proud
turn of the head, but her eyes were dark instead of blue, and she
had a different mouth, a sulky red mouth not without attraction.
"Oh, Mother!" she cried. "Still juggling with those horrid old
accounts? Throw them all into the fire."
"We must know where we are," said Mrs St Vincent uncertainly.
The girl shrugged her shoulders.
"We're always in the same boat," she said dryly. "Damned hard up.
Down to the last penny as usual."
Mrs St Vincent sighed.
"I wish -" she began, and then stopped.
"I must find something to do," said Barbara in hard tones. "And
find it quickly. After all, I have taken that shorthand and typing
course. So have about one million other girls from all I can see!
'What experience?' 'None, but -' 'Oh! Thank you, good morning.
We'll let you know.' But they never do! I must find some other kind
of a job - any job."
"Not yet, dear," pleaded her mother. "Wait a little longer."
Barbara went to the window and stood looking out with unseeing
eyes that took no note of the dingy line of houses opposite.
"Sometimes," she said slowly, "I'm sorry Cousin Amy took me with
her to Egypt last winter. Oh! I know I had fun - about the only fun
I've ever had or am likely to have in my life. I did enjoy myself -
enjoyed myself thoroughly. But it was very unsettling. I mean -
coming back to this."
She swept a hand round the room. Mrs St Vincent followed it with
her eyes and winced. The room was typical of cheap furnished
lodgings. A dusty aspidistra, showily ornamental furniture, a gaudy
wallpaper faded in patches. There were signs that the personality
of the tenants had struggled with that of the landlady; one or two
pieces of good china, much cracked and mended, so that their
saleable value was nil, a piece of embroidery thrown over the back
of the sofa, a water colour sketch of a young girl in the fashion of
twenty years ago, near enough still to Mrs St Vincent not to be
mistaken.
"It wouldn't matter," continued Barbara, "if we'd never known
anything else. But to think of Ansteys -"
She broke off, not trusting herself to speak of that dearly loved
home which had belonged to the St Vincent family for centuries
and which was now in the hands of strangers.
"If only Father - hadn't speculated - and borrowed -"
"My dear," said Mrs St Vincent. "Your father was never, in any
sense of the word, a businessman."
She said it with a graceful kind of finality, and Barbara came over
and gave her an aimless sort of kiss as she murmured, "Poor old
Mums. I won't say anything."
Mrs St Vincent took up her pen again and bent over her desk.
Barbara went back to the window. Presently the girl said:
"Mother. I heard from - from Jim Masterton this morning. He wants
to come and see me."
Mrs St Vincent laid down her pen and looked up sharply.
"Here?" she exclaimed.
"Well, we can't ask him to dinner at the Ritz very well," sneered
Barbara.
Her mother looked unhappy. Again she looked round the room
with innate distaste.
"You're right," said Barbara. "It's a disgusting place. Genteel
poverty! Sounds all right - a whitewashed cottage in the country,
shabby chintzes of good design, bowls of roses, crown Derby tea
service that you wash up yourself. That's what it's like in books. In
real life, with a son starting on the bottom rung of office life, it
means London. Frowsy landladies, dirty children on the stairs,
haddocks for breakfasts that aren't quite - quite and so on."
"If only -" began Mrs St Vincent. "But, really, I'm beginning to be
afraid we can't afford even this room much longer."
"That means a bed-sitting-room - horror! - for you and me," said
Barbara. "And a cupboard under the tiles for Rupert. And when
Jim comes to call, I'll receive him in that dreadful room downstairs
with tabbies all round the walls knitting, and stating at us, and
coughing that dreadful kind of gulping cough they have!"
There was a pause.
"Barbara," said Mrs St Vincent at last. "Do you - I mean - would you
-?"
She stopped, flushing a little.
"You needn't be delicate, Mother," said Barbara. "Nobody is
nowadays. Marry him, I suppose you mean? I would like a shot if he
asked me. But I'm so awfully afraid he won't."
"Oh! Barbara, dear."
"Well, it's one thing seeing me out there with Cousin Amy, moving
(as they say in novelettes) in the best society. He did take a fancy
to me. Now he'll come here and see me in this! And he's a funny
creature, you know, fastidious and old-fashioned. I - I rather like
him for that. It reminds me of Ansteys and the village - everything a
hundred years behind the times, but so - so - oh! I don't know - so
fragrant. Like lavender!"
She laughed, half-ashamed of her eagerness. Mrs Vincent spoke
with a kind of earnest simplicity.
"I should like you to marry Jim Masterton," she said. "He is - one of
us. He is very well off, also, but that I don't mind about so much."
"I do," said Barbara. "I'm sick of being hard up."
"But, Barbara, it isn't -"
"Only for that? No. I do really. I - oh! Mother, can't you see I do?"
Mrs St Vincent looked very unhappy.
"I wish he could see you in your proper setting, darling," she said
wistfully.
"Oh, well!" said Barbara. "Why worry? We might as well try and be
cheerful about things. Sorry I've had such a grouch. Cheer up,
darling."
She bent over her mother, kissed her forehead lightly, and went
out. Mrs St Vincent, relinquishing all attempts at finance, sat down
on the uncomfortable sofa. Her thoughts ran round in circles like
squirrels in a cage.
"One may say what one likes, appearances do put a man off. Not
later - not if they were really engaged. He'd know then what a
sweet, dear girl she is. But it's so easy for young people to take the
tone of their surroundings. Rupert, now, he's quite different from
what he used to be. Not that I want my children to be stuck-up.
That's not it a bit. But I should hate it if Rupert got engaged to that
dreadful girl in the tobacconist's. I daresay she may be a very nice
girl, really. But she's not our kind. It's all so difficult. Poor little
Babs. If I could do anything - anything. But where's the money to
come from? We've sold everything to give Rupert his start. We
really can't even afford this."
To distract herself Mrs St Vincent picked up the Morning Post and
glanced down the advertisements on the front page. Most of them
she knew by heart. People who wanted capital, people who had
capital and were anxious to dispose of it on note of hand alone,
people who wanted to buy teeth (she always wondered why),
people who wanted to sell furs and gowns and who had optimistic
ideas on the subject of price.
Suddenly she stiffened to attention. Again and again she read the
printed words.
"To gentlepeople only. Small house in Westminster, exquisitely
furnished, offered to those who would really care for it. Rent
purely nominal. No agents."
A very ordinary advertisement. She had read many the same or -
well, nearly the same. Nominal rent, that was where the trap lay.
Yet, since she was restless and anxious to escape from her
thoughts, she put on her hat straightaway and took a convenient
bus to the address given in the advertisement.
It proved to be that of a firm of house agents. Not a new bustling
firm - a rather decrepit, old-fashioned place. Rather timidly she
produced the advertisement, which she had torn out, and asked
for particulars.
The white-haired old gentleman who was attending to her stroked
his chin thoughtfully.
"Perfectly. Yes, perfectly, madam. That house, the house
mentioned in the advertisement, is No. 7 Cheviot Place. You would
like an order?"
"I should like to know the rent first?" said Mrs St Vincent.
"Ah! The rent. The exact figure is not settled, but I can assure you
that it is purely nominal."
"Ideas of what is purely nominal can vary," said Mrs St Vincent.
The old gentleman permitted himself to chuckle a little.
"Yes, that's an old trick - an old trick. But you can take my word for
it, it isn't so in this case. Two or three guineas a week, perhaps,
not more."
Mrs St Vincent decided to have the order. Not, of course, that
there was any real likelihood of her being able to afford the place.
But, after all, she might just see it. There must be some grave
disadvantage attaching to it, to be offered at such a price.
But her heart gave a little throb as she looked up at the outside of 7
Cheviot Place. A gem of a house. Queen Anne, and in perfect
condition! A butler answered the door. He had grey hair and little
side whiskers, and the meditative calm of an archbishop. A kindly
archbishop, Mrs St Vincent thought.
He accepted the order with a benevolent air.
"Certainly, madam, I will show you over. The house is ready for
occupation."
He went before her, opening doors, announcing rooms.
"The drawing room, the white study, a powder closet through
here, madam."
It was perfect - a dream. The furniture all of the period, each piece
with signs of wear, but polished with loving care. The loose rugs
were of beautiful dim old colours. In each room were bowls of
fresh flowers. The back of the house looked over the Green Park.
The whole place radiated an old-world charm.
The tears came into Mrs St Vincent's eyes, and she fought them
back with difficulty. So had Ansteys looked - Ansteys...
She wondered whether the butler had noticed her emotion. If so,
he was too much the perfectly trained servant to show it. She liked
these old servants, one felt safe with them, at ease. They were like
friends.
"It is a beautiful house," she said softly. "Very beautiful. I am glad
to have seen it."
"Is it for yourself alone, madam?"
"For myself and my son and daughter. But I'm afraid -"
She broke off. she wanted it so dreadfully - so dreadfully.
She felt instinctively that the butler understood. He did not look at
her, as he said in a detached, impersonal way:
"I happen to be aware, madam, that the owner requires above all
suitable tenants. The rent is of no importance to him. He wants the
house to be tenanted by someone who will really care for and
appreciate it."
"I should appreciate it," said Mrs St Vincent in a low voice.
She turned to go.
"Thank you for showing me over," she said courteously.
"Not at all, madam."
He stood in the doorway, very correct and upright as she walked
away down the street. She thought to herself: "He knows. He's
sorry for me. He's one of the old lot too. He'd like me to have it - not
a labour member, or a button manufacturer! We're dying out, our
sort, but we hang together."
In the end she decided not to go back to the agents. What was the
good? She could afford the rent - but there were servants to be
considered. There would have to be servants in a house like that.
The next morning a letter lay by her plate. It was from the house
agents. It offered her the tenancy of 7 Cheviot Place for six months
at two guineas a week, and went on: "You have, I presume, taken
into consideration the fact that the servants are remaining at the
landlord's expense? It is really a unique offer."
It was. So startled was she by it, that she read the letter out. A fire
of questions followed and she described her visit of yesterday.
"Secretive little Mums!" cried Barbara. "Is it really so lovely?"
Rupert cleared his throat and began a judicial cross-questioning.
"There's something behind all this. It's fishy, if you ask me.
Decidedly fishy."
"So's my egg," said Barbara, wrinkling her nose. "Ugh! Why should
there be something behind it? That's just like you, Rupert, always
making mysteries out of nothing. It's those dreadful detective
stories you're always reading."
"The rent's a joke," said Rupert. "In the city," he added
importantly, "one gets wise to all sorts of queer things. I tell you,
there's something very fishy about this business."
"Nonsense," said Barbara. "House belongs to a man with lots of
money, he's fond of it, and he wants it lived in by decent people
while he's away. Something of that kind. Money's probably no
object to him."
"What did you say the address was?" asked Rupert of his mother.
"Seven Cheviot Place."
"Whew!" He pushed back his chair. "I say, this is exciting. That's
the house Lord Listerdale disappeared from."
"Are you sure?" asked Mrs St Vincent doubtfully.
"Positive. He's got a lot of other houses all over London, but this is
the one he lived in. He walked out of it one evening saying he was
going to his club, and nobody ever saw him again. Supposed to
have done a bunk to East Africa or somewhere like that, but
nobody knows why. Depend upon it, he was murdered in hat
house. You say there's a lot of panelling?"
"Ye-es," said Mrs St Vincent faintly; "but -"
Rupert gave her no time. He went on with immense enthusiasm.
"Panelling! There you are. Sure to be a secret recess somewhere.
Body's been stuffed in there and has been there ever since.
Perhaps it was embalmed first."
"Rupert, dear, don't talk nonsense," said his mother.
"Don't be a double-dyed idiot," said Barbara. "You've been taking
that peroxide blonde to the pictures too much."
Rupert rose with dignity - such dignity as his lanky and awkward
age allowed, and delivered a final ultimatum.
"You take that house, Mums. I'll ferret out the mystery. You see if I
don't."
Rupert departed hurriedly, in fear of being late at the office.
The eyes of the two women met.
"Could we, Mother?" murmured Barbara tremulously. "Oh! If we
could."
"The servants," said Mrs St Vincent pathetically, "would eat, you
know. I mean, of course, one would want them to - but that's the
drawback. One can so easily - just do without things - when it's
only oneself."
She looked piteously at Barbara, and the girl nodded.
"We must think it over," said the mother.
But in reality her mind was made up. She had seen the sparkle in
the girl's eyes. She thought to herself: "Jim Masterton must see
her in proper surroundings. This is a chance - a wonderful chance.
I must take it."
She sat down and wrote to the agents accepting their offer.
II
"Quentin, where did the lilies come from? I really can't buy
expensive flowers."
"They were sent up from King's Cheviot, madam. It has always
been the custom here."
The butler withdrew. Mrs St Vincent heaved a sigh of relief. What
would she do without Quentin? He made everything so easy. She
thought to herself: "It's too good to last. I shall wake up soon, I
know I shall, and find it's been all a dream. I'm so happy here - two
months already, and it's passed like a flash."
Life indeed had been astonishingly pleasant. Quentin, the butler,
had displayed himself the autocrat of 7 Cheviot Place. "If you will
leave everything to me, madam," he had said respectfully. "You
will find it the best way."
Each week, he brought her the housekeeping books, their totals
astonishingly low. There were only two other servants, a cook and
a housemaid. They were pleasant in manner, and efficient in their
duties, but it was Quentin who ran the house. Game and poultry
appeared on the table sometimes, causing Mrs St Vincent
solicitude. Quentin reassured her. Sent up from Lord Listerdale's
country seat, King's Cheviot, or from his Yorkshire moor. "It has
always been the custom, madam."
Privately Mrs St Vincent doubted whether the absent Lord
Listerdale would agree with those words. She was inclined to
suspect Quentin of usurping his master's authority. It was clear
that he had taken a fancy to them, and that in his eyes nothing was
too good for them.
Her curiosity aroused by Rupert's declaration, Mrs St Vincent had
made a tentative reference to Lord Listerdale when she next
interviewed the house agents. The white-haired old gentleman had
responded immediately.
Yes, Lord Listerdale was in East Africa, had been there for the last
eighteen months.
"Our client is rather an eccentric man," he had said, smiling
broadly. "He left London in a most unconventional manner, as you
may perhaps remember? Not a word to anyone. The newspapers
got hold of it. There were actually inquiries on foot at Scotland
Yard. Luckily, news was received from Lord Listerdale himself
from East Africa. He invested his cousin, Colonel Carfax, with
power of attorney. It is the latter who conducts all Lord
Listerdale's affairs. Yes, rather eccentric, I fear. He has always
been a great traveller in the wilds - it is quite on the cards that he
may not return for years to England, though he is getting on in
years."
"Surely lie is not so very old," said Mrs St Vincent, with a sudden
memory of a bluff, bearded face, rather like an Elizabethan sailor,
which she had once noticed in an illustrated magazine.
"Middle-aged," said the white-haired gentleman. "Fifty-three,
according to Debrett."
This conversation Mrs St Vincent had retailed to Rupert with the
intention of rebuking that young gentleman.
Rupert, however, was undismayed.
"It looks fishier than ever to me," he had declared. "Who's this
Colonel Carfax? Probably comes into the title if anything happens
to Listerdale. The letter from East Africa was probably forged. In
three years, or whatever it is, this Carfax will presume death, and
take the title. Meantime, he's got all the handling of the estate.
Very fishy, I call it."
He had condescended graciously to approve the house. In his
leisure moments he was inclined to tap the panelling and make
elaborate measurements for the possible location of a secret
room, but little by little his interest in the mystery of Lord
Listerdale abated. He was also less enthusiastic on the subject of
the tobacconist's daughter. Atmosphere tells.
To Barbara the house had brought great satisfaction. Jim
Masterton had come home, and was a frequent visitor. He and Mrs
St Vincent got on splendidly together, and he said something to
Barbara one day that startled her.
"This house is a wonderful setting for your mother, you know."
"For Mother?"
"Yes. It was made for her! She belongs to it in an extraordinary
way. You know there's something queer about this house
altogether, something uncanny and haunting."
"Don't get like Rupert," Barbara implored him. "He is convinced
that the wicked Colonel Carfax murdered Lord Listerdale and hid
his body under the floor."
Masterton laughed.
"I admire Rupert's detective zeal. No, I didn't mean anything of that
kind. But there's something in the air, some atmosphere that one
doesn't quite understand."
They had been three months in Cheviot Place when Barbara came
to her mother with a radiant face.
"Jim and I - we're engaged. Yes - last night. Oh, Mother! It all
seems like a fairy tale come true."
"Oh, my dear! I'm so glad - so glad."
Mother and daughter clasped each other close.
"You know Jim's almost as much in love with you as he is with me,"
said Barbara at last, with a mischievous laugh.
Mrs St Vincent blushed very prettily.
"He is," persisted the girl. "You thought this house would make
such a beautiful setting for me, and all the time it's really a setting
for you. Rupert and I don't quite belong here. You do."
"Don't talk nonsense, darling."
"It's not nonsense. There's a flavour of enchanted castle about it,
with you as an enchanted princess and Quentin as - as - oh! - a
benevolent magician."
Mrs St Vincent laughed and admitted the last item.
Rupert received the news of his sister's engagement very calmly.
"I thought there was something of the kind in the wind," he
observed sapiently.
He and his mother were dining alone together. Barbara was out
with Jim.
Quentin placed the port in front of him and withdrew noiselessly.
"That's a rum old bird," said Rupert, nodding towards the closed
door. "There's something odd about him, you know, something -"
"Not fishy?" interrupted Mrs St Vincent, with a faint smile.
"Why, Mother, how did you know what I was going to say?"
demanded Rupert in all seriousness.
"It's rather a word of yours, darling. You think everything is fishy. I
suppose you have an idea that it was Quentin who did away with
Lord Listerdale and put him under the floor?"
"Behind the panelling," corrected Rupert. "You always get things a
little bit wrong, Mother. No, I've inquired about that. Quentin was
down at King's Cheviot at the time."
Mrs St Vincent smiled at him, as she rose from the table and went
up to the drawing room. In some ways Rupert was a long time
growing up.
Yet a sudden wonder swept over her for the first time as to Lord
Listerdale's reasons for leaving England so abruptly. There must
be something behind it, to account for that sudden decision. She
was still thinking the matter over when Quentin came in with the
coffee tray, and she spoke out impulsively.
"You have been with Lord Listerdale a long time, haven't you,
Quentin?"
"Yes, madam; since I was a lad of twenty-one. That was in the late
lord's time. I started as third footman."
"You must know Lord Listerdale very well. What kind of a man is
he?"
The butler turned the tray a little, so that she could help herself to
sugar more conveniently, as he replied in even unemotional tones:
"Lord Listerdale was a very selfish gentleman, madam; with no
consideration for others."
He removed the tray and bore it from the room. Mrs St Vincent sat
with her coffee cup in her hand and a puzzled frown on her face.
Something struck her as odd in the speech apart from the views it
expressed. In another minute it flashed home to her.
Quentin had used the word "was," not "is." But then, he must think
- must believe - She pulled herself up. She was as bad as Rupert!
But a very definite uneasiness assailed her. Afterwards she dated
her first suspicions from that moment.
With Barbara's happiness and future assured, she had time to
think her own thoughts, and against her will, they began to centre
round the mystery of Lord Listerdale. What was the real story?
Whatever it was, Quentin knew something about it. Those had
been odd words of his - "a very selfish gentleman - no
consideration for others." What lay behind them? He had spoken
as a judge might speak, detachedly and impartially.
Was Quentin involved in Lord Listerdale's disappearance? Had he
taken an active part in any tragedy there might have been? After
all, ridiculous as Rupert's assumption had seemed at the time, that
single letter with its power of attorney coming from East Africa
was - well, open to suspicion.
But try as she would, she could not believe any real evil of Quentin.
Quentin, she told herself over and over again, was good - she used
the word as simply as a child might have done. Quentin was good.
But he knew something!
She never spoke with him again of his master. The subject was
apparently forgotten. Rupert and Barbara had other things to think
of, and there were no further discussions.
It was towards the end of August that her vague surmises
crystallized into realities. Rupert had gone for a fortnight's holiday
with a friend who had a motorcycle and trailer. It was some ten
days after his departure that Mrs St Vincent was startled to see
him rush into the room where she sat writing.
"Rupert!" she exclaimed.
"I know, Mother. You didn't expect to see me for another three
days. But something's happened. Anderson - my pal, you know -
didn't much care where he went, so I suggested having a look in at
King's Cheviot -"
"King's Cheviot? But why -?"
"You know perfectly well, Mother, that I've always scented
something fishy about things here. Well, I had a look at the old
place - it's let, you know - nothing there. Not that I actually
expected to find anything - I was just nosing round, so to speak."
Yes, she thought, Rupert was very like a dog at this moment.
Hunting in circles for something vague and undefined, led by
instinct, busy and happy.
"It was when we were passing through a village about eight or nine
miles away that it happened - that I saw him, I mean."
"Saw whom?"
"Quentin - just going into a little cottage. Something fishy here, I
said to myself, and we stopped the bus, and I went back. I rapped
on the door and he himself opened it."
"But I don't understand. Quentin hasn't been away -"
"I'm coming to that, Mother. If you'd only listen and not interrupt. It
was Quentin, and it wasn't Quentin, if you know what I mean."
Mrs St Vincent clearly did not know, so he elucidated matters
further.
"It was Quentin all right, but it wasn't our Quentin. It was the real
man."
"Rupert!"
"You listen. It was taken in myself at first, and said: 'It is Quentin,
isn't it?' And the old johnny said: 'Quite right, sir, that is my name.
What can I do for you?' And then I saw that it wasn't our man,
though it was precious like him, voice and all. I asked a few
questions, and it all came out. The old chap hadn't an idea of
anything fishy being on. He'd been butler to Lord Listerdale, all
right, and was retired on a pension and given this cottage just
about the time that Lord Listerdale was supposed to have gone off
to Africa. You see where that leads us. This man's an impostor -
he's playing the part of Quentin for purposes of his own. My theory
is that he came up to town that evening, pretending to be the
butler from King's Cheviot, got an interview with Lord Listerdale,
killed him and hid his body behind the panelling. It's an old house,
there's sure to be a secret recess -"
"Oh, don't let's go into all that again," interrupted Mrs St Vincent
wildly. "I can't bear it. Why should he - that's what I want to know -
why? If he did such a thing - which I don't believe for one minute,
mind you - what was the reason for it all?"
"You're right," said Rupert. "Motive - that's important. Now I've
made inquiries. Lord Listerdale had a lot of house property. In the
last two days I've discovered that practically every one of these
houses of his have been let in the last eighteen months to people
like ourselves for a merely nominal rent - and with the proviso that
the servants should remain. And in every case Quentin himself -
the man calling himself Quentin, I mean - has been there for part of
the time as butler. That looks as though there were something -
jewels, or papers - secreted in one of Lord Listerdale's houses,
and the gang doesn't know which. I'm assuming a gang, but of
course this fellow Quentin may be in it single-handed. There's a -"
Mrs St Vincent interrupted him with a certain amount of
determination:
"Rupert! Do stop talking for one minute. You're making my head
spin. Anyway, what you are saying is nonsense - about gangs and
hidden papers."
"There's another theory," admitted Rupert. "This Quentin may be
someone that Lord Listerdale has injured. The real butler told me a
long story about a man called Samuel Lowe - an undergardener he
was, and about the same height and build as Quentin himself. He'd
got a grudge against Listerdale -"
Mrs St Vincent started.
"With no consideration for others." The words came back to her
mind in their passionless, measured accents. Inadequate words,
but what might they not stand for?
In her absorption she hardly listened to Rupert. He made a rapid
explanation of something that she did not take in, and went
hurriedly from the room.
Then she woke up. Where had Rupert gone? What was he going to
do? She had not caught his last words. Perhaps he was going for
the police. In that case -
She rose abruptly and rang the bell. With his usual promptness,
Quentin answered it.
"You rang, madam?"
"Yes. Come in, please, and shut the door."
The butler obeyed, and Mrs St Vincent was silent a moment while
she studied him with earnest eyes.
She thought: "He's been kind to me - nobody knows how kind. The
children wouldn't understand. This wild story of Rupert's may be
all nonsense - On the other hand, there may - yes, there may - be
something in it. Why should one judge? One can't know. The rights
and wrongs of it, I mean... And I'd stake my life - yes, I would! - on
his being a good man."
Flushed and tremulous, she spoke.
"Quentin, Mr Rupert has just got back. He has been down to King's
Cheviot - to a village near there -"
She stopped, noticing the quick start he was not able to conceal.
"He has - seen someone," she went on in measured accents.
She thought to herself: "There - he's warned. At any rate, he's
warned."
After that first quick start, Quentin had resumed his unruffled
demeanour, but his eyes were fixed on her face, watchful and
keen, with something in them she had not seen there before. They
were, for the first time, the eyes of a man and not of a servant.
He hesitated for a minute, then said in a voice which also had
subtly changed:
"Why do you tell me this, Mrs St Vincent?"
Before she could answer, the door flew open and Rupert strode
into the room. With him was a dignified middle-aged man with little
side whiskers and the air of a benevolent archbishop. Quentin!
"Here he is," said Rupert. "The real Quentin. I had him outside in
the taxi. Now, Quentin, look at this man and tell me - is he Samuel
Lowe?"
It was for Rupert a triumphant moment. But it was short-lived;
almost at once he scented something wrong. For while the real
Quentin was looking abashed and highly uncomfortable, the
second Quentin was smiling a broad smile of undisguised
enjoyment.
He slapped his embarrassed duplicate on the back.
"It's all right, Quentin. Got to let the cat out of the bag sometime, I
suppose. You can tell 'em who I am."
The dignified stranger drew himself up.
"This, sir," he announced in a reproachful tone, "is my master,
Lord Listerdale, sir."
The next minute beheld many things. First, the complete collapse
of the cocksure Rupert. Before he knew what was happening, his
mouth still open from the shock of the discovery, he found himself
being gently manoeuvred towards the door, a friendly voice that
was, and yet was not, familiar in his ear.
"It's quite all right, my boy. No bones broken. But I want a word
with your mother. Very good work of yours, to ferret me out like
this."
He was outside on the landing gazing at the shut door. The real
Quentin was standing by his side, a gentle stream of explanation
flowing from his lips. Inside the room Lord Listerdale was fronting
Mrs St Vincent.
"Let me explain - if I can! I've been a selfish devil all my life - the
fact came home to me one day. I thought I'd try a little altruism for
a change, and being a fantastic kind of fool, I started my career
fantastically. I'd sent subscriptions to odd things, but I felt the
need of doing something - well, something personal. I've been
sorry always for the class that can't beg, that must suffer in silence
- poor gentlefolk. I have a lot of house property. I conceived the
idea of leasing these houses to people who - well, needed and
appreciated them. Young couples with their way to make, widows
with sons and daughters starting in the world. Quentin has been
more than butler to me; he's a friend. With his consent and
assistance I borrowed his personality. I've always had a talent for
acting. The idea came to me on my way to the club one night, and I
went straight off to talk it over with Quentin. When I found they
were making a fuss about my disappearance, I arranged that a
letter should come from me in East Africa. In it, I gave full
instructions to my cousin, Maurice Carfax. And - well, that's the
long and short of it."
He broke off rather lamely, with an appealing glance at Mrs St
Vincent. She stood very straight, and her eyes met his steadily.
"It was a kind plan," she said. "A very unusual one, and one that
does you credit. I am - most grateful. But - of course, you
understand that we cannot stay?"
"I expected that," he said. "Your pride won't let you accept what
you'd probably style 'charity.'"
"Isn't that what it is?" she asked steadily.
"No," he answered. "Because I ask something in exchange."
"Something?"
"Everything." His voice rang out, the voice of one accustomed to
dominate.
"When I was twenty-three," he went on, "I married the girl I loved.
She died a year later. Since then I have been very lonely. I have
wished very much I could find a certain lady - the lady of my
dreams..."
"Am I that?" she asked, very low. "I am so old - so faded."
He laughed.
"Old? You are younger than either of your children. Now I am old, if
you like."
But her laugh rang out in turn, a soft ripple of amusement.
"You? You arc a boy still. A boy who loves to dress up!"
She held out her hands and he caught them in his.