The Jewel Robbery at the Grand Metropolitan
'Poirot,' I said, 'a change of air would do you good.'
'You think so, mon ami?'
'I am sure of it.'
'Eh - eh?' said my friend, smiling, 'It is all arranged, then?'
'You will come?'
'Where do you propose to take me?'
'Brighton. As a matter of fact, a friend of mine in the City put me on
to a very good thing, and - well, I have money to burn, as the saying
goes. I think a weekend at the Grand Metropolitan would do us all
the good in the world.'
'Thank you, I accept most gratefully. You have the good heart to
think of an old man. And the good heart, it is in the end worth all the
little grey cells. Yes, yes, I who speak to you am in danger of
forgetting that sometimes.'
I did not quite relish the implication. I fancy that Poirot is sometimes
a little inclined to underestimate my mental capacities. But his
pleasure was so evident that I put my slight annoyance aside.
'Then, that's all right,' I said hastily.
Saturday evening saw us dining at the Grand Metropolitan in the
midst of a gay throng. All the world and his wife seemed to be at
Brighton. The dresses were marvellous, and the jewels - worn
sometimes with more love of display than good taste - were
something magnificent.
'Hein, it is a sight, this!' murmured Poirot. 'This is the home of the
Profiteer, is it not so, Hastings?'
'Supposed to be,' I replied. 'But we'll hope they aren't all tarred with
the Profiteering brush.'
Poirot gazed round him placidly.
'The sight of so many jewels makes me wish I had turned my brains
to crime, instead of to its detection. What a magnificent opportunity
for some thief of distinction! Regard, Hastings, that stout woman by
the pillar. She is, as you would say, plastered with gems.'
I followed his eyes.
'Why,' I exclaimed, 'it's Mrs Opalsen.'
'You know her?'
'Slightly. Her husband is a rich stockbroker who made a fortune in
the recent Oil boom.'
After dinner we ran across the Opalsens in the lounge, and I
introduced Poirot to them. We chatted for a few minutes, and ended
by having our coffee together.
Poirot said a few words in praise of some of the costlier gems
displayed on the lady's ample bosom, and she brightened up at
once.
'It's a perfect hobby of mine, Mr Poirot. I just love jewellery. Ed
knows my weakness, and every time things go well he brings me
something new. You are interested in precious stones?'
'I have had a good deal to do with them one time and another,
madame. My profession has brought me into contact with some of
the most famous jewels in the world.'
He went on to narrate, with discreet pseudonyms, the story of the
historic jewels of a reigning house, and Mrs Opalsen listened with
bated breath.
'There now,' she exclaimed, as he ended. 'If it isn't just like a play!
You know, I've got some pearls of my own that have a history
attached to them. I believe it's supposed to be one of the finest
necklaces in the world - the pearls are so beautifully matched and
so perfect in colour. I declare I really must run up and get it!'
'Oh, madame,' protested Poirot, 'you are too amiable. Pray do not
derange yourself!'
'Oh, but I'd like to show it to you.'
The buxom dame waddled across to the lift briskly enough. Her
husband, who had been talking to me, looked at Poirot inquiringly.
'Madame your wife is so amiable as to insist on showing me her
pearl necklace,' explained the latter.
'Oh, the pearls!' Opalsen smiled in a satisfied fashion. 'Well, they
are worth seeing. Cost a pretty penny too! Still, the money's there
all right; I could get what I paid for them any day - perhaps more.
May have to, too, if things go on as they are now. Money's
confoundedly tight in the City. All this infernal EPD.' He rambled on,
launching into technicalities where I could not follow him.
He was interrupted by a small page-boy who approached and
murmured something in his ear.
'Eh - what? I'll come at once. Not taken ill, is she? Excuse me,
gentlemen.'
He left us abruptly. Poirot leaned back and lit one of his tiny
Russian cigarettes. Then, carefully and meticulously, he arranged
the empty coffee-cups in a neat row, and beamed happily on the
result.
The minutes passed. The Opalsens did not return.
'Curious,' I remarked, at length. 'I wonder when they will come
back.'
Poirot watched the ascending spirals of smoke, and then said
thoughtfully:
'They will not come back.'
'Why?'
'Because, my friend, something has happened.'
'What sort of thing? How do you know?' I asked curiously.
Poirot smiled.
'A few moments ago the manager came hurriedly out of his office
and ran upstairs. He was much agitated. The lift-boy is deep in talk
with one of the pages. The lift-bell has rung three times, but he
heeds it not. Thirdly, even the waiters are distrait; and to make a
waiter distrait - ' Poirot shook his head with an air of finality. 'The
affair must indeed be of the first magnitude. Ah, it is as I thought!
Here come the police.'
Two men had just entered the hotel - one in uniform, the other in
plain clothes. They spoke to a page, and were immediately ushered
upstairs. A few minutes later, the same boy descended and came
up to where we were sitting.
'Mr Opalsen's compliments, and would you step upstairs?'
Poirot sprang nimbly to his feet. One would have said that he
awaited the summons. I followed with no less alacrity.
The Opalsens' apartments were situated on the first floor. After
knocking on the door, the page-boy retired, and we answered the
summons, 'Come in!' A strange scene met our eyes. The room was
Mrs Opalsen's bedroom, and in the centre of it, lying back in an
armchair, was the lady herself, weeping violently. She presented an
extraordinary spectacle, with the tears making great furrows in the
powder with which her complexion was liberally coated. Mr
Opalsen was striding up and down angrily. The two police officials
stood in the middle of the room, one with a notebook in hand. An
hotel chambermaid, looking frightened to death, stood by the
fireplace; and on the other side of the room a Frenchwoman,
obviously Mrs Opalsen's maid, was weeping and wringing her
hands, with an intensity of grief that rivalled that of her mistress.
Into this pandemonium stepped Poirot, neat and smiling.
Immediately, with an energy surprising in one of her bulk, Mrs
Opalsen sprang from her chair towards him.
'There now; Ed may say what he likes, but I believe in luck, I do. It
was fated I should meet you the way I did this evening, and I've a
feeling that if you can't get my pearls back for me nobody can.'
'Calm yourself, I pray of you, madame.' Poirot patted her hand
soothingly. 'Reassure yourself. All will be well. Hercule Poirot will
aid you!'
Mr Opalsen turned to the police inspector.
'There will be no objection to my - er - calling in this gentleman, I
suppose?'
'None at all, sir,' replied the man civilly, but with complete
indifference. 'Perhaps now your lady's feeling better she'll just let
us have the facts?'
Mrs Opalsen looked helplessly at Poirot. He led her back to her
chair.
'Seat yourself, madame, and recount to us the whole history
without agitating yourself.'
Thus abjured, Mrs Opalsen dried her eyes gingerly, and began.
'I came upstairs after dinner to fetch my pearls for Mr Poirot here to
see. The chambermaid and Célestine were both in the room as
usual - '
'Excuse me, madame, but what do you mean by "as usual"?'
Mr Opalsen explained.
'I make it a rule that no one is to come into this room unless
Célestine, the maid, is there also. The chambermaid does the room
in the morning while Célestine is present, and comes in after dinner
to turn down the beds under the same conditions; otherwise she
never enters the room.'
'Well, as I was saying,' continued Mrs Opalsen, 'I came up. I went to
the drawer here' - she indicated the bottom right-hand drawer of
the knee-hole dressing-table - 'took out my jewel-case and unlocked
it. It seemed quite as usual - but the pearls were not there!'
The inspector had been busy with his notebook. 'When had you last
seen them?' he asked.
'They were there when I went down to dinner.'
'You are sure?'
'Quite sure. I was uncertain whether to wear them or not, but in the
end I decided on the emeralds, and put them back in the jewelcase.'
'Who locked up the jewel-case?'
'I did. I wear the key on a chain round my neck.' She held it up as
she spoke.
The inspector examined it, and shrugged his shoulders.
'The thief must have had a duplicate key. No difficult matter. The
lock is quite a simple one. What did you do after you'd locked the
jewel-case?'
'I put it back in the bottom drawer where I always keep it.'
'You didn't lock the drawer?'
'No, I never do. My maid remains in the room till I come up, so
there's no need.'
The inspector's face grew graver.
'Am I to understand that the jewels were there when you went down
to dinner, and that since then the maid has not left the room?'
Suddenly, as though the horror of her own situation for the first
time burst upon her, Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and,
flinging herself upon Poirot, poured out a torrent of incoherent
French.
The suggestion was infamous! That she should be suspected of
robbing Madame! The police were well known to be of a stupidity
incredible! But Monsieur, who was a Frenchman -
'A Belgian,' interjected Poirot, but Célestine paid no attention to the
correction.
Monsieur would not stand by and see her falsely accused, while
that infamous chambermaid was allowed to go scot-free. She had
never liked her - a bold, red-faced thing - a born thief. She had said
from the first that she was not honest. And had kept a sharp watch
over her too, when she was doing Madame's room! Let those idiots
of policemen search her, and if they did not find Madame's pearls
on her it would be very surprising!
Although this harangue was uttered in rapid and virulent French,
Célestine had interlarded it with a wealth of gesture, and the
chambermaid realized at least a part of her meaning. She reddened
angrily.
'If that foreign woman's saying I took the pearls, it's a lie!' she
declared heatedly. 'I never so much as saw them.'
'Search her!' screamed the other. 'You will find it is as I say.'
'You're a liar - do you hear?' said the chambermaid, advancing upon
her. 'Stole 'em yourself, and want to put it on me. Why, I was only in
the room about three minutes before the lady come up, and then
you were sitting here the whole time, as you always do, like a cat
watching a mouse.'
The inspector looked across inquiringly at Célestine. 'Is that true?
Didn't you leave the room at all?'
'I did not actually leave her alone,' admitted Célestine reluctantly,
'but I went into my own room through the door here twice - once to
fetch a reel of cotton, and once for my scissors. She must have
done it then.'
'You wasn't gone a minute,' retorted the chambermaid angrily. 'Just
popped out and in again. I'd be glad if the police would search me.
I’ve nothing to be afraid of.'
At this moment there was a tap at the door. The inspector went to it.
His face brightened when he saw who it was.
'Ah!' he said. 'That's rather fortunate. I sent for one of our female
searchers, and she's just arrived. Perhaps if you wouldn't mind
going into the room next door.'
He looked at the chambermaid, who stepped across the threshold
with a toss of her head, the searcher following her closely.
The French girl had sunk sobbing into a chair. Poirot was looking
round the room, the main features of which I have made clear by a
sketch.
'Where does that door lead?' he inquired, nodding his head
towards the one by the window.
'Into the next apartment, I believe,' said the inspector. 'It's bolted,
anyway, on this side.'
Poirot walked across to it, tried it, then drew back the bolt and tried
it again.
'And on the other side as well,' he remarked. 'Well, that seems to
rule out that.'
He walked over to the windows, examining each of them in turn.
'And again - nothing. Not even a balcony outside.'
'Even if there were,' said the inspector impatiently, 'I don't see how
that would help us, if the maid never left the room.'
'Évidemment,' said Poirot, not disconcerted. 'As Mademoiselle is
positive she did not leave the room - '
He was interrupted by the reappearance of the chamber-maid and
the police searcher.
'Nothing,' said the latter laconically.
'I should hope not, indeed,' said the chambermaid virtuously. 'And
that French hussy ought to be ashamed of herself taking away an
honest girl's character!'
'There, there, my girl; that's all right,' said the inspector, opening
the door. 'Nobody suspects you. You go along and get on with your
work.'
The chambermaid went unwillingly.
'Going to search her?' she demanded, pointing at Célestine.
'Yes, yes!' He shut the door on her and turned the key.
Célestine accompanied the searcher into the small room in her
turn. A few minutes later she also returned. Nothing had been found
on her.
The inspector's face grew graver.
'I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to come along with me all the same,
miss.' He turned to Mrs Opalsen. 'I'm sorry, madam, but all the
evidence points that way. If she's not got them on her, they're
hidden somewhere about the room.'
Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and clung to Poirot's arm. The
latter bent and whispered something in the girl's ear. She looked up
at him doubtfully.
'Si, si, mon enfant - I assure you it is better not to resist.' Then he
turned to the inspector. 'You permit, monsieur? A little experiment -
purely for my own satisfaction.'
'Depends on what it is,' replied the police officer non-committally.
Poirot addressed Célestine once more.
'You have told us that you went into your room to fetch a reel of
cotton. Whereabouts was it?'
'On top of the chest of drawers, monsieur.'
'And the scissors?'
'They also.'
'Would it be troubling you too much, mademoiselle, to ask you to
repeat those two actions? You were sitting here with your work,
you say?'
Célestine sat down, and then, at a sign from Poirot, rose, passed
into the adjoining room, took up an object from the chest of
drawers, and returned.
Poirot divided his attention between her movements and a large
turnip of a watch which he held in the palm of his hand.
'Again, if you please, mademoiselle.'
At the conclusion of the second performance, he made a note in his
pocket-book, and returned the watch to his pocket.
'Thank you, mademoiselle. And you, monsieur' - he bowed to the
inspector - 'for your courtesy.'
The inspector seemed somewhat entertained by this excessive
politeness. Célestine departed in a flood of tears, accompanied by
the woman and the plain-clothes official.
Then, with a brief apology to Mrs Opalsen, the inspector set to work
to ransack the room. He pulled out drawers, opened cupboards,
completely unmade the bed, and tapped the floor. Mr Opalsen
looked on sceptically.
'You really think you will find them?'
'Yes, sir. It stands to reason. She hadn't time to take them out of the
room. The lady's discovering the robbery so soon upset her plans.
No, they're here right enough. One of the two must have hidden
them - and it's very unlikely for the chambermaid to have done so.'
'More than unlikely - impossible!'' said Poirot quietly.
'Eh?' The inspector stared.
Poirot smiled modestly.
'I will demonstrate. Hastings, my good friend, take my watch in your
hand - with care. It is a family heirloom! Just now I timed
Mademoiselle's movements - her first absence from the room was
of twelve seconds, her second of fifteen. Now observe my actions.
Madame will have the kindness to give me the key of the jewel-case.
I thank you. My friend Hastings will have the kindness to say "Go!"'
'Go! 'I said.
With almost incredible swiftness, Poirot wrenched open the drawer
of the dressing-table, extracted the jewel-case, fitted the key in the
lock, opened the case, selected a piece of jewellery, shut and
locked the case, and returned it to the drawer, which he pushed to
again. His movements were like lightning.
'Well, mon ami?' he demanded of me breathlessly.
'Forty-six seconds,' I replied.
'You see?' He looked round. 'There would not have been time for
the chambermaid even to take the necklace out, far less hide it.'
'Then that settles it on the maid,' said the inspector with
satisfaction, and returned to his search. He passed into the maid's
bedroom next door.
Poirot was frowning thoughtfully. Suddenly he shot a question at Mr
Opalsen.
'This necklace - it was, without doubt, insured?'
Mr Opalsen looked a trifle surprised at the question.
'Yes,' he said hesitatingly, 'that is so.'
'But what does that matter?' broke in Mrs Opalsen tearfully. 'It's my
necklace I want. It was unique. No money could be the same.'
'I comprehend, madame,' said Poirot soothingly. 'I comprehend
perfectly. To la femme sentiment is everything - is it not so? But,
monsieur, who has not the so fine susceptibility, will doubtless find
some slight consolation in the fact.'
'Of course, of course,' said Mr Opalsen rather uncertainly. 'Still - '
He was interrupted by a shout of triumph from the inspector. He
came in dangling something from his fingers.
With a cry, Mrs Opalsen heaved herself up from her chair. She was
a changed woman.
'Oh, oh, my necklace!'
She clasped it to her breast with both hands. We crowded round.
'Where was it?' demanded Opalsen.
'Maid's bed. In among the springs of the wire mattress. She must
have stolen it and hidden it there before the chambermaid arrived
on the scene.'
'You permit, madame?' said Poirot gently. He took the necklace
from her and examined it closely; then handed it back with a bow.
'I'm afraid, madam, you'll have to hand it over to us for the time
being,' said the inspector. 'We shall want it for the charge. But it
shall be returned to you as soon as possible.'
Mr Opalsen frowned.
'Is that necessary?'
'I'm afraid so, sir. Just a formality.'
'Oh, let him take it, Ed!' cried his wife. 'I'd feel safer if he did. I
shouldn't sleep a wink thinking someone else might try and get hold
of it. That wretched girl! And I would never have believed it of her.'
'There, there, my dear, don't take on so.'
I felt a gentle pressure on my arm. It was Poirot.
'Shall we slip away, my friend? I think our services are no longer
needed.'
Once outside, however, he hesitated, and then, much to my
surprise, he remarked:
'I should rather like to see the room next door.'
The door was not locked, and we entered. The room, which was a
large double one, was unoccupied. Dust lay about rather
noticeably, and my sensitive friend gave a characteristic grimace
as he ran his finger round a rectangular mark on a table near the
window.
'The service leaves to be desired,' he observed dryly.
He was staring thoughtfully out of the window, and seemed to have
fallen into a brown study.
'Well?' I demanded impatiently. 'What did we come in here for?'
He started.
'Je vous demande pardon, mon ami. I wished to see if the door was
really bolted on this side also.'
'Well,' I said, glancing at the door which communicated with the
room we had just left, 'it is bolted.'
Poirot nodded. He still seemed to be thinking.
'And anyway,' I continued, 'what does it matter? The case is over. I
wish you'd had more chance of distinguishing yourself. But it was
the kind of case that even a stiff-backed idiot like that inspector
couldn't go wrong over.'
Poirot shook his head.
'The case is not over, my friend. It will not be over until we find out
who stole the pearls.'
'But the maid did!'
'Why do you say that? '
'Why,' I stammered, 'they were found - actually in her mattress.'
'Ta, ta, ta!' said Poirot impatiently. 'Those were not the pearls.'
'What?'
'Imitation, mon ami.'
The statement took my breath away. Poirot was smiling placidly.
'The good inspector obviously knows nothing of jewels. But
presently there will be a fine hullabaloo!'
'Come!' I cried, dragging at his arm.
'Where?'
'We must tell the Opalsens at once.'
'I think not.'
'But that poor woman - '
'Eh bien; that poor woman, as you call her, will have a much better
night believing the jewels to be safe.'
'But the thief may escape with them!'
'As usual, my friend, you speak without reflection. How do you
know that the pearls Mrs Opalsen locked up so carefully tonight
were not the false ones, and that the real robbery did not take place
at a much earlier date?'
'Oh! 'I said, bewildered.
'Exactly,' said Poirot, beaming. 'We start again.'
He led the way out of the room, paused a moment as though
considering, and then walked down to the end of the corridor,
stopping outside the small den where the chambermaids and valets
of the respective floors congregated. Our particular chambermaid
appeared to be holding a small court there, and to be retailing her
late experiences to an appreciative audience. She stopped in the
middle of a sentence. Poirot bowed with his usual politeness.
'Excuse that I derange you, but I shall be obliged if you will unlock
for me the door of Mr Opalsen's room.'
The woman rose willingly, and we accompanied her down the
passage again. Mr Opalsen's room was on the other side of the
corridor, its door facing that of his wife's room. The chambermaid
unlocked it with her pass-key, and we entered.
As she was about to depart Poirot detained her.
'One moment; have you ever seen among the effects of Mr Opalsen
a card like this?'
He held out a plain white card, rather highly glazed and uncommon
in appearance. The maid took it and scrutinized it carefully.
'No, sir, I can't say I have. But, anyway, the valet has most to do
with the gentlemen's rooms.'
'I see. Thank you.'
Poirot took back the card. The woman departed. Poirot appeared to
reflect a little. Then he gave a short, sharp nod of the head.
'Ring the bell, I pray of you, Hastings. Three times, for the valet.'
I obeyed, devoured with curiosity. Meanwhile Poirot had emptied
the waste-paper basket on the floor, and was swiftly going through
its contents.
In a few moments the valet answered the bell. To him Poirot put the
same question, and handed him the card to examine. But the
response was the same. The valet had never seen a card of that
particular quality among Mr Opalsen's belongings. Poirot thanked
him, and he withdrew, somewhat unwillingly, with an inquisitive
glance at the overturned waste-paper basket and the litter on the
floor. He could hardly have helped overhearing Poirot's thoughtful
remark as he bundled the torn papers back again:
'And the necklace was heavily insured ... '
'Poirot,' I cried, 'I see - '
'You see nothing, my friend,' he replied quickly. 'As usual, nothing
at all! It is incredible - but there it is. Let us return to our own
apartments.'
We did so in silence. Once there, to my intense surprise, Poirot
effected a rapid change of clothing.
'I go to London tonight,' he explained. 'It is imperative.'
'What?'
'Absolutely. The real work, that of the brain (ah, those brave little
grey cells), it is done. I go to seek the confirmation. I shall find it!
Impossible to deceive Hercule Poirot!'
'You'll come a cropper one of these days,' I observed, rather
disgusted by his vanity.
'Do not be enraged, I beg of you, mon ami. I count on you to do me a
service - of your friendship.'
'Of course,' I said eagerly, rather ashamed of my moroseness.
'What is it?'
'The sleeve of my coat that I have taken off - will you brush it? See
you, a little white powder has clung to it. You without doubt
observed me run my finger round the drawer of the dressing-table?'
'No, I didn't.'
'You should observe my actions, my friend. Thus I obtained the
powder on my finger, and, being a little overexcited, I rubbed it on
my sleeve; an action without method which I deplore - false to all my
principles.'
'But what was the powder?' I asked, not particularly interested in
Poirot's principles.
'Not the poison of the Borgias,' replied Poirot, with a twinkle. 'I see
your imagination mounting. I should say it was French chalk.'
'French chalk?'
'Yes, cabinet-makers use it to make drawers run smoothly.
I laughed.
'You old sinner! I thought you were working up to something
exciting.'
'Au revoir, my friend. I save myself. I fly!'
The door shut behind him. With a smile, half of derision, half of
affection, I picked up the coat and stretched out my hand for the
clothes brush.
II
The next morning, hearing nothing from Poirot, I went out for a
stroll, met some old friends, and lunched with them at their hotel. In
the afternoon we went for a spin. A punctured tyre delayed us, and
it was past eight when I got back to the Grand Metropolitan.
The first sight that met my eyes was Poirot, looking even more
diminutive than usual, sandwiched between the Opalsens, beaming
in a state of placid satisfaction.
'Mon ami Hastings!' he cried, and sprang to meet me. 'Embrace me,
my friend; all has marched to a marvel!'
Luckily, the embrace was merely figurative - not a thing one is
always sure of with Poirot.
'Do you mean - ' I began.
'Just wonderful, I call it!' said Mrs Opalsen, smiling all over her fat
face. 'Didn't I tell you, Ed, that if he couldn't get back my pearls
nobody would?'
'You did, my dear, you did. And you were right.'
I looked helplessly at Poirot, and he answered the glance.
'My friend Hastings is, as you say in England, all at the seaside.
Seat yourself, and I will recount to you all the affair that has so
happily ended.'
'Ended?'
'But yes. They are arrested.'
'Who are arrested?'
'The chambermaid and the valet, parbleu! You did not suspect? Not
with my parting hint about the French chalk?'
'You said cabinet-makers used it.'
'Certainly they do - to make drawers slide easily. Somebody wanted
that drawer to slide in and out without any noise. Who could that
be? Obviously, only the chambermaid. The plan was so ingenious
that it did not at once leap to the eye - not even to the eye of
Hercule Poirot.
'Listen, this was how it was done. The valet was in the empty room
next door, waiting. The French maid leaves the room. Quick as a
flash the chambermaid whips open the drawer, takes out the jewelcase
and, slipping back the bolt, passes it through the door. The
valet opens it at his leisure with the duplicate key with which he has
provided himself, extracts the necklace, and waits his time.
Célestine leaves the room again, and - pst! - in a flash the case is
passed back again and replaced in the drawer.
'Madame arrives, the theft is discovered. The chambermaid
demands to be searched, with a good deal of righteous indignation,
and leaves the room without a stain on her character. The imitation
necklace with which they have provided themselves has been
concealed in the French girl's bed that morning by the
chambermaid—a master stroke, ça!'
'But what did you go to London for?'
'You remember the card?'
'Certainly. It puzzled me - and puzzles me still. I thought - '
I hesitated delicately, glancing at Mr Opalsen.
Poirot laughed heartily.
'Une blague! For the benefit of the valet. The card was one with a
specially prepared surface - for fingerprints. I went straight to
Scotland Yard, asked for our old friend Inspector Japp, and laid the
facts before him. As I had suspected, the fingerprints proved to be
those of two well-known jewel thieves who have been "wanted" for
some time. Japp came down with me, the thieves were arrested,
and the necklace was discovered in the valet's possession. A clever
pair, but they failed in method. Have I not told you, Hastings, at
least thirty-six times, that without method - '
'At least thirty-six thousand times!' I interrupted. 'But where did
their "method" break down?'
'Mon ami, it is a good plan to take a place as chambermaid or valet -
but you must not shirk your work. They left an empty room
undusted; and therefore, when the man put down the jewel-case on
the little table near the communicating door, it left a square mark - '
'I remember,' I cried.
'Before, I was undecided. Then - I knew!'
There was a moment's silence.
'And I've got my pearls,' said Mrs Opalsen as a sort of Greek
chorus.
'Well,' I said, 'I'd better have some dinner.'
Poirot accompanied me.
'This ought to mean kudos for you,' I observed.
'Pas du tout,' replied Poirot tranquilly. 'Japp and the local inspector
will divide the credit between them. But' - he tapped his pocket - 'I
have a cheque here, from Mr Opalsen, and, how say you, my friend?
This weekend has not gone according to plan. Shall we return here
next weekend - at my expense this time?'
The Kidnapped Prime Minister
Now that war and the problems of war are things of the past, I think
I may safely venture to reveal to the world the part which my friend
Poirot played in a moment of national crisis. The secret has been
well guarded. Not a whisper of it reached the Press. But, now that
the need for secrecy has gone by, I feel it is only just that England
should know the debt it owes to my quaint little friend, whose
marvellous brain so ably averted a great catastrophe.
One evening after dinner - I will not particularize the date; it suffices
to say that it was at the time when 'Peace by negotiation' was the
parrot-cry of England's enemies - my friend and I were sitting in his
rooms. After being invalided out of the Army I had been given a
recruiting job, and it had become my custom to drop in on Poirot in
the evenings after dinner and talk with him of any cases of interest
that he might have on hand.
I was attempting to discuss with him the sensational news of that
day - no less than an attempted assassination of Mr David
MacAdam, England's Prime Minister. The account in the papers had
evidently been carefully censored. No details were given, save that
the Prime Minister had had a marvellous escape, the bullet just
grazing his cheek.
I considered that our police must have been shamefully careless for
such an outrage to be possible. I could well understand that the
German agents in England would be willing to risk much for such an
achievement. 'Fighting Mac,' as his own party had nicknamed him,
had strenuously and unequivocally combated the Pacifist influence
which was becoming so prevalent.
He was more than England's Prime Minister - he was England; and
to have removed him from his sphere of influence would have been
a crushing and paralysing blow to Britain.
Poirot was busy mopping a grey suit with a minute sponge. Never
was there a dandy such as Hercule Poirot. Neatness and order
were his passion. Now, with the odour of benzene filling the air, he
was quite unable to give me his full attention.
'In a little minute I am with you, my friend. I have all but finished. The
spot of grease - he is not good - I remove him - so!' He waved his
sponge.
I smiled as I lit another cigarette.
'Anything interesting on?' I inquired, after a minute or two.
'I assist a - how do you call it? - "charlady" to find her husband. A
difficult affair, needing the tact. For I have a little idea that when he
is found he will not be pleased. What would you? For my part, I
sympathize with him. He was a man of discrimination to lose
himself.'
I laughed.
'At last! The spot of grease, he is gone! I am at your disposal.'
'I was asking you what you thought of this attempt to assassinate
MacAdam?'
'Enfantillage!' replied Poirot promptly. 'One can hardly take it
seriously. To fire with the rifle - never does it succeed. It is a device
of the past.'
'It was very near succeeding this time,' I reminded him.
Poirot shook his head impatiently. He was about to reply when the
landlady thrust her head round the door and informed him that
there were two gentlemen below who wanted to see him.
'They won't give their names, sir, but they says as it's very
important.'
'Let them mount,' said Poirot, carefully folding his grey trousers.
In a few minutes the two visitors were ushered in, and my heart
gave a leap as in the foremost I recognized no less a personage
than Lord Estair, Leader of the House of Commons; whilst his
companion, Mr Bernard Dodge, was also a member of the War
Cabinet, and, as I knew, a close personal friend of the Prime
Minister.
'Monsieur Poirot?' said Lord Estair interrogatively. My friend
bowed. The great man looked at me and hesitated. 'My business is
private.'
'You may speak freely before Captain Hastings,' said my friend,
nodding to me to remain. 'He has not all the gifts, no! But I answer
for his discretion.'
Lord Estair still hesitated, but Mr Dodge broke in abruptly:
'Oh, come on - don't let's beat about the bush! As far as I can see,
the whole of England will know the hole we're in soon enough.
Time's everything.'
'Pray be seated, messieurs,' said Poirot politely. 'Will you take the
big chair, milord?'
Lord Estair started slightly. 'You know me?'
Poirot smiled. 'Certainly. I read the little papers with the pictures.
How should I not know you? '
'Monsieur Poirot, I have come to consult you upon a matter of the
most vital urgency. I must ask for absolute secrecy.'
'You have the word of Hercule Poirot - I can say no more!' said my
friend grandiloquently.
'It concerns the Prime Minister. We are in grave trouble.'
'We're up a tree!' interposed Mr Dodge.
'The injury is serious then?' I asked.
'What injury?'
'The bullet wound.'
'Oh, that!' cried Mr Dodge contemptuously. 'That's old history.'
'As my colleague says,' continued Lord Estair, 'that affair is over
and done with. Luckily, it failed. I wish I could say as much for the
second attempt.'
'There has been a second attempt, then?'
'Yes, though not of the same nature. Monsieur Poirot, the Prime
Minister has disappeared.'
'What?'
'He has been kidnapped!'
'Impossible!' I cried, stupefied.
Poirot threw a withering glance at me, which I knew enjoined me to
keep my mouth shut.
'Unfortunately, impossible as it seems, it is only too true,' continued
his lordship.
Poirot looked at Mr Dodge. 'You said just now, monsieur, that time
was everything. What did you mean by that?'
The two men exchanged glances, and then Lord Estair said:
'You have heard, Monsieur Poirot, of the approaching Allied
Conference?'
My friend nodded.
'For obvious reasons, no details have been given of when and
where it is to take place. But, although it has been kept out of the
newspapers, the date is, of course, widely known in diplomatic
circles. The Conference is to be held tomorrow - Thursday -
evening at Versailles. Now you perceive the terrible gravity of the
situation. I will not conceal from you that the Prime Minister's
presence at the Conference is a vital necessity. The Pacifist
propaganda, started and maintained by the German agents in our
midst, has been very active. It is the universal opinion that the
turning-point of the Conference will be the strong personality of the
Prime Minister. His absence may have the most serious results -
possibly a premature and disastrous peace. And we have no one
who can be sent in his place. He alone can represent England.'
Poirot's face had grown very grave. 'Then you regard the
kidnapping of the Prime Minister as a direct attempt to prevent his
being present at the Conference?'
'Most certainly I do. He was actually on his way to France at the
time.'
'And the Conference is to be held?'
'At nine o'clock tomorrow night.'
Poirot drew an enormous watch from his pocket.
'It is now a quarter to nine.'
'Twenty-four hours,' said Mr Dodge thoughtfully.
'And a quarter,' amended Poirot. 'Do not forget the quarter,
monsieur - it may come in useful. Now for the details - the
abduction, did it take place in England or in France?'
'In France. Mr MacAdam crossed to France this morning. He was to
stay tonight as the guest of the Commander-in-Chief, proceeding
tomorrow to Paris. He was conveyed across the Channel by
destroyer. At Boulogne he was met by a car from General
Headquarters and one of the Commander-in-Chief's ADCs.'
'Eh bien?'
'Well, they started from Boulogne - but they never arrived.'
'What?'
'Monsieur Poirot, it was a bogus car and a bogus ADC. The real car
was found in a side road, with the chauffeur and the ADC neatly
gagged and bound.'
'And the bogus car?'
'Is still at large.'
Poirot made a gesture of impatience. 'Incredible! Surely it cannot
escape attention for long?'
'So we thought. It seemed merely a question of searching
thoroughly. That part of France is under Military Law. We were
convinced that the car could not go long unnoticed. The French
police and our own Scotland Yard men, and the military are
straining every nerve. It is, as you say, incredible - but nothing has
been discovered!'
At that moment a tap came at the door, and a young officer entered
with a heavily sealed envelope which he handed to Lord Estair.
'Just through from France, sir. I brought it on here, as you
directed.'
The Minister tore it open eagerly, and uttered an exclamation. The
officer withdrew.
'Here is news at last! This telegram has just been decoded. They
have found the second car, also the secretary, Daniels,
chloroformed, gagged, and bound, in an abandoned farm near C-.
He remembers nothing, except something being pressed against
his mouth and nose from behind, and struggling to free himself. The
police are satisfied as to the genuineness of his statement.'
'And they have found nothing else?'
'No.'
'Not the Prime Minister's dead body? Then, there is hope. But it is
strange. Why, after trying to shoot him this morning, are they now
taking so much trouble to keep him alive?'
Dodge shook his head. 'One thing's quite certain. They're
determined at all costs to prevent his attending the Conference.'
'If it is humanly possible, the Prime Minister shall be there. God
grant it is not too late. Now, messieurs, recount to me everything -
from the beginning. I must know about this shooting affair as well.'
'Last night, the Prime Minister, accompanied by one of his
secretaries, Captain Daniels - '
'The same who accompanied him to France?'
'Yes. As I was saying, they motored down to Windsor, where the
Prime Minister was granted an Audience. Early this morning he
returned to town, and it was on the way that the attempted
assassination took place,'
'One moment, if you please. Who is this Captain Daniels? You have
his dossier?'
Lord Estair smiled. 'I thought you would ask me that. We do not
know very much of him. He is of no particular family. He has served
in the English Army, and is an extremely able secretary, being an
exceptionally fine linguist. I believe he speaks seven languages. It
is for that reason that the Prime Minister chose him to accompany
him to France.'
'Has he any relatives in England?'
'Two aunts. A Mrs Everard, who lives at Hampstead, and a Miss
Daniels, who lives near Ascot.'
'Ascot? That is near to Windsor, is it not?'
'That point has not been overlooked. But it has led to nothing.'
'You regard the Capitaine Daniels, then, as above suspicion?'
A shade of bitterness crept into Lord Estair's voice, as he replied:
'No, Monsieur Poirot. In these days, I should hesitate before I
pronounced anyone above suspicion.'
'Très bien. Now I understand, milord, that the Prime Minister would,
as a matter of course, be under vigilant police protection, which
ought to render any assault upon him an impossibility?'
Lord Estair bowed his head. 'That is so. The Prime Minister's car
was closely followed by another car containing detectives in plain
clothes. Mr MacAdam knew nothing of these precautions. He is
personally a most fearless man, and would be inclined to sweep
them away arbitrarily. But, naturally, the police make their own
arrangements. In fact, the Premier's chauffeur, O'Murphy, is a CID
man.'
'O'Murphy? That is a name of Ireland, is it not so?'
'Yes, he is an Irishman.'
'From what part of Ireland?'
'County Clare, I believe.'
'Tiens! But proceed, milord.'
'The Premier started for London. The car was a closed one. He and
Captain Daniels sat inside. The second car followed as usual. But,
unluckily, for some unknown reason, the Prime Minister's car
deviated from the main road - '
'At a point where the road curves?' interrupted Poirot.
'Yes - but how did you know?'
'Oh, c'est évident! Continue!'
'For some unknown reason,' continued Lord Estair, 'the Premier's
car left the main road. The police car, unaware of the deviation,
continued to keep to the high road. At a short distance down the
unfrequented lane, the Prime Minister's car was suddenly held up
by a band of masked men. The chauffeur - '
'That brave O'Murphy!' murmured Poirot thoughtfully.
'The chauffeur, momentarily taken aback, jammed on the brakes.
The Prime Minister put his head out of the window. Instantly a shot
rang out - then another. The first one grazed his cheek, the second,
fortunately, went wide. The chauffeur, now realizing the danger,
instantly forged straight ahead, scattering the band of men.'
'A near escape,' I ejaculated, with a shiver.
'Mr MacAdam refused to make any fuss over the slight wound he
had received. He declared it was only a scratch. He stopped at a
local cottage hospital, where it was dressed and bound up - he did
not, of course, reveal his identity. He then drove, as per schedule,
straight to Charing Cross, where a special train for Dover was
awaiting him, and, after a brief account of what had happened had
been given to the anxious police by Captain Daniels, he duly
departed for France. At Dover, he went on board the waiting
destroyer. At Boulogne, as you know, the bogus car was waiting for
him, carrying the Union Jack, and correct in every detail.'
'That is all you have to tell me?'
'Yes.'
'There is no other circumstance that you have omitted, milord?'
'Well, there is one rather peculiar thing.'
'Yes?'
'The Prime Minister's car did not return home after leaving the
Prime Minister at Charing Cross. The police were anxious to
interview O'Murphy, so a search was instituted at once. The car
was discovered standing outside a certain unsavoury little
restaurant in Soho, which is well known as a meeting-place of
German agents.'
'And the chauffeur?'
'The chauffeur was nowhere to be found. He, too, had disappeared.'
'So,' said Poirot thoughtfully, 'there are two disappearances: the
Prime Minister in France, and O'Murphy in London.'
He looked keenly at Lord Estair, who made a gesture of despair.
'I can only tell you, Monsieur Poirot, that, if anyone had suggested
to me yesterday that O'Murphy was a traitor, I should have laughed
in his face.'
'And today?'
'Today I do not know what to think.'
Poirot nodded gravely. He looked at his turnip of a watch again.
'I understand that I have carte blanche, messieurs - in every way, I
mean? I must be able to go where I choose, and how I choose.'
'Perfectly. There is a special train leaving for Dover in an hour's
time, with a further contingent from Scotland Yard. You shall be
accompanied by a Military officer and a CID man, who will hold
themselves at your disposal in every way. Is that satisfactory?'
'Quite. One more question before you leave, messieurs. What made
you come to me? I am unknown, obscure, in this great London of
yours.'
'We sought you out on the express recommendation and wish of a
very great man of your own country.'
'Comment? My old friend the Préfet - ?'
Lord Estair shook his head.
'One higher than the Préfet. One whose word was once law in
Belgium - and shall be again! That England has sworn!'
Poirot's hand flew swiftly to a dramatic salute. 'Amen to that! Ah,
but my Master does not forget ... Messieurs, I, Hercule Poirot, will
serve you faithfully. Heaven only send that it will be in time. But this
is dark - dark ... I cannot see.'
'Well, Poirot,' I cried impatiently, as the door closed behind the
Ministers, 'what do you think?'
My friend was busy packing a minute suit-case, with quick, deft
movements. He shook his head thoughtfully.
'I do not know what to think. My brains desert me.'
'Why, as you said, kidnap him, when a knock on the head would do
as well?' I mused.
'Pardon me, mon ami, but I did not quite say that. It is undoubtedly
far more their affair to kidnap him.'
'But why?'
'Because uncertainty creates panic. That is one reason. Were the
Prime Minister dead, it would be a terrible calamity, but the
situation would have to be faced. But now you have paralysis. Will
the Prime Minister reappear, or will he not? Is he dead or alive?
Nobody knows, and until they know nothing definite can be done.
And, as I tell you, uncertainty breeds panic, which is what les
Boches are playing for. Then, again, if the kidnappers are holding
him secretly somewhere, they have the advantage of being able to
make terms with both sides. The German Government is not a
liberal paymaster, as a rule, but no doubt they can be made to
disgorge substantial remittances in such a case as this. Thirdly,
they run no risk of the hangman's rope. Oh, decidedly, kidnapping
is their affair.'
'Then, if that is so, why should they first try to shoot him?'
Poirot made a gesture of anger. 'Ah, that is just what I do not
understand! It is inexplicable - stupid! They have all their
arrangements made (and very good arrangements too!) for the
abduction, and yet they imperil the whole affair by a melodramatic
attack, worthy of a cinema, and quite as unreal. It is almost
impossible to believe in it, with its band of masked men, not twenty
miles from London!'
'Perhaps they were two quite separate attempts which happened
irrespective of each other,' I suggested.
'Ah, no, that would be too much of a coincidence! Then, further -
who is the traitor? There must have been a traitor - in the first affair,
anyway. But who was it - Daniels or O'Murphy? It must have been
one of the two, or why did the car leave the main road? We cannot
suppose that the Prime Minister connived at his own assassination!
Did O'Murphy take that turning of his own accord, or was it Daniels
who told him to do so?'
'Surely it must have been O'Murphy's doing.'
'Yes, because if it was Daniels' the Prime Minister would have heard
the order, and would have asked the reason. But there are
altogether too many "whys" in this affair, and they contradict each
other. If O'Murphy is an honest man, why did he leave the main
road? But if he was a dishonest man, why did he start the car again
when only two shots had been fired - thereby, in all probability,
saving the Prime Minister's life? And, again, if he was honest, why
did he, immediately on leaving Charing Cross, drive to a well-known
rendezvous of German spies?'
'It looks bad,' I said.
'Let us look at the case with method. What have we for and against
these two men? Take O'Murphy first. Against: that his conduct in
leaving the main road was suspicious; that he is an Irishman from
County Clare; that he has disappeared in a highly suggestive
manner. For: that his promptness in restarting the car saved the
Premier's life; that he is a Scotland Yard man, and, obviously, from
the post allotted to him, a trusted detective. Now for Daniels. There
is not much against him, except the fact that nothing is known of his
antecedents, and that he speaks too many languages for a good
Englishman! (Pardon me, mon ami, but, as linguists, you are
deplorable!) Now for him, we have the fact that he was found
gagged, bound, and chloroformed - which does not look as though
he had anything to do with the matter.'
'He might have gagged and bound himself, to divert suspicion.'
Poirot shook his head. 'The French police would make no mistake of
that kind. Besides, once he had attained his object, and the Prime
Minister was safely abducted, there would not be much point in his
remaining behind. His accomplices could have gagged and
chloroformed him, of course, but I fail to see what object they
hoped to accomplish by it. He can be of little use to them now, for,
until the circumstances concerning the Prime Minister have been
cleared up, he is bound to be closely watched.'
'Perhaps he hoped to start the police on a false scent?'
'Then why did he not do so? He merely says that something was
pressed over his nose and mouth, and that he remembers nothing
more. There is no false scent there. It sounds remarkably like the
truth.'
'Well,' I said, glancing at the clock, 'I suppose we'd better start for
the station. You may find more clues in France.'
'Possibly, mon ami, but I doubt it. It is still incredible to me that the
Prime Minister has not been discovered in that limited area, where
the difficulty of concealing him must be tremendous. If the military
and the police of two countries have not found him, how shall I?'
At Charing Cross we were met by Mr Dodge.
'This is Detective Barnes, of Scotland Yard, and Major Norman.
They will hold themselves entirely at your disposal. Good luck to
you. It's a bad business, but I've not given up hope. Must be off
now.' And the Minister strode rapidly away.
We chatted in a desultory fashion with Major Norman. In the centre
of the little group of men on the platform I recognized a little ferretfaced
fellow talking to a tall, fair man. He was an old acquaintance
of Poirot's - Detective-Inspector Japp, supposed to be one of the
smartest of Scotland Yard's officers. He came over and greeted my
friend cheerfully.
'I heard you were on this job too. Smart bit of work. So far they've
got away with the goods all right. But I can't believe they can keep
him hidden long. Our people are going through France with a
toothcomb. So are the French. I can't help feeling it's only a matter
of hours now.'
'That is, if he's still alive,' remarked the tall detective gloomily.
Japp's face fell. 'Yes ... But somehow I've got the feeling he's alive
all right.'
Poirot nodded. 'Yes, yes; he's alive. But can he be found in time? I,
like you, did not believe he could be hidden so long.'
The whistle blew, and we all trooped up into the Pullman car. Then,
with a slow, unwilling jerk, the train drew out of the station.
It was a curious journey. The Scotland Yard men crowded together.
Maps of Northern France were spread out, and eager forefingers
traced the lines of roads and villages. Each man had his own pet
theory. Poirot showed none of his usual loquacity, but sat staring in
front of him, with an expression on his face that reminded me of a
puzzled child. I talked to Norman, whom I found quite an amusing
fellow. On arriving at Dover Poirot's behaviour moved me to intense
amusement. The little man, as he went on board the boat, clutched
desperately at my arm. The wind was blowing lustily.
'Mon Dieu!' he murmured. 'This is terrible!'
'Have courage, Poirot,' I cried. 'You will succeed. You will find him. I
am sure of it.'
'Ah, mon ami, you mistake my emotion. It is this villainous sea that
troubles me! The mal de mer - it is horrible suffering!'
'Oh!' I said, rather taken aback.
The first throb of the engines was felt, and Poirot groaned and
closed his eyes.
'Major Norman has a map of Northern France if you would like to
study it? '
Poirot shook his head impatiently.
'But no, but no! Leave me, my friend. See you, to think, the stomach
and the brain must be in harmony. Laverguier has a method most
excellent for averting the mal de mer. You breathe in - and out -
slowly, so - turning the head from left to right and counting six
between each breath.'
I left him to his gymnastic endeavours; and went on deck.
As we came slowly into Boulogne Harbour Poirot appeared, neat
and smiling, and announced to me in a whisper that Laverguier's
system had succeeded 'to a marvel!'
Japp's forefinger was still tracing imaginary routes on his map.
'Nonsense! The car started from Boulogne - here they branched off.
Now, my idea is that they transferred the Prime Minister to another
car. See?'
'Well,' said the tall detective, 'I shall make for the seaports. Ten to
one, they've smuggled him on board a ship.'
Japp shook his head. 'Too obvious. The order went out at once to
close all the ports.'
The day was just breaking as we landed. Major Norman touched
Poirot on the arm. 'There's a military car here waiting for you, sir.'
'Thank you, monsieur. But, for the moment, I do not propose to
leave Boulogne.'
'What?'
'No, we will enter this hotel here, by the quay.'
He suited the action to the word, demanded and was accorded a
private room. We three followed him, puzzled and
uncomprehending.
He shot a quick glance at us. 'It is not so that the good detective
should act, eh? I perceive your thought. He must be full of energy.
He must rush to and fro. He should prostrate himself on the dusty
road and seek the marks of tyres through a little glass. He must
gather up the cigarette-end, the fallen match? That is your idea, is it
not?'
His eyes challenged us. 'But I - Hercule Poirot - tell you that it is not
so! The true clues are within - here!' He tapped his forehead. 'See
you, I need not have left London. It would have been sufficient for
me to sit quietly in my rooms there. All that matters is the little grey
cells within. Secretly and silently they do their part, until suddenly I
call for a map, and I lay my finger on a spot - so - and I say: the
Prime Minister is there! And it is so! With method and logic one can
accomplish anything! This frantic rushing to France was a mistake -
it is playing a child's game of hide-and-seek. But now, though it may
be too late, I will set to work the right way, from within. Silence, my
friends, I beg of you.'
And for five long hours the little man sat motionless, blinking his
eyelids like a cat, his green eyes nickering and becoming steadily
greener and greener. The Scotland Yard man was obviously
contemptuous, Major Norman was bored and impatient, and I
myself found the time pass with wearisome slowness.
Finally, I got up and strolled as noiselessly as I could to the window.
The matter was becoming a farce. I was secretly concerned for my
friend. If he failed, I would have preferred him to fail in a less
ridiculous manner. Out of the window I idly watched the daily leave
boat, belching forth columns of smoke, as she lay alongside the
quay.
Suddenly I was aroused by Poirot's voice close to my elbow.
'Mes amis, let us start!'
I turned. An extraordinary transformation had come over my friend.
His eyes were flickering with excitement, his chest was swelled to
the uttermost.
'I have been an imbecile, my friends! But I see daylight at last.'
Major Norman moved hastily to the door. 'I'll order the car.'
'There is no need. I shall not use it. Thank Heaven the wind has
fallen.'
'Do you mean you are going to walk, sir?'
'No, my young friend. I am no St Peter. I prefer to cross the sea by
boat.'
'To cross the sea?'
'Yes. To work with method, one must begin from the beginning. And
the beginning of this affair was in England. Therefore, we return to
England.'
II
At three o'clock, we stood once more upon Charing Cross platform.
To all our expostulations, Poirot turned a deaf ear, and reiterated
again and again that to start at the beginning was not a waste of
time, but the only way. On the way over, he had conferred with
Norman in a low voice, and the latter had despatched a sheaf of
telegrams from Dover.
Owing to the special passes held by Norman, we got through
everywhere in record time. In London, a large police car was
waiting for us, with some plain-clothes men, one of whom handed a
typewritten sheet of paper to my friend. He answered my inquiring
glance.
'A list of the cottage hospitals within a certain radius west of
London. I wired for it from Dover.'
We were whirled rapidly through the London streets. We were on
the Bath Road. On we went, through Hammersmith, Chiswick and
Brentford. I began to see our objective. Through Windsor and on to
Ascot. My heart gave a leap. Ascot was where Daniels had an aunt
living. We were after him, then, not O'Murphy.
We duly stopped at the gate of a trim villa. Poirot jumped out and
rang the bell. I saw a perplexed frown dimming the radiance of his
face. Plainly, he was not satisfied. The bell was answered. He was
ushered inside. In a few moments he reappeared, and climbed into
the car with a short, sharp shake of his head. My hopes began to
die down. It was past four now. Even if he found certain evidence
incriminating Daniels, what would be the good of it, unless he could
wring from someone the exact spot in France where they were
holding the Prime Minister?
Our return progress towards London was an interrupted one. We
deviated from the main road more than once, and occasionally
stopped at a small building, which I had no difficulty in recognizing
as a cottage hospital. Poirot only spent a few minutes at each, but
at every halt his radiant assurance was more and more restored.
He whispered something to Norman, to which the latter replied:
'Yes, if you turn off to the left, you will find them waiting by the
bridge.'
We turned up a side road, and in the failing light I discerned a
second car, waiting by the side of the road. It contained two men in
plain clothes. Poirot got down and spoke to them, and then we
started off in a northerly direction, the other car following close
behind.
We drove for some time, our objective being obviously one of the
northern suburbs of London. Finally, we drove up to the front door
of a tall house, standing a little back from the road in its own
grounds.
Norman and I were left with the car. Poirot and one of the
detectives went up to the door and rang. A neat parlourmaid
opened it. The detective spoke.
'I am a police officer, and I have a warrant to search this house.'
The girl gave a little scream, and a tall, handsome woman of middle
age appeared behind her in the hall.
'Shut the door, Edith. They are burglars, I expect.'
But Poirot swiftly inserted his foot in the door, and at the same
moment blew a whistle. Instantly the other detectives ran up, and
poured into the house, shutting the door behind them.
Norman and I spent about five minutes cursing our forced
inactivity. Finally the door reopened, and the men emerged,
escorting three prisoners - a woman and two men. The woman and
one of the men were taken to the second car. The other man was
placed in our car by Poirot himself.
'I must go with the others, my friend. But have great care of this
gentleman. You do not know him, no? Eh bien, let me present to
you. Monsieur O'Murphy!'
O'Murphy! I gaped at him open-mouthed as we started again. He
was not handcuffed, but I did not fancy he would try to escape. He
sat there staring in front of him as though dazed. Anyway, Norman
and I would be more than a match for him.
To my surprise, we still kept a northerly route. We were not
returning to London, then! I was much puzzled. Suddenly, as the
car slowed down, I recognized that we were close to Hendon
Aerodrome. Immediately I grasped Poirot's idea. He proposed to
reach France by aeroplane.
It was a sporting idea, but, on the face of it, impracticable. A
telegram would be far quicker. Time was everything. He must leave
the personal glory of rescuing the Prime Minister to others.
As we drew up. Major Norman jumped out, and a plain-clothes man
took his place. He conferred with Poirot for a few minutes, and then
went off briskly.
I, too, jumped out, and caught Poirot by the arm.
'I congratulate you, old fellow! They have told you the hiding-place?
But, look here, you must wire to France at once. You'll be too late if
you go yourself.'
Poirot looked at me curiously for a minute or two.
'Unfortunately, my friend, there are some things that cannot be sent
by telegram.'
III
At that moment Major Norman returned, accompanied by a young
officer in the uniform of the Flying Corps.
'This is Captain Lyall, who will fly you over to France. He can start at
once.'
'Wrap up warmly, sir,' said the young pilot. 'I can lend you a coat, if
you like.'
Poirot was consulting his enormous watch. He murmured to
himself: 'Yes, there is time - just time.' Then he looked up, and
bowed politely to the young officer. 'I thank you, monsieur. But it is
not I who am your passenger. It is this gentleman here.'
He moved a little aside as he spoke, and a figure came forward out
of the darkness. It was the second male prisoner who had gone in
the other car, and as the light fell on his face, I gave a gasp of
surprise.
It was the Prime Minister!
IV
'For Heaven's sake, tell me all about it,' I cried impatiently, as
Poirot, Norman and I motored back to London. 'How in the world
did they manage to smuggle him back to England?'
'There was no need to smuggle him back,' replied Poirot dryly. 'The
Prime Minister has never left England. He was kidnapped on his
way from Windsor to London.'
'What?'
'I will make all clear. The Prime Minister was in his car, his
secretary beside him. Suddenly a pad of chloroform is clapped on
his face - '
'But by whom?'
'By the clever linguistic Captain Daniels. As soon as the Prime
Minister is unconscious, Daniels picks up the speaking-tube, and
directs O'Murphy to turn to the right, which the chauffeur, quite
unsuspicious, does. A few yards down that unfrequented road a
large car is standing, apparently broken down. Its driver signals to
O'Murphy to stop. O'Murphy slows up. The stranger approaches.
Daniels leans out of the window, and, probably with the aid of an
instantaneous anaesthetic, such as ethylchloride, the chloroform
trick is repeated. In a few seconds, the two helpless men are
dragged out and transferred to the other car, and a pair of
substitutes take their places.'
'Impossible!'
'Pas du tout! Have you not seen music-hall turns imitating
celebrities with marvellous accuracy? Nothing is easier than to
personate a public character. The Prime Minister of England is far
easier to understudy than Mr John Smith of Clapham, say. As for
O'Murphy's "double", no one was going to take much notice of him
until after the departure of the Prime Minister, and by then he would
have made himself scarce. He drives straight from Charing Cross
to the meeting-place of his friends. He goes in as O'Murphy, he
emerges as someone quite different. O'Murphy has disappeared,
leaving a conveniently suspicious trail behind him.'
'But the man who personated the Prime Minister was seen by
everyone!'
'He was not seen by anyone who knew him privately or intimately.
And Daniels shielded him from contact with anyone as much as
possible. Moreover, his face was bandaged up, and anything
unusual in his manner would be put down to the fact that he was
suffering from shock as a result of the attempt upon his life. Mr
MacAdam has a weak throat, and always spares his voice as much
as possible before any great speech. The deception was perfectly
easy to keep up as far as France. There it would be impracticable
and impossible - so the Prime Minister disappears. The police of
this country hurry across the Channel, and no one bothers to go
into the details of the first attack. To sustain the illusion that the
abduction has taken place in France, Daniels is gagged and
chloroformed in a convincing manner.'
'And the man who has enacted the part of the Prime Minister?'
'Rids himself of his disguise. He and the bogus chauffeur may be
arrested as suspicious characters, but no one will dream of
suspecting their real part in the drama, and they will eventually be
released for lack of evidence.'
'And the real Prime Minister?'
'He and O'Murphy were driven straight to the house of "Mrs
Everard," at Hampstead, Daniels' so-called "aunt". In reality, she is
Frau Bertha Ebenthal, and the police have been looking for her for
some time. It is a valuable little present that I have made to them - to
say nothing of Daniels! Ah, it was a clever plan, but he did not
reckon on the cleverness of Hercule Poirot!'
I think my friend might well be excused his moment of vanity.
'When did you first begin to suspect the truth of the matter?'
'When I began to work the right way - from within! I could not make
that shooting affair fit in - but when I saw that the net result of it was
that the Prime Minister went to France with his face bound up I
began to comprehend! And when I visited all the cottage hospitals
between Windsor and London, and found that no one answering to
my description had had his face bound up and dressed that
morning, I was sure! After that, it was child's play for a mind like
mine!'
The following morning, Poirot showed me a telegram he had just
received. It had no place of origin, and was unsigned. It ran:
'In time.'
Later in the day the evening paper published an account of the
Allied Conference. They laid particular stress on the magnificent
ovation accorded to Mr David MacAdam, whose inspiring speech
had produced a deep and lasting impression.