He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three
other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left
him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the smiles
which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for
jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions to Mr. Darcy
were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's entrance, exerted
herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his
sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible,
every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this
likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunity of
saying, with sneering civility:
“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire Militia removed from
Meryton? They must be a great loss to YOUR family.”
In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's name; but
Elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her
thoughts; and the various recollections connected with him gave her a
moment's distress; but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured
attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone.
While she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a
heightened complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome
with confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known
what pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly
would have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to
discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom
she believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might
injure her in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the
follies and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected
with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy's
meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections her
brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very wish which
Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming hereafter her
own. He had certainly formed such a plan, and without meaning that it
should effect his endeavour to separate him from Miss Bennet, it is
probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the
welfare of his friend.
Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his
emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not
approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though
not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she
feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair, and the very
circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from
Elizabeth seemed to have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer
above mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their
carriage Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on
Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join
her. Her brother's recommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his
judgement could not err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth
as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than
lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley
could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying
to his sister.
“How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,”
she cried; “I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since
the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were
agreeing that we should not have known her again.”
However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he
contented himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other
alteration than her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of
travelling in the summer.
“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could
see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants
character--there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are tolerable,
but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have
sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything extraordinary
in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; and
in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency without fashion, which is
intolerable.”
Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this
was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are
not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she
had all the success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and,
from a determination of making him speak, she continued:
“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how
amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I
particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at
Netherfield, 'SHE a beauty!--I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But
afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her
rather pretty at one time.”
“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but
THAT was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I have
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the
satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but
herself.
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during
their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were
discussed, except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention.
They talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit--of everything
but himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner
thought of him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by
her niece's beginning the subject.
Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter
from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had
been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there;
but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane
had written the direction remarkably ill.
They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and
her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had been
written five days ago.
The beginning contained an account of all their little parties and
engagements, with such news as the country afforded; but the latter half,
which was dated a day later, and written in evident agitation, gave more
important intelligence. It was to this effect:
“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of
a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--
be assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our
surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I
am very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am
willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step (and let
us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is disinterested
at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing. Our poor
mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How thankful am I
that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must
forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about twelve, as is
conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight.
“The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have
passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect
him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of their
intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I
am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly know what I
have written.”
Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely
knowing what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized
the other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.
“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried
letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for
time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent.
Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news
for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between
Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be
assured it has taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they
are not gone to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left
Brighton the day before, not many hours after the express. Though
Lydia's short letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were
going to Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his
belief that W. never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which
was repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from
B. intending to trace their route.
“He did trace them easily to Clapham, but no further; for on
entering that place, they removed into a hackney coach, and dismissed
the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known after this is,
that they were seen to continue the London road. I know not what to
think. After making every possible inquiry on that side London, Colonel
F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at all the
turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any
success--no such people had been seen to pass through. With the kindest
concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions to us in
a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and
Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear
Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I
cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make it more
eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue their first
plan; and even if HE could form such a design against a young woman
of Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to
everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. is not
disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his head when I
expressed my hopes, and said he fear W. was not a man to be trusted.
My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert
herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And as to my
father, I never in my life saw him so affected.
“Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed their attachment; but as
it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad,
dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared something of these distressing
scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for
your return? I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if
inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just told
you I would not; but circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly
begging you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle
and aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still
something more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with
Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I
am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to
pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is
obliged to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such and
exigence, my uncle's advice and assistance would be everything in the
world; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely
upon his goodness.”
“Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her
seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing
a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared.
Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he
could recover himself to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was
superseded by Lydia's situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon,
but I must leave you. I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business
that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to lose.”
“Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute; but
let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are not
well enough; you cannot go yourself.”
Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt
how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling
back the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so
breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his
master and mistress home instantly.
On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself,
and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave
her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
“Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”
“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself.
“There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only
distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from
Longbourn.”
She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes
could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only
say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in
compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I have just had a
letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from
anyone. My younger sister has left all her friends--has eloped; has
thrown herself into the power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off
together from Brighton. YOU know him too well to doubt the rest. She
has no money, no connections, nothing that can tempt him to--she is lost
for ever.”
Darcy was fixed in astonishment. “When I consider,” she added in
a yet more agitated voice, “that I might have prevented it! I, who knew
what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only--some part of
what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this
could not have happened. But it is all--all too late now.”
“I am grieved indeed,” cried Darcy; “grieved--shocked. But is it
certain--absolutely certain?”
“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were
traced almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to
Scotland.”
“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover
her?”
“My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my
uncle's immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-anhour.
But nothing can be done--I know very well that nothing can be
done. How is such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be
discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”
Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.
“When MY eyes were opened to his real character--Oh! had I
known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of
doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was
walking up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow
contracted, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly
understood it. Her power was sinking; everything MUST sink under
such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest
disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his
self-conquest brought nothing to her consolatory to her bosom, afforded
no palliation of her distress. It was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to
make her understand her own wishes; and never had she so honestly felt
that she could have loved him, as now, when all love must be vain.
But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up
every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of several
minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her
companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke
likewise restraint, said, “I am afraid you have been long desiring my
absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real,
though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything could be
either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to such
distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem
purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I fear,
prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley today.”
“Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth
as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.”
He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow
for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only
one serious, parting look, went away.
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that
they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had
marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of
contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings
which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly
have rejoiced in its termination.
If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection,
Elizabeth's change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty.
But if otherwise--if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable
or unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a
first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other less
interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go with
regret; and in this early example of what Lydia's infamy must produce,
found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business.
Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had she entertained a hope of
Wickham's meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought, could
flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least of her
feelings on this development.
While the contents of the first letter remained in her mind, she was
all surprise--all astonishment that Wickham should marry a girl whom it
was impossible he could marry for money; and how Lydia could ever
have attached him had appeared incomprehensible. But now it was all
too natural. For such an attachment as this she might have sufficient
charms; and though she did not suppose Lydia to be deliberately
engaging in an elopement without the intention of marriage, she had no
difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor her understanding
would preserve her from falling an easy prey.
She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire,
that Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes
one officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their
attentions raised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually
been fluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect
and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she
now feel it!
She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, her uncle's interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's
account that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them
instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their
summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript
of the last with trembling energy, though Lydia had never been a
favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply
afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the first
exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner promised every
assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked
him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit,
everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be
off as soon as possible. “But what is to be done about Pemberley?” cried
Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for us;
was it so?”
“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our
engagement. THAT is all settled.”
“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room
to prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!”

But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in
the hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at
leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment
was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be
written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the
morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have
supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.
“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as
they drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am
much more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the
matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should
form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel's family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is not
adequate to the risk!”
“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a
moment.
“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your
uncle's opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for him to be guilty of. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham.
Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe him
capable of it?”
“Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other
neglect I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I dare
not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had been the
case?”
“In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute
proof that they are not gone to Scotland.”
“Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is
such a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on
the Barnet road.”
“Well, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there,
though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose.
It is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London than in Scotland.”
“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must
their marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most
particular friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded of his never
intending to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without
some money. He cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia--what
attraction has she beyond youth, health, and good humour that could
make him, for her sake, forego every chance of benefiting himself by
marrying well? As to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the
corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able
to judge; for I know nothing of the effects that such a step might
produce. But as to your other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold
good. Lydia has no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from
my father's behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has
ever seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that HE
would do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter.”
“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of
him as to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?”
“It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,” replied Elizabeth,
with tears in her eyes, “that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.
“Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has
never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,
nay, for a twelvemonth--she has been given up to nothing but
amusement and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in
the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came
in her way. Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing
but love, flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been
doing everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to
give greater--what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are
naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every
charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.”
“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so very ill of
Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.”
“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever
might be their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an
attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I
do, what Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in
every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he
is as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”
“And do you really know all this?” cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose
curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.
“I do indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you, the other
day, of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you yourself, when
last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had
behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are
other circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth
while to relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are
endless. From what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to
see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary
himself. He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we
have found her.”
“But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what
you and Jane seem so well to understand?”
“Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that was the case,
neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary to
make our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to
any one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of him
should then be overthrown?
“And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs.
Forster, the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never occurred
to me. That SHE could be in any danger from the deception never
entered my head. That such a consequence as THIS could ensue, you
may easily believe, was far enough from my thoughts.”
“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason,
I suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”
“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on
either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be
aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When
first he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so
we all were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about
him for the first two months; but he never distinguished HER by any
particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of
extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others
of the regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her
favourites.”
It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be
added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject,
by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long,
during the whole of the journey.
From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the
keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval of ease
or forgetfulness.
They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one night
on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a
comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied
by long expectations.
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were
standing on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and,
when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted
up their faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety
of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her
mother's apartment, immediately met her.
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled
the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives.
“Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I
hope everything will be well.”
“Is my father in town?”
“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”
“And have you heard from him often?”
“We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on
Wednesday to say that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his
directions, which I particularly begged him to do. He merely added that
he should not write again till he had something of importance to
mention.”
“And my mother--how is she? How are you all?”
“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
shaken. She is upstairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all.
She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty are, thank
Heaven, are quite well.”
“But you--how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How
much you must have gone through!”
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and
their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner
were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the
approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and
welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.
When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which
Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and
they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give.
The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of
her heart suggested had not yet deserted her; she still expected that it
would all end well, and that every morning would bring some letter,
either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and,
perhaps, announce their marriage.
Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few
minutes' conversation together, received them exactly as might be
expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the
villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings
and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging
indulgence the errors of her daughter must principally be owing.
“If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to
Brighton, with all my family, THIS would not have happened; but poor
dear Lydia had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let
her go out of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other
on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had
been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the
charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child! And
now here's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham,
wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become
of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his grave,
and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do.”
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner,
after general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told
her that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist
Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.
“Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he; “though it is right to
be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain. It
is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we may
gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married, and
have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as lost. As
soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make him come home
with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult together as to
what is to be done.”
“Oh! my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, MAKE them
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but tell
Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them, after
they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting. Tell
him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my wits--and
have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me--such spasms in my
side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that I can get no
rest by night nor by day.
“And tell my dear Lydia not to give any directions about her
clothes till she has seen me, for she does not know which are the best
warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I know you will contrive it
all.”
But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest
endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to
her, as well in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this
manner till dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her
feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her
daughters.
Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no
real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt
to oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that ONE only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the subject.
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who
had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their
appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her
toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change
was visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the
anger which she had herself incurred in this business, had given more of
fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty.
As for Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to
Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were
seated at table:
“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much
talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the
wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this
useful lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one
false step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded in
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”
Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much
oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console
herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for
half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of
the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager
to satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject, by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I
have not already heard.
“Give me further particulars. hat did Colonel Forster say? Had they
no apprehension of anything before the elopement took place? They
must have seen them together for ever.”
“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some
partiality, especially on Lydia's side, but nothing to give him any alarm.
I am so grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the
utmost. He WAS coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern,
before he had any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that
apprehension first got abroad, it hastened his journey.”
“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did
he know of their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny
himself?”
“Yes; but, when questioned by HIM, Denny denied knowing
anything of their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He
did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying--and from THAT, I
am inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood before.”
“And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained
a doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”
“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I
felt a little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister's happiness with him in
marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite
right.
“My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other, many weeks.”
“But not before they went to Brighton?”
“No, I believe not.”
“And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham
himself? Does he know his real character?”
“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he
formerly did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And
since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly
in debt; but I hope this may be false.”
“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of
him, this could not have happened!”
“Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister. “But to
expose the former faults of any person without knowing what their
present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best
intentions.”
“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his
wife?”
“He brought it with him for us to see.”
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth.
These were the contents:
“MY DEAR HARRIET,
“You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot
help laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I
am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with
who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world
I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think
it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my
going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater, when
I write to them and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke it
will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt
for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him
I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will dance
with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall send for
my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to
mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up.
Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our
good journey.
“Your affectionate friend,
“LYDIA BENNET.”
“Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she
had finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment!
But at least it shows that SHE was serious on the subject of their
journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her
side a SCHEME of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!”
“I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for
full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole
house in such confusion!”
“Oh! Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it
who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”
“I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time
is very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured
to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so
much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly
happen almost took from me my faculties.”
“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not
look well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and
anxiety upon yourself alone.”
“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in
every fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them.
Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours of
repose should not be broken in on.
“My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father
went away; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. She was of
great use and comfort to us all. And Lady Lucas has been very kind; she
walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us, and offered her
services, or any of her daughters', if they should be of use to us.”
“She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth; “perhaps
she MEANT well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see
too little of one's neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”
She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father
had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
“He meant I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place
where they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if anything
could be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover
the number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had
come with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance
of a gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another
might be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could
anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his
fare, he determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be
impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach.
“I do not know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was
in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I
had difficulty in finding out even so much as this.”
The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent
and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for
exertion. They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing
intelligence to send; but even of THAT they would have been glad to be
certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.
When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could, to
the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security
for her husband's not being killed in a duel.
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a
few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be
serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet,
and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other
aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the
design of cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came
without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or
irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited
than she found them.
All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three
months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be
in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured
with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's
family. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the
world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted
the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit
above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former
assurance of her sister's ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed
still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was
now come when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never
before entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained
some news of them.
Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife
received a letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had
immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to
Gracechurch Street; that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham,
before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and
that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town,
as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them,
on their first coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr.
Gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure, but as
his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He
added that Mr. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave
London and promised to write again very soon. There was also a
postscript to this effect:
“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely
to know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there
were anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a
clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have
nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his
power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy
could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any other
person.”
Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference
to her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any
information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She
had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and
mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible,
however, that some of his companions in the ----shire might be able to
give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in
expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to.
Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most
anxious part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of
letters was the grand object of every morning's impatience. Through
letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated,
and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of
importance.
But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence, she
accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters
always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:
“MY DEAR SIR,
“I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in
life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering
under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from
Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself
sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in your
present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding
from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting
on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune--or that may comfort
you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting
to a parent's mind. The death of your daughter would have been a
blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented,
because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte informs me, that
this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has proceeded from a
faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the
consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her
own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such
an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are
grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs.
Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I
have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this
false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the
others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will
connect themselves with such a family?
“And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with
augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for had it
been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and
disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much
as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for
ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offense.
“I am, dear sir, etc., etc.”
Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer
from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to
send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with
whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near
one living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he
had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of
particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who
could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the
wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for
secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for it
had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very
considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a
thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton.
He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more
formidable.
Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the
Longbourn family. Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she
cried. “This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it.”
Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered
spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his
brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it
to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for
continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did not
express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what
her anxiety for his life had been before.
“What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried.
“Sure he will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to
fight Wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?”
As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that
she and the children should go to London, at the same time that Mr.
Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of
their journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and
her Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the world.
His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her
niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed,
of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing.
Elizabeth had received none since her return that could come from
Pemberley.
The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse
for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from THAT, though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought,
one sleepless night out of two.
When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the habit
of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away,
and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it.
It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say
nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own
doing, and I ought to feel it.”
“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.
“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so
prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I
have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the
impression. It will pass away soon enough.”
“Do you suppose them to be in London?”
“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”
“And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added Kitty.
“She is happy then,” said her father drily; “and her residence there
will probably be of some duration.”
Then after a short silence he continued:
“Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to
me last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of
mind.”
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her
mother's tea.
“This is a parade,” he cried, “which does one good; it gives such
an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in
my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much
trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”
“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty fretfully. “If I
should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.”
“YOU go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as
Eastbourne for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be
cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter
into my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be
absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And
you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have spent
ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.”
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.
“Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a
good girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.”
Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were
walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the
housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call
them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the
expected summons, when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet,
“I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you
might have got some good news from town, so I took the liberty of
coming to ask.”
“What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.”
“Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, “don't you
know there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has
been here this half-hour, and master has had a letter.”
Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech.
They ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to
the library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said:
“If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards
the little copse.”
Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once
more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.
Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath, came
up with him, and eagerly cried out:
“Oh, papa, what news--what news? Have you heard from my
uncle?”
“Yes I have had a letter from him by express.”
“Well, and what news does it bring--good or bad?”
“What is there of good to be expected?” said he, taking the letter
from his pocket. “But perhaps you would like to read it.”
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.
“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it
is about.”
“Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2.
“MY DEAR BROTHER,
“At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you
left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of
London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough to
know they are discovered. I have seen them both--”
“Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane; “they are married!”
Elizabeth read on:
“I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there
was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the
engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will
not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure to
your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand
pounds secured among your children after the decease of yourself and
my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her,
during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions
which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as
far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by express,
that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer.
“You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr.
Wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally
believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am
happy to say there will be some little money, even when all his debts are
discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I
conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name
throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions
to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the
smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at
Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your
answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have
judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, of which
I hope you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as
soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,
“EDW. GARDINER.”
“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it be
possible that he will marry her?”
“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,” said
her sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”
“And have you answered the letter?” cried Elizabeth.
“No; but it must be done soon.”
Most earnestly did she then entreaty him to lose no more time
before he wrote.
“Oh! my dear father,” she cried, “come back and write
immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a case.”
“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble
yourself.”
“I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.”
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the
house.
“And may I ask--” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must
be complied with.”
“Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”
“And they MUST marry! Yet he is SUCH a man!”
“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But
there are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much
money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am
I ever to pay him.”
“Money!My uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”
“I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight
a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone.”
“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to
me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain!
Oh! it must be my uncle's doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he
has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.”
“No,” said her father; “Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a
farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I should be sorry to think so ill of
him, in the very beginning of our relationship.”
“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to
be repaid?”
Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought,
continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to
the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.
“And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as
they were by themselves. “How strange this is! And for THIS we are to
be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of
happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh,
Lydia!”
“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly
would not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our
kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe
that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has
children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten
thousand pounds?”
“If he were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been,”
said Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we
shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because
Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and
aunt can never be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her
their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her
advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this
time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her
miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for
her, when she first sees my aunt!”
“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,”
said Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to
marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.”
“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither you,
nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it.”
It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to
make it known to her. He was writing and, without raising his head,
coolly replied:
“Just as you please.”
“May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?”
“Take whatever you like, and get away.”
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went
upstairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one
communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for
good news, the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain
herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's being
soon married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to
its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as
she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her
daughter would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear
for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.
“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried. “This is delightful indeed! She
will be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen!My
good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage
everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how
much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty,
for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How
merry we shall be together when we meet!”
Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the
violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations
which Mr. Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.
“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a
great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged
himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money.”
“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy!
In a short time I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How
well it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am
in such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you
write for me. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin,
and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders,
had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.
“I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell
the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call
on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have
you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you
shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.”
Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took refuge
in her own room, that she might think with freedom.
Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was
no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in
looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could
be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared,
only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.
Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life
that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum
for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of
honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to
be her husband might then have rested in its proper place.
He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to
anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law,
and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his
assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be
perfectly useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The son was to
join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the
widow and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five
daughters successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come;
and Mrs. Bennet, for many years after Lydia's birth, had been certain
that he would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then
too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her
husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding
their income.
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs.
Bennet and the children. But in what proportions it should be divided
amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one
point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and
Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before
him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his
brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his
perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be
done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement.
He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the hundred
that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance,
and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her
mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within that sum.
That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too,
was another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have
as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of
rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he
naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon
dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in
its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was
indebted to his brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any
message to her.
The good news spread quickly through the house, and with
proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the
latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for
the advantage of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the
town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in
some distant farmhouse. But there was much to be talked of in marrying
her; and the good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had
proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a
little of their spirit in this change of circumstances, because with such an
husband her misery was considered certain.
It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on
this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of
her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants.
She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper
situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering what
their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance.
“Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings could quit it--or
the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth
is too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her: “Mrs.
Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into ONE house in this
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage
the impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”
A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm.
It soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and
horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for
his daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly
comprehend it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of
inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without
which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could
believe possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of
new clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
took place.
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the
distress of the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with
their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the
proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
spot.
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There
were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently
depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a
sister's frailty would have mortified her so much--not, however, from
any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate,
there seemed a gulf impassable between them.
Had Lydia's marriage been concluded on the most honourable
terms, it was not to be supposed that Mr. Darcy would connect himself
with a family where, to every other objection, would now be added an
alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so
justly scorned.
From such a connection she could not wonder that he would
shrink. The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself
of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive
such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented,
though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem,
when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear
of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She
was convinced that she could have been happy with him, when it was no
longer likely they should meet.
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that
the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago,
would now have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was as
generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he
was mortal, there must be a triumph.
She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners
improved; and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the
world, she must have received benefit of greater importance.
But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring
multitude what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different
tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be
formed in their family.
How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable
independence, she could not imagine. But how little of permanent
happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together
because their passions were stronger than their virtue, she could easily
conjecture.
Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia.
“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon
as his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in
considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his
account and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go into the
regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who are able
and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an ensigncy
in General ----'s regiment, now quartered in the North. It is an advantage
to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He promises fairly; and I
hope among different people, where they may each have a character to
preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to Colonel
Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that
he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near
Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged
myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar
assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list
according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at
least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will
be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment, unless they are
first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs. Gardiner, that my
niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the South. She
is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and your mother.--
Yours, etc.,
“E. GARDINER.”
Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's
removal from the ----shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs.
Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the
North, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her
company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was
acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites.
“She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite
shocking to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too,
that she likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General-
---'s regiment.”
His daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into her family again before she set off for the North, received
at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in
wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and consequence, that she
should be noticed on her marriage by her parents, urged him so earnestly
yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at
Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to
think as they thought, and act as they wished.
And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be
able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was
banished to the North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother,
therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled,
that as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to
Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should
consent to such a scheme, and had she consulted only her own
inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her
wishes.
Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for
her probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to
meet them at ----, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially,
who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must
endure.
They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to
receive them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage
drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her
daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.
Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown
open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced
her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate
smile, to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy
with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.
Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was
not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he
scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple,
indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even
Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed,
wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding
their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked
eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and
observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been
there.
Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his
manners were always so pleasing, that had his character and his
marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address,
while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all.
Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but
she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the
impudence of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the
cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of
colour.
There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could
neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit
near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that
neighbourhood, with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable
to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest
memories in the world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain;
and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have
alluded to for the world.
“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went
away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am
sure I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was.”
Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, “Oh! mamma, do the
people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might
not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was
determined he should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to
him, and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window
frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like
anything.”
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the
room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall
to the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia,
with anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her
say to her eldest sister, “Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must
go lower, because I am a married woman.”
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that
embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease
and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases,
and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs.
Wickham” by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner
to show her ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two
housemaids.
“Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the
breakfast room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a
charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they
may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the
place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go.”
“Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I
don't at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”
“Oh, lord! yes;--there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things.
You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be
at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I
will take care to get good partners for them all.”
“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.
“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my
sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before
the winter is over.”
“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do
not particularly like your way of getting husbands.”
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr.
Wickham had received his commission before he left London, and he
was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight.
No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short;
and she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter,
and having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable
to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think, than such as did not.
Wickham's affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had
expected to find it; not equal to Lydia's for him. She had scarcely needed
her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain that his
flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that
were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of
having a companion.
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on
every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did
every thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds
on the first of September, than any body else in the country.
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her
two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:
“Lizzy, I never gave YOU an account of my wedding, I believe.
You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not
you curious to hear how it was managed?”
“No really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little
said on the subject.”
“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We
were married, you know, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings
were in that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by
eleven o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the
others were to meet us at the church.Well, Monday morning came, and I
was in such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would
happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And
there was my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking
away just as if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above
one word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear
Wickham. I longed to know whether he would be married in his blue
coat.”
“Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would
never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and
aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll
believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just
as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon
business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once
they get together, there is no end of it.
“Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle
was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hour, we could not be
married all day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes' time,
and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he had
been prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy
might have done as well.”
“Mr. Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.
“Oh, yes!--he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But
gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I
promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such
a secret!”
“If it was to be secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”
“Oh! certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; “we
will ask you no questions.”
“Thank you,” said Lydia, “for if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be angry.”
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out
of her power, by running away.
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least
it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at her
sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote
a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had
dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
“You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity
must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and
(comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been
amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand
it--unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which
Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be
satisfied with ignorance.”
“Not that I SHALL, though,” she added to herself, as she finished
the letter; “and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out.”
Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it;--
till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she
had rather be without a confidante.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter
as soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it
than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be
happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a
denial.
“Gracechurch street, Sept. 6.
“MY DEAR NIECE,
“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
morning to answering it, as I foresee that a LITTLE writing will not
comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by
your application; I did not expect it from YOU. Don't think me angry,
however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such
inquiries to be necessary on YOUR side.
“If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence.
Your uncle is as much surprised as I am--and nothing but the belief of
your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has
done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more
explicit.
“On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle
had a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with
him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was
not so dreadfully racked as YOUR'S seems to have been. He came to tell
Mr. Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham
were, and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham
repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only
one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting
for them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to
make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide
in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and
confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private
actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He called
it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil
which had been brought on by himself.
“If he HAD ANOTHER motive, I am sure it would never disgrace
him. He had been some days in town, before he was able to discover
them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than
WE had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his
resolving to follow us.
“There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago
governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some
cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a
large house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting
lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with
Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to
town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and
corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found.
Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and
had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken
up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the
wished-for direction. They were in ---- street. He saw Wickham, and
afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he
acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on
to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go.
“But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she
was. She cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she
would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be
married some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since
such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and
expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham,
he easily learnt had never been HIS design. He confessed himself
obliged to leave the regiment, on account of some debts of honour,
which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the illconsequences
of Lydia's flight on her own folly alone. He meant to
resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he
could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he did
not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on.
“Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once.
Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have
been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been
benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that
Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune
by marriage in some other country. Under such circumstances, however,
he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
“They met several times, for there was much to be discussed.
Wickham of course wanted more than he could get; but at length was
reduced to be reasonable.
“Every thing being settled between THEM, Mr. Darcy's next step
was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in
Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner
could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your
father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did
not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult
as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day
it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.
“On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at
home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.
“They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all
settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to
Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been
accused of many faults at different times, but THIS is the true one.
Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure
(and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your
uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
“They battled it together for a long time, which was more than
either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your
uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to
his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,
which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this
morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that
would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was
due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most.
“You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the
young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to
considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition
to her own settled upon HER, and his commission purchased. The
reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have
given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper
consideration, that Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and
consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps
there was some truth in THIS; though I doubt whether HIS reserve, or
ANYBODY'S reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of
all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that