2. THE MAN IN THE MIST (continued)
Tommy and Tuppence stared at each other in bewilderment. "Well,"
said Tommy, "something's happened in that house to scare our friend
Reilly pretty badly."
Tuppence drew her finger absently across the gate post.
"He must have put his hand on some wet red paint somewhere," she
said idly.
"H'm," said Tommy. "I think we'd better go inside rather quickly. I don't
understand this business."
In the doorway of the house a white capped maid servant was
standing, almost speechless with indignation.
"Did you ever see the likes of that now, Father," she burst out, as
Tommy ascended the steps. "That fellow comes here, asks for the
young lady, rushes upstairs without how or by your leave. She lets out
a screech like a wild cat-and what wonder, poor pretty dear, and
straightway he comes rushing down again, with the white face on him,
like one who's seen a ghost. What will be the meaning of it all?"
"Who are you talking with at the front door, Ellen?" demanded a sharp
voice from the interior of the hall.
"Here's Missus," said Ellen, somewhat unnecessarily.
She drew back and Tommy found himself confronting a grey haired,
middle aged woman, with frosty blue eyes imperfectly concealed by
pince nez, and a spare figure clad in black with bugle trimming.
"Mrs. Honeycott?" said Tommy. "I came here to see Miss Glen."
Mrs. Honeycott gave him a sharp glance, then went on to Tuppence
and took in every detail of her appearance.
"Oh! you did, did you?" she said. "Well, you'd better come inside."
She led the way into the hall and along it into a room at the back of the
house facing on the garden. It was a fair sized room, but looked
smaller than it was, owing to the large amount of chairs and tables
crowded into it. A big fire burned in the grate, and a chintz covered
sofa stood at one side of it. The wall paper was a small grey stripe with
a festoon of roses round the top. Quantities of engravings and oil
paintings covered the walls.
It was a room almost impossible to associate with the expensive
personality of Miss Gilda Glen.
"Sit down," said Mrs. Honeycott. "To begin with, you'll excuse me if I
say I don't hold with the Roman Catholic religion. Never did I think to
see a Roman Catholic priest in my house. But if Gilda's gone over to
the Scarlet Woman it's only what's to be expected in a life like hers-and
I daresay it might be worse. She mightn't have any religion at all. I
should think more of Roman Catholics if their priests were married-I
always speak my mind. And to think of those convents-quantities of
beautiful young girls shut up there, and no one knowing what becomes
of them-well, it won't bear thinking about."
Mrs. Honeycott came to a full stop, and drew a deep breath.
Without entering upon a defence of the celibacy of the priesthood or
the other controversial points touched upon, Tommy went straight to
the point.
"I understand, Mrs. Honeycott, that Miss Glen is in this house."
"She is. Mind you, I don't approve. Marriage is marriage and your
husband's your husband. As you make your bed, so you must lie on it."
"I don't quite understand-" began Tommy, bewildered.
"I thought as much. That's the reason I brought you in here. You can go
up to Gilda after I've spoken my mind. She came to me-after all these
years, think of it!-and asked me to help her. Wanted me to see this man
and persuade him to agree to a divorce. I told her straight out I'd have
nothing whatever to do with it. Divorce is sinful. But I couldn't refuse
my own sister shelter in my house, could I now?"
"Your sister?" exclaimed Tommy.
"Yes, Gilda's my sister. Didn't she tell you?"
Tommy stared at her open mouthed. The thing seemed fantastically
impossible. Then he remembered that the angelic beauty of Gilda Glen
had been in evidence for many years. He had been taken to see her act
as quite a small boy. Yes, it was possible after all. But what a piquant
contrast. So it was from this lower middle class respectability that
Gilda Glen had sprung. How well she had guarded her secret!
"I am not yet quite clear," he said. "Your sister is married?"
"Ran away to be married as a girl of seventeen," said Miss Honeycott
succinctly. "Some common fellow far below her in station. And our
father a reverend. It was a disgrace. Then she left her husband and
went on the stage. Play acting! I've never been inside a theatre in my
life. I hold no truck with wickedness. Now, after all these years, she
wants to divorce the man. Means to marry some big wig, I suppose.
But her husband's standing firm-not to be bullied and not to be bribed-I
admire him for it."
"What is his name?" asked Tommy suddenly.
"That's an extraordinary thing now, but I can't remember! It's nearly
twenty years ago, remember, since I heard it. My father forbade it to
be mentioned. And I've refused to discuss the matter with Gilda. She
knows what I think, and that's enough for her."
"It wasn't Reilly, was it?"
"Might have been. I really can't say. It's gone clean out of my head."
"The man I mean was here just now."
"That man! I thought he was an escaped lunatic. I'd been in the kitchen
giving orders to Ellen. I'd just got back into this room, and was
wondering whether Gilda had come in yet (she has a latch key) when I
heard her. She hesitated a minute or two in the hall and then went
straight upstairs. About three minutes later, all this tremendous rat
tatting began. I went out into the hall, and just saw a man rushing
upstairs. Then there was a sort of cry upstairs and presently down he
came again and rushed out like a madman. Pretty goings on."
Tommy rose.
"Mrs. Honeycott, let us go upstairs at once. I am afraid-"
"What of?"
"Afraid that you have no red wet paint in the house."
Mrs. Honeycott stared at him.
"Of course I haven't."
“That is what I feared," said Tommy gravely. "Please let us go to your
sister's room at once."
Momentarily silenced, Mrs. Honeycott led the way. They caught a
glimpse of Ellen in the hall, backing hastily into one of the rooms.
Mrs. Honeycott opened the first door at the top of the stairs. Tommy
and Tuppence entered close behind her.
Suddenly she gave a gasp and fell back.
A motionless figure in black and ermine lay stretched on the sofa. The
face was untouched, a beautiful soulless face like a mature child
asleep. The wound was on the side of the head, a heavy blow with
some blunt instrument had crushed in the skull. Blood was dripping
slowly onto the floor, but the wound itself had long since ceased to
bleed. . .
Tommy examined the prostrate figure his face very white
"So," he said at last, "he didn't strangle her after all."
"What do you mean? Who?" cried Mrs. Honeycott. "Is she dead?"
"Oh! yes, Mrs. Honeycott, she's dead. Murdered. The question is-by
whom? Not that it is much of a question. Funny-for all his ranting
words, I didn't think the fellow had got it in him."
He paused a minute, then turned to Tuppence with decision.
"Will you go out and get a policeman, or ring up the police station from
somewhere?"
Tuppence nodded. She, too, was very white. Tommy led Mrs.
Honeycott downstairs again.
"I don't want there to be any mistake about this," he said. "Do you
know exactly what time it was when your sister came in?"
"Yes, I do," said Mrs. Honeycott. "Because I was just setting the clock
on five minutes as I have to do every evening. It gains just five minutes
a day. It was exactly eight minutes past six by my watch, and that
never loses or gains a second."
Tommy nodded. That agreed perfectly with the policeman's story. He
had seen the woman with the white furs go in at the gate, probably
three minutes had elapsed before he and Tuppence had reached the
same spot. He had glanced at his own watch then and had noted that it
was just one minute after the time of their appointment.
There was just the faint chance that someone might have been waiting
for Gilda Glen in the room upstairs. But if so, he must still be hiding in
the house. No one but James Reilly had left it.
He ran upstairs and made a quick but efficient search of the premises.
But there was no one concealed anywhere.
Then he spoke to Ellen. After breaking the news to her, and waiting for
her first lamentations and invocations to the Saints to have exhausted
themselves, he asked a few questions.
"Had anyone come to the house that afternoon asking for Miss Glen?
No one whatsoever. Had she herself been upstairs at all that evening?
Yes, she'd gone up at six o'clock as usual to draw the curtains-or it
might have been a few minutes after six. Anyway it was just before that
wild fellow come breaking the knocker down. She'd run downstairs to
answer the door. And him a black hearted murderer at the time."
Tommy let it go at that. But he still felt a curious pity for Reilly, an
unwillingness to believe the worst of him. And yet there was no one
else who could have murdered Gilda Glen. Mrs. Honeycott and Ellen
had been the only two people in the house.
He heard voices in the hall, and went out to find Tuppence and the
policeman from the beat outside. The latter had produced a notebook,
and a rather blunt pencil which he licked surreptitiously. He went
upstairs and surveyed the victim stolidly, merely remarking that if he
was to touch anything the Inspector would give him beans. He listened
to all Mrs. Honeycott's hysterical outbursts and confused
explanations, and occasionally he wrote something down. His
presence was calming and soothing.
Tommy finally got him alone for a minute or two on the steps outside,
ere he departed to telephone headquarters.
"Look here," said Tommy. "You saw the deceased turning in at the
gate, you say. Are you sure she was alone?"
"Oh, she was alone all right. Nobody with her."
"And between that time and when you met us, nobody came out of the
gate?"
"Not a soul."
"You'd have seen them if they had?"
"In course I should. Nobody come out till that wild chap did."
The majesty of the law moved portentously down the steps and paused
by the white gate post which bore the imprint of a hand in red.
"Kind of amateur he must have been," he said pityingly. "To leave a
thing like that."
Then he swung out into the road.
It was the day after the crime. Tommy and Tuppence were still at the
Grand Hotel, but Tommy had thought it prudent to discard his clerical
disguise.
James Reilly had been apprehended, and was in custody. His solicitor,
Mr. Marvell, had just finished a lengthy conversation with Tommy on
the subject of the crime.
"I never would have believed it of James Reilly," he said simply. "He's
always been a man of violent speech, but that's all."
Tommy nodded.
"If you disperse energy in speech, it doesn't leave you too much over
for action. What I realise is that I shall be one of the principal witnesses
against him. That conversation he had with me just before the crime
was particularly damning. And in spite of everything, I like the man,
and if there was anyone else to suspect, I should believe him to be
innocent. What's his own story?"
The solicitor pursed up his lips.
"He declares that he found her lying there dead. But that's impossible,
of course. He's using the first lie that comes into his head."
"Because, if he happened to be speaking the truth, it would mean that
our garrulous Mrs. Honeycott committed the crime-and that is
fantastic. Yes, he must have done it."
"The maid heard her cry out, remember."
"The maid-yes-"
Tommy was silent a moment. Then he said thoughtfully:
"What credulous creatures we are, really. We believe evidence as
though it were gospel truth. And what is it ready? Only the impressions
conveyed to the mind by the senses- and suppose they're the wrong
impressions?"
The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.
"Oh! we all know that there are unreliable witnesses, witnesses who
remember more and more as time goes on, with no real intention to
deceive."
"I don't mean only that. I mean all of us-we say things that aren't really
so, and never know that we've done so. For instance, both you and I,
without doubt, have said some time or other 'There's the post,' when
what we really meant was that we'd heard a double knock and the
rattle of the letter box. Nine times out of ten we'd be right, and it would
be the post, but just possibly the tenth time it might be only a little
urchin playing a joke on us. See what I mean?"
"Ye-es," said Mr. Marvell slowly. "But I don't see what you're driving
at?"
"Don't you? I'm not sure that I do myself. But I'm beginning to see. It's
like the stick, Tuppence. You remember? One end of it pointed one
way-but the other end always points the opposite way. It depends
whether you get hold of it by the right end. Doors open-but they also
shut. People go upstairs, but they also go downstairs. Boxes shut, but
they also open."
"What do you mean?" demanded Tuppence.
"It's so ridiculously easy, really," said Tommy. "And yet it's only just
come to me. How do you know when a person's come into the house?
You hear the door open and bang to, and if you re expecting anyone to
come in, you will be quite sure it is them. But it might just as easily be
someone going out."
"But Miss Glen didn't go out?"
"No, I know she didn't. But someone else did-the murderer."
"But how did she get in, then?"
"She came in whilst Mrs. Honeycott was in the kitchen talking to Ellen.
They didn't hear her. Mrs. Honeycott went back to the drawing-room,
wondered if her sister had come in and began to put the clock right,
and then, as she thought, she heard her come in and go upstairs."
"Well, what about that? The footsteps going upstairs?"
"That was Ellen, going up to draw the curtains. You remember, Mrs.
Honeycott said her sister paused before going up. That pause was just
the time needed for Ellen to come out from the kitchen into the hall.
She just missed seeing the murderer."
"But Tommy," cried Tuppence. "The cry she gave?"
"That was James Reilly. Didn't you notice what a high pitched voice he
has? In moments of great emotion, men often squeal just like a
woman."
"But the murderer? We'd have seen him?"
"We did see him. We even stood talking to him. Do you remember the
sudden way that policeman appeared? That was because he stepped
out of the gate, just after the mist cleared from the road. It made us
jump, don't you remember? After all, though we never think of them as
that, policemen are men just like any other men. They love and they
hate. They marry. . . .
"I think Gilda Glen met her husband suddenly just outside that gate,
and took him in with her to thrash the matter out. He hadn't Reilly's
relief of violent words, remember. He just saw red-and he had his
truncheon handy. . . ."
13. THE CRACKLER
"Tuppence," said Tommy, "we shall have to move into a much larger
office."
"Nonsense," said Tuppence, "You mustn't get swollen headed and
think you are a millionaire just because you solved two or three
twopenny halfpenny cases with the aid of the most amazing luck."
"What some call luck, others call skill."
"Of course if you really think you are Sherlock Holmes, Thorndyke,
McCarty and the Brothers Okewood all rolled into one there is no more
to be said. Personally I would much rather have luck on my side than
all the skill in the world."
"Perhaps there is something in that," conceded Tommy. "All the same,
Tuppence, we do need a larger office."
"Why?"
"The Classics," said Tommy. "We need several hundreds of yards of
extra book shelf if Edgar Wallace is to be properly represented."
"We haven't had an Edgar Wallace case yet."
"I am afraid we never shall," said Tommy. "If you notice he never does
give the amateur sleuth much of a chance. It is all stern Scotland Yard
kind of stuff-the real thing and no base counterfeit."
Albert, the office boy, appeared at the door.
"Inspector Marriot to see you," he announced.
"The mystery man of Scotland Yard" murmured Tommy.
"The busiest of the Busies," said Tuppence. "Or is it 'Noses?' I always
get mixed between Busies and Noses."
The Inspector advanced upon them with a beaming smile of welcome.
"Well and how are things?" he asked breezily. "None the worse for our
little adventure the other day?"
"Oh! rather not," said Tuppence. "Too, too marvellous, wasn't it?"
"Well, I don't know that I would describe it exactly that way myself,"
said Marriot cautiously.
"What has brought you here today, Marriott?" asked Tommy. "Not just
solicitude for our nervous systems, is it?"
"No," said the Inspector. "It is work for the brilliant Mr. Blunt."
"Ha!" said Tommy. "Let me put my brilliant expression on."
"I have come to make you a proposition, Mr. Beresford. What would
you say to rounding up a really big gang?"
"Is there such a thing?" asked Tommy.
"What do you mean, is there such a thing?"
"I always thought that gangs were confined to fiction-like master
crooks, and super criminals."
“The master crook isn't very common," agreed the Inspector. "But
Lord bless you, sir, there's any amount of gangs knocking about."
"I don't know that I should be at my best dealing with a gang," said
Tommy. "The amateur crime, the crime of quiet family life-that is where
I flatter myself that I shine. Drama of strong domestic interest. That's
the thing-with Tuppence at hand to supply all those little feminine
details which are so important, and so apt to be ignored by the denser
male."
His eloquence was arrested abruptly, as Tuppence threw a cushion at
him and requested him not to talk nonsense.
"Will have your little bit of fun, won't you, sir?" said Inspector Marriot,
smiling paternally at them both. "If you'll not take offense at my saying
so, it's a pleasure to see two your" people enjoying life as much as you
two do."
"Do we enjoy life?" said Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide. "I
suppose we do. I've never thought about it before."
"To return to that gang you were talking about," said Tommy. "In spite
of my extensive private practice, Duchesses, millionaires, and all the
best charwomen-I might perhaps condescend to look into the matter
for you. I don't like to see Scotland Yard at fault. You'll have the Daily
Mail after you before you know where you are."
"As I said before, you must have your bit of fun. Well, it's like this."
Again he hitched his chair forward. "There's any amount of forged
notes going about just now-hundreds of 'em! The amount of counterfeit
Treasury notes in circulation would surprise you. Most artistic bit of
work it is. Here's one of 'em."
He took a one pound note from his pocket and handed it to Tommy.
"Looks all right, doesn't it?"
Tommy examined the note with great interest.
"By Jove, I'd never spot there was anything wrong with that."
"No more would most people. Now here's a genuine one. I'll show you
the differences-very slight they are, but you'll soon learn to tell them
apart. Take this magnifying glass."
At the end of five minutes' coaching, both Tommy and Tuppence were
fairly expert.
"What do you want us to do, Inspector Marriot?" asked Tuppence.
"Just keep our eyes open for these things?"
"A great deal more than that, Mrs. Beresford. I'm pinning my faith on
you to get to the bottom of the matter. You see we've discovered that
the notes are being circulated from the West End. Somebody pretty
high up in the social scale is doing the distributing. They're passing
them the other side of the Channel as well. Now there's a certain
person who is interesting us very much. A Major Laidlaw-perhaps
you've heard the name?"
"I think I have," said Tommy. "Connected with racing, isn't that it?"
"Yes. Major Laidlaw is pretty well known in connection with the Turf.
There's nothing actually against him, but there's a general impression
that he's been a bit too smart over one or two rather shady
transactions. Men in the know look queer when he's mentioned.
Nobody knows much of his past or where he came from. He's got a
very attractive French wife who's seen about everywhere with a train
of admirers. They must spend a lot of money, the Laidlaws, and I'd like
to know where it comes from."
"Possibly from the train of admirers," suggested Tommy.
"That's the general idea. But I'm not so sure. It may be coincidence,
but a lot of notes have been forthcoming from a certain very smart
little gambling club which is much frequented by the Laidlaws and
their set. This racing, gambling set get rid of a lot of loose money in
notes. There couldn't be a better way of getting it into circulation."
"And where do we come in?"
"This way. Young St. Vincent and his wife are friends of yours, I
understand? They're in pretty thick with the Laidlaw set-though not as
thick as they were. Through them it will be easy for you to get a footing
in the same set in a way that none of our people could attempt. There's
no likelihood of their spotting you. You'll have an ideal opportunity."
"What have we got to find out exactly?"
"Where they get the stuff from, if they are passing it."
"Quite so," said Tommy. "Major Laidlaw goes out with an empty
suitcase. When he returns it is crammed to the bursting point with
Treasury notes. How is it done? I sleuth him and find out. Is that the
idea?"
"More or less. But don't neglect the lady, and her father, M. Heroulade.
Remember the notes are being passed on both sides of the Channel."
"My dear Marriot," exclaimed Tommy reproachfully. "Blunt's Brilliant
Detectives do not know the meaning of the word neglect."
The Inspector rose.
"Well, good luck to you," he said, and departed.
"Slush," said Tuppence enthusiastically.
"Eh?" said Tommy perplexed.
"Counterfeit money," explained Tuppence. "It is always called Slush. I
know I'm right. Oh, Tommy, we have got an Edgar Wallace case. At last
we are Busies."
"We are," said Tommy, "and we are out to get The Crackler and we will
get him good."
"Did you say The Cackler or The Crackler?"
"The Crackler."
"Oh, what is a Crackler?"
"A new word that I have coined," said Tommy. "Descriptive of one who
passes false notes into circulation. Bank notes crackle; therefore he is
called a Crackler. Nothing could be more simple."
"That is rather a good idea," said Tuppence, "it makes it seem more
real. I like the Rustler myself. Much more descriptive and sinister."
"No," said Tommy, "I said the Crackler first and I stick to it.”
"I shall enjoy this case," said Tuppence. "Lots of Night Clubs and
cocktails in it. I shall buy some eyelash black to-morrow."
"Your eyelashes are black already," objected her husband.
"I could make them blacker," said Tuppence, "and cherry lip stick
would be useful too. That ultra bright kind."
"Tuppence," said Tommy, "you're a real rake at heart. What a good
thing it is that you are married to a sober steady middle aged man like
myself."
"You wait," said Tuppence. "When you have been to the Python Club a
bit you mayn't be so sober yourself."
Tommy produced from a cupboard various bottles, two glasses, and a
cocktail shaker.
"Let's start now," he said. "We are after you, Crackler, and we mean to
get you."
14. THE CRACKLER (continued)
Making the acquaintance of the Laidlaws proved an easy affair.
Tommy and Tuppence, young, well dressed, eager for life and with
apparently money to burn, were soon made free of that particular
coterie in which the Laidlaws had their being.
Major Laidlaw was a tall fair man, typically English in appearance, with
a hearty sportsmanlike manner, slightly belied by the hard lines round
his eyes and the occasional quick sideways glance that assorted oddly
with his supposed character.
He was a very dexterous card player, and Tommy noticed that when
the stakes were high he seldom rose from the table a loser.
Marguerite Laidlaw was quite a different proposition. She was a
charming creature, with the slenderness of a wood nymph and the
face of a Greuze picture. Her dainty broken English was fascinating,
and Tommy felt that it was no wonder most men were her slaves. She
seemed to take a great fancy to Tommy from the first, and playing his
part, he allowed himself to be swept into her train.
"My Tommee," she would say. "But positively I cannot go without my
Tommee. His 'air, eet ees the color of the sunset, ees eet not?"
Her father was a more sinister figure. Very correct, very upright, with
his little black beard and his watchful eyes.
Tuppence was the first to report progress. She came to Tommy with
ten one pound notes.
"Have a look at these. They're wrong 'uns, aren't they?"
Tommy examined them and confirmed.Tuppence's diagnosis.
"Where did you get them from?"
"That boy, Jimmy Faulkener. Marguerite Laidlaw gave them to him to
put on a horse for her. I said I wanted small notes, and gave him a
tenner in exchange."
"All new and crisp," said Tommy thoughtfully. "They can't have passed
through many hands. I suppose young Faulkener is all right?"
"Jimmy? Oh! he's a dear. He and I are becoming great Friends."
"So I have noticed," said Tommy coldly. "Do you really think it is
necessary?"
"Oh! it isn't business," said Tuppence cheerily. "It's pleasure. He's
such a nice boy. I'm glad to get him out of that woman's clutches.
You've no idea of the amount of money she's cost him."
"It looks to me as though he were getting rather a pash for you,
Tuppence."
"I've thought the same myself sometimes. It's nice to know one's still
young and attractive, isn't it?"
"Your moral tone, Tuppence, is deplorably low. You look at these
things from the wrong point of view."
"I haven't enjoyed myself so much for years," declared Tuppence
shamelessly. "And anyway, what about you? Do I ever see you
nowadays? Aren't you always living in Marguerite Laidlaw's pocket?"
"Business," said Tommy crisply.
"But she is attractive, isn't she?"
"Not my type," said Tommy. "I don't admire her."
"Liar," laughed Tuppence. "But I always did think I'd rather marry a
liar than a fool."
"I suppose," said Tommy, "that there's no absolute necessity for a
husband to be either?"
But Tuppence merely threw him a pitying glance and withdrew.
Amongst Mrs. Laidlaw's train of admirers was a simple but extremely
wealthy gentleman of the name of Hank Ryder.
Mr. Ryder came from Alabama, and from the first he was disposed to
make a friend and confidant of Tommy.
"That's a wonderful woman, sir," said Mr. Ryder, following the lovely
Marguerite with reverential eyes. "Plumb full of civilization. Can’t beat
la gaie France, can you? When I'm near her, I feel as though I was one
of the Almighty's earliest experiments. I guess He'd got to get His hand
in before He attempted anything so lovely as that perfectly lovely
woman."
Tommy agreeing politely with these sentiments, Mr. Ryder unburdened
himself still further.
"Seems kind of a shame a lovely creature like that should have money
worries."
"Has she?" asked Tommy.
"You betcha life she has. Queer fish, Laidlaw. She's skeered of him.
Told me so. Daren't tell him about her little bills."
"Are they little billls?" asked Tommy.
"Well-when I say little! After all, a woman's got to wear clothes, and the
less there are of them the more they cost, the way I figure it out. And a
pretty woman like that doesn't want to go about in last season's goods.
Cards too, the poor little thing's been mighty unlucky at cards. Why,
she lost fifty to me last night."
"She won two hundred from Jimmy Faulkener the night before," said
Tommy drily.
"Did she indeed? That relieves my mind some. By the way, there
seems to be a lot of dud notes floating around in your country just now.
I paid in a bunch at my bank this morning, and twenty-five of them were
down and outers, so the polite gentleman behind the counter informed
me."
"That's rather a large proportion. Were they new looking?"
"New and crisp as they make 'em. Why, they were the ones Mrs.
Laidlaw paid over to me, I reckon. Wonder where she got 'em from.
One of these toughs on the race course as likely as not."
"Yes," said Tommy. "Very likely."
"You know, Mr. Beresford, I'm new to this sort of high life. All these
swell dames, and the rest of the outfit. Only made my pile a short while
back. Came right over to Yurrop to see life."
Tommy nodded. He made a mental note to the effect that with the aid
of Marguerite Laidlaw Mr. Ryder would probably see a good deal of life
and that the price charged would be heavy.
Meantime, for the second time, he had evidenced that the forged notes
were being distributed pretty near at hand, and that in all probability
Marguerite Laidlaw had a hand in their distribution.
On the following night he himself was given a proof.
It was at that small select meeting place mentioned by Inspector
Marriot. There was dancing there, but the real attraction of the place
lay behind a pair of imposing folding doors. There were two rooms
there with green baize covered tables, where vast sums changed
hands nightly.
Marguerite Laidlaw, rising at last to go, thrust a quantity of small notes
into Tommy's hands.
"They are so bulkee, Tommee-you will change them, yes? A beeg note.
See my so sweet leetle bag, it bulges him to distraction."
Tommy brought her the hundred pound note she asked for. Then in a
quiet corner, he examined the notes she had given him. At least a
quarter of them were counterfeit.
But where did she get her supplies from? To that he had as yet no
answer. By means of Albert's cooperation, he was almost sure that
Laidlaw was not the man. His movements had been watched closely
and had yielded no result.
Tommy suspected her father, the saturnine M. Heroulade. He went to
and fro to France fairly often. What could be simpler than to bring the
notes across with him? A false bottom to a trunk-something of that
kind.
Tommy strolled slowly out of the Club, absorbed in these thoughts, but
was suddenly recalled to immediate necessities. Outside in the street
was Mr. Hank P. Ryder, and it was clear at once that Mr. Ryder was not
strictly sober. At the moment he was trying to hang his hat on the
radiator of a car, and missing it by some inches every time.
"This goddarned hatshtand, this goddarned hatshtand," said Mr.
Ryder tearfully. "Not like that in the Shtates. Man can hang up hishhat
every night-every night, sir. You're wearing two hatshs. Never sheen a
man wearing two hatsh before. Mushtbe effectclimate."
"Perhaps I've got two heads," said Tommy gravely.
"Sho you have," said Mr. Ryder. "Thatsh odd. Thatsh remarkable fac.
Letsh have a cocktail. Prohibition-probishun-thatsh whatsh done me
in. I guess I'm drunk-constootionally drunk. Cocktailsh-mixed 'em-
Angel's Kiss- that's Marguerite-lovely creature, fon' o' me too. Horshes
Neck, two Martinis-three Road to Ruinsh-no, roadshto roon-mixed 'em
all-in a beer tankard. Bet me I wouldn't-I shaid-to hell, I shayed-"
Tommy interrupted.
"That's all right," he said soothingly. "Now what about getting home?"
"No home to go to," said Mr. Ryder sadly, and wept.
"What Hotel are you staying at?" asked Tommy.
"Can't go home," said Mr. Ryder. "Treasurehunt. Swell thing to do. She
did it. Whitechapel-White heartsh, white headsh shorrow to the grave-"
"Never mind that," said Tommy. "Where are you-"
But Mr. Ryder became suddenly dignified. He drew himself erect and
attained a sudden miraculous command over his speech.
"Young man, I'm telling you. Margee took me. In her car Treasure
Hunting. Englisharishtocrashy all do it. Under the cobblestones. Five
hundred poundsh. Solemn thought, 'tis solemn thought. I'm telling you,
young man. You've been kind to me. I've got your welfare at heart, sir,
at heart. We Americans-"
Tommy interrupted him this time with even less ceremony.
"What's that you say? Mrs. Laidlaw took you in a car?"
The American nodded with a kind of owlish solemnity.
"To Whitechapel?" Again that owlish nod. "And you found five hundred
pounds there?"
Mr. Ryder struggled for words.
"S-she did," he corrected his questioner. "Left me outside. Outside the
door. Always left outside. It's kinder sad. Outside-always outside."
"Would you know your way there?"
"I guess so. Hank Ryder doesn't lose his bearings-"
Tommy hauled him along unceremoniously. He found his own car
where it was waiting, and presently they were bowling eastward. The
cool air revived Mr. Ryder. After slumping against Tommy's shoulder in
a kind of stupor, he awoke clear headed and refreshed.
"Say, boy, where are we?" he demanded.
"Whitechapel," said Tommy crisply. "Is this where you came with Mrs.
Laidlaw tonight?"'
"It looks kinder familiar," admitted Mr. Ryder looking round. "Seems to
me we turned off to the left somewhere down here. That's it-that street
there."
Tommy turned off obediently. Mr. Ryder issued directions.
"That's it. Sure. And round to the right. Say, aren't the smells awful?
Yes, past the pub at the corner-sharp round, and stop at the mouth of
that little alley. But what's the big idea? Hand it to me. Some of the oof
left behind? Are we going to put one over on them?"
"That's exactly it," said Tommy. "We're going to put one over on them.
Rather a joke, isn't it?"
"I'll tell the world," assented Mr. Ryder. "Though I'm just a mite hazed
about it all," he ended wistfully.
Tommy got out and assisted Mr. Ryder to alight also. They advanced
into the alley way. On the left were the backs of a row of dilapidated
houses, most of which had doors opening into the alley. Mr. Ryder
came to a stop before one of these doors.
"In here she went," he declared. "It was this door-I'm plumb certain of
it."
"They all look very alike," said Tommy. "Reminds me of the story of the
soldier and the Princess. You remember, they made a cross on the
door to show which one it was. Shall we do the same?"
Laughing, he drew a piece of white chalk from his pocket and made a
rough cross low down on the door. Then he looked up at various dim
shapes that prowled high on the walls of the alley, one of which was
uttering a blood curdling yawl.
"Lots of cats about," he remarked cheerfully.
"What is the procedure?" asked Mr. Ryder. "Do we step inside?"
"Adopting due precautions we do," said Tommy.
He glanced up and down the alley way, then softly tried the door. It
yielded. He pushed it open, and peered into a dim yard.
Noiselessly he passed through, Mr. Ryder on his heels.
"Gee!" said the latter. "There's someone coming down the alley."
He slipped outside again. Tommy stood still for a minute, then hearing
nothing went on. He took a torch from his pocket and switched on the
light for a brief second. That momentary flash enabled him to see his
way ahead. He pushed forward and tried the closed door ahead of him.
That too gave, and very softly he pushed it open and went in.
After standing still a second and listening, he again switched on the
torch, and at that flash, as though at a given signal, the place seemed
to rise round him. Two men were in front of him, two men were behind
him. They closed in on him, and bore him down.
"Lights," growled a voice.
An incandescent gas burner was lit. By its light Tommy saw a circle of
unpleasing faces. His eyes wandered gently round the room and noted
some of the objects in it.
"Ah!" he said pleasantly. "The headquarters of the counterfeiting
industry, if I am not mistaken."
"Shut your jaw," growled one of the men.
The door opened and shut behind Tommy, and a genial and well known
voice spoke.
"Got him, boys. That's right. Now, Mr. Busy, let me tell you you're up
against it."
"That dear old word," said Tommy. "How it thrills me. Yes. I am the
Mystery Man of Scotland Yard. Why it's Mr. Hank Ryder. This is a
surprise."
"I guess you mean that too. I've been laughing fit to bust all this
evening-leading you here like a little child. And you so pleased with
your cleverness. Why, sonny, I was on to you from the start. You
weren't in with that crowd for your health. I let you play about for a
while, and when you got real suspicious of the lovely Marguerite, I said
to myself 'Now's the time to lead him to it.' I guess your friends won't
be hearing of you for some time."
"Going to do me in? That's the correct expression, I believe. You have
got it in for me."
"You've got a nerve all right. Not we shan't attempt violence. Just keep
you under restraint, so to speak."
"I'm afraid you're backing the wrong horse," said Tommy. "I've no
intention of being 'kept under restraint' as you call it."
Mr. Ryder smiled genially. From outside a cat uttered a melancholy cry
to the moon.
"Banking on that cross you put on the door, eh Sonny?" said Mr.
Ryder. "I shouldn't if I were you. Because I know that story you
mentioned. Heard it when I was a little boy. I stepped back into the
alleyway to enact the part of the dog with eyes as big as cart wheels. If
you were in that alley now, you would observe that every door in the
alley is marked with an identical cross."
Tommy drooped his head despondently.
"Thought you were mighty clever, didn't you?" said Ryder.
As the words left his lips a sharp rapping sounded on the door.
"What's that?" he cried, starting.
At the same time, an assault began on the front of the house. The door
at the back was a flimsy affair. The lock gave almost immediately and
Inspector Marriot showed in the doorway.
"Well done, Marriot," said Tommy. "You were quite right as to the
district. I'd like you to make the acquaintance of Mr. Hank Ryder who
knows all the best fairy tales."
"You see, Mr. Ryder," he added gently, "I've had my suspicions of you.
Albert (that important looking boy with the big ears is Albert) had
orders to follow on his motor cycle if you and I went off joy riding at any
time. And whilst I was ostentatiously marking a chalk cross on the door
to engage your attention, I also emptied a little bottle of valerian on the
ground. Nasty smell, but cats love it. All the cats in the neighborhood
were assembled outside to mark the right house when Albert and the
police arrived."
He looked at the dumbfounded Mr. Ryder with a smile. Then rose to his
feet.
"I said I would get you, Crackler, and I have got you," he observed.
"What the Hell are you talking about?" asked Mr. Ryder. "What do you
mean-Crackler?"
"You will find it in the glossary of the next criminal dictionary," said
Tommy. "Etymology doubtful."
He looked round him with a happy smile.
"And all done without a Nose," he murmured brightly. "Good night,
Marriot. I must go now to where the happy ending of the story awaits
me. No reward like the love of a good woman-and the love of a good
woman awaits me at home-that is I hope it does, but one never knows
nowadays. This has been a very dangerous job, Marriot. Do you know
Captain Jimmy Faulkener? His dancing is simply too marvellous and as
for his taste in cocktails-! Yes, Marriot, it has been a very dangerous
job."

15.THE SUNNINGDALE MYSTERY
“Do you know where we are going to lunch today, Tuppence?"
Mrs. Beresford considered the question.
"The Ritz?" she suggested hopefully.
"Think again."
"That nice little place in Soho?"
"No." Tommy's tone was full of importance. "An A.B.C. shop. This one
in fact."
He drew her deftly inside an establishment of the kind indicated, and
steered her to a corner marble-topped table.
"Excellent," said Tommy with satisfaction, as he seated himself.
"Couldn't be better."
"Why has this craze for the simple life come upon you?" demanded
Tuppence.
"You see, Watson, but you do not observe. I wonder now whether one
of these haughty damsels would condescend to notice us? Splendid,
she drifts this way. It is true that she appears to be thinking of
something else, but doubtless her subconscious mind is functioning
busily with such matters as ham and eggs and pots of tea. Chop and
fried potatoes, please, Miss, and a large coffee, a roll and butter, and a
plate of tongue for the lady."
The waitress repeated the order in a scornful tone, but Tuppence leant
forward suddenly and interrupted her.
"No, not a chop and fried potatoes. This gentleman will have a cheese
cake and a glass of milk."
"A cheese cake and a milk," said the waitress with even deeper scorn
if that were possible. Still thinking of something else, she drifted away
again.
"That was uncalled for," said Tommy coldly.
"But I'm right, aren't I? You are the Old Man in the Corner? Where's
your piece of string?"
Tommy drew a long twisted mesh of string from his pocket, and
proceeded to tie a couple of knots in it.
"Complete to the smallest detail," he murmured.
"You made a small mistake in ordering your meal, though."
"Women are so literal minded," said Tommy. "If there's one thing I hate
it's milk to drink, and cheese cakes are always so yellow and bilious
looking."
"Be an artist," said Tuppence. "Watch me attack my cold tongue. Jolly
good stuff, cold tongue. Now then, I'm all ready to be Miss Polly
Burton. Tie a large knot and begin."
"First of all," said Tommy, "speaking in a strictly unofficial capacity, let
me point out this. Business is not too brisk lately. If business does not
come to us, we must go to business. Apply our minds to one of the
great public mysteries of the moment. Which brings me to the point-the
Sunningdale Mystery."
"Ah!" said Tuppence, with deep interest. "The Sunningdale Mystery!"
Tommy drew a crumpled piece of newspaper from his pocket and laid
it on the table.
"That is the latest portrait of Captain Sessle as it appeared in the Daily
Leader."
"Just so," said Tuppence. "I wonder someone doesn't sue these
newspapers sometimes. You can see it's a man and that's all."
"When I said the Sunningdale Mystery, I should have said the so-called
Sunningdale Mystery," went on Tommy rapidly. "A mystery to the
police perhaps, but not to an intelligent mind."
"Tie another knot," said Tuppence.
"I don't know how much of the case you remember," continued Tommy
quietly.
"All of it," said Tuppence, "but don't let me cramp your style."
"It was just over three weeks ago," said Tommy, "that that gruesome
discovery was made on the famous golf links. Two members of the
Club who were enjoying an early round were horrified to find the body
of a man lying face downwards on the seventh tee. Even before they
turned him over they had guessed him to be Captain Sessle, a well
known figure on the links, and who always wore a golf coat of a
peculiarly bright blue color.
"Captain Sessle was often seen out on the links early in the morning,
practicing, and it was thought at first that he had been suddenly
overcome by some form of heart disease. But examination by a doctor
revealed the sinister fact that he had been murdered, stabbed to the
heart with a significant object, a woman's hat pin. He was also found to
have been dead at least twelve hours.
"That put an entirely different complexion on the matter, and very soon
some interesting facts came to light. Practically the last person to see
Captain Sessle alive was his friend and partner Mr. Hollaby of the
Porcupine Assurance Co., and he told his story as follows.
"Sessle and he played a round earlier in the day. After tea the other
suggested that they should play a few more holes before it got too
dark to see. Hollaby assented. Sessle seemed in good spirits, and was
in excellent form. There is a public footpath that crosses the links, and
just as they were playing up to the sixth green Hollaby noticed a
woman coming along it. She was very tall and dressed in brown, but he
did not observe her particularly and Sessle he thought did not notice
her at all.
"The footpath in question crosses in front of the seventh tee,"
continued Tommy. "The woman had passed along this, and was
standing at the farther side, as though waiting. Captain Sessle was the
first to reach the tee, as Mr. Hollaby was replacing the pin in the hole.
As the latter came towards the tee, he was astonished to see Sessle
and the woman talking together. As he came nearer, they both turned
abruptly, Sessle calling over his shoulder: 'Shan't be a minute.'
“The two of them walked off side by side, still deep in earnest
conversation. The footpath there leaves the course, and passing
between two narrow hedges of neighboring gardens comes out on the
road to Windlesham.
"Captain Sessle was as good as his word. He reappeared within a
minute or two, much to Hollaby's satisfaction, as two other players
were coming up behind them, and the light was failing rapidly. They
drove off, and at once Hollaby noticed that something had occurred to
upset his companion. Not only did he foozle his drive badly, but his
face was worried, and his forehead creased in a big frown. He hardly
answered his companion's remarks, and his golf was atrocious.
Evidently something had occurred to put him completely off his game.
"They played that hole and the eighth, and then Captain Sessle
declared abruptly that the light was too bad and that he was off home.
Just at that point there is another of those narrow 'slips' leading to the
Windlesham road, and Captain Sessle departed that way which was a
short cut to his home, a small bungalow on the road in question. The
other two players came up, a Major Barnard and Mr. Lecky, and to
them Hollaby mentioned Captain Sessle's sudden change of manner.
They also had seen him speaking to the woman in brown, but had not
been near enough to see her face. All three men wondered what she
could have said to upset their friend to that extent.
"They returned to the Club House together, and as far as was known at
the time, were the last people to see Captain Sessle alive. The day was
a Wednesday and on Wednesdays cheap tickets to London are issued.
The man and wife who ran Captain Sessle's small bungalow were up in
town according to custom, and did not return until the late train. They
entered the Bungalow as usual, and supposed their master to be in his
room asleep. Mrs. Sessle, his wife, was away on a visit.
"The murder of the Captain was a nine days' wonder. Nobody could
suggest a motive for it. The identity of the tall woman in brown was
eagerly discussed, but without result. The police were, as usual,
blamed for their supineness-most unjustly as time was to show. For a
week later, a girl called Doris Evans was arrested and charged with
the murder of Captain Anthony Sessle.
"The police had had little to work upon. A strand of fair hair caught in
the dead man's fingers, and a few threads of flame colored wool
caught on one of the buttons of his blue coat. Diligent inquiries at the
Railway Station and elsewhere had elicited the following facts.
"A young girl dressed in a flame colored coat and skirt had arrived by
Main that evening about seven o'clock, and had asked the way to
Captain Sessle's house. The same girl had reappeared again at the
station, two hours later. Her hat was awry and her hair tousled, and
she seemed in a state of great agitation. She inquired about the trains
back to town, and was continually looking over her shoulder as though
afraid of something.
"Our police force is in many ways very wonderful. With this slender
evidence to go upon, they managed to track down the girl, and identify
her as one Doris Evans. She was charged with murder, and cautioned
that anything she might say would be used against her, but she
nevertheless persisted in making a statement, and this statement she
repeated again in detail, without any substantial variation, at the
subsequent proceedings.
"Her story was this. She was a typist by profession, and had made
friends one evening, in a Cinema, with a well dressed man who
declared he had taken a fancy to her. His name, he told her, was
Anthony, and he suggested that she should come down to his
bungalow at Sunningdale. She had no idea then, or at any other time,
that he had a wife. It was arranged between them that she should
come down on the following Wednesday-the day, you will remember,
when the servants would be absent and his wife away from home. In
the end he told her his full name was Anthony Sessle, and gave her the
name of his house.
"She duly arrived at the Bungalow on the evening in question, and was
greeted by Sessle who had just come in from She links. Though he
professed himself delighted to see her, the girl declared that from the
first his manner was strange and different. A half acknowledged fear
sprang up in her, and she wished fervently that she had not come.
"After a simple meal which was all ready and prepared, Sessle
suggested going out for a stroll. The girl consenting, he took her out of
the house, down the road, and along the 'slip' onto the golf course. And
then suddenly, just as they were crossing the seventh tee, he seemed
to go completely mad. Drawing a revolver from his pocket, he
brandished it in the air, declaring that he had come to the end of his
tether.
"'Everything must go! I'm ruined-done for. And you shall go with me. I
shall shoot you first-then myself. They will find our bodies here in the
morning side by side-together in death.'
"And so on-a lot more. He had hold of Doris Evans by the arm and she,
realising she had to do with a madman, made frantic efforts to free
herself, or failing that to get the revolver away from him. They
struggled together, and in that struggle he must have torn out a piece
of her hair and got the wool of her coat entangled on a button.
"Finally, with a desperate effort, she freed herself, and ran for her life
across the golf links, expecting every minute to be shot down with a
revolver bullet. She fell twice-tripping over the heather, but eventually
regained the road to the station and realised that she was not being
pursued.
"That is the story that Doris Evans tells-and from which she has never
varied. She strenuously denies that she ever struck at him with a hat
pin in self defence-a natural enough thing to do under the
circumstances, though-and one which may well be the truth. In
support of her story a revolver has been found in the furze bushes
near where the body is lying. It had not been fired.
"Doris Evans has been sent for trial, but the mystery still remains a
mystery. If her story is to be believed, who was it who stabbed Captain
Sessle? The other woman, the tall woman in brown whose appearance
so upset him? So far no one has explained her connection with the
case. She appears out of space suddenly on the footpath across the
links, she disappears along the slip, and no one ever hears of her
again. Who was she? A local resident? A visitor from London? If so, did
she come by car or train? There is nothing remarkable about her
except her height, no one seems to be able to describe her
appearance. She could not have been Doris Evans for Doris Evans is
small and fair, and moreover was only just then arriving at the station."
"The wife?" suggested Tuppence. "What about the wife?"
"A very natural suggestion. But Mrs. Sessle is also a small woman, and
besides Mr. Hollaby knows her well by sight, and there seems no doubt
that she was really away from home. One further development has
come to light. The Porcupine Assurance Co. is in liquidation. The
accounts reveal the most daring misappropriation of funds. The
reasons for Captain Sessle's wild words to Doris Evans are now quite
apparent. For some years past, he must have been systematically
embezzling money. Neither Mr. Hollaby, nor his son, had any idea of
what was going on. They are practically ruined.
"The case stands like this. Captain Sessle was on the verge of
discovery and ruin. Suicide would be a natural solution, but the nature
of the wound rules that theory out. Who killed him? Was it Doris Evans?
Was it the mysterious woman in brown?"
Tommy paused, took a sip of milk, made a wry face, and bit cautiously
at the cheese cake.
16. THE SUNNINGDALE MYSTERY (continued)
"Of course," murmured Tommy, "I saw at once where the hitch in this
particular case lay, and just where the police were going astray."
"Yes?" said Tuppence eagerly.
Tommy shook his head sadly.
"I wish I did. Tuppence, it's dead easy being the Old Man in the Corner
up to a certain point. But the solution beats me. Who did murder the
beggar? I don't know."
He took some more newspaper cuttings out of his pocket.
"Further exhibits. Mr. Hollaby. His son. Mrs. Sessle. Doris Evans."
Tuppence pounced on the last, and looked at it for some time.
"She didn't murder him anyway," she remarked at last. "Not with a hat
pin."
"Why this certainty?"
"A Lady Molly touch. She's got bobbed hair. Only one woman in twenty
uses hat pins nowadays, anyway-long hair or short. Hats fit tight and
pull on-there's no need for such a thing."
"Still, she might have had one by her."
"My dear boy, we don't keep them as heirlooms! What on earth should
she have brought a hat pin down to Sunningdale for?"
"Then it must have been the other woman, the woman in brown."
"I wish she hadn't been tall. Then she could have been the wife. I
always suspect wives who are away at the time and so couldn't have
had anything to do with it. If she found her husband carrying on with
that girl, it would be quite natural for her to go for him with a hat pin."
"I shall have to be careful, I see," remarked Tommy.
But Tuppence was deep in thought and refused to be drawn.
"What were the Sessles like?" she asked suddenly. "What sort of thing
did people say about them?"
"As far as I can make out, they were very popular. He and his wife
were supposed to be devoted to one another. That's what makes the
business of the girl so odd. It's the last thing you'd have expected of a
man like Sessle. He was an ex-soldier, you know. Came into a good bit
of money, retired and went into this Insurance business. The last man
in the world, apparently, whom you would have suspected of being a
crook."
"Is it absolutely certain that he was the crook? Couldn't it have been
the other two who took the money?"
"The Hollabys? They say they're ruined."
"Oh, they say! Perhaps they've got it all in a Bank under another name.
I put it foolishly, I daresay, but you know what I mean. Suppose they'd
been speculating with the money for some time, unbeknownst to
Sessle, and lost it all. It might be jolly convenient for them that Sessle
died just when he did."
Tommy tapped the photograph of Mr. Hollaby senior with his finger
nail.
“So you're accusing this respectable gentleman of murdering his
friend and partner? You forget that he parted from Sessle on the links
in full view of Barnard and Lecky, and spent the evening in the Dormy
House. Besides, there's the hat pin."
"Bother the hat pin," said Tuppence impatiently. "That hat pin, you
think, points to the crime having been committed by a woman?"
"Naturally. Don't you agree?"
"No. Men are notoriously old fashioned. It takes them ages to rid
themselves of preconceived ideas. They associate hat pins and
hairpins with the female sex, and call them 'women's weapons.' They
may have been in the past, but they're both rather out of date now.
Why, I haven't had a hat pin or hairpin for the last four years."
"Then you think-?"
"That it was a man killed Sessle. The hat pin was used to make it seem
a woman's crime."
"There's something in what you say, Tuppence," said Tommy slowly.
"It's extraordinary how things seem to straighten themselves out when
you talk a thing over."
Tuppence nodded.
"Everything must be logical-if you look at it the right way. And
remember what Marriot once said about the Amateur point of view-that
it had the intimacy. We know something about people like Captain
Sessle and his wife. We know what they're likely to do-and what they're
not likely to do. And we've each got our special knowledge."
Tommy smiled.
"You mean," he said, "that you are an authority on what people with
bobbed and shingled heads are likely to have in their possession, and
that you have an intimate acquaintance with what wives are likely to
feel and do?"
"Something of the sort."
"And what about me? What is my special knowledge? Do husbands
pick up girls etc.?"
"No," said Tuppence gravely. "You know the course you've been on itnot
as a detective, searching for clues, but as a golfer. You know about
golf, and what's likely to put a man off his game."
"It must have been something pretty serious to put Sessle off his
game. His handicap's two, and from the seventh tee on he played like a
child, so they say."
"Who say?"
"Barnard and Lecky. They were playing just behind him, you
remember."
"That was after he met the woman-the tall woman in brown. They saw
him speaking to her, didn't they?"
"Yes-at least-"
Tommy broke off. Tuppence looked up at him, and was puzzled. He
was staring at the piece of string in his fingers, but staring with the
eyes of one who sees something very different.
"Tommy-what is it?"
"Be quiet, Tuppence. I'm playing the sixth hole at Sunningdale. Sessle
and old Hollaby are holding out on the sixth green ahead of me. It's
getting dusk, but I can see that bright blue coat of Sessle's clearly
enough. And on the footpath to the left of me there's a woman coming
along. She hasn't crossed from the Ladies' Course-that's on the right-I
should have seen her if she had done so. And it's odd I didn't see her
on the footpath before-from the fifth tee, for instance."
He paused.
"You said just now I knew the course, Tuppence. Just behind the sixth
tee, there's a little hut or shelter made of turf. Anyone could wait in
there until-the right moment came. They could change their
appearance there. I mean-tell me, Tuppence this is where your special
knowledge comes in again-would it be very difficult for a man to look
like a woman, and then change back to being a man again? Could he
wear a skirt over plus fours, for instance?"
"Certainly he could. The woman would look a bit bulky, that would be
all. A longish brown skirt, say, a brown sweater of the kind both men
and women wear, and a woman's felt hat with a bunch of side curls
attached each side. That would be all that was needed-I'm speaking, of
course, of what would pass at a distance, which I take to be what you
are driving at. Switch off the skirt, take off the hat and curls, and put
on a man's cap which you can carry rolled up in your hand, and there
you'd be-back as a man again."
"And the time required for the transformation?"
"From woman to man, a minute and a half at the outside, probably a
good deal less. The other way about would take longer, you'd have to
arrange the hat and curls a bit, and the skirt would stick getting it on
over the plus fours."
"That doesn't worry me. It's the time for the first that matters. As I tell
you, I'm playing the sixth hole. The woman in brown has reached the
seventh tee now. She crosses it and waits. Sessle in his blue coat goes
towards her. They stand together a minute, and then they follow the
path round the trees out of sight. Hollaby is on the tee alone. Two or
three minutes pass. I'm on the green now. The man in the blue coat
comes back and drives off, foozling badly. The light's getting worse. I
and my partner go on. Ahead of us are those two, Sessle slicing and
topping and doing everything he shouldn't do. At the eighth green, I
see him stride off and vanish down the slip. What happened to him to
make him play like a different man?"
"The woman in brown-or the man, if you think it was a man."
"Exactly, and where they were standing-out of sight, remember, of
those coming after them-there's a deep tangle of furze bushes. You
could thrust a body in there, and it would be pretty certain to lie hidden
until the morning."
“Tommy! You think it was then-But someone would have heard-"
"Heard what? The doctors agreed death must have been
instantaneous. I've seen men killed instantaneously in the War. They
don't cry out as a rule-just a gurgle, or a moan -perhaps just a sigh, or
a funny little cough. Sessle comes towards the seventh tee, and the
woman comes forward and speaks to him. He recognizes her perhaps,
as a man he knows masquerading. Curious to learn the why and
wherefore, he allows himself to be drawn along the footpath out of
sight. One stab with the deadly hat pin as they walk along. Sessle fallsdead.
The other man drags his body into the furze bushes, strips off
the blue coat, then sheds his own skirt and the hat and curls. He puts
on Sessle's well known blue coat and cap, and strides back to the tee.
Three minutes would do it. The others behind can't see his face, only
the peculiar blue coat they know so well. They never doubt that it's
Sessle-but he doesn't play Sessle's brand of golf. They all say he
played like a different man. Of course he did. He was a different man."
"But-"
"Point No. 2. His action in bringing the girl down there was the action
of a different man. It wasn't Sessle who met Doris Evans at a Cinema,
and induced her to come down to Sunningdale. It was a man calling
himself Sessle. Remember, Doris Evans wasn't arrested until a
fortnight after the crime. She never saw the body. If she had, she might
have bewildered everyone by declaring that that wasn't the man who
took her out on the golf links that night, and spoke so wildly of suicide.
It was a carefully laid plot. The girl invited down for Wednesday when
Sessle's house would be empty, then the hat pin which pointed to its
being a woman's doing. The murderer meets the girl, takes her into the
Bungalow and gives her supper, then takes her out on the links and
when he gets to the scene of the crime, brandishes his revolver and
scares the life out of her. Once she has taken to her heels, all he has to
do is to pull out the body and leave it lying on the tee. The revolver he
chucks into the bushes. Then he makes a neat parcel of the skirt and
hat and-now I admit I'm guessing-in all probability walks to Woking
which is only about six or seven miles away, and goes back to town
from there."
"Wait a minute," said Tuppence. "There's one thing you haven't
explained. What about Hollaby?"
"Hollaby?"
"Yes. I admit that the people behind couldn't have seen whether it was
really Sessle or not. But you can't tell me that the man who was playing
with him was so hypnotised by the blue coat that he never looked at his
face."
"My dear old thing," said Tommy. "That's just the point. Hollaby knew
all right. You see, I'm adopting your theory-that Hollaby and his son
were the real embezzlers. The murderer's got to be a man who knew
Sessle pretty well-knew, for instance, about the servants being always
out on a Wednesday, and that his wife was away. And also someone
who was able to get an impression of Sessle's latch key. I think Hollaby
Junior would fulfill all these requirements. He's about the same age
and height as Sessle, and they were both clean shaven men. Doris
Evans probably saw several photographs of the murdered man
reproduced in the papers, but as you yourself observed-one can just
see that it's a man and that's about all."
"Didn't she ever see Hollaby in Court?"
"The son never appeared in the case at all. Why should he? He had no
evidence to give. It was old Hollaby, with his irreproachable alibi, who
stood in the limelight throughout. Nobody has even bothered to inquire
what son was doing that particular evening."
"It all fits in," admitted Tuppence. She paused a minute, and then
asked: "Are you going to tell all this to the police?"
"I don't know if they'd listen."
"They'll listen all right," said an unexpected voice behind him.
Tommy swung round to confront Inspector Marriot. The Inspector was
sitting at the next table. In front of him was a poached egg.
"Often drop in here to lunch," said Inspector Marriot. "As I was saying,
we'll listen all right-in fact I've been listening. I don't mind telling you
that we've not been quite satisfied all along over those Porcupine
figures. You see, we've had our suspicions of those Hollabys. But
nothing to go upon. Too sharp for us. Then this murder came, and that
seemed to upset all our ideas. But thanks to you and the lady, sir, we'll
confront young Hollaby and Doris Evans and see if she recognizes him.
I rather fancy she will. That's a very ingenious idea of yours about the
blue coat. I'll see that Blunt's Brilliant Detectives get the credit for it."
"You are a nice man, Inspector Marriot," said Tuppence gratefully.
"We think a lot of you two at the Yard," replied that stolid gentleman.
"You'd be surprised. If I may ask you, sir, what's the meaning of that
piece of string?"
"Nothing," said Tommy, stuffing it into his pocket. "A bad habit of mine.
As to the cheese cake and the milk-I'm on a diet. Nervous dyspepsia.
Busy men are always martyrs to it."
"Ah!" said the detective. "I thought perhaps you'd been reading-well,
it's of no consequence."
But the Inspector's eyes twinkled.