4. THE AFFAIR OF THE PINK PEARL (continued)
Tuppence watched him drive off in the car with a faint misgiving.
Tommy was very sure-she herself was not so sure. There were one or
two things she did not quite understand.
She was still standing by the window, watching the road, when she
saw a man leave the shelter of a gateway opposite, cross the road and
ring the bell.
In a flash Tuppence was out of the room and down the stairs. Gladys
Hill the parlormaid, was emerging from the back part of the house, but
Tuppence motioned her back authoritatively. Then she went to the
front door and opened it.
A lanky young man with ill-fitting clothes, and eager dark eyes was
standing on the step.
He hesitated a moment, and then said.
"Is Miss Kingston Bruce in?"
"Will you come inside?" said Tuppence.
She stood aside to let him enter, closing the door.
"Mr. Rennie, I think?" she said sweetly.
He shot a quick glance at her.
"Er-yes."
"Will you come in here, please?"
She opened the study door. The room was empty, and Tuppence
entered it after him, closing the door behind her. He turned on her with
a frown.
"I want to see Miss Kingston Bruce."
"I am not quite sure that you can," said Tuppence composedly.
"Look here, who the devil are you?" said Mr. Rennie rudely.
"International Detective Agency," said Tuppence succinctly-and
noticed Mr. Rennie's uncontrollable start.
"Please sit down, Mr. Rennie," she went on. "To begin with, we know
all about Miss Kingston Bruce's visit to you this morning."
It was a bold guess, but it succeeded. Perceiving his consternation,
Tuppence went on quickly.
"The recovery of the pearl is the great thing, Mr. Rennie. No one in this
house is anxious for-publicity. Can't we come to some arrangement?"
The young man looked at her keenly.
"I wonder how much you know," he said thoughtfully. "Let me think for
a moment."
He buried his head in his hands-then asked a most unexpected
question.
"I say, is it really true that young St. Vincent is engaged to be
married?"
"Quite true," said Tuppence. "I know the girl."
Mr. Rennie suddenly became confidential.
"It's been hell," he confided. "They've been asking him here morning,
noon and night-chucking Beatrice at his head. All because he'll come
into a title some day. If I had my way-"
"Don't let's talk politics," said Tuppence hastily. "Do you mind telling
me, Mr. Rennie, why you think Miss Kingston Bruce took the pearl?"
"I-I don't."
"You do," said Tuppence calmly. “You wait to see the detective, as you
think, drive off and the coast clear, and then you come and ask for her.
It's obvious. If you'd taken the pearl yourself, you wouldn't be half so
upset."
"Her manner was so odd," said the young man. "She came this
morning and told me about the robbery, explaining that she was on her
way to a firm of private detectives. She seemed anxious to say
something, and yet not able to get it out."
"Well," said Tuppence. "All I want is the pearl. You'd better go and talk
to her."
But at that moment Colonel Kingston Bruce opened the door.
"Lunch is ready, Miss Robinson. You will lunch with us, I hope. The-"
Then he stopped and glared at the guest.
"Clearly," said Mr. Rennie, "you don't want to ask me to lunch. All right,
I'll go."
"Come back later," whispered Tuppence, as he passed her.
Tuppence followed Colonel Kingston Bruce, still growling into his
moustache about the pestilential impudence of some people, into a
massive dining-room where the family was already assembled. Only
one person present was unknown to Tuppence.
"This, Lady Laura, is Miss Robinson who is kindly assisting us."
Lady Laura bent her head, and then proceeded to stare at Tuppence
through her pince nez. She was a tall thin woman, with a sad smile, a
gentle voice, and very hard shrewd eyes. Tuppence returned her
stare, and Lady Laura's eyes dropped.
After lunch Lady Laura entered into conversation with an air of gentle
curiosity. How was the inquiry proceeding? Tuppence laid suitable
stress on the suspicion attaching to the parlormaid, but her mind was
not really on Lady Laura. Lady Laura might conceal teaspoons and
other articles in her clothing, but Tuppence felt fairly sure that she had
not taken the pink pearl.
Presently Tuppence proceeded with her search of the house. Time
was going on. There was no sign of Tommy and, what mattered far
more to Tuppence, there was no sign of Mr. Rennie. Suddenly
Tuppence came out of a bedroom and collided with Beatrice Kingston
Bruce who was going down stairs. She was fully dressed for the street.
"I'm afraid," said Tuppence, "that you mustn't go out just now."
The other girl looked at her haughtily.
"Whether I go out or not is no business of yours," she said coldly.
"It is my business whether I communicate with the police or not,
though," said Tuppence.
In a minute the girl had turned ashy pale.
"You mustn't-you mustn't-I won't go out-but don't do that." She clung to
Tuppence beseechingly.
"My dear Miss Kingston Bruce," said Tuppence smiling.
“The case has been perfectly clear to me from the start-I-“
But she was interrupted. In the stress of her encounter with the girl,
Tuppence had not heard the front door bell. Now, to her astonishment,
Tommy came bounding up the stairs, and in the hall below she caught
sight of a big burly man in the act of removing a bowler hat.
"Detective Inspector Marriot of Scotland Yard," he said with a grin.
With a cry, Beatrice Kingston Bruce tore herself from Tuppence's
grasp and dashed down the stairs, just as the front door was opened
once more to admit Mr. Rennie.
"Now you have torn it," said Tuppence bitterly.
"Eh?" said Tommy, hurrying into Lady Laura's room. He passed on into
the bathroom, and picked up a large cake of soap which he brought
out in his hands. The Inspector was just mounting the stairs.
"She went quite quietly," he announced. "She's an old hand, and
knows when the game is up. What about the pearl?"
"I rather fancy," said Tommy, handing him the soap, "that you'll find it
in here."
The Inspector's eyes lit up appreciatively.
"An old trick, and a good one. Cut a cake of soap in half, scoop out a
place for the jewel, clap it together again, and smooth the join wed
over with hot water. A very smart piece of work on your part, sir."
Tommy accepted the compliment gracefully. He and Tuppence
descended the stairs. Colonel Kingston Bruce rushed at him and
shook him warmly by the hand.
"My dear sir, I can't thank you enough. Lady Laura wants to thank you
also-"
"I am glad we have given you satisfaction," said Tommy. "But I'm
afraid I can't stop. I have a most urgent appointment. Member of the
Cabinet."
He hurried out to the car and jumped in. Tuppence jumped in beside
him.
"But Tommy," she cried. "Haven't they arrested Lady Laura, after all?"
"Oh!" said Tommy. "Didn't I tell you? They've not arrested Lady Laura.
They've arrested Elise."
"You see," he went on, as Tuppence sat dumbfounded, "I've often tried
to open a door with soap on my hands myself. It can't be done-your
hands slip. So I wondered what Elise could have been doing with the
soap to get her hands as soapy as all that. She caught up a towel, you
remember, so there were no traces of soap on the handle afterwards.
But it occurred to me that if you were a professional thief, it wouldn't
be a bad plan to be maid to a lady suspected of kleptomania who
stayed about a good deal in different houses. So I managed to get a
photo of her as well as of the room, induced her to handle a glass slide
and toddled off to dear old Scotland Yard. Lightning development of
negative, successful identification of fingerprints-and photo. Elise was
a long lost friend. Useful place, Scotland Yard."
"And to think," said Tuppence, finding her voice, "that those two young
idiots were only suspecting each other in that weak way they do it in
books. But why didn't you tell me what you were up to when you went
off?"
"In the first place, I suspected that Elise was listening on the landing,
and in the second place-"
"Yes?"
"My learned friend forgets," said Tommy. "Thorndyke never tells until
the last moment. Besides, Tuppence, you and your pal Janet Smith put
one over on me last time. This makes us an square."
5. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SINISTER STRANGER
"It's been a darned dull day," said Tommy, and yawned widely.
"Nearly tea time," said Tuppence and also yawned.
Business was not brisk in the International Detective Agency. The
eagerly expected letter from the ham merchant had not arrived and
bona fide cases were not forthcoming.
Albert, the office boy, entered with a sealed package which he laid on
the table.
"The Mystery of the Sealed Packet," murmured Tommy. "Did it contain
the fabulous pearls of the Russian Grand Duchess? Or was it an
infernal machine destined to blow Blunt's Brilliant Detectives to
pieces?"
"As a matter of fact," said Tuppence, tearing open the package, "it's
my wedding present to Francis Haviland. Rather nice, isn't it?"
Tommy took a slender silver cigarette case from her outstretched
hand, noted the inscription engraved in her own handwriting: Francis
from Tuppence, opened and shut the case, and nodded approvingly.
"You do throw your money about, Tuppence," he remarked. "I'll have
one like it, only in gold, for my birthday next month. Fancy wasting a
thing like that on Francis Haviland, who always was and always will be
one of the most perfect asses God ever made!"
"You forget I used to drive him about during the War, when he was a
General. Ah! those were the good old days."
"They were," agreed Tommy. "Beautiful women used to come and
squeeze my hand in Hospital, I remember. But I don't send them all
wedding presents. I don't believe the bride will care much for this gift
of yours, Tuppence."
"It's nice and slim for the pocket, isn't it?" said Tuppence disregarding
his remarks.
Tommy slipped it into his own pocket.
"Just right," he said approvingly. ''Hullo, here is Albert with the
afternoon post. Very possibly the Duchess of Pertheshire is
commissioning us to find her prize Peke."
They sorted through the letters together. Suddenly Tommy gave vent
to a prolonged whistle, and held up one of them in his hand.
"A blue letter with a Russian stamp on it. Do you remember what the
Chief said? We were to look out for letters like that."
"How exciting," said Tuppence. "Something has happened at last.
Open it and see if the contents are up to schedule. A ham merchant,
wasn't it? Half a minute. We shall want some milk for tea. They forgot
to leave it this morning. I'll send Albert out for it."
She returned from the outer office, after despatching Albert on his
errand, to find Tommy holding the blue sheet of paper in his hand.
"As we thought, Tuppence," he remarked. "Almost word for word what
the Chief said."
Tuppence took the letter from him and read it.
It was couched in careful stilted English, and purported to be from one
Gregor Feodorsky who was anxious for news of his wife. The
International Detective Agency was urged to spare no expense in
doing their utmost to trace her. Feodorsky himself was unable to leave
Russia at the moment owing to a crisis in the Pork trade.
"I wonder what it really means," said Tuppence thoughtfully,
smoothing out the sheet on the table in front of her.
"Code of some kind, I suppose," said Tommy. "That's not our business.
Our business is to hand it over to the Chief as soon as possible. Better
just verify it by soaking off the stamp and seeing if the number 16 is
underneath."
"All right," said Tuppence. "But I should think-"
She stopped dead, and Tommy, surprised by her sudden pause,
looked up to see a man's burly figure blocking the doorway.
The intruder was a man of commanding presence, squareIy built, with
a very round head and a powerful jaw. He might have been about fortyfive
years of age.
"I must beg your pardon," said the stranger, advancing into the room,
hat in hand. "I found your outer office empty, and this door open, so I
ventured to intrude. This is Blunt's International Detective Agency, is it
not?"
"Certainly it is."
"And you are, perhaps, Mr. Blunt? Mr. Theodore Blunt?"
"I am Mr. Blunt. You wished to consult me? This is my secretary, Miss
Robinson."
Tuppence inclined her head gracefully, but continued to scrutinise the
stranger narrowly through her downcast eyelashes. She was
wondering how long he had been standing in the doorway, and how
much he had seen and heard. It did not escape her observation that
even while he was talking to Tommy, his eyes kept coming back to the
blue paper in her hand.
Tommy's voice, sharp with a warning note, recalled her to the needs of
the moment.
"Miss Robinson, please, take notes. Now, sir, will you kindly state the
matter on which you wish to have my advice?"
Tuppence reached for her pad and pencil.
The big man began in rather a harsh voice.
"My name is Bower. Dr. Charles Bower. I live in Hampstead where I
have a practice. I have come to you, Mr. Blunt, because several rather
strange occurrences have happened lately."
"Yes, Dr. Bower?"
"Twice in the course of the last week, I have been summoned by
telephone to an urgent case-in each case to find that the summons has
been a fake. The first time I thought a practical joke had been played
upon me, but on my return the second time, I found that some of my
private papers had been displaced and disarranged, and I now believe
that the same thing had happened the first time. I made an exhaustive
search and came to the conclusion that my whole desk had been
thoroughly ransacked, and the various papers replaced hurriedly."
Dr. Bower paused, and gazed at Tommy.
"Well, Mr. Blunt?"
"Well, Dr. Bower," replied the young man smiling.
"What do you think of it, eh?"
"Well, first I should like the facts. What do you keep in your desk?"
"My private papers."
"Exactly. Now, what do those private papers consist of? What value
are they to the common thief-or any particular person?"
"To the common thief I cannot see that they would have any value at
all, but my notes on certain obscure alkaloids would be of interest to
anyone possessed of technical knowledge on the subject. I have been
making a study of such matters for the last few years. These alkaloids
are deadly and virulent poisons, and are, in addition, almost
untraceable. They yield no known reactions."
"The secret of them would be worth money, then?"
“To unscrupulous persons, yes."
"And you suspect-whom?"
The doctor shrugged his massive shoulders.
"As far as I can tell, the house was not entered forcibly from the
outside. That seems to point to some member of my household, and
yet I cannot believe-" He broke off abruptly, then began again, his face
very grave.
"Mr. Blunt, I must place myself in your hands unreservedly. I dare not
go to the police in the matter. Of my three servants I am almost entirely
sure. They have served me long and faithfully. Still, one never knows.
Then I have living with me my two nephews, Bertram and Henry. Henry
is a good boy-a very good boy-he has never caused me any anxiety, an
excellent hard-working young fellow. Bertram, I regret to say, is of
quite a different character-wild, extravagant, and persistently idle."
"I see," said Tommy thoughtfully. "You suspect your nephew Bertram
of being mixed up in this business. Now I don't agree with you. I
suspect the good boy-Henry."
"But why?"
"Tradition. Precedent." Tommy waved his hand airily. "In my
experience, the suspicious characters are always innocent-and vice
versa, my dear sir. Yes, decidedly, I suspect Henry."
"Excuse me, Mr. Blunt," said Tuppence, interrupting in a deferential
voice. "Did I understand Dr. Bower to say that these notes on-erobscure
alkaloids-are kept in the desk with the other papers?"
"They are kept in the desk, my dear young lady, but in a secret drawer,
the position of which is known only to myself. Hence they have so far
defied the search."
"And what exactly do you want me to do, Dr. Bower?" asked Tommy.
"Do you anticipate that a further search will be made?"
"I do, Mr. Blunt. I have every reason to believe so. This afternoon, I
received a telegram from a patient of mine whom I ordered to
Bournemouth a few weeks ago. The telegram states that my patient is
in a critical condition, and begs me to come down at once. Rendered
suspicious by the events I have told you of, I myself despatched a
telegram, prepaid, to the patient in question, and elicited the fact that
he was in good health and had sent no summons to me of any kind. It
occurred to me that if I pretended to have been taken in, and duly
departed to Bournemouth, we should have a very good chance of
finding the miscreants at work. They-or he -will doubtless wait until the
household has retired to bed before commencing operations. I
suggest that you should meet me outside my house at eleven o'clock
this evening, and we will investigate the matter together."
"Hoping, in fact, to catch them in the act." Tommy drummed
thoughtfully on the table with a paper knife. "Your plan seems to me an
excellent one, Dr. Bower. I cannot see any hitch in it. Let me see, your
address is-?"
"The Larches, Hangman's Lane-rather a lonely part, I am afraid. But
we command magnificent views over the Heath."
"Quite so," said Tommy.
The visitor rose.
"Then I shall expect you to-night, Mr. Blunt. Outside The Larches atshall
we say, five minutes to eleven-to be on the safe side?"
"Certainly. Five minutes to eleven. Good afternoon, Dr. Bower."
Tommy rose, pressed the buzzer on his desk, and Albert appeared to
show the client out. The doctor walked with a decided limp, but his
powerful physique was evident in spite of it.
"An ugly customer to tackle," murmured Tommy to himself. "Well,
Tuppence, old girl, what do you think of it?"
"I'll tell you in one word," said Tuppence. "Clubfoot!"
"What?"
"I said Clubfoot! My study of the Classics has not been in vain. Tommy,
this thing's a plant. Obscure alkaloids indeed-I never heard a weaker
story."
"Even I did not find it very convincing," admitted her husband.
"Did you see his eyes on the letter? Tommy, he's one of the gang.
They've got wise to the fact that you're not the real Mr. Blunt, and
they're out for our blood."
"In that case," said Tommy, opening the side cupboard, and surveying
his rows of books with an affectionate eye. "Our role is easy to select.
We are the brothers Okewood! And I am Desmond," he added firmly.
Tuppence shrugged her shoulders.
"All right. Have it your own way. I'd just as soon be Francis. Francis
was much the more intelligent of the two. Desmond always gets into a
mess, and Francis turns up as the gardener or something in the nick of
time, and saves the situation."
"Ah!" said Tommy, "but I shall be a super Desmond! When I arrive at
The Larches-"
Tuppence interrupted him unceremoniously.
"You're not going to Hampstead to-night?"
`'Why not?"
"Walk into a trap with your eyes shut!"
"No, my dear girl, walk into a trap with my eyes open. There's a lot of
difference. I think our friend Dr. Bower will get a little surprise."
"I don't like it," said Tuppence. "You know what happens when
Desmond disobeys the Chief's orders, and acts on his own. Our orders
were quite clear. To send on the letters at once and to report
immediately on anything that happened."
"You've not got it quite right," said Tommy. "We were to report
immediately if anyone came in and mentioned the number 16. Nobody
has."
"That's a quibble," said Tuppence.
"It's no good. I've got a fancy for playing a lone hand. My dear old
Tuppence, I shall be all right. I shall go armed to the teeth. The
essence of the whole thing is that I shall be on my guard and they won't
know it. The Chief will be patting me on the back for a good night's
work."
"Well," said Tuppence. "I don't like it. That man's as strong as a
gorilla."
"Ah!" said Tommy, "but think of my blue-nosed automatic."
The door of the outer office opened and Albert appeared. Closing the
door behind him, he approached them with an envelope in his hand.
"A gentleman to see you," said Albert. "When I began the usual stunt of
saying you were engaged with Scotland Yard, he told me he knew all
about that. Said he came from Scotland Yard himself! And he wrote
something on a card and stuck it up in this envelope."
Tommy took the envelope and opened it. As he read the card, a grin
passed across his face.
"The gentleman was amusing himself at your expense by speaking the
truth, Albert," he remarked. "Show him in."
He tossed the card to Tuppence. It bore the name Detective Inspector
Dymchurch, and across it was scrawled in pencil-"A friend of
Marriot's."
In another minute the Scotland Yard detective was entering the inner
office. In appearance, Inspector Dymchurch was of the same type as
Inspector Marriot, short and thick set, with shrewd eyes.
"Good afternoon," said the detective breezily. "Marriot's away in South
Wales, but before he went, he asked me to keep an eye on you two,
and on this place in general. Oh! bless you, sir," he went on, as Tommy
seemed about to interrupt him, "we know all about it. It's not our
department, and we don't interfere. But somebody's got wise lately to
the fact that all is not what it seems. You've had a gentleman here this
afternoon. I don't know what he called himself, and I don't know what
his real name is, but I know just a little about him. Enough to want to
know more. Am I right in assuming that he made a date with you for
some particular spot this evening?"
"Quite right."
"I thought as much. 16 Westerham Road, Finsbury Park? Was that it?"
"You're wrong there," said Tommy with a smile. "Dead wrong. The
Larches, Hampstead."
Dymchurch seemed honestly taken aback. Clearly he had not
expected this.
"I don't understand it," he muttered. "It must be a new layout. The
Larches, Hampstead, you said?"
"Yes. I'm to meet him there at eleven o'clock to-night."
"Don't you do it, sir."
"There!" burst from Tuppence.
Tommy flushed.
"If you think, Inspector-" he began heatedly.
But the Inspector raised a soothing hand.
"I'll tell you what I think, Mr. Blunt. The place you want to be at eleven
o'clock to-night is here in this office."
"What?" cried Tuppence, astonished.
"Here in this office. Never mind how I know-departments overlap
sometimes-but you got one of those famous "Blue" letters to-day. Old
what's his name is after that. He lures you up to Hampstead, makes
quite sure of your being out of the way, and steps in here at night when
all the building is empty and quiet to have a good search round at his
leisure."
"But why should he think the letter would be here? He'd know I should
have it on me or else have passed it on."
"Begging your pardon, sir, that's just what he wouldn't know. He may
have tumbled to the fact that you're not the original Mr. Blunt, but he
probably thinks that you're a bona fide gentleman who's bought the
business. In that case, the letter would be all in the way of regular
business and would be filed as such."
"I see," said Tuppence.
"And that’s just what we've got to let him think. We'll catch him red
handed here to-night."
"So that's the plan, is it?"
“Yes. It's the chance of a lifetime. Now, let me see, what's the time? Six
o'clock. What time do you usually leave here, sir?"
"About six."
"You must seem to leave the place as usual. Actually we'll sneak back
to it as soon as possible. I don't believe they'll come here till about
eleven, but of course they might. If you'll excuse me, I'll just go and
take a look round outside and see if I can make out anyone watching
the place."
Dymchurch departed, and Tommy began an argument with Tuppence.
It lasted some time and was heated and acrimonious. In the end
Tuppence suddenly capitulated.
"All right," she said. "I give in. I'll go home, and sit there like a good
little girl whilst you tackle crooks and hob nob with detectives-but you
wait, young man. I'll be even with you yet for keeping me out of the
fun."
Dymchurch returned at that moment.
"Coast seems clear enough," he said. "But you can't tell. Better seem
to leave in the usual manner. They won't go on watching the place
once you've gone."
Tommy called Albert, and gave him instructions to lock up.
Then the four of them made their way to the garage near by where the
car was usually left. Tuppence drove and Albert sat beside her.
Tommy and the detective sat behind.
Presently they were held up by a block in the traffic. Tuppence looked
over her shoulder and nodded. Tommy and the detective opened the
right hand door, and stepped out into the middle of Oxford Street. In a
minute or two Tuppence drove on.
6. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SINISTER STRANGER (continued)
"Better not go in just yet," said Dymchurch as he and Tommy hurried
into Haleham Street. "You've got the key all right?"
Tommy nodded.
"Then what about a bite of dinner? It's early, but there's a little place
here right opposite. We'll get a table by the window, so that we can
watch the place all the time."
They had a very welcome little meal, in the manner the detective had
suggested. Tommy found Inspector Dymchurch quite an entertaining
companion. Most of his official work had lain amongst international
spies, and he had tales to tell which astonished his simple listener.
They remained in the little Restaurant until eight o'clock when
Dymchurch suggested a move.
"It's quite dark now, sir," he explained. "We shall be able to slip in
without anyone being the wiser."
It was, as he said, quite dark. They crossed the road looked quickly up
and down the deserted street, and slipped inside the entrance. Then
they mounted the stairs, and Tommy inserted his key in the lock of the
outer office.
Just as he did so, he heard, as he thought, Dymchurch whistle beside
him.
"What are you whistling for?" he asked sharply.
"I didn't whistle," said Dymchurch, very much astonished, "I thought
you did."
"Well, someone-" began Tommy.
He got no further. Strong arms seized him from behind, and before he
could cry out, a pad of something sweet and sickly was pressed over
his mouth and nose.
He struggled valiantly, but in vain. The chloroform did its work. His
head began to whirl and the floor heaved up and down in front of him.
Choking, he lost consciousness....
He came to himself painfully but in full possession of his faculties. The
chloroform had been only a whiff. They had kept him under long
enough to force a gag into his mouth and ensure that he did not cry
out.
When he came to himself, he was half lying, half sitting, propped
against the wall in a corner of his own inner office. Two men were
busily turning out the contents of the desk, and ransacking the
cupboards, and as they worked they cursed freely.
"Swelp me, guvnor," said the taller of the two hoarsely, "we've turned
the whole bloody place upside down and inside out. It's not there."
"It must be here," snarled the other. "It isn't on him. And there's no
other place it can be."
As he spoke he turned, and to Tommy's utter amazement he saw that
the last speaker was none other than Inspector Dymchurch. The latter
grinned when he saw Tommy's astonished face.
"So our young friend is awake again," he said. "And a little surprisedyes,
a little surprised. But it was so simple. We suspect that all is not as
it should be with the International Detective Agency. I volunteer to find
out if that is so, or not. If the new Mr. Blunt is indeed a spy, he will be
suspicious, so I send first my dear old friend Carl Bauer. Carl is told to
act suspiciously and pitch an improbable tale. He does so, and then I
appear on the scene. I use the name of Inspector Marriot to gain
confidence. The rest is easy."
He laughed.
Tommy was dying to say several things, but the gag in his mouth
prevented him. Also, he was dying to do several things -mostly with his
hands and feet-but alas, that too had been attended to. He was
securely bound.
The thing that amazed him most was the astounding change in the man
standing over him. As Inspector Dymchurch, the fellow had been a
typical Englishman. Now, no one could have mistaken him for a
moment for anything but a well educated foreigner who talked English
perfectly without trace of accent.
"Coggins, my good friend," said the erstwhile Inspector, addressing
his ruffianly looking associate. "Take your life preserver and stand by
the prisoner. I am going to remove the gag. You understand, my dear
Mr. Blunt, do you not, that is would be criminally foolish on your part to
cry out? But I am sure you do. For your age, you are quite an intelligent
lad."
Very deftly he removed the gag, and stepped back.
Tommy eased his stiff jaws, rolled his tongue round his mouth,
swallowed twice-and said nothing at all.
"I congratulate you on your restraint," said the other. "You appreciate
the position, I see. Have you nothing at all to say?"
"What I have to say will keep," said Tommy. "And it won't spoil by
waiting."
"Ah! What I have to say will not keep. In plain English, Mr. Blunt, where
is that letter?"
"My dear fellow, I don't know," said Tommy cheerfully. "I haven't got it.
But you know that as well as I do. I should go on looking about if I were
you. I like to see you and friend Coggins playing Hide and Seek
together."
The other's face darkened.
"You are pleased to be flippant, Mr. Blunt. You see that square box
over there. That is Coggins' little outfit. In it there is vitriol . . . yes,
vitriol . . . and irons that can be heated in the fire, so that they are red
hot and burn . . ."
Tommy shook his head sadly.
"An error in diagnosis," he murmured. "Tuppence and I labelled this
adventure wrong. It's not a Clubfoot story. It's a Bull Dog Drummond,
and you are the inimitable Carl Peterson."
"What is this nonsense you are talking?" snarled the other.
"Ah!" said Tommy. "I see you are unacquainted with the Classics. A
pity."
"Ignorant fool? Will you do what we want or will you not? Shall I tell
Coggins to get out his tools and begin?"
"Don't be so impatient," said Tommy. "Of course I'll do what you want,
as soon as you tell me what it is. You don't suppose I want to be carved
up like a filleted sole and fried on a gridiron? I loathe being hurt."
Dymchurch looked at him in contempt.
"Gott! What cowards are these English."
"Common sense, my dear fellow, merely common sense. Leave the
vitriol alone, and let us come down to brass tacks."
"I want the letter."
"I've already told you I haven't got it."
"We know that-we also know who must have it. The girl."
"Very possibly you're right," said Tommy. "She may have slipped it into
her handbag when your pal Carl startled us."
"Oh, you do not deny. That is wise. Very good, you will write to this
Tuppence, as you call her, bidding her bring the letter here
immediately."
"I can't do that," began Tommy.
The other cut in before he had finished the sentence.
"Ah! You can't? Well, we shall soon see. Coggins!"
"Don't be in such a hurry," said Tommy. "And do wait for the end of the
sentence. I was going to say that I can't do that unless you untie my
arms. Hang it all, I'm not one of those freaks who can write with their
noses or their elbows."
"You are willing to write, then?"
"Of course. Haven't I been telling you so all along? I'm all out to be
pleasant and obliging. You won't do anything unkind to Tuppence, of
course. I'm sure you won't. She's such a nice girl."
"We only want the letter," said Dymchurch, but there was a singularly
unpleasant smile on his face.
At a nod from him, the brutal Coggins knealt down and unfastened
Tommy's arms. The latter swung them to and fro.
"That's better," he said cheerfully. "Will kind Coggins hand me my
fountain pen? It's on the table, I think, with my other miscellaneous
property."
Scowling, the man brought it to hire, and provided a sheet of paper.
"Be careful what you say," Dymchurch said menacingly.
"We leave it to you, but failure means-death-and slow death at that."
“In that case," said Tommy, "I will certainly do my best."
He reflected a minute or two, then began to scribble rapidly.
"How will this do?" he asked, handing over the completed epistle.
Dear Tuppence,
Can you come along at once and bring that blue letter
with you? We want to decode it here and now.
In haste
Francis
"Francis?" queried the bogus Inspector, with lifted eyebrows. "Was
that the name she called you?"
"As you weren't at my christening," said Tommy, "I don't suppose you
can know whether it's my name or not. But I think the cigarette case
you took from my pocket is a pretty good proof that I'm speaking the
truth."
The other stepped over to the table and took up the case, read
"Francis from Tuppence," with a faint grin and laid it down again.
"I am glad to find you are behaving so sensibly," he said. "Coggins,
give that note to Vassily. He is on guard outside. Tell him to take it at
once."
The next twenty minutes passed slowly, the ten minutes after that
more slowly still. Dymchurch was striding up and down with a face that
grew darker and darker. Once he turned menacingly on Tommy.
"If you have dared to double cross us . . ." he growled.
"If we'd had a pack of cards here, we might have had a game of
picquet to pass the time," drawled Tommy. "Women always keep one
waiting. I hope you're not going to be unkind to little Tuppence when
she comes?"
"Oh! no," said Dymchurch. "We shall arrange for you to go to the same
place-together."
"Will you, you swine," said Tommy under his breath.
Suddenly there was a stir in the outer office. A man whom Tommy had
not yet seen poked his head in and growled something in Russian.
"Good," said Dymchurch. "She is coming-and coming alone."
For a moment a faint anxiety caught at Tommy's heart.
The next minute he heard Tuppence's voice.
"Oh! there you are, Inspector Dymchurch. I've brought the letter.
Where is Francis?"
With the last words she came through the door, and Vassily sprang on
her from behind, clapping his hand over her mouth. Dymchurch tore
the handbag from her grasp, and turned over its contents in a frenzied
search.
Suddenly he uttered an ejaculation of delight and held up a blue
envelope with a Russian stamp on it. Coggins gave a hoarse shout.
And just in that minute of triumph, the other door, the door into
Tuppence's own office, opened noiselessly and Inspector Marriott and
two men armed with revolvers stepped into the room, with the sharp
command: "Hands Up!"
There was no fight. The others were taken at a hopeless disadvantage.
Dymchurch's automatic lay on the table, and the two others were not
armed.
"A very nice little haul," said Inspector Marriott with approval, as he
snapped on the last pair of handcuffs. "And we'll have more as time
goes on, I hope."
White with rage, Dymchurch glared at Tuppence.
"You little devil," he snarled, "It was you put them on to us."
"It wasn't all my doing. I ought to have guessed, I admit, when you
brought in the number sixteen this afternoon. But it was Tommy's note
clinched matters. I rang up Inspector Marriot, got Albert to meet him
with the duplicate key of the office, and came along myself with the
empty blue envelope in my bag. The letter I forwarded according to my
instructions as soon as I had parted from you two this afternoon."
But one word had caught the other's attention.
"Tommy?" he queried.
Tommy who had just been released from his bonds came towards
them.
"Well done, brother Francis," he said to Tuppence, taking both her
hands in his. And to Dymchurch: "As I told you, my dear fellow, you
really ought to read the Classics."
7. FINESSING THE KING
It was a wet Wednesday in the offices of the International Detective
Agency. Tuppence let the Daily Leader fall idly from her hand.
"Do you know what I've been thinking, Tommy?"
"It's impossible to say," replied her husband. "You think of so many
things, and you think of them all at once."
"I think it's time we went dancing again."
Tommy picked up the Daily Leader hastily.
"Our advertisement looks well," he remarked, his head on one side.
"Blunt's Brilliant Detectives. Do you realise, Tuppence, that you and
you alone are Blunt's Brilliant Detectives? There's glory for you, as
Humpty Dumpty would say."
"I was talking about dancing."
"There's a curious point that I have observed about newspapers. I
wonder if you have ever noticed it. Take these three copies of the Daily
Leader. Can you tell me how they differ one from the other?"
Tuppence took them with some curiosity.
"It seems fairly easy," she remarked witheringly. "One is to-day's, one
is yesterday's, and one is the day before's."
"Positively scintillating, my dear Watson. But that was not my meaning.
Observe the headline, 'The Daily Leader.' Compare the three-do you
see any difference between them?"
"No, I don't," said Tuppence, "and what's more, I don't believe there is
any."
Tommy sighed, and brought the tips of his fingers together in the most
approved Sherlock Holmes fashion.
"Exactly. Yet you read the papers as much-in fact, more than I do. But I
have observed and you have not. If you will look at today's Daily
Leader, you will see that in the middle of the downstroke of the D is a
small white dot, and there is another in the L of the same word. But in
yesterday's paper the white dot is not in DAILY at all. There are two
white dots in the L of LEADER. That of the day before again has two
dots in the D of DAILY. In fact, the dot, or dots, are in a different
position every day."
"Why?" asked Tuppence.
"That's a journalistic secret."
"Meaning you don't know, and can't guess."
"I will merely say this-the practice is common to all newspapers."
"Aren't you clever?" said Tuppence. "Especially at drawing red
herrings across the track. Let's go back to what we were talking about
before."
"What were we talking about?"
"The Three Arts Ball."
Tommy groaned.
"No, no, Tuppence. Not the Three Arts Ball. I'm not young enough. I
assure you I'm not young enough."
"When I was a nice young girl," said Tuppence, "I was brought up to
believe that men-especially husbands-were dissipated beings, fond of
drinking and dancing and staying up late at night. It took an
exceptionally beautiful and clever wife to keep them at home. Another
illusion gone! All the wives I know are hankering to go out and dance,
and weeping because their husbands will wear bedroom slippers and
go to bed at half past nine. And you do dance so nicely, Tommy dear."
"Gently with the butter, Tuppence."
"As a matter of fact," said Tuppence, "it's not purely for pleasure that I
want to go. I'm intrigued by this advertisement."
She picked up the Daily Leader again, and read it out.
"I should go three hearts. 12 tricks. Ace of Spades. Necessary to
finesse the King."
"Rather an expensive way of learning Bridge," was Tommy's comment.
"Don't be an ass. That's nothing to do with Bridge. You see, I was
lunching with a girl yesterday at the Ace of Spades. It's a queer little
underground den in Chelsea, and she told me that it's quite the fashion
at these big shows to trundle round there in the course of the evening
for bacon and eggs and Welsh Rabbits-Bohemian sort of stuff. It's got
screened off booths all round it. Pretty hot place, I should say."
"And your idea is-?"
"Three hearts stands for the Three Arts Ball to-morrow night, 12 tricks
is twelve o'clock, and the Ace of Spades is the Ace of Spades."
"And what about its being necessary to finesse the King?"
"Well, that's what I thought we'd find out."
"I shouldn't wonder if you weren't right, Tuppence," said Tommy
magnanimously. "But I don't quite see why you want to butt in upon
other people's love affairs."
"I shan't butt in. What I'm proposing is an interesting experiment in
detective work. We need practice."
"Business is certainly not too brisk," agreed Tommy. "All the same,
Tuppence, what you want is to go to the Three Arts Ball and dance!
Talk of red herrings."
Tuppence laughed shamelessly.
"Be a sport, Tommy. Try and forget you're thirty-two and have got one
grey hair in your left eyebrow."
"I was always weak where women were concerned," murmured her
husband. "Have I got to make an ass of myself in fancy dress?"
"Of course, but you can leave that to me. I've got a splendid idea."
Tommy looked at her with some misgiving. He was always profoundly
mistrustful of Tuppence's brilliant ideas.
When he returned to the flat on the following evening, Tuppence came
flying out of her bedroom to meet him.
"It's come," she announced.
"What's come?"
“The costume. Come and look at it."
Tommy followed her. Spread out on the bed was a complete fireman's
kit with shining helmet.
"Good God!" groaned Tommy. "Have I joined the Wembley fire
brigade?"
"Guess again," said Tuppence. "You haven't caught the idea yet. Use
your little grey cells, mon ami. Scintillate, Watson. Be a bull that has
been more than ten minutes in the arena."
"Wait a minute," said Tommy. "I begin to see. There is a dark purpose
in this. What are you going to wear, Tuppence?"
"An old suit of your clothes, an American hat and some horn
spectacles."
"Crude," said Tommy. "But I catch the idea. McCarty incog. And I am
Riordan."
"That's it. I thought we ought to practice American detective methods
as well as English ones. Just for once I am going to be the star, and
you will be the humble assistant."
"Don't forget," said Tommy warningly, "that it's always an innocent
remark by the simple Denny that puts McCarty on the right track."
But Tuppence only laughed. She was in high spirits.
It was a most successful evening. The crowds, the music the fantastic
dresses-everything conspired to make the young couple enjoy
themselves. Tommy forgot his role of the bored husband dragged out
against his will.
At ten minutes to twelve, they drove off in the car to the famous-or
infamous-Ace of Spades. As Tuppence had said, it was an
underground den, mean and tawdry in appearance, but it was
nevertheless crowded with couples in fancy dress. There were closed
in booths round the walls, and Tommy and Tuppence secured one of
these. They left the doors purposely a little ajar so that they could see
what was going on outside.
"I wonder which they are-our people, I mean," said Tuppence. "What
about that Columbine over there with the red Mephistopheles?"
"I fancy the wicked Mandarin and the lady who calls herself a
Battleship-more of a fast Cruiser, I should say."
"Isn't he witty?" said Tuppence. "All done on a little drop of drink!
Who's this coming in dressed as the Queen of Hearts-rather a good get
up, that."
The girl in question passed into the booth next to them accompanied
by her escort who was "the gentleman dressed in newspaper" from
Alice in Wonderland. They were both wearing masks-it seemed to be
rather a common custom at the Ace of Spades.
“I'm sure we're in a real den of iniquity," said Tuppence with a pleased
face. "Scandals all round us. What a row everyone makes."
A cry, as of protest, rang out from the booth next door and was
covered by a man's loud laugh. Everybody was laughing and singing.
The shrill voices of the girls rose above the booming of their male
escorts.
"What about that shepherdess?" demanded Tommy. "The one with the
comic Frenchman. They might be our little lot."
"Anyone might be," confessed Tuppence. "I'm not going to bother. The
great thing is that we are enjoying ourselves."
"I could have enjoyed myself better in another costume," grumbled
Tommy. "You've no idea of the heat of this one."
"Cheer up," said Tuppence. "You look lovely."
"I'm glad of that," said Tommy. "It's more than you do. You're the
funniest little guy I've ever seen."
"Will you keep a civil tongue in your head, Denny, my boy. Hullo, the
gentleman in newspaper is leaving his lady alone. Where's he going,
do you think?"
"Going to hurry up the drinks, I expect," said Tommy. "I wouldn't mind
doing the same thing."
"He's a long time doing it," said Tuppence, when four or five minutes
had passed. "Tommy, would you think me an awful ass-" She paused.
Suddenly she jumped up.
"Call me an ass if you like. I'm going in next door."
"Look here, Tuppence-you can't-"
"I've a feeling there's something wrong. "I know there is. Don't try and
stop me."
She passed quickly out of their own booth, and Tommy followed her.
The doors of the one next door were closed. Tuppence pushed them
apart and went in, Tommy on her heels.
The girl dressed as the Queen of Hearts sat in the corner leaning up
against the wall in a queer huddled position. Her eyes regarded them
steadily through her mask, but she did not move. Her dress was
carried out in a bold design of red and white, but on the left side of the
pattern seemed to have got mixed. There was more red than should
have been. . . .
With a cry Tuppence hurried forward. At the same time, Tommy saw
what she had seen, the hilt of a jewelled dagger just below the heart.
Tuppence dropped on her knees by the girl's side.
"Quick, Tommy, she's still alive. Get hold of the Manager and make him
get a doctor at once."
"Right. Mind you don't touch the handle of that dagger,
"I'll be careful. Go quickly."
Tommy hurried out, pulling the doors to behind him Tuppence passed
her arm around the girl. The latter made a faint gesture, and Tuppence
realised that she wanted to get rid of the mask. Tuppence unfastened
it gently. She saw a fresh flower-like face, and wide starry eyes that
were full of horror, suffering, and a kind of dazed bewilderment.
"My dear," said Tuppence, very gently. "Can you speak at all? Will you
tell me, if you can, who did this?"
She felt the eyes fix themselves on her face. The girl was sighing, the
deep palpitating sighs of a failing heart. And still she looked steadily at
Tuppence. Then her lips parted.
"Bingo did it-" she said in a strained whisper
Then her hands relaxed, and she seemed to nestle down on
Tuppence's shoulder.
Tommy came in, two men with him. The bigger of the two came
forward with an air of authority, the word, doctor, written all over him.
Tuppence relinquished her burden.
"She's dead, I'm afraid," she said with a catch in her voice.
The doctor made a swift examination.
"Yes," he said. "Nothing to be done. We had better leave things as they
are till the police come. How did the thing happen?"
Tuppence explained rather haltingly, slurring over her reasons for
entering the booth.
"It's a curious business," said the doctor. "You heard nothing?"
"I heard her give a kind of cry, but then the man laughed. Naturally I
didn't think-"
"Naturally not," agreed the doctor. "And the man wore a mask, you
say. You wouldn't recognise him?" "I'm afraid not. Would you,
Tommy?" "No. Still there is his costume." "The first thing will be to
identify this poor lady," said the doctor. "After that, well, I suppose the
police will get down to things pretty quickly. It ought not to be a
difficult case. Ah, here they come."
8. THE GENTLEMAN DRESSED IN NEWSPAPER
It was after three o'clock when, weary and sick at heart, the husband
and wife reached home. Several hours passed before Tuppence could
sleep. She lay tossing from side to side, seeing always that flower like
face with the horror stricken eyes.
The dawn was coming in through the shutters when Tuppence finally
dropped off to sleep. After the excitement, she slept heavily and
dreamlessly. It was broad daylight when she awoke to find Tommy, up
and dressed, standing by the bedside, shaking her gently by the arm.
"Wake up, old thing. Inspector Marriot and another man are here and
want to see you."
“What time is it?"
"Just on eleven. I'll get Alice to bring you your tea right away."
“Yes, do. Tell Inspector Marriot I'll be there in ten minutes."
A quarter of an hour later, Tuppence came hurrying into the sitting
room. Inspector Marriot who was sitting looking very straight and
solemn, rose to greet her.
"Good morning, Mrs. Beresford. This is Sir Arthur Merivale."
Tuppence shook hands with a tall thin man with haggard eyes and
preying hair.
"It's about this sad business last night," said Inspector Marriot. "I want
Sir Arthur to hear from your own lips what you told me-the words the
poor lady said before she died. Sir Arthur has been very hard to
convince."
"I can't believe," said the other, "and I won't believe, that Bingo Hale
ever hurt a hair on Vere's head."
Inspector Marriot went on.
"We've made some progress since last night, Mrs. Beresford," he said.
"First of all we managed to identify the lady as Lady Merivale. We
communicated with Sir Arthur here. He recognised the body at once,
and was horrified beyond words, of course. Then I asked him if he
knew anyone called Bingo."
"You must understand Mrs. Beresford," said Sir Arthur, "that Captain
Hale, who is known to all his friends as Bingo, is the dearest pal I have.
He practically lives with us. He was staying at my house when they
arrested him this morning. I cannot but believe that you have made a
mistake-it was not his name that my wife uttered."
"There is no possibility of mistake," said Tuppence gently. "She said
'Bingo did it-' "
"You see, Sir Arthur," said Marriot.
The unhappy man sank into a chair and covered his face with his
hands.
"It's incredible. What earthly motive could there be? Oh! I know your
idea, Inspector Marriot. You think Hale was my wife's lover, but even if
that were so-which I don't admit for a moment-what motive was there
for killing her?"
Inspector Marriot coughed.
"It's not a very pleasant thing to say, sir. But Captain Hale has been
paying a lot of attention to a certain young American lady of late-a
young lady with inconsiderable amount of money. If Lady Merivale
liked to turn nasty, she could probably stop his marriage."
"This is outrageous, Inspector."
Sir Arthur sprang angrily to his feet. The other calmed him with a
soothing gesture.
"I beg your pardon, I'm sure, Sir Arthur. You say that you and Captain
Hale both decided to attend this show. Your wife was away on a visit at
the time, and you had no idea that she was to be there?"
"Not the least idea."
"Just show him that advertisement you told me about, Mrs. Beresford."
Tuppence complied.
"That seems to me clear enough. It was inserted by Captain Hale to
catch your wife's eye. They had already arranged to meet there. But
you only made up your mind to go the day before, hence it was
necessary to warn her. That is the explanation of the phrase
"Necessary to finesse the King." You ordered your costume from a
theatrical firm at the last minute, but Captain Hale's was a home made
affair. He went as the Gentleman Dressed in Newspaper. Do you know,
Sir Arthur, what we found clasped in the dead lady's hand? A fragment
torn from a newspaper. My men have orders to take Captain Hale's
costume away with them from your house. I shall find it at the Yard
when I get back. If there's a tear in it corresponding to the missing
piece-well, it'll be the end of the case."
"You won't find it," said Sir Arthur. "I know Bingo Hale."
Apologising to Tuppence for disturbing her, they took their leave.
Late that evening, there was a ring at the bell, and somewhat to the
astonishment of the young pair, Inspector Marriot once more walked
in.
"I thought Blunt's Brilliant Detectives would like to hear the latest
developments," he said, with a hint of a smile.
"They would," said Tommy. "Have a drink?"
He placed materials hospitably at Inspector Marriot's elbow.
"It's a clear case," said the latter, after a minute or two. "Dagger was
the lady's own-the idea was to have made it look like suicide, evidently,
but thanks to you two being on the spot, that didn't come off. We've
found plenty of letters -they'd been carrying on together for some time,
that's clear-without Sir Arthur tumbling to it. Then we found the last
link-"
"The last what?" said Tuppence sharply.
"The last link in the chain-that fragment of the Daily Leader. It was torn
from the dress he wore-fits exactly. Oh! yes, it's a perfectly clear case.
By the way, I brought round a photograph of those two exhibits-I
thought they might interest you. It's very seldom that you get such a
perfectly clear case."
"Tommy," said Tuppence, when her husband returned from showing
the Scotland Yard man out. "Why do you think Inspector Marriot keeps
repeating that it's a perfectly clear case?"
"I don't know. Smug satisfaction, I suppose."
"Not a bit of it. He's trying to get us irritated. You know, Tommy,
butchers, for instance, know something about meat, don't they?"
"I should say so, but what on earth-"
"And in the same way, greengrocers know all about vegetables, and
fishermen about fish. Detectives, professional detectives, must know
all about criminals. They know the real thing when they see it-and they
know when it isn't the real thing. Marriot's expert knowledge tells him
that Captain Hale isn't a criminal-but all the facts are dead against him.
As a last resource Marriot is egging us on, hoping against hope that
some little detail or other will come back to us- something that
happened last night-which will throw a different light on things.
Tommy, why shouldn't it be suicide, after all?"
"Remember what she said to you."
"I know-but take that a different way. It was Bingo's doing-his conduct
that drove her to kill herself. It's just possible."
"Just. But it doesn't explain that fragment of newspaper."
"Let's have a look at Marriot's photographs. I forgot to ask him what
Hale's account of the matter was."
"I asked him that in the hall just now. Hale declared he had never
spoken to Lady Merivale at the show. Says somebody shoved a note
into his hand which said: "Don't try and speak to me to-night. Arthur
suspects." He couldn't produce the piece of paper, though, and it
doesn't sound a very likely story. Anyway, you and I know he was with
her at the Ace of Spades because we saw him."
Tuppence nodded and pored over the two photographs. One was a
tiny fragment with the legend DAILY LE-and the rest torn off. The other
was the front sheet of the Daily Leader with the small round tear at the
top of it. There was no doubt about it. The two fitted together perfectly.
"What are all those marks down the side?" asked Tommy.
"Stitches," said Tuppence. "Where is was sewn to the others, you
know."
“I thought it might be a new scheme of dots," said Tommy. Then he
gave a slight shiver. "My word, Tuppence, how creepy it makes one
feel. To think that you and I were discussing dots and puzzling over
that advertisement all as lighthearted as anything."
Tuppence did not answer. Tommy looked at her, and was startled to
observe that she was staring ahead of her, her mouth slightly open,
and a bewildered expression on her face.
"Tuppence," said Tommy gently, shaking her by the arm. "What's the
matter with you? Are you just going to have a stroke or something?"
But Tuppence remained motionless. Presently she said in a far away
voice.
"Denis Riordan."
"Eh?" said Tommy staring.
"It's just as you said. One simple innocent remark! Find me all this
week's Daily Leaders."
"What are you up to?"
"I'm being McCarty. I've been worrying round, and thanks to you, I've
got a notion at last. This is the front sheet of Tuesday's paper. I seem
to remember that Tuesday's paper was the one with two dots in the L
of LEADER. This has a dot in the D of DAILY-and one in the L too. Get
me the papers and let's make sure."
They compared them anxiously. Tuppence had been quite right in her
remembrance.
"You see? This fragment wasn't torn from Tuesday's paper."
"But Tuppence, we can't be sure. It may merely be different editions."
"It may-but at any rate it's given me an idea. It can't be coincidencethat's
certain. There's only one thing it can be if I'm right in my idea.
Ring up Sir Arthur, Tommy. Ask him to come round here at once. Say
I've got important news for him. Then get hold of Marriot. Scotland
Yard will know his address if he's gone home."
Sir Arthur Merivale, very much intrigued by the summons, arrived at
the flat in about half an hour's time. Tuppence came forward to greet
hire.
“I must apologise for sending for you in such a peremptory fashion,"
she said. "But my husband and I have discovered something that we
think you ought to know at once. Do sit down."
Sir Arthur sat down, and Tuppence went on.
"You are, I know, very anxious to clear your friend."
Sir Arthur shook his head sadly.
"I was, but even I have had to give in to the overwhelming evidence."
"What would you say if I told you that chance has placed in my hands a
piece of evidence that will certainly clear him of all complicity?"
"I should be overjoyed to hear it, Mrs. Beresford."
"Supposing," continued Tuppence, "that I had come across a girl who
was actually dancing with Captain Hale last night at twelve o'clock-the
hour when he was supposed to be at the Ace of Spades."
"Marvellous," cried Sir Arthur. "I knew there was some mistake. Poor
Vere must have killed herself after all."
"Hardly that," said Tuppence. "You forget the other man."
"What other man?"
"The one my husband and I saw leave the booth. You see, Sir Arthur,
there must have been a second man dressed in newspaper at the Ball.
By the way, what was your own costume?"
"Mine? I went as a seventeenth century executioner."
"How very appropriate," said Tuppence softly.
"Appropriate, Mrs. Beresford? What do you mean by appropriate?"
"For the part you played. Shall I tell you my ideas on the subject, Sir
Arthur? The newspaper dress is easily put on over that of an
executioner. Previously a little note has been slipped into Captain
Hale's hand, asking him not to speak to a certain lady. But the lady
herself knows nothing of that note. She goes to the Ace of Spades at
the appointed time, and sees the figure she expects to see. They go
into the booth. He takes her in his arms, I think, and kisses her-the kiss
of a Judas, and as he kisses he strikes with the dagger. She only utters
one faint cry and he covers that with a laugh. Presently he goes awayand
to the last, horrified and bewildered, she believes her lover is the
man who killed her.
"But she has torn a small fragment from the costume. The murderer
notices that-he is a man who pays great attention to detail. To make
the case absolutely clear against his victim the fragment must seem to
have been torn from Captain Hale's costume. That would present great
difficulties unless tale two men happened to be living in the same
house. Then, of course, the thing would be simplicity itself. He makes
an exact duplicate of the tear in Captain Hale's costume-then he burns
his own and prepares to play the part of the loyal friend."
Tuppence paused.
"Well, Sir Arthur?"
Sir Arthur rose and made her a bow.
“The rather vivid imagination of a charming lady who reads too much
fiction."
"You think so?" said Tommy.
"And a husband who is guided by his wife," said Sir Arthur. "I do not
fancy you will find anybody to take the matter seriously."
He laughed out loud, and Tuppence stiffened in her chair.
"I would swear to that laugh anywhere," she said. "I heard it last in the
Ace of Spades. And you are under a little misapprehension about us
both. Beresford is our real name, but we have another."
She picked up a card from the table and handed it to him. Sir Arthur
read it aloud.
"International Detective Agency . . ." He drew his breath sharply. "So
that is what you really are! That was why Marriot brought me here this
morning. It was a trap-"
He strolled to the window.
"A fine view you have from here," he said. "Right over London."
"Inspector Marriot," cried Tommy sharply.
In a flash the Inspector appeared from the communicating door in the
opposite wall.
A little smile of amusement came to Sir Arthur's lips.
"I thought as much," he said. "But you won't get me this time, I'm
afraid, Inspector. I prefer to take my own way out."
And, putting his hands on the sill, he vaulted clean through the
window.
Tuppence shrieked and clapped her hands to her ears to shut out the
sound she had already imagined-the sickening thud far beneath.
Inspector Marriot uttered an oath.
“We should have thought of the window," he said. "Though, mind you,
it would have been a difficult thing to prove, I'll go down and-and-see
to things."
"Poor devil," said Tommy slowly. "If he was fond of his wife-"
But the Inspector interrupted him with a snort.
"Fond of her? That's as may be. He was at his wits' end where to turn
for money. Lady Merivale had a large fortune of her own, and it all went
to him. If she'd bolted with young Hale, he'd never have seen a penny
of it."
"That was it, was it?"
"Of course, from the very start, I sensed that Sir Arthur was a bad lot,
and that Captain Hale was all right. We know pretty well what's what at
the Yard-but it's awkward when you're up against facts. I'll be going
down now-I should give your wife a glass of brandy if I were you, Mr.
Beresford-it's been upsetting like for her."
"Greengrowers," said Tuppence in a low voice as the door closed
behind the imperturbable Inspector. "Butchers. Fishermen.
Detectives. I was right, wasn't I? He knew."
Tommy, who had been busy at the sideboard, approached her with a
large glass.
"Drink this."
"What is it? Brandy?"
"No, it's a large cocktail-suitable for a triumphant McCarty. Yes,
Marriot's right all round-that was the way of it. A bold finesse for game
and rubber."
Tuppence nodded.
"But he finessed the wrong way round."
"And so," said Tommy. "Exit the King."