The Jungle Book
------------------------------------------------------------------

Mowgli’s Brothers
Now Rann the Kite brings home the night
That Mang the Bat sets free—
The herds are shut in byre and hut
For loosed till dawn are we.
This is the hour of pride and power,
Talon and tush and claw.
Oh, hear the call!—Good hunting all
That keep the Jungle Law!
Night-Song in the Jungle
It was seven o’clock of a very warm evening in the
Seeonee hills when Father Wolf woke up from his day’s
rest, scratched himself, yawned, and spread out his paws
one after the other to get rid of the sleepy feeling in their
tips. Mother Wolf lay with her big gray nose dropped
across her four tumbling, squealing cubs, and the moon
shone into the mouth of the cave where they all lived.
‘Augrh!’ said Father Wolf. ‘It is time to hunt again.’ He
was going to spring down hill when a little shadow with a
bushy tail crossed the threshold and whined: ‘Good luck
go with you, O Chief of the Wolves. And good luck and
strong white teeth go with noble children that they may
never forget the hungry in this world.’

3 of 241
It was the jackal—Tabaqui, the Dish-licker—and the
wolves of India despise Tabaqui because he runs about
making mischief, and telling tales, and eating rags and
pieces of leather from the village rubbish-heaps. But they
are afraid of him too, because Tabaqui, more than anyone
else in the jungle, is apt to go mad, and then he forgets
that he was ever afraid of anyone, and runs through the
forest biting everything in his way. Even the tiger runs and
hides when little Tabaqui goes mad, for madness is the
most disgraceful thing that can overtake a wild creature.
We call it hydrophobia, but they call it dewanee—the
madness— and run.
‘Enter, then, and look,’ said Father Wolf stiffly, ‘but
there is no food here.’
‘For a wolf, no,’ said Tabaqui, ‘but for so mean a
person as myself a dry bone is a good feast. Who are we,
the Gidur-log [the jackal people], to pick and choose?’ He
scuttled to the back of the cave, where he found the bone
of a buck with some meat on it, and sat cracking the end
merrily.
‘All thanks for this good meal,’ he said, licking his lips.
‘How beautiful are the noble children! How large are their
eyes! And so young too! Indeed, indeed, I might have
eBook brought to you by


4 of 241
remembered that the children of kings are men from the
beginning.’
Now, Tabaqui knew as well as anyone else that there is
nothing so unlucky as to compliment children to their
faces. It pleased him to see Mother and Father Wolf look
uncomfortable.
Tabaqui sat still, rejoicing in the mischief that he had
made, and then he said spitefully:
‘Shere Khan, the Big One, has shifted his hunting
grounds. He will hunt among these hills for the next
moon, so he has told me.’
Shere Khan was the tiger who lived near the
Waingunga River, twenty miles away.
‘He has no right!’ Father Wolf began angrily—‘By the
Law of the Jungle he has no right to change his quarters
without due warning. He will frighten every head of game
within ten miles, and I—I have to kill for two, these days.’
‘His mother did not call him Lungri [the Lame One]
for nothing,’ said Mother Wolf quietly. ‘He has been lame
in one foot from his birth. That is why he has only killed
cattle. Now the villagers of the Waingunga are angry with
him, and he has come here to make our villagers angry.
They will scour the jungle for him when he is far away,

5 of 241
and we and our children must run when the grass is set
alight. Indeed, we are very grateful to Shere Khan!’
‘Shall I tell him of your gratitude?’ said Tabaqui.
‘Out!’ snapped Father Wolf. ‘Out and hunt with thy
master. Thou hast done harm enough for one night.’
‘I go,’ said Tabaqui quietly. ‘Ye can hear Shere Khan
below in the thickets. I might have saved myself the
message.’
Father Wolf listened, and below in the valley that ran
down to a little river he heard the dry, angry, snarly,
singsong whine of a tiger who has caught nothing and
does not care if all the jungle knows it.
‘The fool!’ said Father Wolf. ‘To begin a night’s work
with that noise! Does he think that our buck are like his
fat Waingunga bullocks?’
‘H’sh. It is neither bullock nor buck he hunts to-night,’
said Mother Wolf. ‘It is Man.’
The whine had changed to a sort of humming purr that
seemed to come from every quarter of the compass. It was
the noise that bewilders woodcutters and gypsies sleeping
in the open, and makes them run sometimes into the very
mouth of the tiger.

6 of 241
‘Man!’ said Father Wolf, showing all his white teeth.
‘Faugh! Are there not enough beetles and frogs in the
tanks that he must eat Man, and on our ground too!’
The Law of the Jungle, which never orders anything
without a reason, forbids every beast to eat Man except
when he is killing to show his children how to kill, and
then he must hunt outside the hunting grounds of his pack
or tribe. The real reason for this is that man-killing means,
sooner or later, the arrival of white men on elephants,
with guns, and hundreds of brown men with gongs and
rockets and torches. Then everybody in the jungle suffers.
The reason the beasts give among themselves is that Man
is the weakest and most defenseless of all living things, and
it is unsportsmanlike to touch him. They say too—and it is
true —that man-eaters become mangy, and lose their
teeth.
The purr grew louder, and ended in the full-throated
‘Aaarh!’ of the tiger’s charge.
Then there was a howl—an untigerish howl—from
Shere Khan. ‘He has missed,’ said Mother Wolf. ‘What is
it?’
Father Wolf ran out a few paces and heard Shere Khan
muttering and mumbling savagely as he tumbled about in
the scrub.

7 of 241
‘The fool has had no more sense than to jump at a
woodcutter’s campfire, and has burned his feet,’ said
Father Wolf with a grunt. ‘Tabaqui is with him.’
‘Something is coming uphill,’ said Mother Wolf,
twitching one ear. ‘Get ready.’
The bushes rustled a little in the thicket, and Father
Wolf dropped with his haunches under him, ready for his
leap. Then, if you had been watching, you would have
seen the most wonderful thing in the world—the wolf
checked in mid-spring. He made his bound before he saw
what it was he was jumping at, and then he tried to stop
himself. The result was that he shot up straight into the air
for four or five feet, landing almost where he left ground.
‘Man!’ he snapped. ‘A man’s cub. Look!’
Directly in front of him, holding on by a low branch,
stood a naked brown baby who could just walk—as soft
and as dimpled a little atom as ever came to a wolf’s cave
at night. He looked up into Father Wolf’s face, and
laughed.
‘Is that a man’s cub?’ said Mother Wolf. ‘I have never
seen one. Bring it here.’
A Wolf accustomed to moving his own cubs can, if
necessary, mouth an egg without breaking it, and though
Father Wolf’s jaws closed right on the child’s back not a

8 of 241
tooth even scratched the skin as he laid it down among the
cubs.
‘How little! How naked, and—how bold!’ said Mother
Wolf softly. The baby was pushing his way between the
cubs to get close to the warm hide. ‘Ahai! He is taking his
meal with the others. And so this is a man’s cub. Now,
was there ever a wolf that could boast of a man’s cub
among her children?’
‘I have heard now and again of such a thing, but never
in our Pack or in my time,’ said Father Wolf. ‘He is
altogether without hair, and I could kill him with a touch
of my foot. But see, he looks up and is not afraid.’
The moonlight was blocked out of the mouth of the
cave, for Shere Khan’s great square head and shoulders
were thrust into the entrance. Tabaqui, behind him, was
squeaking: ‘My lord, my lord, it went in here!’
‘Shere Khan does us great honor,’ said Father Wolf, but
his eyes were very angry. ‘What does Shere Khan need?’
‘My quarry. A man’s cub went this way,’ said Shere
Khan. ‘Its parents have run off. Give it to me.’
Shere Khan had jumped at a woodcutter’s campfire, as
Father Wolf had said, and was furious from the pain of his
burned feet. But Father Wolf knew that the mouth of the
cave was too narrow for a tiger to come in by. Even

9 of 241
where he was, Shere Khan’s shoulders and forepaws were
cramped for want of room, as a man’s would be if he tried
to fight in a barrel.
‘The Wolves are a free people,’ said Father Wolf.
‘They take orders from the Head of the Pack, and not
from any striped cattle-killer. The man’s cub is ours—to
kill if we choose.’
‘Ye choose and ye do not choose! What talk is this of
choosing? By the bull that I killed, am I to stand nosing
into your dog’s den for my fair dues? It is I, Shere Khan,
who speak!’
The tiger’s roar filled the cave with thunder. Mother
Wolf shook herself clear of the cubs and sprang forward,
her eyes, like two green moons in the darkness, facing the
blazing eyes of Shere Khan.
‘And it is I, Raksha [The Demon], who answers. The
man’s cub is mine, Lungri—mine to me! He shall not be
killed. He shall live to run with the Pack and to hunt with
the Pack; and in the end, look you, hunter of little naked
cubs—frog-eater— fish-killer—he shall hunt thee! Now
get hence, or by the Sambhur that I killed (I eat no starved
cattle), back thou goest to thy mother, burned beast of the
jungle, lamer than ever thou camest into the world! Go!’

10 of 241
Father Wolf looked on amazed. He had almost
forgotten the days when he won Mother Wolf in fair fight
from five other wolves, when she ran in the Pack and was
not called The Demon for compliment’s sake. Shere Khan
might have faced Father Wolf, but he could not stand up
against Mother Wolf, for he knew that where he was she
had all the advantage of the ground, and would fight to
the death. So he backed out of the cave mouth growling,
and when he was clear he shouted:
‘Each dog barks in his own yard! We will see what the
Pack will say to this fostering of man-cubs. The cub is
mine, and to my teeth he will come in the end, O bushtailed
thieves!’
Mother Wolf threw herself down panting among the
cubs, and Father Wolf said to her gravely:
‘Shere Khan speaks this much truth. The cub must be
shown to the Pack. Wilt thou still keep him, Mother?’
‘Keep him!’ she gasped. ‘He came naked, by night,
alone and very hungry; yet he was not afraid! Look, he has
pushed one of my babes to one side already. And that lame
butcher would have killed him and would have run off to
the Waingunga while the villagers here hunted through all
our lairs in revenge! Keep him? Assuredly I will keep him.
Lie still, little frog. O thou Mowgli —for Mowgli the

11 of 241
Frog I will call thee—the time will come when thou wilt
hunt Shere Khan as he has hunted thee.’
‘But what will our Pack say?’ said Father Wolf.
The Law of the Jungle lays down very clearly that any
wolf may, when he marries, withdraw from the Pack he
belongs to. But as soon as his cubs are old enough to stand
on their feet he must bring them to the Pack Council,
which is generally held once a month at full moon, in
order that the other wolves may identify them. After that
inspection the cubs are free to run where they please, and
until they have killed their first buck no excuse is accepted
if a grown wolf of the Pack kills one of them. The
punishment is death where the murderer can be found;
and if you think for a minute you will see that this must
be so.
Father Wolf waited till his cubs could run a little, and
then on the night of the Pack Meeting took them and
Mowgli and Mother Wolf to the Council Rock—a hilltop
covered with stones and boulders where a hundred wolves
could hide. Akela, the great gray Lone Wolf, who led all
the Pack by strength and cunning, lay out at full length on
his rock, and below him sat forty or more wolves of every
size and color, from badger-colored veterans who could
handle a buck alone to young black three-year-olds who

12 of 241
thought they could. The Lone Wolf had led them for a
year now. He had fallen twice into a wolf trap in his
youth, and once he had been beaten and left for dead; so
he knew the manners and customs of men. There was
very little talking at the Rock. The cubs tumbled over
each other in the center of the circle where their mothers
and fathers sat, and now and again a senior wolf would go
quietly up to a cub, look at him carefully, and return to his
place on noiseless feet. Sometimes a mother would push
her cub far out into the moonlight to be sure that he had
not been overlooked. Akela from his rock would cry: ‘Ye
know the Law—ye know the Law. Look well, O
Wolves!’ And the anxious mothers would take up the call:
‘Look—look well, O Wolves!’
At last—and Mother Wolf’s neck bristles lifted as the
time came—Father Wolf pushed ‘Mowgli the Frog,’ as
they called him, into the center, where he sat laughing and
playing with some pebbles that glistened in the moonlight.
Akela never raised his head from his paws, but went on
with the monotonous cry: ‘Look well!’ A muffled roar
came up from behind the rocks—the voice of Shere Khan
crying: ‘The cub is mine. Give him to me. What have the
Free People to do with a man’s cub?’ Akela never even
twitched his ears. All he said was: ‘Look well, O Wolves!

13 of 241
What have the Free People to do with the orders of any
save the Free People? Look well!’
There was a chorus of deep growls, and a young wolf
in his fourth year flung back Shere Khan’s question to
Akela: ‘What have the Free People to do with a man’s
cub?’ Now, the Law of the Jungle lays down that if there
is any dispute as to the right of a cub to be accepted by the
Pack, he must be spoken for by at least two members of
the Pack who are not his father and mother.
‘Who speaks for this cub?’ said Akela. ‘Among the Free
People who speaks?’ There was no answer and Mother
Wolf got ready for what she knew would be her last fight,
if things came to fighting.
Then the only other creature who is allowed at the
Pack Council—Baloo, the sleepy brown bear who teaches
the wolf cubs the Law of the Jungle: old Baloo, who can
come and go where he pleases because he eats only nuts
and roots and honey—rose upon his hind quarters and
grunted.
‘The man’s cub—the man’s cub?’ he said. ‘I speak for
the man’s cub. There is no harm in a man’s cub. I have no
gift of words, but I speak the truth. Let him run with the
Pack, and be entered with the others. I myself will teach
him.’

14 of 241
‘We need yet another,’ said Akela. ‘Baloo has spoken,
and he is our teacher for the young cubs. Who speaks
besides Baloo?’
A black shadow dropped down into the circle. It was
Bagheera the Black Panther, inky black all over, but with
the panther markings showing up in certain lights like the
pattern of watered silk. Everybody knew Bagheera, and
nobody cared to cross his path; for he was as cunning as
Tabaqui, as bold as the wild buffalo, and as reckless as the
wounded elephant. But he had a voice as soft as wild
honey dripping from a tree, and a skin softer than down.
‘O Akela, and ye the Free People,’ he purred, ‘I have
no right in your assembly, but the Law of the Jungle says
that if there is a doubt which is not a killing matter in
regard to a new cub, the life of that cub may be bought at
a price. And the Law does not say who may or may not
pay that price. Am I right?’
‘Good! Good!’ said the young wolves, who are always
hungry. ‘Listen to Bagheera. The cub can be bought for a
price. It is the Law.’
‘Knowing that I have no right to speak here, I ask your
leave.’
‘Speak then,’ cried twenty voices.

15 of 241
‘To kill a naked cub is shame. Besides, he may make
better sport for you when he is grown. Baloo has spoken
in his behalf. Now to Baloo’s word I will add one bull,
and a fat one, newly killed, not half a mile from here, if ye
will accept the man’s cub according to the Law. Is it
difficult?’
There was a clamor of scores of voices, saying: ‘What
matter? He will die in the winter rains. He will scorch in
the sun. What harm can a naked frog do us? Let him run
with the Pack. Where is the bull, Bagheera? Let him be
accepted.’ And then came Akela’s deep bay, crying: ‘Look
well—look well, O Wolves!’
Mowgli was still deeply interested in the pebbles, and
he did not notice when the wolves came and looked at
him one by one. At last they all went down the hill for the
dead bull, and only Akela, Bagheera, Baloo, and Mowgli’s
own wolves were left. Shere Khan roared still in the night,
for he was very angry that Mowgli had not been handed
over to him.
‘Ay, roar well,’ said Bagheera, under his whiskers, ‘for
the time will come when this naked thing will make thee
roar to another tune, or I know nothing of man.’
‘It was well done,’ said Akela. ‘Men and their cubs are
very wise. He may be a help in time.’
eBook brought to you by


16 of 241
‘Truly, a help in time of need; for none can hope to
lead the Pack forever,’ said Bagheera.
Akela said nothing. He was thinking of the time that
comes to every leader of every pack when his strength
goes from him and he gets feebler and feebler, till at last he
is killed by the wolves and a new leader comes up—to be
killed in his turn.
‘Take him away,’ he said to Father Wolf, ‘and train
him as befits one of the Free People.’
And that is how Mowgli was entered into the Seeonee
Wolf Pack for the price of a bull and on Baloo’s good
word.
Now you must be content to skip ten or eleven whole
years, and only guess at all the wonderful life that Mowgli
led among the wolves, because if it were written out it
would fill ever so many books. He grew up with the cubs,
though they, of course, were grown wolves almost before
he was a child. And Father Wolf taught him his business,
and the meaning of things in the jungle, till every rustle in
the grass, every breath of the warm night air, every note of
the owls above his head, every scratch of a bat’s claws as it
roosted for a while in a tree, and every splash of every
little fish jumping in a pool meant just as much to him as
the work of his office means to a business man. When he

17 of 241
was not learning he sat out in the sun and slept, and ate
and went to sleep again. When he felt dirty or hot he
swam in the forest pools; and when he wanted honey
(Baloo told him that honey and nuts were just as pleasant
to eat as raw meat) he climbed up for it, and that Bagheera
showed him how to do. Bagheera would lie out on a
branch and call, ‘Come along, Little Brother,’ and at first
Mowgli would cling like the sloth, but afterward he
would fling himself through the branches almost as boldly
as the gray ape. He took his place at the Council Rock,
too, when the Pack met, and there he discovered that if he
stared hard at any wolf, the wolf would be forced to drop
his eyes, and so he used to stare for fun. At other times he
would pick the long thorns out of the pads of his friends,
for wolves suffer terribly from thorns and burs in their
coats. He would go down the hillside into the cultivated
lands by night, and look very curiously at the villagers in
their huts, but he had a mistrust of men because Bagheera
showed him a square box with a drop gate so cunningly
hidden in the jungle that he nearly walked into it, and told
him that it was a trap. He loved better than anything else
to go with Bagheera into the dark warm heart of the
forest, to sleep all through the drowsy day, and at night see
how Bagheera did his killing. Bagheera killed right and left

18 of 241
as he felt hungry, and so did Mowgli—with one
exception. As soon as he was old enough to understand
things, Bagheera told him that he must never touch cattle
because he had been bought into the Pack at the price of a
bull’s life. ‘All the jungle is thine,’ said Bagheera, ‘and
thou canst kill everything that thou art strong enough to
kill; but for the sake of the bull that bought thee thou
must never kill or eat any cattle young or old. That is the
Law of the Jungle.’ Mowgli obeyed faithfully.
And he grew and grew strong as a boy must grow who
does not know that he is learning any lessons, and who has
nothing in the world to think of except things to eat.
Mother Wolf told him once or twice that Shere Khan
was not a creature to be trusted, and that some day he
must kill Shere Khan. But though a young wolf would
have remembered that advice every hour, Mowgli forgot
it because he was only a boy—though he would have
called himself a wolf if he had been able to speak in any
human tongue.
Shere Khan was always crossing his path in the jungle,
for as Akela grew older and feebler the lame tiger had
come to be great friends with the younger wolves of the
Pack, who followed him for scraps, a thing Akela would
never have allowed if he had dared to push his authority

19 of 241
to the proper bounds. Then Shere Khan would flatter
them and wonder that such fine young hunters were
content to be led by a dying wolf and a man’s cub. ‘They
tell me,’ Shere Khan would say, ‘that at Council ye dare
not look him between the eyes.’ And the young wolves
would growl and bristle.
Bagheera, who had eyes and ears everywhere, knew
something of this, and once or twice he told Mowgli in so
many words that Shere Khan would kill him some day.
Mowgli would laugh and answer: ‘I have the Pack and I
have thee; and Baloo, though he is so lazy, might strike a
blow or two for my sake. Why should I be afraid?’
It was one very warm day that a new notion came to
Bagheera— born of something that he had heard. Perhaps
Ikki the Porcupine had told him; but he said to Mowgli
when they were deep in the jungle, as the boy lay with his
head on Bagheera’s beautiful black skin, ‘Little Brother,
how often have I told thee that Shere Khan is thy enemy?’
‘As many times as there are nuts on that palm,’ said
Mowgli, who, naturally, could not count. ‘What of it? I
am sleepy, Bagheera, and Shere Khan is all long tail and
loud talk—like Mao, the Peacock.’

20 of 241
‘But this is no time for sleeping. Baloo knows it; I
know it; the Pack know it; and even the foolish, foolish
deer know. Tabaqui has told thee too.’
‘Ho! ho!’ said Mowgli. ‘Tabaqui came to me not long
ago with some rude talk that I was a naked man’s cub and
not fit to dig pig-nuts. But I caught Tabaqui by the tail
and swung him twice against a palm-tree to teach him
better manners.’
‘That was foolishness, for though Tabaqui is a mischiefmaker,
he would have told thee of something that
concerned thee closely. Open those eyes, Little Brother.
Shere Khan dare not kill thee in the jungle. But
remember, Akela is very old, and soon the day comes
when he cannot kill his buck, and then he will be leader
no more. Many of the wolves that looked thee over when
thou wast brought to the Council first are old too, and the
young wolves believe, as Shere Khan has taught them, that
a man-cub has no place with the Pack. In a little time
thou wilt be a man.’
‘And what is a man that he should not run with his
brothers?’ said Mowgli. ‘I was born in the jungle. I have
obeyed the Law of the Jungle, and there is no wolf of ours
from whose paws I have not pulled a thorn. Surely they
are my brothers!’

21 of 241
Bagheera stretched himself at full length and half shut
his eyes. ‘Little Brother,’ said he, ‘feel under my jaw.’
Mowgli put up his strong brown hand, and just under
Bagheera’s silky chin, where the giant rolling muscles were
all hid by the glossy hair, he came upon a little bald spot.
‘There is no one in the jungle that knows that I,
Bagheera, carry that mark—the mark of the collar; and
yet, Little Brother, I was born among men, and it was
among men that my mother died—in the cages of the
king’s palace at Oodeypore. It was because of this that I
paid the price for thee at the Council when thou wast a
little naked cub. Yes, I too was born among men. I had
never seen the jungle. They fed me behind bars from an
iron pan till one night I felt that I was Bagheera—the
Panther— and no man’s plaything, and I broke the silly
lock with one blow of my paw and came away. And
because I had learned the ways of men, I became more
terrible in the jungle than Shere Khan. Is it not so?’
‘Yes,’ said Mowgli, ‘all the jungle fear Bagheera—all
except Mowgli.’
‘Oh, thou art a man’s cub,’ said the Black Panther very
tenderly. ‘And even as I returned to my jungle, so thou
must go back to men at last—to the men who are thy
brothers—if thou art not killed in the Council.’

22 of 241
‘But why—but why should any wish to kill me?’ said
Mowgli.
‘Look at me,’ said Bagheera. And Mowgli looked at
him steadily between the eyes. The big panther turned his
head away in half a minute.
‘That is why,’ he said, shifting his paw on the leaves.
‘Not even I can look thee between the eyes, and I was
born among men, and I love thee, Little Brother. The
others they hate thee because their eyes cannot meet
thine; because thou art wise; because thou hast pulled out
thorns from their feet—because thou art a man.’
‘I did not know these things,’ said Mowgli sullenly, and
he frowned under his heavy black eyebrows.
‘What is the Law of the Jungle? Strike first and then
give tongue. By thy very carelessness they know that thou
art a man. But be wise. It is in my heart that when Akela
misses his next kill—and at each hunt it costs him more to
pin the buck—the Pack will turn against him and against
thee. They will hold a jungle Council at the Rock, and
then—and then—I have it!’ said Bagheera, leaping up. ‘Go
thou down quickly to the men’s huts in the valley, and
take some of the Red Flower which they grow there, so
that when the time comes thou mayest have even a

23 of 241
stronger friend than I or Baloo or those of the Pack that
love thee. Get the Red Flower.’
By Red Flower Bagheera meant fire, only no creature
in the jungle will call fire by its proper name. Every beast
lives in deadly fear of it, and invents a hundred ways of
describing it.
‘The Red Flower?’ said Mowgli. ‘That grows outside
their huts in the twilight. I will get some.’
‘There speaks the man’s cub,’ said Bagheera proudly.
‘Remember that it grows in little pots. Get one swiftly,
and keep it by thee for time of need.’
‘Good!’ said Mowgli. ‘I go. But art thou sure, O my
Bagheera’—he slipped his arm around the splendid neck
and looked deep into the big eyes—‘art thou sure that all
this is Shere Khan’s doing?’
‘By the Broken Lock that freed me, I am sure, Little
Brother.’
‘Then, by the Bull that bought me, I will pay Shere
Khan full tale for this, and it may be a little over,’ said
Mowgli, and he bounded away.
‘That is a man. That is all a man,’ said Bagheera to
himself, lying down again. ‘Oh, Shere Khan, never was a
blacker hunting than that frog-hunt of thine ten years
ago!’

24 of 241
Mowgli was far and far through the forest, running
hard, and his heart was hot in him. He came to the cave as
the evening mist rose, and drew breath, and looked down
the valley. The cubs were out, but Mother Wolf, at the
back of the cave, knew by his breathing that something
was troubling her frog.
‘What is it, Son?’ she said.
‘Some bat’s chatter of Shere Khan,’ he called back. ‘I
hunt among the plowed fields tonight,’ and he plunged
downward through the bushes, to the stream at the
bottom of the valley. There he checked, for he heard the
yell of the Pack hunting, heard the bellow of a hunted
Sambhur, and the snort as the buck turned at bay. Then
there were wicked, bitter howls from the young wolves:
‘Akela! Akela! Let the Lone Wolf show his strength.
Room for the leader of the Pack! Spring, Akela!’
The Lone Wolf must have sprung and missed his hold,
for Mowgli heard the snap of his teeth and then a yelp as
the Sambhur knocked him over with his forefoot.
He did not wait for anything more, but dashed on; and
the yells grew fainter behind him as he ran into the
croplands where the villagers lived.

25 of 241
‘Bagheera spoke truth,’ he panted, as he nestled down
in some cattle fodder by the window of a hut. ‘Tomorrow
is one day both for Akela and for me.’
Then he pressed his face close to the window and
watched the fire on the hearth. He saw the husbandman’s
wife get up and feed it in the night with black lumps. And
when the morning came and the mists were all white and
cold, he saw the man’s child pick up a wicker pot
plastered inside with earth, fill it with lumps of red-hot
charcoal, put it under his blanket, and go out to tend the
cows in the byre.
‘Is that all?’ said Mowgli. ‘If a cub can do it, there is
nothing to fear.’ So he strode round the corner and met
the boy, took the pot from his hand, and disappeared into
the mist while the boy howled with fear.
‘They are very like me,’ said Mowgli, blowing into the
pot as he had seen the woman do. ‘This thing will die if I
do not give it things to eat"; and he dropped twigs and
dried bark on the red stuff. Halfway up the hill he met
Bagheera with the morning dew shining like moonstones
on his coat.
‘Akela has missed,’ said the Panther. ‘They would have
killed him last night, but they needed thee also. They
were looking for thee on the hill.’

26 of 241
‘I was among the plowed lands. I am ready. See!’
Mowgli held up the fire-pot.
‘Good! Now, I have seen men thrust a dry branch into
that stuff, and presently the Red Flower blossomed at the
end of it. Art thou not afraid?’
‘No. Why should I fear? I remember now—if it is not a
dream—how, before I was a Wolf, I lay beside the Red
Flower, and it was warm and pleasant.’
All that day Mowgli sat in the cave tending his fire pot
and dipping dry branches into it to see how they looked.
He found a branch that satisfied him, and in the evening
when Tabaqui came to the cave and told him rudely
enough that he was wanted at the Council Rock, he
laughed till Tabaqui ran away. Then Mowgli went to the
Council, still laughing.
Akela the Lone Wolf lay by the side of his rock as a
sign that the leadership of the Pack was open, and Shere
Khan with his following of scrap-fed wolves walked to
and fro openly being flattered. Bagheera lay close to
Mowgli, and the fire pot was between Mowgli’s knees.
When they were all gathered together, Shere Khan began
to speak—a thing he would never have dared to do when
Akela was in his prime.

27 of 241
‘He has no right,’ whispered Bagheera. ‘Say so. He is a
dog’s son. He will be frightened.’
Mowgli sprang to his feet. ‘Free People,’ he cried, ‘does
Shere Khan lead the Pack? What has a tiger to do with our
leadership?’
‘Seeing that the leadership is yet open, and being asked
to speak—’ Shere Khan began.
‘By whom?’ said Mowgli. ‘Are we all jackals, to fawn
on this cattle butcher? The leadership of the Pack is with
the Pack alone.’
There were yells of ‘Silence, thou man’s cub!’ ‘Let him
speak. He has kept our Law"; and at last the seniors of the
Pack thundered: ‘Let the Dead Wolf speak.’ When a
leader of the Pack has missed his kill, he is called the Dead
Wolf as long as he lives, which is not long.
Akela raised his old head wearily:—
‘Free People, and ye too, jackals of Shere Khan, for
twelve seasons I have led ye to and from the kill, and in all
that time not one has been trapped or maimed. Now I
have missed my kill. Ye know how that plot was made.
Ye know how ye brought me up to an untried buck to
make my weakness known. It was cleverly done. Your
right is to kill me here on the Council Rock, now.
Therefore, I ask, who comes to make an end of the Lone
eBook brought to you by


28 of 241
Wolf? For it is my right, by the Law of the Jungle, that ye
come one by one.’
There was a long hush, for no single wolf cared to fight
Akela to the death. Then Shere Khan roared: ‘Bah! What
have we to do with this toothless fool? He is doomed to
die! It is the man-cub who has lived too long. Free
People, he was my meat from the first. Give him to me. I
am weary of this man-wolf folly. He has troubled the
jungle for ten seasons. Give me the man-cub, or I will
hunt here always, and not give you one bone. He is a
man, a man’s child, and from the marrow of my bones I
hate him!’
Then more than half the Pack yelled: ‘A man! A man!
What has a man to do with us? Let him go to his own
place.’
‘And turn all the people of the villages against us?’
clamored Shere Khan. ‘No, give him to me. He is a man,
and none of us can look him between the eyes.’
Akela lifted his head again and said, ‘He has eaten our
food. He has slept with us. He has driven game for us. He
has broken no word of the Law of the Jungle.’
‘Also, I paid for him with a bull when he was accepted.
The worth of a bull is little, but Bagheera’s honor is

29 of 241
something that he will perhaps fight for,’ said Bagheera in
his gentlest voice.
‘A bull paid ten years ago!’ the Pack snarled. ‘What do
we care for bones ten years old?’
‘Or for a pledge?’ said Bagheera, his white teeth bared
under his lip. ‘Well are ye called the Free People!’
‘No man’s cub can run with the people of the jungle,’
howled Shere Khan. ‘Give him to me!’
‘He is our brother in all but blood,’ Akela went on,
‘and ye would kill him here! In truth, I have lived too
long. Some of ye are eaters of cattle, and of others I have
heard that, under Shere Khan’s teaching, ye go by dark
night and snatch children from the villager’s doorstep.
Therefore I know ye to be cowards, and it is to cowards I
speak. It is certain that I must die, and my life is of no
worth, or I would offer that in the man-cub’s place. But
for the sake of the Honor of the Pack,—a little matter that
by being without a leader ye have forgotten,—I promise
that if ye let the man-cub go to his own place, I will not,
when my time comes to die, bare one tooth against ye. I
will die without fighting. That will at least save the Pack
three lives. More I cannot do; but if ye will, I can save ye
the shame that comes of killing a brother against whom

30 of 241
there is no fault—a brother spoken for and bought into
the Pack according to the Law of the Jungle.’
‘He is a man—a man—a man!’ snarled the Pack. And
most of the wolves began to gather round Shere Khan,
whose tail was beginning to switch.
‘Now the business is in thy hands,’ said Bagheera to
Mowgli. ‘We can do no more except fight.’
Mowgli stood upright—the fire pot in his hands. Then
he stretched out his arms, and yawned in the face of the
Council; but he was furious with rage and sorrow, for,
wolflike, the wolves had never told him how they hated
him. ‘Listen you!’ he cried. ‘There is no need for this
dog’s jabber. Ye have told me so often tonight that I am a
man (and indeed I would have been a wolf with you to
my life’s end) that I feel your words are true. So I do not
call ye my brothers any more, but sag [dogs], as a man
should. What ye will do, and what ye will not do, is not
yours to say. That matter is with me; and that we may see
the matter more plainly, I, the man, have brought here a
little of the Red Flower which ye, dogs, fear.’
He flung the fire pot on the ground, and some of the
red coals lit a tuft of dried moss that flared up, as all the
Council drew back in terror before the leaping flames.

31 of 241
Mowgli thrust his dead branch into the fire till the
twigs lit and crackled, and whirled it above his head
among the cowering wolves.
‘Thou art the master,’ said Bagheera in an undertone.
‘Save Akela from the death. He was ever thy friend.’
Akela, the grim old wolf who had never asked for
mercy in his life, gave one piteous look at Mowgli as the
boy stood all naked, his long black hair tossing over his
shoulders in the light of the blazing branch that made the
shadows jump and quiver.
‘Good!’ said Mowgli, staring round slowly. ‘I see that
ye are dogs. I go from you to my own people—if they be
my own people. The jungle is shut to me, and I must
forget your talk and your companionship. But I will be
more merciful than ye are. Because I was all but your
brother in blood, I promise that when I am a man among
men I will not betray ye to men as ye have betrayed me.’
He kicked the fire with his foot, and the sparks flew up.
‘There shall be no war between any of us in the Pack. But
here is a debt to pay before I go.’ He strode forward to
where Shere Khan sat blinking stupidly at the flames, and
caught him by the tuft on his chin. Bagheera followed in
case of accidents. ‘Up, dog!’ Mowgli cried. ‘Up, when a
man speaks, or I will set that coat ablaze!’

32 of 241
Shere Khan’s ears lay flat back on his head, and he shut
his eyes, for the blazing branch was very near.
‘This cattle-killer said he would kill me in the Council
because he had not killed me when I was a cub. Thus and
thus, then, do we beat dogs when we are men. Stir a
whisker, Lungri, and I ram the Red Flower down thy
gullet!’ He beat Shere Khan over the head with the
branch, and the tiger whimpered and whined in an agony
of fear.
‘Pah! Singed jungle cat—go now! But remember when
next I come to the Council Rock, as a man should come,
it will be with Shere Khan’s hide on my head. For the
rest, Akela goes free to live as he pleases. Ye will not kill
him, because that is not my will. Nor do I think that ye
will sit here any longer, lolling out your tongues as though
ye were somebodies, instead of dogs whom I drive out—
thus! Go!’ The fire was burning furiously at the end of the
branch, and Mowgli struck right and left round the circle,
and the wolves ran howling with the sparks burning their
fur. At last there were only Akela, Bagheera, and perhaps
ten wolves that had taken Mowgli’s part. Then something
began to hurt Mowgli inside him, as he had never been
hurt in his life before, and he caught his breath and
sobbed, and the tears ran down his face.

33 of 241
‘What is it? What is it?’ he said. ‘I do not wish to leave
the jungle, and I do not know what this is. Am I dying,
Bagheera?’
‘No, Little Brother. That is only tears such as men use,’
said Bagheera. ‘Now I know thou art a man, and a man’s
cub no longer. The jungle is shut indeed to thee
henceforward. Let them fall, Mowgli. They are only tears.’
So Mowgli sat and cried as though his heart would break;
and he had never cried in all his life before.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘I will go to men. But first I must say
farewell to my mother.’ And he went to the cave where
she lived with Father Wolf, and he cried on her coat,
while the four cubs howled miserably.
‘Ye will not forget me?’ said Mowgli.
‘Never while we can follow a trail,’ said the cubs.
‘Come to the foot of the hill when thou art a man, and we
will talk to thee; and we will come into the croplands to
play with thee by night.’
‘Come soon!’ said Father Wolf. ‘Oh, wise little frog,
come again soon; for we be old, thy mother and I.’
‘Come soon,’ said Mother Wolf, ‘little naked son of
mine. For, listen, child of man, I loved thee more than
ever I loved my cubs.’

34 of 241
‘I will surely come,’ said Mowgli. ‘And when I come it
will be to lay out Shere Khan’s hide upon the Council
Rock. Do not forget me! Tell them in the jungle never to
forget me!’
The dawn was beginning to break when Mowgli went
down the hillside alone, to meet those mysterious things
that are called men.

35 of 241
Hunting-Song of the Seeonee
Pack
As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur
belled
Once, twice and again!
And a doe leaped up, and a doe leaped up
From the pond in the wood where the
wild deer sup.
This I, scouting alone, beheld,
Once, twice and again!
As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur
belled
Once, twice and again!
And a wolf stole back, and a wolf stole
back
To carry the word to the waiting pack,
And we sought and we found and we
bayed on his track
Once, twice and again!
As the dawn was breaking the Wolf Pack
yelled
Once, twice and again!
Feet in the jungle that leave no mark!

36 of 241
Eyes that can see in the dark—the dark!
Tongue—give tongue to it! Hark! O hark!
Once, twice and again!
Kaa’s Hunting
His spots are the joy of the Leopard: his
horns are the
Buffalo’s pride.
Be clean, for the strength of the hunter is
known by the
gloss of his hide.
If ye find that the Bullock can toss you, or
the heavy-browed
Sambhur can gore;
Ye need not stop work to inform us: we
knew it ten seasons
before.
Oppress not the cubs of the stranger, but
hail them as Sister
and Brother,
For though they are little and fubsy, it may
be the Bear is
their mother.
‘There is none like to me!’ says the Cub in
the pride of his
earliest kill;
But the jungle is large and the Cub he is

37 of 241
small. Let him
think and be still.
Maxims of Baloo
All that is told here happened some time before
Mowgli was turned out of the Seeonee Wolf Pack, or
revenged himself on Shere Khan the tiger. It was in the
days when Baloo was teaching him the Law of the Jungle.
The big, serious, old brown bear was delighted to have so
quick a pupil, for the young wolves will only learn as
much of the Law of the Jungle as applies to their own
pack and tribe, and run away as soon as they can repeat
the Hunting Verse —‘Feet that make no noise; eyes that
can see in the dark; ears that can hear the winds in their
lairs, and sharp white teeth, all these things are the marks
of our brothers except Tabaqui the Jackal and the Hyaena
whom we hate.’ But Mowgli, as a man-cub, had to learn a
great deal more than this. Sometimes Bagheera the Black
Panther would come lounging through the jungle to see
how his pet was getting on, and would purr with his head
against a tree while Mowgli recited the day’s lesson to
Baloo. The boy could climb almost as well as he could
swim, and swim almost as well as he could run. So Baloo,
the Teacher of the Law, taught him the Wood and Water

38 of 241
Laws: how to tell a rotten branch from a sound one; how
to speak politely to the wild bees when he came upon a
hive of them fifty feet above ground; what to say to Mang
the Bat when he disturbed him in the branches at midday;
and how to warn the water-snakes in the pools before he
splashed down among them. None of the Jungle People
like being disturbed, and all are very ready to fly at an
intruder. Then, too, Mowgli was taught the Strangers’
Hunting Call, which must be repeated aloud till it is
answered, whenever one of the Jungle-People hunts
outside his own grounds. It means, translated, ‘Give me
leave to hunt here because I am hungry.’ And the answer
is, ‘Hunt then for food, but not for pleasure.’
All this will show you how much Mowgli had to learn
by heart, and he grew very tired of saying the same thing
over a hundred times. But, as Baloo said to Bagheera, one
day when Mowgli had been cuffed and run off in a
temper, ‘A man’s cub is a man’s cub, and he must learn all
the Law of the Jungle.’
‘But think how small he is,’ said the Black Panther,
who would have spoiled Mowgli if he had had his own
way. ‘How can his little head carry all thy long talk?’

39 of 241
‘Is there anything in the jungle too little to be killed?
No. That is why I teach him these things, and that is why
I hit him, very softly, when he forgets.’
‘Softly! What dost thou know of softness, old Ironfeet?’
Bagheera grunted. ‘His face is all bruised today by
thy— softness. Ugh.’
‘Better he should be bruised from head to foot by me
who love him than that he should come to harm through
ignorance,’ Baloo answered very earnestly. ‘I am now
teaching him the Master Words of the Jungle that shall
protect him with the birds and the Snake People, and all
that hunt on four feet, except his own pack. He can now
claim protection, if he will only remember the words,
from all in the jungle. Is not that worth a little beating?’
‘Well, look to it then that thou dost not kill the mancub.
He is no tree trunk to sharpen thy blunt claws upon.
But what are those Master Words? I am more likely to
give help than to ask it’ —Bagheera stretched out one paw
and admired the steel-blue, ripping-chisel talons at the end
of it—‘still I should like to know.’
‘I will call Mowgli and he shall say them—if he will.
Come, Little Brother!’
‘My head is ringing like a bee tree,’ said a sullen little
voice over their heads, and Mowgli slid down a tree trunk
eBook brought to you by


40 of 241
very angry and indignant, adding as he reached the
ground: ‘I come for Bagheera and not for thee, fat old
Baloo!’
‘That is all one to me,’ said Baloo, though he was hurt
and grieved. ‘Tell Bagheera, then, the Master Words of
the Jungle that I have taught thee this day.’
‘Master Words for which people?’ said Mowgli,
delighted to show off. ‘The jungle has many tongues. I
know them all.’
‘A little thou knowest, but not much. See, O Bagheera,
they never thank their teacher. Not one small wolfling has
ever come back to thank old Baloo for his teachings. Say
the word for the Hunting-People, then—great scholar.’
‘We be of one blood, ye and I,’ said Mowgli, giving
the words the Bear accent which all the Hunting People
use.
‘Good. Now for the birds.’
Mowgli repeated, with the Kite’s whistle at the end of
the sentence.
‘Now for the Snake-People,’ said Bagheera.
The answer was a perfectly indescribable hiss, and
Mowgli kicked up his feet behind, clapped his hands
together to applaud himself, and jumped on to Bagheera’s
back, where he sat sideways, drumming with his heels on

41 of 241
the glossy skin and making the worst faces he could think
of at Baloo.
‘There—there! That was worth a little bruise,’ said the
brown bear tenderly. ‘Some day thou wilt remember me.’
Then he turned aside to tell Bagheera how he had begged
the Master Words from Hathi the Wild Elephant, who
knows all about these things, and how Hathi had taken
Mowgli down to a pool to get the Snake Word from a
water-snake, because Baloo could not pronounce it, and
how Mowgli was now reasonably safe against all accidents
in the jungle, because neither snake, bird, nor beast would
hurt him.
‘No one then is to be feared,’ Baloo wound up, patting
his big furry stomach with pride.
‘Except his own tribe,’ said Bagheera, under his breath;
and then aloud to Mowgli, ‘Have a care for my ribs, Little
Brother! What is all this dancing up and down?’
Mowgli had been trying to make himself heard by
pulling at Bagheera’s shoulder fur and kicking hard. When
the two listened to him he was shouting at the top of his
voice, ‘And so I shall have a tribe of my own, and lead
them through the branches all day long.’
‘What is this new folly, little dreamer of dreams?’ said
Bagheera.

42 of 241
‘Yes, and throw branches and dirt at old Baloo,’
Mowgli went on. ‘They have promised me this. Ah!’
‘Whoof!’ Baloo’s big paw scooped Mowgli off
Bagheera’s back, and as the boy lay between the big forepaws
he could see the Bear was angry.
‘Mowgli,’ said Baloo, ‘thou hast been talking with the
Bandar-log—the Monkey People.’
Mowgli looked at Bagheera to see if the Panther was
angry too, and Bagheera’s eyes were as hard as jade stones.
‘Thou hast been with the Monkey People—the gray
apes—the people without a law—the eaters of everything.
That is great shame.’
‘When Baloo hurt my head,’ said Mowgli (he was still
on his back), ‘I went away, and the gray apes came down
from the trees and had pity on me. No one else cared.’ He
snuffled a little.
‘The pity of the Monkey People!’ Baloo snorted. ‘The
stillness of the mountain stream! The cool of the summer
sun! And then, man-cub?’
‘And then, and then, they gave me nuts and pleasant
things to eat, and they—they carried me in their arms up
to the top of the trees and said I was their blood brother
except that I had no tail, and should be their leader some
day.’

43 of 241
‘They have no leader,’ said Bagheera. ‘They lie. They
have always lied.’
‘They were very kind and bade me come again. Why
have I never been taken among the Monkey People? They
stand on their feet as I do. They do not hit me with their
hard paws. They play all day. Let me get up! Bad Baloo,
let me up! I will play with them again.’
‘Listen, man-cub,’ said the Bear, and his voice rumbled
like thunder on a hot night. ‘I have taught thee all the
Law of the Jungle for all the peoples of the jungle—except
the Monkey-Folk who live in the trees. They have no
law. They are outcasts. They have no speech of their own,
but use the stolen words which they overhear when they
listen, and peep, and wait up above in the branches. Their
way is not our way. They are without leaders. They have
no remembrance. They boast and chatter and pretend that
they are a great people about to do great affairs in the
jungle, but the falling of a nut turns their minds to
laughter and all is forgotten. We of the jungle have no
dealings with them. We do not drink where the monkeys
drink; we do not go where the monkeys go; we do not
hunt where they hunt; we do not die where they die. Hast
thou ever heard me speak of the Bandar-log till today?’

44 of 241
‘No,’ said Mowgli in a whisper, for the forest was very
still now Baloo had finished.
‘The Jungle-People put them out of their mouths and
out of their minds. They are very many, evil, dirty,
shameless, and they desire, if they have any fixed desire, to
be noticed by the Jungle People. But we do not notice
them even when they throw nuts and filth on our heads.’
He had hardly spoken when a shower of nuts and twigs
spattered down through the branches; and they could hear
coughings and howlings and angry jumpings high up in
the air among the thin branches.
‘The Monkey-People are forbidden,’ said Baloo,
‘forbidden to the Jungle-People. Remember.’
‘Forbidden,’ said Bagheera, ‘but I still think Baloo
should have warned thee against them.’
‘I—I? How was I to guess he would play with such
dirt. The Monkey People! Faugh!’
A fresh shower came down on their heads and the two
trotted away, taking Mowgli with them. What Baloo had
said about the monkeys was perfectly true. They belonged
to the tree-tops, and as beasts very seldom look up, there
was no occasion for the monkeys and the Jungle-People to
cross each other’s path. But whenever they found a sick
wolf, or a wounded tiger, or bear, the monkeys would

45 of 241
torment him, and would throw sticks and nuts at any beast
for fun and in the hope of being noticed. Then they
would howl and shriek senseless songs, and invite the
Jungle-People to climb up their trees and fight them, or
would start furious battles over nothing among themselves,
and leave the dead monkeys where the Jungle-People
could see them. They were always just going to have a
leader, and laws and customs of their own, but they never
did, because their memories would not hold over from
day to day, and so they compromised things by making up
a saying, ‘What the Bandar-log think now the jungle will
think later,’ and that comforted them a great deal. None of
the beasts could reach them, but on the other hand none
of the beasts would notice them, and that was why they
were so pleased when Mowgli came to play with them,
and they heard how angry Baloo was.
They never meant to do any more—the Bandar-log
never mean anything at all; but one of them invented
what seemed to him a brilliant idea, and he told all the
others that Mowgli would be a useful person to keep in
the tribe, because he could weave sticks together for
protection from the wind; so, if they caught him, they
could make him teach them. Of course Mowgli, as a
woodcutter’s child, inherited all sorts of instincts, and used

46 of 241
to make little huts of fallen branches without thinking
how he came to do it. The Monkey-People, watching in
the trees, considered his play most wonderful. This time,
they said, they were really going to have a leader and
become the wisest people in the jungle —so wise that
everyone else would notice and envy them. Therefore
they followed Baloo and Bagheera and Mowgli through
the jungle very quietly till it was time for the midday nap,
and Mowgli, who was very much ashamed of himself,
slept between the Panther and the Bear, resolving to have
no more to do with the Monkey People.
The next thing he remembered was feeling hands on
his legs and arms—hard, strong, little hands—and then a
swash of branches in his face, and then he was staring
down through the swaying boughs as Baloo woke the
jungle with his deep cries and Bagheera bounded up the
trunk with every tooth bared. The Bandar-log howled
with triumph and scuffled away to the upper branches
where Bagheera dared not follow, shouting: ‘He has
noticed us! Bagheera has noticed us. All the Jungle-People
admire us for our skill and our cunning.’ Then they began
their flight; and the flight of the Monkey-People through
tree-land is one of the things nobody can describe. They
have their regular roads and crossroads, up hills and down

47 of 241
hills, all laid out from fifty to seventy or a hundred feet
above ground, and by these they can travel even at night if
necessary. Two of the strongest monkeys caught Mowgli
under the arms and swung off with him through the
treetops, twenty feet at a bound. Had they been alone they
could have gone twice as fast, but the boy’s weight held
them back. Sick and giddy as Mowgli was he could not
help enjoying the wild rush, though the glimpses of earth
far down below frightened him, and the terrible check and
jerk at the end of the swing over nothing but empty air
brought his heart between his teeth. His escort would rush
him up a tree till he felt the thinnest topmost branches
crackle and bend under them, and then with a cough and
a whoop would fling themselves into the air outward and
downward, and bring up, hanging by their hands or their
feet to the lower limbs of the next tree. Sometimes he
could see for miles and miles across the still green jungle,
as a man on the top of a mast can see for miles across the
sea, and then the branches and leaves would lash him
across the face, and he and his two guards would be almost
down to earth again. So, bounding and crashing and
whooping and yelling, the whole tribe of Bandar-log
swept along the tree-roads with Mowgli their prisoner.

48 of 241
For a time he was afraid of being dropped. Then he
grew angry but knew better than to struggle, and then he
began to think. The first thing was to send back word to
Baloo and Bagheera, for, at the pace the monkeys were
going, he knew his friends would be left far behind. It was
useless to look down, for he could only see the topsides of
the branches, so he stared upward and saw, far away in the
blue, Rann the Kite balancing and wheeling as he kept
watch over the jungle waiting for things to die. Rann saw
that the monkeys were carrying something, and dropped a
few hundred yards to find out whether their load was
good to eat. He whistled with surprise when he saw
Mowgli being dragged up to a treetop and heard him give
the Kite call for—‘We be of one blood, thou and I.’ The
waves of the branches closed over the boy, but Chil
balanced away to the next tree in time to see the little
brown face come up again. ‘Mark my trail!’ Mowgli
shouted. ‘Tell Baloo of the Seeonee Pack and Bagheera of
the Council Rock.’
‘In whose name, Brother?’ Rann had never seen
Mowgli before, though of course he had heard of him.
‘Mowgli, the Frog. Man-cub they call me! Mark my
tra-il!’

49 of 241
The last words were shrieked as he was being swung
through the air, but Rann nodded and rose up till he
looked no bigger than a speck of dust, and there he hung,
watching with his telescope eyes the swaying of the
treetops as Mowgli’s escort whirled along.
‘They never go far,’ he said with a chuckle. ‘They
never do what they set out to do. Always pecking at new
things are the Bandar-log. This time, if I have any eyesight,
they have pecked down trouble for themselves, for
Baloo is no fledgling and Bagheera can, as I know, kill
more than goats.’
So he rocked on his wings, his feet gathered up under
him, and waited.
Meantime, Baloo and Bagheera were furious with rage
and grief. Bagheera climbed as he had never climbed
before, but the thin branches broke beneath his weight,
and he slipped down, his claws full of bark.
‘Why didst thou not warn the man-cub?’ he roared to
poor Baloo, who had set off at a clumsy trot in the hope
of overtaking the monkeys. ‘What was the use of half
slaying him with blows if thou didst not warn him?’
‘Haste! O haste! We—we may catch them yet!’ Baloo
panted.