The Adventure of the Cheap Flat
So far, in the cases which I have recorded, Poirot's investigations
have started from the central fact, whether murder or robbery, and
have proceeded from thence by a process of logical deduction to
the final triumphant unravelling. In the events I am now about to
chronicle, a remarkable chain of circumstances led from the
apparently trivial incidents which first attracted Poirot's attention to
the sinister happenings which completed a most unusual case.
I had been spending the evening with an old friend of mine, Gerald
Parker. There had been, perhaps, about half a dozen people there
besides my host and myself, and the talk fell, as it was bound to do
sooner or later wherever Parker found himself, on the subject of
house-hunting in London. Houses and flats were Parker's special
hobby. Since the end of the War, he had occupied at least half a
dozen different flats and maisonnettes. No sooner was he settled
anywhere than he would light unexpectedly upon a new find, and
would forthwith depart bag and baggage. His moves were nearly
always accomplished at a slight pecuniary gain, for he had a
shrewd business head, but it was sheer love of the sport that
actuated him, and not a desire to make money at it. We listened to
Parker for some time with the respect of the novice for the expert.
Then it was our turn, and a perfect babel of tongues was let loose.
Finally the floor was left to Mrs Robinson, a charming little bride
who was there with her husband. I had never met them before, as
Robinson was only a recent acquaintance of Parker's.
'Talking of flats,' she said, 'have you heard of our piece of luck, Mr
Parker? We've got a flat - at last! In Montagu Mansions.'
'Well,' said Parker, 'I've always said there are plenty of flats - at a
price!'
'Yes, but this isn't at a price. It's dirt cheap. Eighty pounds a year!'
'But - but Montagu Mansions is just off Knightsbridge, isn't it? Big
handsome building. Or are you talking of a poor relation of the
same name stuck in the slums somewhere?'
'No, it's the Knightsbridge one. That's what makes it so wonderful.'
'Wonderful is the word! It's a blinking miracle. But there must be a
catch somewhere. Big premium, I suppose?'
'No premium!'
'No prem - oh, hold my head, somebody!' groaned Parker.
'But we've got to buy the furniture,' continued Mrs Robinson.
'Ah!' Parker bristled up. 'I knew there was a catch!'
'For fifty pounds. And it's beautifully furnished!'
'I give it up,' said Parker. 'The present occupants must be lunatics
with a taste for philanthropy.'
Mrs Robinson was looking a little troubled. A little pucker appeared
between her dainty brows.
'It is queer, isn't it? You don't think that - that - the place is
haunted?'
'Never heard of a haunted flat,' declared Parker decisively.
'No-o.' Mrs Robinson appeared far from convinced. 'But there were
several things about it all that struck me as - well, queer.'
'For instance - ' I suggested.
'Ah,' said Parker, 'our criminal expert's attention is aroused!
Unburden yourself to him, Mrs Robinson. Hastings is a great
unraveller of mysteries.'
I laughed, embarrassed, but not wholly displeased with the rôle
thrust upon me.
'Oh, not really queer, Captain Hastings, but when we went to the
agents, Stosser and Paul - we hadn't tried them before because
they only have the expensive Mayfair flats, but we thought at any
rate it would do no harm - everything they offered us was four and
five hundred a year, or else huge premiums, and then, just as we
were going, they mentioned that they had a flat at eighty, but that
they doubted if it would be any good our going there, because it
had been on their books some time and they had sent so many
people to see it that it was almost sure to be taken - "snapped up"
as the clerk put it - only people were so tiresome in not letting them
know, and then they went on sending, and people get annoyed at
being sent to a place that had, perhaps, been let some time.'
Mrs Robinson paused for some much needed breath, and then
continued:
'We thanked him, and said that we quite understood it would
probably be no good, but that we should like an order all the same -
just in case. And we went there straight away in a taxi, for, after all,
you never know. No 4 was on the second floor, and just as we were
waiting for the lift, Elsie Ferguson - she's a friend of mine, Captain
Hastings, and they are looking for a flat too - came hurrying down
the stairs. "Ahead of you for once, my dear," she said. "But it's no
good. It's already let." That seemed to finish it, but - well, as John
said, the place was very cheap, we could afford to give more, and
perhaps if we offered a premium. A horrid thing to do, of course,
and I feel quite ashamed of telling you, but you know what flathunting
is.'
I assured her that I was well aware that in the struggle for houseroom
the baser side of human nature frequently triumphed over the
higher, and that the well-known rule of dog eat dog always applied.
'So we went up and, would you believe it, the flat wasn't let at all.
We were shown over it by the maid, and then we saw the mistress,
and the thing was settled then and there. Immediate possession
and fifty pounds for the furniture. We signed the agreement next
day, and we are to move in tomorrow!' Mrs Robinson paused
triumphantly.
'And what about Mrs Ferguson?' asked Parker. 'Let's have your
deductions, Hastings.'
'"Obvious, my dear Watson,"' I quoted lightly. 'She went to the
wrong flat.'
'Oh, Captain Hastings, how clever of you!' cried Mrs Robinson
admiringly.
I rather wished Poirot had been there. Sometimes I have the feeling
that he rather underestimates my capabilities.
II
The whole thing was rather amusing, and I propounded the thing as
a mock problem to Poirot on the following morning. He seemed
interested, and questioned me rather narrowly as to the rents of
flats in various localities.
'A curious story,' he said thoughtfully. 'Excuse me, Hastings, I must
take a short stroll.'
When he returned, about an hour later, his eyes were gleaming with
a peculiar excitement. He laid his stick on the table, and brushed
the nap of his hat with his usual tender care before he spoke.
'It is as well, mon ami, that we have no affairs of moment on hand.
We can devote ourselves wholly to the present investigation.'
'What investigation are you talking about?'
'The remarkable cheapness of your friend, Mrs Robinson's, new
flat.'
'Poirot, you are not serious!'
'I am most serious. Figure to yourself, my friend, that the real rent
of those flats is £350. I have just ascertained that from the
landlord's agents. And yet this particular flat is being sublet at
eighty pounds! Why?'
'There must be something wrong with it. Perhaps it is haunted, as
Mrs Robinson suggested.'
Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner.
'Then again how curious it is that her friend tells her the flat is let,
and, when she goes up, behold, it is not so at all!'
'But surely you agree with me that the other woman must have gone
to the wrong flat. That is the only possible solution.'
'You may or may not be right on that point, Hastings. The fact still
remains that numerous other applicants were sent to see it, and
yet, in spite of its remarkable cheapness, it was still in the market
when Mrs Robinson arrived.'
'That shows that there must be something wrong about it.'
'Mrs Robinson did not seem to notice anything amiss. Very curious,
is it not? Did she impress you as being a truthful woman, Hastings?'
'She was a delightful creature!'
'Evidemment! since she renders you incapable of replying to my
question. Describe her to me, then.'
'Well, she's tall and fair; her hair's really a beautiful shade of auburn
- '
'Always you have had a penchant for auburn hair!' murmured
Poirot. 'But continue.'
'Blue eyes and a very nice complexion and - well, that's all, I think,' I
concluded lamely.
'And her husband?'
'Oh, he's quite a nice fellow - nothing startling.'
'Dark or fair?'
'I don't know - betwixt and between, and just an ordinary sort of
face.'
Poirot nodded.
'Yes, there are hundreds of these average men - and, anyway, you
bring more sympathy and appreciation to your description of
women. Do you know anything about these people? Does Parker
know them well?'
'They are just recent acquaintances, I believe. But surely, Poirot,
you don't think for an instant - '
Poirot raised his hand.
'Tout doucement, mon ami. Have I said that I think anything? All I
say is - it is a curious story. And there is nothing to throw light upon
it; except perhaps the lady's name, eh, Hastings?'
'Her name is Stella,' I said stiffly, 'but I don't see - '
Poirot interrupted me with a tremendous chuckle. Something
seemed to be amusing him vastly.
'And Stella means a star, does it not? Famous!'
'What on earth -? '
'And stars give light! Voilà! Calm yourself, Hastings. Do not put on
that air of injured dignity. Come, we will go to Montagu Mansions
and make a few inquiries.'
I accompanied him, nothing loath. The Mansions were a handsome
block of buildings in excellent repair. A uniformed porter was
sunning himself on the threshold, and it was to him that Poirot
addressed himself:
'Pardon, but could you tell me if a Mr and Mrs Robinson reside
here?'
The porter was a man of few words and apparently of a sour or
suspicious disposition. He hardly looked at us and grunted out:
'No 4. Second floor.'
'I thank you. Can you tell me how long they have been here?'
'Six months.'
I started forward in amazement, conscious as I did so of Poirot's
malicious grin.
'Impossible,' I cried. 'You must be making a mistake.'
'Six months.'
'Are you sure? The lady I mean is tall and fair with reddish gold hair
and - '
'That's 'er,' said the porter. 'Come in the Michaelmas quarter, they
did. Just six months ago.'
He appeared to lose interest in us and retreated slowly up the hall. I
followed Poirot outside.
'Eh bien, Hastings?' my friend demanded slyly. 'Are you so sure now
that delightful women always speak the truth?'
I did not reply.
Poirot had steered his way into Brompton Road before I asked him
what he was going to do and where we were going.
'To the house agents, Hastings. I have a great desire to have a flat
in Montagu Mansions. If I am not mistaken, several interesting
things will take place there before long.'
We were fortunate in our quest. No 8, on the fourth floor, was to be
let furnished at ten guineas a week. Poirot promptly took it for a
month. Outside in the street again, he silenced my protests:
'But I make money nowadays! Why should I not indulge a whim? By
the way, Hastings, have you a revolver?'
'Yes - somewhere,' I answered, slightly thrilled. 'Do you think - '
'That you will need it? It is quite possible. The idea pleases you, I
see. Always the spectacular and romantic appeals to you.'
The following day saw us installed in our temporary home. The flat
was pleasantly furnished. It occupied the same position in the
building as that of the Robinsons, but was two floors higher.
The day after our installation was a Sunday. In the afternoon, Poirot
left the front door ajar, and summoned me hastily as a bang
reverberated from somewhere below.
'Look over the banisters. Are those your friends? Do not let them
see you.'
I craned my neck over the staircase.
'That's them,' I declared in an ungrammatical whisper.
'Good. Wait awhile.'
About half an hour later, a young woman emerged in brilliant and
varied clothing. With a sigh of satisfaction, Poirot tiptoed back into
the flat.
'C'est ça. After the master and mistress, the maid. The flat should
now be empty.'
'What are we going to do?' I asked uneasily.
Poirot had trotted briskly into the scullery and was hauling at the
rope of the coal-lift.
'We are about to descend after the method of the dustbins,' he
explained cheerfully. 'No one will observe us. The Sunday concert,
the Sunday 'afternoon out,' and finally the Sunday nap after the
Sunday dinner of England - le rosbif - all these will distract attention
from the doings of Hercule Poirot. Come, my friend.'
He stepped into the rough wooden contrivance and I followed him
gingerly.
'Are we going to break into the flat?' I asked dubiously.
Poirot's answer was not too reassuring:
'Not precisely today,' he replied.
Pulling on the rope, we descended slowly till we reached the
second floor. Poirot uttered an exclamation of satisfaction as he
perceived that the wooden door into the scullery was open.
'You observe? Never do they bolt these doors in the daytime. And
yet anyone could mount or descend as we have done. At night, yes -
though not always then - and it is against that that we are going to
make provision.'
He had drawn some tools from his pocket as he spoke, and at once
set deftly to work, his object being to arrange the bolt so that it
could be pulled back from the lift. The operation only occupied
about three minutes. Then Poirot returned the tools to his pocket,
and we reascended once more to our own domain.
III
On Monday Poirot was out all day, but when he returned in the
evening he flung himself into his chair with a sigh of satisfaction.
'Hastings, shall I recount to you a little history? A story after your
own heart and which will remind you of your favourite cinema?'
'Go ahead,' I laughed. 'I presume that it is a true story, not one of
your efforts of fancy.'
'It is true enough. Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard will vouch for its
accuracy, since it was through his kind offices that it came to my
ears. Listen, Hastings. A little over six months ago some important
Naval plans were stolen from an American Government
department. They showed the position of some of the most
important Harbour defences, and would be worth a considerable
sum to any foreign Government - that of Japan, for example.
Suspicion fell upon a young man named Luigi Valdarno, an Italian
by birth, who was employed in a minor capacity in the Department
and who was missing at the same time as the papers. Whether Luigi
Valdarno was the thief or not, he was found two days later on the
East Side in New York, shot dead. The papers were not on him. Now
for some time past Luigi Valdarno had been going about with a Miss
Elsa Hardt, a young concert singer who had recently appeared and
who lived with a brother in an apartment in Washington. Nothing
was known of the antecedents of Miss Elsa Hardt, and she
disappeared suddenly about the time of Valdarno's death. There
are reasons for believing that she was in reality an accomplished
international spy who has done much nefarious work under various
aliases. The American Secret Service, whilst doing their best to
trace her, also kept an eye upon certain insignificant Japanese
gentlemen living in Washington. They felt pretty certain that, when
Elsa Hardt had covered her tracks sufficiently, she would approach
the gentlemen in question. One of them left suddenly for England a
fortnight ago. On the face of it, therefore, it would seem that Elsa
Hardt is in England.' Poirot paused, and then added softly: 'The
official description of Elsa Hardt is: Height 5 ft 7, eyes blue, hair
auburn, fair complexion, nose straight, no special distinguishing
marks.'
'Mrs Robinson!' I gasped.
'Well, there is a chance of it, anyhow,' amended Poirot. 'Also, I learn
that a swarthy man, a foreigner of some kind, was inquiring about
the occupants of No 4 only this morning. Therefore, mon ami, I fear
that you must forswear your beauty sleep tonight, and join me in my
all-night vigil in that flat below - armed with that excellent revolver
of yours, bien entendu!'
'Rather,' I cried with enthusiasm. 'When shall we start?'
'The hour of midnight is both solemn and suitable, I fancy. Nothing
is likely to occur before then.'
At twelve o'clock precisely, we crept cautiously into the coal-lift
and lowered ourselves to the second floor. Under Poirot's
manipulation, the wooden door quickly swung inwards, and we
climbed into the flat. From the scullery we passed into the kitchen
where we established ourselves comfortably in two chairs with the
door into the hall ajar.
'Now we have but to wait,' said Poirot contentedly, closing his eyes.
To me, the waiting appeared endless. I was terrified of going to
sleep. Just when it seemed to me that I had been there about eight
hours - and had, as I found out afterwards, in reality been exactly
one hour and twenty minutes - a faint scratching sound came to my
ears. Poirot's hand touched mine. I rose, and together we moved
carefully in the direction of the hall. The noise came from there.
Poirot placed his lips to my ear.
'Outside the front door. They are cutting out the lock. When I give
the word, not before, fall upon him from behind and hold him fast.
Be careful, he will have a knife.'
Presently there was a rending sound, and a little circle of light
appeared through the door. It was extinguished immediately and
then the door was slowly opened. Poirot and I flattened ourselves
against the wall. I heard a man's breathing as he passed us. Then
he flashed on his torch, and as he did so, Poirot hissed in my ear:
'Allez.'
We sprang together, Poirot with a quick movement enveloped the
intruder's head with a light woollen scarf whilst I pinioned his arms.
The whole affair was quick and noiseless. I twisted a dagger from
his hand, and as Poirot brought down the scarf from his eyes, whilst
keeping it wound tightly round his mouth, I jerked up my revolver
where he could see it and understand that resistance was useless.
As he ceased to struggle Poirot put his mouth close to his ear and
began to whisper rapidly. After a minute the man nodded. Then
enjoining silence with a movement of the hand, Poirot led the way
out of the flat and down the stairs. Our captive followed, and I
brought up the rear with the revolver. When we were out in the
street, Poirot turned to me.
'There is a taxi waiting just round the corner. Give me the revolver.
We shall not need it now.'
'But if this fellow tries to escape?'
Poirot smiled.
'He will not.'
I returned in a minute with the waiting taxi. The scarf had been
unwound from the stranger's face, and I gave a start of surprise.
'He's not a Jap,' I ejaculated in a whisper to Poirot.
'Observation was always your strong point, Hastings! Nothing
escapes you. No, the man is not a Jap. He is an Italian.'
We got into the taxi, and Poirot gave the driver an address in St
John's Wood. I was by now completely fogged. I did not like to ask
Poirot where we were going in front of our captive, and strove in
vain to obtain some light upon the proceedings.
We alighted at the door of a small house standing back from the
road. A returning wayfarer, slightly drunk, was lurching along the
pavement and almost collided with Poirot, who said something
sharply to him which I did not catch. All three of us went up the
steps of the house. Poirot rang the bell and motioned us to stand a
little aside. There was no answer and he rang again and then seized
the knocker which he plied for some minutes vigorously.
A light appeared suddenly above the fanlight, and the door was
opened cautiously a little way.
'What the devil do you want?' a man's voice demanded harshly.
'I want the doctor. My wife is taken ill.'
'There's no doctor here.'
The man prepared to shut the door, but Poirot thrust his foot in
adroitly. He became suddenly a perfect caricature of an infuriated
Frenchman.
'What you say, there is no doctor? I will have the law on you. You
must come! I will stay here and ring and knock all night.'
'My dear sir - ' The door was opened again, the man, clad in a
dressing-gown and slippers, stepped forward to pacify Poirot with
an uneasy glance round.
'I will call the police.'
Poirot prepared to descend the steps.
'No, don't do that for Heaven's sake!' The man dashed after him.
With a neat push Poirot sent him staggering down the steps. In
another minute all three of us were inside the door and it was
pushed to and bolted.
'Quick - in here.' Poirot led the way into the nearest room, switching
on the light as he did so. 'And you - behind the curtain.'
'Si, signor,' said the Italian and slid rapidly behind the full folds of
rose-coloured velvet which draped the embrasure of the window.
Not a minute too soon. Just as he disappeared from view a woman
rushed into the room. She was tall with reddish hair and held a
scarlet kimono round her slender form.
'Where is my husband?' she cried, with a quick frightened glance.
'Who are you?'
Poirot stepped forward with a bow.
'It is to be hoped your husband will not suffer from a chill. I
observed that he had slippers on his feet, and that his dressinggown
was a warm one.'
'Who are you? What are you doing in my house?'
'It is true that none of us have the pleasure of your acquaintance,
madame. It is especially to be regretted as one of our number has
come specially from New York in order to meet you.'
The curtains parted and the Italian stepped out. To my horror I
observed that he was brandishing my revolver, which Poirot must
doubtless have put down through inadvertence in the cab.
The woman gave a piercing scream and turned to fly, but Poirot
was standing in front of the closed door.
'Let me by,' she shrieked. 'He will murder me.'
'Who was it dat croaked Luigi Valdarno?' asked the Italian hoarsely,
brandishing the weapon, and sweeping each one of us with it. We
dared not move.
'My God, Poirot, this is awful. What shall we do?' I cried.
'You will oblige me by refraining from talking so much, Hastings. I
can assure you that our friend will not shoot until I give the word.'
'You’ sure o' dat, eh?' said the Italian, leering unpleasantly.
It was more than I was, but the woman turned to Poirot like a flash.
'What is it you want?'
Poirot bowed.
'I do not think it is necessary to insult Miss Elsa Hardt's intelligence
by telling her.'
With a swift movement, the woman snatched up a big black velvet
cat which served as a cover for the telephone.
'They are stitched in the lining of that.'
'Clever,' murmured Poirot appreciatively. He stood aside from the
door. 'Good evening, madame. I will detain your friend from New
York whilst you make your getaway.'
'Whatta fool!' roared the big Italian, and raising the revolver he fired
point-blank at the woman's retreating figure just as I flung myself
upon him.
But the weapon merely clicked harmlessly and Poirot's voice rose
in mild reproof.
'Never will you trust your old friend, Hastings. I do not care for my
friends to carry loaded pistols about with them and never would I
permit a mere acquaintance to do so. No, no, mon ami,' This to the
Italian who was swearing hoarsely. Poirot continued to address him
in a tone of mild reproof: 'See now, what I have done for you. I have
saved you from being hanged. And do not think that our beautiful
lady will escape. No, no, the house is watched, back and front.
Straight into the arms of the police they will go. Is not that a
beautiful and consoling thought? Yes, you may leave the room now.
But be careful - be very careful. I - Ah, he is gone! And my friend
Hastings looks at me with eyes of reproach. But it was all so simple!
It was clear, from the first, that out of several hundred, probably,
applicants for No 4 Montagu Mansions, only the Robinsons were
considered suitable. Why? What was there that singled them out
from the rest - at practically a glance. Their appearance? Possibly,
but it was not so unusual. Their name, then!'
'But there's nothing unusual about the name of Robinson,' I cried.
'It's quite a common name.'
'Ah! Sapristi, but exactly! That was the point. Elsa Hardt and her
husband, or brother or whatever he really is, come from New York,
and take a flat in the name of Mr and Mrs Robinson. Suddenly they
learn that one of these secret societies, the Mafia, or the Camorra,
to which doubtless Luigi Valdarno belonged, is on their track. What
do they do? They hit on a scheme of transparent simplicity.
Evidently they knew that their pursuers were not personally
acquainted with either of them. What, then, can be simpler? They
offer the flat at an absurdly low rental. Of the thousands of young
couples in London looking for flats, there cannot fail to be several
Robinsons. It is only a matter of waiting. If you will look at the name
of Robinson in the telephone directory, you will realize that a fairhaired
Mrs Robinson was pretty sure to come along sooner or later.
Then what will happen? The avenger arrives. He knows the name,
he knows the address. He strikes! All is over, vengeance is
satisfied, and Miss Elsa Hardt has escaped by the skin of her teeth
once more. By the way, Hastings, you must present me to the real
Mrs Robinson - that delightful and truthful creature! What will they
think when they find their flat has been broken into! We must hurry
back. Ah, that sounds like Japp and his friends arriving.'
A mighty tattoo sounded on the knocker.
'How did you know this address?' I asked as I followed Poirot out
into the hall. 'Oh, of course, you had the first Mrs Robinson followed
when she left the other flat.'
'A la bonne heure, Hastings. You use your grey cells at last. Now for
a little surprise for Japp.'
Softly unbolting the door, he stuck the cat's head round the edge
and ejaculated a piercing 'Miaow.'
The Scotland Yard inspector, who was standing outside with
another man, jumped in spite of himself.
'Oh, it's only Monsieur Poirot at one of his little jokes!' he exclaimed,
as Poirot's head followed that of the cat. 'Let us in, moosior.'
'You have our friends safe and sound? '
'Yes, we've got the birds all right. But they hadn't got the goods with
them.'
'I see. So you come to search. Well, I am about to depart with
Hastings, but I should like to give you a little lecture upon the
history and habits of the domestic cat.'
'For the Lord's sake, have you gone completely balmy?'
'The cat,' declaimed Poirot, 'was worshipped by the ancient
Egyptians. It is still regarded as a symbol of good luck if a black cat
crosses your path. This cat crossed your path tonight, Japp. To
speak of the interior of any animal or any person is not, I know,
considered polite in England. But the interior of this cat is perfectly
delicate. I refer to the lining.'
With a sudden grunt, the second man seized the cat from Poirot's
hand.
'Oh, I forgot to introduce you,' said Japp. 'Mr Poirot, this is Mr Burt
of the United States Secret Service.'
The American's trained fingers had felt what he was looking for. He
held out his hand, and for a moment speech failed him. Then he
rose to the occasion.
'Pleased to meet you,' said Mr Burt.
The Mystery of Hunter's Lodge
'After all,' murmured Poirot, 'it is possible that I shall not die this
time.'
Coming from a convalescent influenza patient, I hailed the remark
as showing a beneficial optimism. I myself had been the first
sufferer from the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down. He was
now sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows, his head muffled in a
woollen shawl, and was slowly sipping a particularly noxious tisane
which I had prepared according to his directions. His eye rested
with pleasure upon a neatly graduated row of medicine bottles
which adorned the mantelpiece.
'Yes, yes,' my little friend continued. 'Once more shall I be myself
again, the great Hercule Poirot, the terror of evildoers! Figure to
yourself, mon ami, that I have a little paragraph to myself in Society
Gossip. But yes! Here it is: "Go it - criminals - all out! Hercule Poirot
- and believe me, girls, he's some Hercules! - our own pet society
detective can't get a grip on you. 'Cause why? 'Cause he's got la
grippe himself"!'
I laughed.
'Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming quite a public character.
And fortunately you haven't missed anything of particular interest
during this time.'
'That is true. The few cases I have had to decline did not fill me with
any regret.'
Our landlady stuck her head in at the door.
'There's a gentleman downstairs. Says he must see Monsieur Poirot
or you, Captain. Seeing as he was in a great to-do - and with all that
quite the gentleman - I brought up 'is card.'
She handed me the bit of pasteboard. 'Mr Roger Havering,' I read.
Poirot motioned with his head towards the bookcase, and I
obediently pulled forth Who's Who. Poirot took it from me and
scanned the pages rapidly.
'Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married 1913 Zoe, fourth
daughter of William Crabb.'
'H'm!' I said. 'I rather fancy that's the girl who used to act at the
Frivolity - only she called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember she
married some young man about town just before the War.'
'Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down and hear what our
visitor's particular little trouble is? Make him all my excuses.'
Roger Havering was a man of about forty, well set up and of smart
appearance. His face, however, was haggard, and he was evidently
labouring under great agitation.
'Captain Hastings? You are Monsieur Poirot's partner, I understand.
It is imperative that he should come with me to Derbyshire today.'
'I'm afraid that's impossible,' I replied. 'Poirot is ill in bed -
influenza.'
His face fell.
'Dear me, that is a great blow to me.'
'The matter on which you want to consult him is serious?'
'My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend I have in the world, was
foully murdered last night.'
'Here in London?'
'No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and received a telegram from my
wife this morning. Immediately upon its receipt I determined to
come round and beg Monsieur Poirot to undertake the case.'
'If you will excuse me a minute,' I said, struck by a sudden idea.
I rushed upstairs, and in a few brief words acquainted Poirot with
the situation. He took any further words out of my mouth.
'I see. I see. You want to go yourself, is it not so? Well, why not? You
should know my methods by now. All I ask is that you should report
to me fully every day, and follow implicitly any instructions I may
wire you.'
To this I willingly agreed.
II
An hour later I was sitting opposite Mr Havering in a first-class
carriage on the Midland Railway, speeding rapidly away from
London.
'To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must understand that
Hunter's Lodge, where we are going, and where the tragedy took
place, is only a small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire
moors. Our real home is near Newmarket, and we usually rent a flat
in town for the season. Hunter's Lodge is looked after by a
housekeeper who is quite capable of doing all we need when we
run down for an occasional weekend. Of course, during the
shooting season, we take down some of our own servants from
Newmarket. My uncle, Mr Harrington Pace (as you may know, my
mother was a Miss Pace of New York), has, for the last three years,
made his home with us. He never got on well with my father, or my
elder brother, and I suspect that my being somewhat of a prodigal
son myself rather increased than diminished his affection towards
me. Of course I am a poor man, and my uncle was a rich one - in
other words, he paid the piper! But, though exacting in many ways,
he was not really hard to get on with, and we all three lived very
harmoniously together. Two days ago my uncle, rather wearied
with some recent gaieties of ours in town, suggested that we
should run down to Derbyshire for a day or two. My wife
telegraphed to Mrs Middleton, the housekeeper, and we went down
that same afternoon. Yesterday evening I was forced to return to
town, but my wife and my uncle remained on. This morning I
received this telegram.' He handed it over to me:
'Come at once uncle Harrington murdered last night bring good
detective if you can but do come - Zoe.'
'Then, as yet you know no details?'
'No, I suppose it will be in the evening papers. Without doubt the
police are in charge.'
It was about three o'clock when we arrived at the little station of
Elmer's Dale. From there a five-mile drive brought us to a small grey
stone building in the midst of the rugged moors.
'A lonely place,' I observed with a shiver.
Havering nodded.
'I shall try and get rid of it. I could never live here again.'
We unlatched the gate and were walking up the narrow path to the
oak door when a familiar figure emerged and came to meet us.
'Japp!' I ejaculated.
The Scotland Yard inspector grinned at me in a friendly fashion
before addressing my companion.
'Mr Havering, I think? I've been sent down from London to take
charge of this case, and I'd like a word with you, if I may, sir.'
'My wife - '
'I've seen your good lady, sir - and the housekeeper. I won't keep
you a moment, but I'm anxious to get back to the village now that
I've seen all there is to see here.'
'I know nothing as yet as to what - '
'Ex-actly,' said Japp soothingly. 'But there are just one or two little
points I'd like your opinion about all the same. Captain Hastings
here, he knows me, and he'll go on up to the house and tell them
you're coming. What have you done with the little man, by the way,
Captain Hastings?'
'He's ill in bed with influenza.'
'Is he now? I'm sorry to hear that. Rather the case of the cart
without the horse, your being here without him, isn't it?'
And on his rather ill-timed jest I went on to the house. I rang the
bell, as Japp had closed the door behind him. After some moments
it was opened to me by a middle-aged woman in black.
'Mr Havering will be here in a moment,' I explained. 'He has been
detained by the inspector. I have come down with him from London
to look into the case. Perhaps you can tell me briefly what occurred
last night.'
'Come inside, sir.' She closed the door behind me, and we stood in
the dimly-lighted hall. 'It was after dinner last night, sir, that the
man came. He asked to see Mr Pace, sir, and, seeing that he spoke
the same way, I thought it was an American gentleman friend of Mr
Pace's and I showed him into the gun-room, and then went to tell Mr
Pace. He wouldn't give any name, which, of course, was a bit odd,
now I come to think of it. I told Mr Pace, and he seemed puzzled
like, but he said to the mistress: "Excuse me, Zoe, while I just see
what this fellow wants." He went off to the gun-room, and I went
back to the kitchen, but after a while I heard loud voices, as if they
were quarrelling, and I came out into the hall. At the same time, the
mistress she comes out too, and just then there was a shot and then
a dreadful silence. We both ran to the gun-room door, but it was
locked and we had to go round to the window. It was open, and
there inside was Mr Pace, all shot and bleeding.'
'What became of the man?'
'He must have got away through the window, sir, before we got to
it.'
'And then?'
'Mrs Havering sent me to fetch the police. Five miles to walk it was.
They came back with me, and the constable he stayed all night, and
this morning the police gentleman from London arrived.'
'What was this man like who called to see Mr Pace?'
The housekeeper reflected.
'He had a black beard, sir, and was about middle-aged, and had on
a light overcoat. Beyond the fact that he spoke like an American I
didn't notice much about him.'
'I see. Now I wonder if I can see Mrs Havering?'
'She's upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?'
'If you please. Tell her that Mr Havering is outside with Inspector
Japp, and that the gentleman he has brought back with him from
London is anxious to speak to her as soon as possible.'
'Very good, sir.'
I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the facts. Japp had two or
three hours' start of me, and his anxiety to be gone made me keen
to be close at his heels.
Mrs Havering did not keep me waiting long. In a few minutes I heard
a light step descending the stairs, and looked up to see a very
handsome young woman coming towards me. She wore a flamecoloured
jumper, that set off the slender boyishness of her figure.
On her dark head was a little hat of flame-coloured leather. Even
the present tragedy could not dim the vitality of her personality.
I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick comprehension.
'Of course I have often heard of you and your colleague, Monsieur
Poirot. You have done some wonderful things together, haven't
you? It was very clever of my husband to get you so promptly. Now
will you ask me questions? That is the easiest way, isn't it, of
getting to know all you want to about this dreadful affair?'
'Thank you, Mrs Havering. Now what time was it that this man
arrived?'
'It must have been just before nine o'clock. We had finished dinner,
and were sitting over our coffee and cigarettes.'
'Your husband had already left for London?'
'Yes, he went up by the 6.15.'
'Did he go by car to the station, or did he walk?'
'Our own car isn't down here. One came out from the garage in
Elmer's Dale to fetch him in time for the train.'
'Was Mr Pace quite his usual self?'
'Absolutely. Most normal in every way.'
'Now, can you describe this visitor at all?'
'I'm afraid not. I didn't see him. Mrs Middleton showed him straight
into the gun-room and then came to tell my uncle.'
'What did your uncle say?'
'He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at once. It was about five
minutes later that I heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out into
the hall and almost collided with Mrs Middleton. Then we heard the
shot. The gun-room door was locked on the inside, and we had to
go right round the house to the window. Of course that took some
time, and the murderer had been able to get well away. My poor
uncle' - her voice faltered - 'had been shot through the head. I saw
at once that he was dead. I sent Mrs Middleton for the police. I was
careful to touch nothing in the room but to leave it exactly as I found
it.'
I nodded approval.
'Now, as to the weapon?'
'Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain Hastings. A pair of revolvers
of my husband's were mounted upon the wall. One of them is
missing. I pointed this out to the police, and they took the other one
away with them. When they have extracted the bullet, I suppose
they will know for certain.'
'May I go to the gun-room?'
'Certainly. The police have finished with it. But the body has been
removed.'
She accompanied me to the scene of the crime. At that moment
Havering entered the hall, and with a quick apology his wife ran to
him. I was left to undertake my investigations alone.
I may as well confess at once that they were rather disappointing.
In detective novels clues abound, but here I could find nothing that
struck me as out of the ordinary except a large blood-stain on the
carpet where I judged the dead man had fallen. I examined
everything with painstaking care and took a couple of pictures of
the room with my little camera which I had brought with me. I also
examined the ground outside the window, but it appeared to have
been so heavily trampled underfoot that I judged it was useless to
waste time over it. No, I had seen all that Hunter's Lodge had to
show me. I must go back to Elmer's Dale and get into touch with
Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the Haverings, and was driven off
in the car that had brought us up from the station.
I found Japp at the Matlock Arms and he took me forthwith to see
the body. Harrington Pace was a small, spare, clean-shaven man,
typically American in appearance. He had been shot through the
back of the head, and the revolver had been discharged at close
quarters.
'Turned away for a moment,' remarked Japp, 'and the other fellow
snatched up a revolver and shot him. The one Mrs Havering handed
over to us was fully loaded and I suppose the other one was also.
Curious what darn fool things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded
revolvers hanging up on your wall.'
'What do you think of the case?' I asked, as we left the gruesome
chamber behind us.
'Well, I'd got my eye on Havering to begin with. Oh, yes!' - noting my
exclamation of astonishment. 'Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at Oxford there was some
funny business about the signature on one of his father's cheques.
All hushed up of course. Then, he's pretty heavily in debt now, and
they're the kind of debts he wouldn't like to go to his uncle about,
whereas you may be sure the uncle's will would be in his favour.
Yes, I'd got my eye on him, and that's why I wanted to speak to him
before he saw his wife, but their statements dovetail all right, and
I've been to the station and there's no doubt whatever that he left by
the 6.15. That gets up to London about 10.30. He went straight to
his club, he says, and if that's confirmed all right - why, he couldn't
have been shooting his uncle here at nine o'clock in a black beard!'
'Ah, yes, I was going to ask you what you thought about that beard?'
Japp winked.
'I think it grew pretty fast - grew in the five miles from Elmer's Dale
to Hunter's Lodge. Americans that I've met are mostly cleanshaven.
Yes, it's amongst Mr Pace's American associates that we'll
have to look for the murderer. I questioned the housekeeper first,
and then her mistress, and their stories agree all right, but I'm sorry
Mrs Havering didn't get a look at the fellow. She's a smart woman,
and she might have noticed something that would set us on the
track.'
I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy account to Poirot. I was
able to add various further items of information before I posted the
letter.
The bullet had been extracted and was proved to have been fired
from a revolver identical with the one held by the police.
Furthermore, Mr Havering's movements on the night in question
had been checked and verified, and it was proved beyond doubt
that he had actually arrived in London by the train in question. And,
thirdly, a sensational development had occurred. A city gentleman,
living at Ealing, on crossing Haven Green to get to the District
Railway Station that morning, had observed a brown-paper parcel
stuck between the railings. Opening it, he found that it contained a
revolver. He handed the parcel over to the local police station, and
before night it was proved to be the one we were in search of, the
fellow to that given us by Mrs Havering. One bullet had been fired
from it.
All this I added to my report. A wire from Poirot arrived whilst I was
at breakfast the following morning:
'Of course black-bearded man was not Havering only you or Japp
would have such an idea wire me description of housekeeper and
what clothes she wore this morning same of Mrs Havering do not
waste time taking photographs of interiors they are underexposed
and not in the least artistic.'
It seemed to me that Poirot's style was unnecessarily facetious. I
also fancied he was a shade jealous of my position on the spot with
full facilities for handling the case. His request for a description of
the clothes worn by the two women appeared to me to be simply
ridiculous, but I complied as well as I, a mere man, was able to.
At eleven a reply wire came from Poirot:
'Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is too late.'
Dumbfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He swore softly under his
breath.
'He's the goods, Monsieur Poirot! If he says so, there's something in
it. And I hardly noticed the woman. I don't know that I can go so far
as arresting her, but I'll have her watched. We'll go up right away,
and take another look at her.'
But it was too late. Mrs Middleton, that quiet middle-aged woman,
who had appeared so normal and respectable, had vanished into
thin air. Her box had been left behind. It contained only ordinary
wearing apparel. There was no clue in it to her identity, or as to her
whereabouts.
From Mrs Havering we elicited all the facts we could:
'I engaged her about three weeks ago when Mrs Emery, our former
housekeeper, left. She came to me from Mrs Selbourne's Agency in
Mount Street - a very well-known place. I get all my servants from
there. They sent several women to see me, but this Mrs Middleton
seemed much the nicest, and had splendid references. I engaged
her on the spot, and notified the Agency of the fact. I can't believe
that there was anything wrong with her. She was such a nice quiet
woman.'
The thing was certainly a mystery. Whilst it was clear that the
woman herself could not have committed the crime, since at the
moment the shot was fired Mrs Havering was with her in the hall,
nevertheless she must have some connection with the murder, or
why should she suddenly take to her heels and bolt?
I wired the latest development to Poirot and suggested returning to
London and making inquiries at Selbourne's Agency.
Poirot's reply was prompt:
'Useless to inquire at agency they will never have heard of her find
out what vehicle took her up to hunters lodge when she first arrived
there.'
Though mystified, I was obedient. The means of transport in
Elmer's Dale were limited. The local garage had two battered Ford
cars, and there were two station flies. None of these had been
requisitioned on the date in question. Questioned, Mrs Havering
explained that she had given the woman the money for her fare
down to Derbyshire and sufficient to hire a car or fly to take her up
to Hunter's Lodge. There was usually one of the Fords at the station
on the chance of its being required. Taking into consideration the
further fact that nobody at the station had noticed the arrival of a
stranger, black-bearded or otherwise, on the fatal evening,
everything seemed to point to the conclusion that the murderer had
come to the spot in a car, which had been waiting near at hand to
aid his escape, and that the same car had brought the mysterious
housekeeper to her new post. I may mention that inquiries at the
Agency in London bore out Poirot's prognostication. No such
woman as 'Mrs Middleton' had ever been on their books. They had
received the Hon. Mrs Havering's application for a housekeeper,
and had sent her various applicants for the post. When she sent
them the engagement fee, she omitted to mention which woman
she had selected.
Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London. I found Poirot
established in an arm-chair by the fire in a garish silk dressinggown.
He greeted me with much affection.
'Mon ami Hastings! But how glad I am to see you. Veritably I have
for you a great affection! And you have enjoyed yourself? You have
run to and fro with the good Japp? You have interrogated and
investigated to your heart's content?'
'Poirot,' I cried, 'the thing's a dark mystery! It will never be solved.'
'It is true that we are not likely to cover ourselves with glory over it.'
'No, indeed. It's a hard nut to crack.'
'Oh, as far as that goes, I am very good at cracking the nuts! A
veritable squirrel! It is not that which embarrasses me. I know well
enough who killed Mr Harrington Pace.'
'You know? How did you find out?'
'Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied me with the truth.
See here, Hastings, let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr Harrington Pace is a man with a considerable fortune
which at his death will doubtless pass to his nephew. Point No 1.
His nephew is known to be desperately hard up. Point No 2. His
nephew is also known to be - shall we say a man of rather loose
moral fibre? Point No 3.'
'But Roger Havering is proved to have journeyed straight up to
London.'
'Précisément - and therefore, as Mr Havering left Elmer's Dale at
6.15, and since Mr Pace cannot have been killed before he left, or
the doctor would have spotted the time of the crime as being given
wrongly when he examined the body, we conclude quite rightly,
that Mr Havering did not shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs
Havering, Hastings.'
'Impossible! The housekeeper was with her when the shot was
fired.'
'Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has disappeared.'
'She will be found.'
'I think not. There is something peculiarly elusive about that
housekeeper, don't you think so, Hastings? It struck me at once.'
'She played her part, I suppose, and then got out in the nick of time.'
'And what was her part?'
'Well, presumably to admit her confederate, the black-bearded
man.'
'Oh, no, that was not her part! Her part was what you have just
mentioned, to provide an alibi for Mrs Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her, mon ami, because she
does not exist! "There's no such person," as your so great
Shakespeare says.'
'It was Dickens,' I murmured, unable to suppress a smile. 'But what
do you mean, Poirot?'
'I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress before her marriage, that
you and Japp only saw the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim
middle-aged figure in black with a faint subdued voice, and finally
that neither you nor Japp, nor the local police whom the
housekeeper fetched, ever saw Mrs Middleton and her mistress at
one and the same time. It was child's play for that clever and daring
woman. On the pretext of summoning her mistress, she runs
upstairs, slips on a bright jumper and a hat with black curls
attached which she jams down over the grey transformation. A few
deft touches, and the make-up is removed, a slight dusting of
rouge, and the brilliant Zoe Havering comes down with her clear
ringing voice. Nobody looks particularly at the housekeeper. Why
should they? There is nothing to connect her with the crime. She,
too, has an alibi.'
'But the revolver that was found at Ealing? Mrs Havering could not
have placed it there?'
'No, that was Roger Havering's job - but it was a mistake on their
part. It put me on the right track. A man who has committed murder
with a revolver which he found on the spot would fling it away at
once, he would not carry it up to London with him. No, the motive
was clear, the criminals wished to focus the interest of the police
on a spot far removed from Derbyshire, they were anxious to get
the police away as soon as possible from the vicinity of Hunter's
Lodge. Of course the revolver found at Ealing was not the one with
which Mr Pace was shot. Roger Havering discharged one shot from
it, brought it up to London, went straight to his club to establish his
alibi, then went quickly out to Ealing by the District, a matter of
about twenty minutes only, placed the parcel where it was found
and so back to town. That charming creature, his wife, quietly
shoots Mr Pace after dinner - you remember he was shot from
behind? Another significant point, that! - reloads the revolver and
puts it back in its place, and then starts off with her desperate little
comedy.'
'It's incredible,' I murmured, fascinated, 'and yet - '
'And yet it is true. Bien sur, my friend, it is true. But to bring that
precious pair to justice, that is another matter. Well, Japp must do
what he can - I have written him fully - but I very much fear,
Hastings, that we shall be obliged to leave them to Fate, or le bon
Dieu, whichever you prefer.'
'The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,' I reminded him.
'But at a price, Hastings, always at a price, croyez-moi!'
Poirot's forebodings were confirmed. Japp, though convinced of
the truth of his theory, was unable to get together the necessary
evidence to ensure a conviction.
Mr Pace's huge fortune passed into the hands of his murderers.
Nevertheless, Nemesis did overtake them, and when I read in the
paper that the Hon. Roger and Mrs Havering were amongst those
killed in the crashing of the Air Mail to Paris I knew that Justice was
satisfied.