Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr.
Bingley. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always
assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit
was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the
following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming
a hat, he suddenly addressed her with:
“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”
“We are not in a way to know WHAT Mr. Bingley likes,” said her
mother resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”
“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him
at the assemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him.”
“I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two
nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no
opinion of her.”
“No more have I,” said Mr. Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you
do not depend on her serving you.”
Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.
“Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! Have a little
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”
“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times
them ill.”
“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty fretfully.
“When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”
“To-morrow fortnight.”
“Aye, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come
back till the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,
for she will not know him herself.”
“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and
introduce Mr. Bingley to HER.”
“Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted
with him myself; how can you be so teasing?”
“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is
certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of
a fortnight. But if WE do not venture somebody else will; and after all,
Mrs. Long and her daughters must stand their chance; and, therefore, as
she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it
on myself.”
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, “Nonsense,
nonsense!”
“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried
he. “Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid
on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you THERE. What say
you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and
read great books and make extracts.”
Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how.
“While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued, “let us return to
Mr. Bingley.”
“I am sick of Mr. Bingley,” cried his wife.
“I am sorry to hear THAT; but why did not you tell me that
before? If I had known as much this morning I certainly would not have
called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.”
The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of
Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of
joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all
the while.
“How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I
should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said a
word about it till now.”
“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Mr.
Bennet; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of
his wife.
“What an excellent father you have, girls!” said she, when the door
was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his
kindness; or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you ARE
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.”
“Oh!” said Lydia stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I AM the
youngest, I'm the tallest.”
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he
would return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask
him to dinner.
Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at last
obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Lady
Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been delighted
with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively hopes
of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained.
“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at
Netherfield,” said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others
equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat
about ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of
being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had
heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper
window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and
already had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to
her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr.
Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently,
unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was
quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have
in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear
that he might be always flying about from one place to another, and
never settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her
fears a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get
a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the
assembly.
The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted
the day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only
six with him from London--his five sisters and a cousin. And when the
party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five altogether--Mr.
Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young
man.
Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a
pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were
fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr.
Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew
the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features,
noble mien, and the report which was in general circulation within five
minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The
gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies
declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked
at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave
a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered
to be proud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not
all his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most
forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be
compared with his friend.
Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the
principal people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced
every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving
one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy
danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined
being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man
in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there
again. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose
dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment
by his having slighted one of her daughters.
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen,
to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had
been standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him
and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press
his friend to join it.
“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance.”
“I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this it
would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.”
“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Mr. Bingley, “for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in
my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
uncommonly pretty.”
“YOU are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said
Mr. Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.
“Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is
one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”
“Which do you mean?” and turning round he looked for a moment
at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:
“She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt ME; I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”
Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and
Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told
the story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a
lively, playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family.
Mrs. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the
Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had
been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as
her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had
been fortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that
they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a
book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the events of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views on
the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a
different story to hear.
“Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had
a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been
there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how
well she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and
danced with her twice! Only think of THAT, my dear; he actually
danced with her twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he
asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to
see him stand up with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all;
indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as
she was going down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got
introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced
with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth
with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the BOULANGER--”
“If he had had any compassion for ME,” cried her husband
impatiently, “he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake,
say no more of his partners. O that he had sprained his ankle in the first
place!”
“Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessively
handsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw
anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.
Hurst's gown--”
Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much
by not suiting HIS fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not
at all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no
enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so
very great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been
there, my dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest
the man.”
Lydia's example, she became, by proper attention and management, less
irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of
Lydia's society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs.
Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the
promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her
going.
Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was
necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's
being quite unable to sit alone.
Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still
moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified
by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own, it was
suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much
reluctance.
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution
from the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction
that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his
ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite
of every thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be
prevailed on to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which
Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by
his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter
was to this effect:
“MY DEAR LIZZY,
“I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear
Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so
rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us. I
am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not
think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help.
Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however,
do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.
“Yours, etc.”
As it happened that Elizabeth had MUCH rather not, she
endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and
expectation of the kind. Such relief, however, as it was in her power to
afford, by the practice of what might be called economy in her own
private expences, she frequently sent them. It had always been evident to
her that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so
extravagant in their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very
insufficient to their support; and whenever they changed their quarters,
either Jane or herself were sure of being applied to for some little
assistance towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even
when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled
in the extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of
a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His
affection for her soon sunk into indifference; her's lasted a little longer;
and in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
reputation which her marriage had given her.
Though Darcy could never receive HIM at Pemberley, yet, for
Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was
occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy
himself in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them
frequently staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour was
overcome, and he proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be
gone.
Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but
as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley,
she dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost
as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth.
Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the
sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love
each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest
opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with
an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen
in her way. By Elizabeth's instructions, she began to comprehend that a
woman may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her
nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her
character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she
sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some
time all intercourse was at an end.
But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he was prevailed on to
overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further
resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her
affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself;
and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that
pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of
such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.
“The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.”
“When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself
perfectly calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.”
“The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings of the
person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so widely
different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance
attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my
philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.”
“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude
which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish
being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I was
taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was
given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt by
my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all
that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught
me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own
family circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least
to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own.
“Such I was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still
have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe
you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most
advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a
doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my
pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”
“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”
“Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to
be wishing, expecting my addresses.”
“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I
assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead
me wrong. How you must have hated me after THAT evening?”
“Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began
to take a proper direction.”
“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we
met at Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?”
“No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise.”
“Your surprise could not be greater than MINE in being noticed by
you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness,
and I confess that I did not expect to receive MORE than my due.”
“My object then,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every
civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I
hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting
you see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other
wishes introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about
half an hour after I had seen you.”
He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of
her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there
had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.
She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject
to each, to be dwelt on farther.
After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to
know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches,
that it was time to be at home.
“What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!” was a wonder
which introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted
with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information
of it.
“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.
“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”
“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as
much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been
pretty much the case.
“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told
him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to
him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”
Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend.
“Did you speak from your own observation,” said she, “when you
told him that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last
spring?”
“From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two
visits which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her
affection.”
“And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction
to him.”
“It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess one
thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow
myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last
winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me
now.”
Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most
delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she
checked herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed
at, and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of
Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
parted.
“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a
question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their
room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only
to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her
own knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor
anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary.
The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were
silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in
mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather KNEW that she was
happy than FELT herself to be so; for, besides the immediate
embarrassment, there were other evils before her.
She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation
became known; she was aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even
feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and
consequence might do away.
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very
far from Miss Bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous
here.
“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!--engaged to Mr. Darcy!
No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”
“This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on
you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet,
indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me,
and we are engaged.”
Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know
how much you dislike him.”
“You know nothing of the matter. THAT is all to be forgot.
Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases
as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall
ever remember it myself.”
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously assured her of its truth.
“Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,”
cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would--I do congratulate you--but
are you certain? forgive the question --are you quite certain that you can
be happy with him?”
“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already,
that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased,
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?”
“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself
more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do
you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather
than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you
ought to do?”
“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel MORE than I ought to do,
when I tell you all.”
“What do you mean?”
“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am
afraid you will be angry.”
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
- 394 -
“My dearest sister, now BE serious. I want to talk very seriously.
Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell
me how long you have loved him?”
“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it
began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful
grounds at Pemberley.”
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of
attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish.
“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as
myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of
you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and
your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me.
But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did
you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I
know of it to another, not to you.”
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been
unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings
had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would
no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was
acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the
next morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again
with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be
always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or
something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we
do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not
be in Bingley's way.”
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal;
yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such
an epithet.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bennet, have you no more
lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?”
“I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bennet, “to
walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr.
Darcy has never seen the view.”
“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I
am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?” Kitty owned that
she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the
view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up
stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying:
“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all
for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him,
except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.”
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should
be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether
she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she
saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it
was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going
to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means--that SHE,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her--was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he
approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, “Go to your father, he
wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
“Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been
more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared
her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly
awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him,
with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.
“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to
be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than
Jane. But will they make you happy?”
“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief
of my indifference?”
“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of
man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.”
“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes, “I love
him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do
not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him
in such terms.”
“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the
kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything,
which he condescended to ask. I now give it to YOU, if you are resolved
on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your
disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing YOU
unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are
about.”
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply;
and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the
object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her
estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his
affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many
months suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities,
she did conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no
more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted
with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr.
Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.
“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every
thing; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and
got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of
trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and
WOULD have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every
thing their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and
storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his
reading Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed
her at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men
come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”
Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and,
after half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she
followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was
most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and
unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she
could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to
credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the
shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget
about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.
“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy!
Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest
Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what
jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to it--nothing at
all. I am so pleased--so happy. Such a charming man!--so handsome! so
tall!--Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so
much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in
town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten
thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go
distracted.”
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be
doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only
by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in
her own room, her mother followed her.
“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else! Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a
special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that
I may have it to-morrow.”
This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the
gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the
certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations'
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to
him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her
deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to
get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was
rising every hour in his esteem.
“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham,
perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like YOUR husband quite as
well as Jane's.”
Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could
you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly,
when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the
first place?”
“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words,
which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
knew that I HAD begun.”
“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my
behaviour to YOU was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I
never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”
“For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”
“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little
less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always
speaking, and looking, and thinking for YOUR approbation alone. I
roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike THEM. Had you not
been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the
pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and
just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so
assiduously courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of
accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it
perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me--but
nobody thinks of THAT when they fall in love.”
“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while
she was ill at Netherfield?”
“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a
virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your protection,
and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it
belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as
often as may be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you
so unwilling to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me,
when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when
you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?”
“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no
encouragement.”
“But I was embarrassed.”
“And so was I.”
“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”
“A man who had felt less, might.”
“How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give,
and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long
you WOULD have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder
when you WOULD have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution
of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
TOO MUCH, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject. This will never do.”
“You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair.
Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means
of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness
to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour
to wait for any opening of your's. My aunt's intelligence had given me
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing.”
“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her
happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down
to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be
embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious consequence?”
“My real purpose was to see YOU, and to judge, if I could,
whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or
what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial
to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have
since made.”
“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what
is to befall her?”
“I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But
it ought to done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done
directly.”
“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did.
But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”
From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr.
Darcy had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs.
Gardiner's long letter; but now, having THAT to communicate which
she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that
her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and
immediately wrote as follows:
“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have
done, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say
the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really
existed. But NOW suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to
your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the
subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you
cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a
great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again,
for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your
idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours, etc.”
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and
still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in
reply to his last.
“DEAR SIR,
“I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you
can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to
give.
“Yours sincerely, etc.”
Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to
Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former
professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and
though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much
kinder answer than she knew was deserved.
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar
information, was as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of
paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest
desire of being loved by her sister.
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any
congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard
that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of
this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been
rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter,
that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when
she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of
her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness.
He could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented
him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed
his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent
composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was
out of sight.
Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on
his forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good
humour encouraged, yet, whenever she DID speak, she must be vulgar.
Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely
to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from
the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to
herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without
mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all
this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to
the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time
when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to
all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley.
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs.
Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted
pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy,
may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of
her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it
was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic
felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and
invariably silly.
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection
for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He
delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth.
So near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable
even to HIS easy temper, or HER affectionate heart. The darling wish of
his sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring
county to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other
source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time
with her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had
generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so
ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of