as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her
mother.
She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either,
or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any
of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each
other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did.
Her mother's ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him
more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and she would, at times, have given
anything to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither
unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity
of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass
away without enabling them to enter into something more of
conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his
entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawingroom,
before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree
that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the
point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
“If he does not come to me, THEN,” said she, “I shall give him up
for ever.”
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would
have answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the
table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the
coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near
her which would admit of a chair.
And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of the girls moved closer
to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:
“The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none
of them; do we?”
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed
him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely
patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against
herself for being so silly!
“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish
enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who
would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the
same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!”
She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee
cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:
“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”
“Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.”
“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?”
“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to
Scarborough, these three weeks.”
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to
converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her,
however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's
whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.
When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the
ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him,
when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen
to supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.
“Well girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves,
“What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off
uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I
ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said they
never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we
had at the Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that
the partridges were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or
three French cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in
greater beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did
not. And what do you think she said besides? 'Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall
have her at Netherfield at last.'
“She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good a creature as ever
lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all
handsome: I like them prodigiously.”
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen
enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would
get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in
a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite
disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his
proposals.
“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth.
“The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I
hope we may often meet again.”
Elizabeth smiled.
“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies
me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I
am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing,
than any other man.”
“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile,
and are provoking me to it every moment.”
“How hard it is in some cases to be believed!”
“And how impossible in others!”
“But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?”
“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all
love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing.
Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your
confidante.”
A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.
“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.”
He should be particularly happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she
would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on
them.
“Can you come to-morrow?”
Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation
was accepted with alacrity.
He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of
them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughter's room, in her dressing
gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:
“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr.
Bingley is come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah,
come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown.
Never mind Miss Lizzy's hair.”
“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say
Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour
ago.”
“Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be
quick!Where is your sash, my dear?”
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to
go down without one of her sisters.
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in
the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter mamma? What
do you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?”
“Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, “Come here, my love, I want to
speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at
Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her
entreaty that SHE would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet
half-opened the door and called out:
“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”
Elizabeth was forced to go.
“We may as well leave them by themselves you know;” said her
mother, as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to
sit in my dressing-room.”
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into
the drawing-room.
Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was
every thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her
daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable
addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged
officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a
forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the
daughter.
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he
went away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and
Mrs. Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her
husband.
After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word
passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to
bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr.
Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt
tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that
gentleman's concurrence.
Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet
spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much
more agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of
presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or
disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less
eccentric, than the other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned
with him to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was
again at work to get every body away from him and her daughter.
Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfast room for that
purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to
cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother's schemes.
But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was
finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that
her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she
perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if
engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the
faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each
other, would have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but
HER'S she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either;
and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who
as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
words to her sister, ran out of the room.
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence
would give pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with
the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.
“'Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it.
Oh! why is not everybody as happy?”
Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth,
a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said
for the present.
“I must go instantly to my mother;” she cried. “I would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! how shall I bear so much happiness!”
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken
up the card party, and was sitting up stairs with Kitty.
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and
ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so
many previous months of suspense and vexation.
“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend's anxious
circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the
happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!”
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference
with her father had been short and to the purpose.
“Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.
“With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare
say.”
He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good
wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily
expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship.
They shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister
came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness,
and of Jane's perfections; and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth
really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded,
because they had for basis the excellent understanding, and superexcellent
disposition of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste
between her and himself.
It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the
satisfaction of Miss Bennet's mind gave a glow of such sweet animation
to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and
smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not
give her consent or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to
satisfy her feelings, though she talked to Bingley of nothing else for half
an hour; and when Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and
manner plainly showed how really happy he was.
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned
to his daughter, and said:
“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.”
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness.
“You are a good girl;” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your doing
very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each
of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so easy, that
every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always
exceed your income.”
“I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters
would be unpardonable in me.”
“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what
are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very
likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I
am so happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how
it would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that
you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!”
Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition
her favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense.
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at
Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining
till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not
be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he
thought himself obliged to accept.
Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister;
for while he was present, Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone
else; but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those
hours of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane,
he always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means
of relief.
“He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me
that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not
believed it possible.”
“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account
for it?”
“It must have been his sister's doing. They were certainly no
friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he
might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects.
“But when they see, as I trust they will, that their brother is happy
with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms
again; though we can never be what we once were to each other.”
“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the
dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard.”
“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last
November, he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of MY
being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!”
“He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty.”
This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence,
and the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was
pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend;
for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world,
she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.
“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried
Jane. “Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all! If I could but see YOU as happy! If there WERE but
such another man for you!”
“If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy
as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have
your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have
very good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”
The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long
a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips, and
she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton.
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in
the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run
away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.
One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane
had been formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting
together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the
window, by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four
driving up the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and
besides, the equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours.
The horses were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the
servant who preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain,
however, that somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on
Miss Bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk
away with him into the shrubbery.
They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open
and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious,
made no other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of
the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned
her name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.
Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of
such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After
sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,
“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother.”
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
“And THAT I suppose is one of your sisters.”
“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady
Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately
married, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a
young man who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.”
“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine after a
short silence.
“It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I
assure you it is much larger than SirWilliam Lucas's.”
“This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in
summer; the windows are full west.”
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and
then added:
“May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left
Mr. and Mrs. Collins well.”
“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her
from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling.
But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,
“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little
wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it,
if you will favour me with your company.”
“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the hall,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawingroom,
and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent looking
rooms, walked on.
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel
walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort
for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent
and disagreeable.
“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she
looked in her face.
As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the
following manner:--
“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of
my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you
why I come.”
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
“Indeed, you are mistaken, Madam. I have not been at all able to
account for the honour of seeing you here.”
“Miss Bennet,” replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought
to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere YOU
may choose to be, you shall not find ME so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such moment
as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming
nature reached me two days ago. I was told that not only your sister was
on the point of being most advantageously married, but that you, that
Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards
united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I KNOW it
must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him so much
as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off
for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”
“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of
coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?”
“At once to insist upon having such a report universally
contradicted.”
“Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said
Elizabeth coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a
report is in existence.”
“If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?”
“I never heard that it was.”
“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?”
“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
You may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.”
“This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied.
Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”
“Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.” “It ought to be
so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But your arts and
allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what
he owes to himself and to all his family. You may have drawn him in.”
“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”
“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been
accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he
has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”
“But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as
this, ever induce me to be explicit.”
“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is
engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?”
“Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he
will make an offer to me.”
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:
“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their
infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite
wish of HIS mother, as well as of her's. While in their cradles, we
planned the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both
sisters would be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a
young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and
wholly unallied to the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his
friends? To his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to
every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that
from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”
“Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is
no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be
kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry
Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by
honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”
“Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes,
Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be
censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your
alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by
any of us.”
“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife of
Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness
necessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole,
have no cause to repine.”
“Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your
gratitude for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on
that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I
came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor
will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any
person's whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking
disappointment.”
“THAT will make your ladyship's situation at present more
pitiable; but it will have no effect on me.”
“I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient--though untitled--families. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid.
“They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of
their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart
pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune.
Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible
of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you
have been brought up.”
“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting
that sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we
are equal.”
“True. You ARE a gentleman's daughter. But who was your
mother? Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of
their condition.”
“Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your
nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to YOU.”
“Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?”
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging
Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after
a moment's deliberation:
“I am not.”
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
“And will you promise me, never to enter into such an
engagement?”
“I will make no promise of the kind.”
“Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a
more reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief
that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require.”
“And I certainly NEVER shall give it. I am not to be intimidated
into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to
marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise
make their marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached
to me, would my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it
on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with
which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken
my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as
these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his
affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself
in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the
subject.”
“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am no
stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous elopement.
I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a patched-up
business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is such a girl to
be my nephew's sister?
“Is her husband, is the son of his late father's steward, to be his
brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are you thinking? Are the shades of
Pemberley to be thus polluted?”
“You can now have nothing further to say,” she resentfully
answered. “You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg
to return to the house.”
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they
turned back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.
“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my
nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection
with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”
“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my
sentiments.”
“You are then resolved to have him?”
“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that
manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness,
without reference to YOU, or to any person so wholly unconnected with
me.”
“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”
“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “have
any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to
the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the
former WERE excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one
moment's concern--and the world in general would have too much sense
to join in the scorn.” “And this is your real opinion! This is your final
resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss
Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I
hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my
point.”
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door
of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, “I take no leave
of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You
deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
“She did not choose it,” said her daughter, “she would go.”
“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was
prodigiously civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses
were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing
through Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she
had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”
Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.
The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till
she recollected that HIS being the intimate friend of Bingley, and HER
being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of
one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She
had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring
them more frequently together.
And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their
communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had
reached lady Catherine), had only set that down as almost certain and
immediate, which she had looked forward to as possible at some future
time.
In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not
help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her
persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution
to prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate
an application to her nephew; and how HE might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that he thought much higher of her ladyship than SHE could do; and it
was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with ONE,
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt
would address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he
would probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared
weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.
If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had
often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more.
Lady Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his
engagement to Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.
“If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come
to his friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to
understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have
obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him at all.”
The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor
had been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.
The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by
her father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.
“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you; come into my
room.”
She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to
tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it might be
from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent
explanations.
She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down.
He then said,
“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink of
matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.”
The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and
she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself; when her father continued:
“You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such
matters as these; but I think I may defy even YOUR sagacity, to
discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.”
“From Mr. Collins! and what can HE have to say?”
“Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says
on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: 'Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another;
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may be
reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this
land.'
“Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?” 'This
young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart
of mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and
extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn
my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a
precipitate closure with this gentleman's proposals, which, of course,
you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.'
“Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it
comes out:
“'My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to
imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the
match with a friendly eye.'
“MR. DARCY, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I HAVE
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at
any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you
in his life! It is admirable!”
Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only
force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a
manner so little agreeable to her.
“Are you not diverted?”
“Oh! yes. Pray read on.”
“'After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship
last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed
what she felt on the occasion; when it become apparent, that on the score
of some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never
give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it
my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she
and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.'
“Mr. Collins moreover adds, 'I am truly rejoiced that my cousin
Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned
that their living together before the marriage took place should be so
generally known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station,
or refrain from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the
young couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them,
as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
names to be mentioned in your hearing.' That is his notion of Christian
forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte's
situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you
look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be MISSISH, I hope,
and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to
make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?”
“Oh!” cried Elizabeth, “I am excessively diverted. But it is so
strange!”
“Yes--THAT is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any
other man it would have been nothing; but HIS perfect indifference, and
YOUR pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I
abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for
any consideration.
“Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the
preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”
To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it
had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his
repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by
what he said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of his
seeing too little, she might have fancied too much.
Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady
Catherine's visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet
had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter
sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane,
proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in
the habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining
five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others
to outstrip them.
They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to
entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much
afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate
resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same.
They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call
upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general
concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now
was the moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her
courage was high, she immediately said:
“Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding your's.
I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my
poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of
my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.”
“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of
surprise and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may,
in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs.
Gardiner was so little to be trusted.”
“You must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first
betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of
course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars.
“Let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family,
for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much
trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering
them.”
“If you WILL thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone.
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your
FAMILY owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
only of YOU.”
Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short
pause, her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If
your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. MY
affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever.”
Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and
anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately,
though not very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had
undergone so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as
to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances.
The happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had probably
never felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly
and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do.
Had Elizabeth been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen
how well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over his face,
became him; but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told
her of feelings, which, in proving of what importance she was to him,
made his affection every moment more valuable.
They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too
much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects.
She soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good
understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return
through London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive,
and the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling
emphatically on every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's
apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the
belief that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that
promise from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily
for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.
“It taught me to hope,” said he, “as I had scarcely ever allowed
myself to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain
that, had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you
would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly.”
Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know
enough of my frankness to believe me capable of THAT. After abusing
you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you
to all your relations.”
“What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my
behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was
unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”
“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct of neither, if strictly examined,
will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved in
civility.”
“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of
what I then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the
whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to
me. Your reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: 'had you behaved
in a more gentlemanlike manner.' Those were your words. You know
not, you can scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;--though it
was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their
justice.”
“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a
way.”
“I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every
proper feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall
never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any
possible way that would induce you to accept me.”
“Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do
at all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.”
Darcy mentioned his letter. “Did it,” said he, “did it soon make you
think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?”
She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually
all her former prejudices had been removed.
“I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part
especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the
power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might
justly make you hate me.”
“The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.”
“When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself
perfectly calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.”
“The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings of the
person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so widely
different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance
attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my
philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.”
“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude
which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish
being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I was
taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was
given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt by
my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all
that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught
me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own
family circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least
to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own.
“Such I was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still
have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe
you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most
advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a
doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my
pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”
“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”
“Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to
be wishing, expecting my addresses.”
“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I
assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead
me wrong. How you must have hated me after THAT evening?”
“Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began
to take a proper direction.”
“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we
met at Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?”
“No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise.”
“Your surprise could not be greater than MINE in being noticed by
you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness,
and I confess that I did not expect to receive MORE than my due.”
“My object then,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every
civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I
hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting
you see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other
wishes introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about
half an hour after I had seen you.”
He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of
her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there
had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.
She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject
to each, to be dwelt on farther.
After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to
know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches,
that it was time to be at home.
“What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!” was a wonder
which introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted
with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information
of it.
“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.
“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”
“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as
much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been
pretty much the case.
“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told
him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to
him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”
Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend.
“Did you speak from your own observation,” said she, “when you
told him that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last
spring?”
“From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two
visits which I had lately made here; and I was convinced of her
affection.”
“And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction
to him.”
“It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess one
thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow
myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last
winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me
now.”
Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most
delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she
checked herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed
at, and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of
Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
parted.
“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a
question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their
room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only
to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her
own knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor
anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary.
The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were
silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in
mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather KNEW that she was
happy than FELT herself to be so; for, besides the immediate
embarrassment, there were other evils before her.
She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation
became known; she was aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even
feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and
consequence might do away.
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very
far from Miss Bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous
here.
“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!--engaged to Mr. Darcy!
No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”
“This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on
you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet,
indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me,
and we are engaged.”
Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know
how much you dislike him.”
“You know nothing of the matter. THAT is all to be forgot.
Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases
as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall
ever remember it myself.”
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously assured her of its truth.
“Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,”
cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would--I do congratulate you--but
are you certain? forgive the question --are you quite certain that you can
be happy with him?”
“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already,
that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased,
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?”
“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself
more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do
you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather
than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you
ought to do?”
“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel MORE than I ought to do,
when I tell you all.”
“What do you mean?”
“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am
afraid you will be angry.”
“My dearest sister, now BE serious. I want to talk very seriously.
Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell
me how long you have loved him?”
“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it
began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful
grounds at Pemberley.”
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of
attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish.
“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as
myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of
you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and
your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me.
But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did
you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I
know of it to another, not to you.”
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been
unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings
had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would
no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was
acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the
next morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again
with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be
always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or
something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we
do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not
be in Bingley's way.”
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal;
yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such
an epithet.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bennet, have you no more
lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?”
“I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bennet, “to
walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr.
Darcy has never seen the view.”
“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I
am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?” Kitty owned that
she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the
view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up
stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying:
“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all
for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him,
except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.”
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should
be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether
she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she
saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it
was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going
to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means--that SHE,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her--was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he
approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, “Go to your father, he
wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
“Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been
more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared
her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly
awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him,
with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.
“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to
be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than
Jane. But will they make you happy?”
“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief
of my indifference?”
“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of
man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.”
“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes, “I love
him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do
not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him
in such terms.”
“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the
kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything,
which he condescended to ask. I now give it to YOU, if you are resolved
on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your
disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing YOU
unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are
about.”
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply;
and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the
object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her
estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his
affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many
months suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities,
she did conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no
more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted
with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr.
Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.
“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every
thing; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and
got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of
trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and
WOULD have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every
thing their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and
storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his
reading Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed
her at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men
come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”
Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and,
after half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she
followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was
most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and
unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she
could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to
credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the
shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget
about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.
“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy!
Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest
Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what
jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to it--nothing at
all. I am so pleased--so happy. Such a charming man!--so handsome! so
tall!--Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so
much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in
town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten
thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go
distracted.”
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be
doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only
by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in
her own room, her mother followed her.
“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else! Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a
special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that
I may have it to-morrow.”
This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the
gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the
certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations'
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to
him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her
deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to
get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was
rising every hour in his esteem.
“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham,
perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like YOUR husband quite as
well as Jane's.”
Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could
you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly,
when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the
first place?”
“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words,
which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
knew that I HAD begun.”
“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my
behaviour to YOU was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I
never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”
“For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”
“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little
less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always
speaking, and looking, and thinking for YOUR approbation alone. I
roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike THEM. Had you not
been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the
pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and
just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so
assiduously courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of
accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it
perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me--but
nobody thinks of THAT when they fall in love.”
“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while
she was ill at Netherfield?”
“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a
virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your protection,
and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it
belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as
often as may be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you
so unwilling to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me,
when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when
you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?”
“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no
encouragement.”
“But I was embarrassed.”
“And so was I.”
“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”
“A man who had felt less, might.”
“How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give,
and that I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long
you WOULD have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder
when you WOULD have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution
of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect.
TOO MUCH, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject. This will never do.”
“You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair.
Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means
of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness
to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour
to wait for any opening of your's. My aunt's intelligence had given me
hope, and I was determined at once to know every thing.”
“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her
happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down
to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be
embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious consequence?”
“My real purpose was to see YOU, and to judge, if I could,
whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or
what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial
to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have
since made.”
“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what
is to befall her?”
“I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But
it ought to done, and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done
directly.”
“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did.
But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”
From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr.
Darcy had been over-rated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs.
Gardiner's long letter; but now, having THAT to communicate which
she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that
her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and
immediately wrote as follows:
“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have
done, for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say
the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really
existed. But NOW suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to
your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the
subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you
cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a
great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again,
for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your
idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours, etc.”
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and
still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in
reply to his last.
“DEAR SIR,
“I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you
can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to
give.
“Yours sincerely, etc.”
Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching
marriage, were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to
Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former
professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and
though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much
kinder answer than she knew was deserved.
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar
information, was as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of
paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest
desire of being loved by her sister.
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any
congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard
that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of
this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been
rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter,
that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when
she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of
her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness.
He could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented
him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed
his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent
composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was
out of sight.
Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on
his forbearance; and though Mrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good
humour encouraged, yet, whenever she DID speak, she must be vulgar.
Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely
to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from
the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to
herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without
mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all
this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to
the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time
when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to
all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley.
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs.
Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted
pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy,
may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of
her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it
was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic
felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and
invariably silly.
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection
for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He
delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth.
So near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable
even to HIS easy temper, or HER affectionate heart. The darling wish of
his sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring
county to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other
source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time
with her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had
generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so
ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of
