The place was entirely land-locked, buried in woods, the trees comingright down to high-water mark, the shores mostly flat, and the hilltopsstanding round at a distance in a sort of amphitheatre, one here, onethere. Two little rivers, or rather two swamps, emptied out into thispond, as you might call it; and the foliage round that part of the shorehad a kind of poisonous brightness. From the ship we could see nothingof the house or stockade, for they were quite buried among trees; and ifit had not been for the chart on the companion, we might have been thefirst that had ever anchored there since the island arose out of theseas.There was not a breath of air moving, nor a sound but that of thesurf booming half a mile away along the beaches and against the rocksoutside. A peculiar stagnant smell hung over the anchorage--a smell ofsodden leaves and rotting tree trunks. I observed the doctor sniffingand sniffing, like someone tasting a bad egg."I don't know about treasure," he said, "but I'll stake my wig there'sfever here."If the conduct of the men had been alarming in the boat, it became trulythreatening when they had come aboard. They lay about the deck growlingtogether in talk. The slightest order was received with a black look andgrudgingly and carelessly obeyed. Even the honest hands must have caughtthe infection, for there was not one man aboard to mend another. Mutiny,it was plain, hung over us like a thunder-cloud.And it was not only we of the cabin party who perceived the danger. LongJohn was hard at work going from group to group, spending himself ingood advice, and as for example no man could have shown a better. Hefairly outstripped himself in willingness and civility; he was allsmiles to everyone. If an order were given, John would be on his crutchin an instant, with the cheeriest "Aye, aye, sir!" in the world; andwhen there was nothing else to do, he kept up one song after another, asif to conceal the discontent of the rest.Of all the gloomy features of that gloomy afternoon, this obviousanxiety on the part of Long John appeared the worst.We held a council in the cabin."Sir," said the captain, "if I risk another order, the whole ship'llcome about our ears by the run. You see, sir, here it is. I get a roughanswer, do I not? Well, if I speak back, pikes will be going in twoshakes; if I don't, Silver will see there's something under that, andthe game's up. Now, we've only one man to rely on.""And who is that?" asked the squire."Silver, sir," returned the captain; "he's as anxious as you and I tosmother things up. This is a tiff; he'd soon talk 'em out of it if hehad the chance, and what I propose to do is to give him the chance.Let's allow the men an afternoon ashore. If they all go, why we'll fightthe ship. If they none of them go, well then, we hold the cabin, and Goddefend the right. If some go, you mark my words, sir, Silver'll bring'em aboard again as mild as lambs."It was so decided; loaded pistols were served out to all the sure men;Hunter, Joyce, and Redruth were taken into our confidence and receivedthe news with less surprise and a better spirit than we had looked for,and then the captain went on deck and addressed the crew."My lads," said he, "we've had a hot day and are all tired and out ofsorts. A turn ashore'll hurt nobody--the boats are still in the water;you can take the gigs, and as many as please may go ashore for theafternoon. I'll fire a gun half an hour before sundown."I believe the silly fellows must have thought they would break theirshins over treasure as soon as they were landed, for they all came outof their sulks in a moment and gave a cheer that started the echo in afaraway hill and sent the birds once more flying and squalling round theanchorage.The captain was too bright to be in the way. He whipped out of sightin a moment, leaving Silver to arrange the party, and I fancy it was aswell he did so. Had he been on deck, he could no longer so much ashave pretended not to understand the situation. It was as plain as day.Silver was the captain, and a mighty rebellious crew he had of it. Thehonest hands--and I was soon to see it proved that there were such onboard--must have been very stupid fellows. Or rather, I suppose thetruth was this, that all hands were disaffected by the example of theringleaders--only some more, some less; and a few, being good fellows inthe main, could neither be led nor driven any further. It is one thingto be idle and skulk and quite another to take a ship and murder anumber of innocent men.At last, however, the party was made up. Six fellows were to stay onboard, and the remaining thirteen, including Silver, began to embark.Then it was that there came into my head the first of the mad notionsthat contributed so much to save our lives. If six men were left bySilver, it was plain our party could not take and fight the ship; andsince only six were left, it was equally plain that the cabin partyhad no present need of my assistance. It occurred to me at once to goashore. In a jiffy I had slipped over the side and curled up in thefore-sheets of the nearest boat, and almost at the same moment sheshoved off.No one took notice of me, only the bow oar saying, "Is that you, Jim?Keep your head down." But Silver, from the other boat, looked sharplyover and called out to know if that were me; and from that moment Ibegan to regret what I had done.The crews raced for the beach, but the boat I was in, having some startand being at once the lighter and the better manned, shot far ahead ofher consort, and the bow had struck among the shore-side trees and Ihad caught a branch and swung myself out and plunged into the nearestthicket while Silver and the rest were still a hundred yards behind."Jim, Jim!" I heard him shouting.But you may suppose I paid no heed; jumping, ducking, and breakingthrough, I ran straight before my nose till I could run no longer.14The First BlowI WAS so pleased at having given the slip to Long John that I began toenjoy myself and look around me with some interest on the strange landthat I was in.I had crossed a marshy tract full of willows, bulrushes, and odd,outlandish, swampy trees; and I had now come out upon the skirts of anopen piece of undulating, sandy country, about a mile long, dotted witha few pines and a great number of contorted trees, not unlike the oakin growth, but pale in the foliage, like willows. On the far side ofthe open stood one of the hills, with two quaint, craggy peaks shiningvividly in the sun.I now felt for the first time the joy of exploration. The isle wasuninhabited; my shipmates I had left behind, and nothing lived in frontof me but dumb brutes and fowls. I turned hither and thither among thetrees. Here and there were flowering plants, unknown to me; here andthere I saw snakes, and one raised his head from a ledge of rock andhissed at me with a noise not unlike the spinning of a top. Little didI suppose that he was a deadly enemy and that the noise was the famousrattle.Then I came to a long thicket of these oaklike trees--live, orevergreen, oaks, I heard afterwards they should be called--which grewlow along the sand like brambles, the boughs curiously twisted, thefoliage compact, like thatch. The thicket stretched down from the top ofone of the sandy knolls, spreading and growing taller as it went, untilit reached the margin of the broad, reedy fen, through which the nearestof the little rivers soaked its way into the anchorage. The marsh wassteaming in the strong sun, and the outline of the Spy-glass trembledthrough the haze.All at once there began to go a sort of bustle among the bulrushes;a wild duck flew up with a quack, another followed, and soon over thewhole surface of the marsh a great cloud of birds hung screaming andcircling in the air. I judged at once that some of my shipmates must bedrawing near along the borders of the fen. Nor was I deceived, for soonI heard the very distant and low tones of a human voice, which, as Icontinued to give ear, grew steadily louder and nearer.This put me in a great fear, and I crawled under cover of the nearestlive-oak and squatted there, hearkening, as silent as a mouse.Another voice answered, and then the first voice, which I now recognizedto be Silver's, once more took up the story and ran on for a long whilein a stream, only now and again interrupted by the other. By the soundthey must have been talking earnestly, and almost fiercely; but nodistinct word came to my hearing.At last the speakers seemed to have paused and perhaps to have sat down,for not only did they cease to draw any nearer, but the birds themselvesbegan to grow more quiet and to settle again to their places in theswamp.And now I began to feel that I was neglecting my business, that sinceI had been so foolhardy as to come ashore with these desperadoes, theleast I could do was to overhear them at their councils, and that myplain and obvious duty was to draw as close as I could manage, under thefavourable ambush of the crouching trees.I could tell the direction of the speakers pretty exactly, not only bythe sound of their voices but by the behaviour of the few birds thatstill hung in alarm above the heads of the intruders.Crawling on all fours, I made steadily but slowly towards them, till atlast, raising my head to an aperture among the leaves, I could see cleardown into a little green dell beside the marsh, and closely set aboutwith trees, where Long John Silver and another of the crew stood face toface in conversation.The sun beat full upon them. Silver had thrown his hat beside him on theground, and his great, smooth, blond face, all shining with heat, waslifted to the other man's in a kind of appeal."Mate," he was saying, "it's because I thinks gold dust of you--golddust, and you may lay to that! If I hadn't took to you like pitch, doyou think I'd have been here a-warning of you? All's up--you can't makenor mend; it's to save your neck that I'm a-speaking, and if one of thewild uns knew it, where'd I be, Tom--now, tell me, where'd I be?""Silver," said the other man--and I observed he was not only red in theface, but spoke as hoarse as a crow, and his voice shook too, like ataut rope--"Silver," says he, "you're old, and you're honest, or has thename for it; and you've money too, which lots of poor sailors hasn't;and you're brave, or I'm mistook. And will you tell me you'll letyourself be led away with that kind of a mess of swabs? Not you! As sureas God sees me, I'd sooner lose my hand. If I turn agin my dooty--"And then all of a sudden he was interrupted by a noise. I had foundone of the honest hands--well, here, at that same moment, came news ofanother. Far away out in the marsh there arose, all of a sudden, a soundlike the cry of anger, then another on the back of it; and then onehorrid, long-drawn scream. The rocks of the Spy-glass re-echoed it ascore of times; the whole troop of marsh-birds rose again, darkeningheaven, with a simultaneous whirr; and long after that death yell wasstill ringing in my brain, silence had re-established its empire, andonly the rustle of the redescending birds and the boom of the distantsurges disturbed the languor of the afternoon.Tom had leaped at the sound, like a horse at the spur, but Silver hadnot winked an eye. He stood where he was, resting lightly on his crutch,watching his companion like a snake about to spring."John!" said the sailor, stretching out his hand."Hands off!" cried Silver, leaping back a yard, as it seemed to me, withthe speed and security of a trained gymnast."Hands off, if you like, John Silver," said the other. "It's a blackconscience that can make you feared of me. But in heaven's name, tellme, what was that?""That?" returned Silver, smiling away, but warier than ever, his eyea mere pin-point in his big face, but gleaming like a crumb of glass."That? Oh, I reckon that'll be Alan."And at this point Tom flashed out like a hero."Alan!" he cried. "Then rest his soul for a true seaman! And as for you,John Silver, long you've been a mate of mine, but you're mate of mineno more. If I die like a dog, I'll die in my dooty. You've killed Alan,have you? Kill me too, if you can. But I defies you."And with that, this brave fellow turned his back directly on the cookand set off walking for the beach. But he was not destined to go far.With a cry John seized the branch of a tree, whipped the crutch out ofhis armpit, and sent that uncouth missile hurtling through the air.It struck poor Tom, point foremost, and with stunning violence, rightbetween the shoulders in the middle of his back. His hands flew up, hegave a sort of gasp, and fell.Whether he were injured much or little, none could ever tell. Likeenough, to judge from the sound, his back was broken on the spot. But hehad no time given him to recover. Silver, agile as a monkey even withoutleg or crutch, was on the top of him next moment and had twice buriedhis knife up to the hilt in that defenceless body. From my place ofambush, I could hear him pant aloud as he struck the blows.I do not know what it rightly is to faint, but I do know that for thenext little while the whole world swam away from before me in a whirlingmist; Silver and the birds, and the tall Spy-glass hilltop, goinground and round and topsy-turvy before my eyes, and all manner of bellsringing and distant voices shouting in my ear.When I came again to myself the monster had pulled himself together,his crutch under his arm, his hat upon his head. Just before him Tomlay motionless upon the sward; but the murderer minded him not a whit,cleansing his blood-stained knife the while upon a wisp of grass.Everything else was unchanged, the sun still shining mercilessly on thesteaming marsh and the tall pinnacle of the mountain, and I could scarcepersuade myself that murder had been actually done and a human lifecruelly cut short a moment since before my eyes.But now John put his hand into his pocket, brought out a whistle, andblew upon it several modulated blasts that rang far across the heatedair. I could not tell, of course, the meaning of the signal, butit instantly awoke my fears. More men would be coming. I might bediscovered. They had already slain two of the honest people; after Tomand Alan, might not I come next?Instantly I began to extricate myself and crawl back again, with whatspeed and silence I could manage, to the more open portion of thewood. As I did so, I could hear hails coming and going between the oldbuccaneer and his comrades, and this sound of danger lent me wings. Assoon as I was clear of the thicket, I ran as I never ran before, scarceminding the direction of my flight, so long as it led me from themurderers; and as I ran, fear grew and grew upon me until it turned intoa kind of frenzy.Indeed, could anyone be more entirely lost than I? When the gun fired,how should I dare to go down to the boats among those fiends, stillsmoking from their crime? Would not the first of them who saw me wringmy neck like a snipe's? Would not my absence itself be an evidence tothem of my alarm, and therefore of my fatal knowledge? It was all over,I thought. Good-bye to the HISPANIOLA; good-bye to the squire, thedoctor, and the captain! There was nothing left for me but death bystarvation or death by the hands of the mutineers.All this while, as I say, I was still running, and without taking anynotice, I had drawn near to the foot of the little hill with the twopeaks and had got into a part of the island where the live-oaks grewmore widely apart and seemed more like forest trees in their bearing anddimensions. Mingled with these were a few scattered pines, some fifty,some nearer seventy, feet high. The air too smelt more freshly than downbeside the marsh.And here a fresh alarm brought me to a standstill with a thumping heart.15The Man of the IslandFROM the side of the hill, which was here steep and stony, a spout ofgravel was dislodged and fell rattling and bounding through the trees.My eyes turned instinctively in that direction, and I saw a figure leapwith great rapidity behind the trunk of a pine. What it was, whetherbear or man or monkey, I could in no wise tell. It seemed dark andshaggy; more I knew not. But the terror of this new apparition broughtme to a stand.I was now, it seemed, cut off upon both sides; behind me the murderers,before me this lurking nondescript. And immediately I began to preferthe dangers that I knew to those I knew not. Silver himself appearedless terrible in contrast with this creature of the woods, and I turnedon my heel, and looking sharply behind me over my shoulder, began toretrace my steps in the direction of the boats.Instantly the figure reappeared, and making a wide circuit, began tohead me off. I was tired, at any rate; but had I been as fresh as when Irose, I could see it was in vain for me to contend in speed with such anadversary. From trunk to trunk the creature flitted like a deer, runningmanlike on two legs, but unlike any man that I had ever seen, stoopingalmost double as it ran. Yet a man it was, I could no longer be in doubtabout that.I began to recall what I had heard of cannibals. I was within an ace ofcalling for help. But the mere fact that he was a man, however wild,had somewhat reassured me, and my fear of Silver began to revive inproportion. I stood still, therefore, and cast about for some method ofescape; and as I was so thinking, the recollection of my pistol flashedinto my mind. As soon as I remembered I was not defenceless, courageglowed again in my heart and I set my face resolutely for this man ofthe island and walked briskly towards him.He was concealed by this time behind another tree trunk; but he musthave been watching me closely, for as soon as I began to move in hisdirection he reappeared and took a step to meet me. Then he hesitated,drew back, came forward again, and at last, to my wonder andconfusion, threw himself on his knees and held out his clasped hands insupplication.At that I once more stopped."Who are you?" I asked."Ben Gunn," he answered, and his voice sounded hoarse and awkward,like a rusty lock. "I'm poor Ben Gunn, I am; and I haven't spoke with aChristian these three years."I could now see that he was a white man like myself and that hisfeatures were even pleasing. His skin, wherever it was exposed, wasburnt by the sun; even his lips were black, and his fair eyes lookedquite startling in so dark a face. Of all the beggar-men that I had seenor fancied, he was the chief for raggedness. He was clothed with tattersof old ship's canvas and old sea-cloth, and this extraordinary patchworkwas all held together by a system of the most various and incongruousfastenings, brass buttons, bits of stick, and loops of tarry gaskin.About his waist he wore an old brass-buckled leather belt, which was theone thing solid in his whole accoutrement."Three years!" I cried. "Were you shipwrecked?""Nay, mate," said he; "marooned."I had heard the word, and I knew it stood for a horrible kind ofpunishment common enough among the buccaneers, in which the offenderis put ashore with a little powder and shot and left behind on somedesolate and distant island."Marooned three years agone," he continued, "and lived on goats sincethen, and berries, and oysters. Wherever a man is, says I, a man cando for himself. But, mate, my heart is sore for Christian diet. Youmightn't happen to have a piece of cheese about you, now? No? Well,many's the long night I've dreamed of cheese--toasted, mostly--and wokeup again, and here I were.""If ever I can get aboard again," said I, "you shall have cheese by thestone."All this time he had been feeling the stuff of my jacket, smoothingmy hands, looking at my boots, and generally, in the intervals ofhis speech, showing a childish pleasure in the presence of a fellowcreature. But at my last words he perked up into a kind of startledslyness."If ever you can get aboard again, says you?" he repeated. "Why, now,who's to hinder you?""Not you, I know," was my reply."And right you was," he cried. "Now you--what do you call yourself,mate?""Jim," I told him."Jim, Jim," says he, quite pleased apparently. "Well, now, Jim, I'velived that rough as you'd be ashamed to hear of. Now, for instance, youwouldn't think I had had a pious mother--to look at me?" he asked."Why, no, not in particular," I answered."Ah, well," said he, "but I had--remarkable pious. And I was a civil,pious boy, and could rattle off my catechism that fast, as you couldn'ttell one word from another. And here's what it come to, Jim, and itbegun with chuck-farthen on the blessed grave-stones! That's what itbegun with, but it went further'n that; and so my mother told me, andpredicked the whole, she did, the pious woman! But it were Providencethat put me here. I've thought it all out in this here lonely island,and I'm back on piety. You don't catch me tasting rum so much, but justa thimbleful for luck, of course, the first chance I have. I'm boundI'll be good, and I see the way to. And, Jim"--looking all round him andlowering his voice to a whisper--"I'm rich."I now felt sure that the poor fellow had gone crazy in his solitude, andI suppose I must have shown the feeling in my face, for he repeated thestatement hotly: "Rich! Rich! I says. And I'll tell you what: I'll makea man of you, Jim. Ah, Jim, you'll bless your stars, you will, you wasthe first that found me!"And at this there came suddenly a lowering shadow over his face, and hetightened his grasp upon my hand and raised a forefinger threateninglybefore my eyes."Now, Jim, you tell me true: that ain't Flint's ship?" he asked.At this I had a happy inspiration. I began to believe that I had foundan ally, and I answered him at once."It's not Flint's ship, and Flint is dead; but I'll tell you true, asyou ask me--there are some of Flint's hands aboard; worse luck for therest of us.""Not a man--with one--leg?" he gasped."Silver?" I asked."Ah, Silver!" says he. "That were his name.""He's the cook, and the ringleader too."He was still holding me by the wrist, and at that he give it quite awring."If you was sent by Long John," he said, "I'm as good as pork, and Iknow it. But where was you, do you suppose?"I had made my mind up in a moment, and by way of answer told himthe whole story of our voyage and the predicament in which we foundourselves. He heard me with the keenest interest, and when I had done hepatted me on the head."You're a good lad, Jim," he said; "and you're all in a clove hitch,ain't you? Well, you just put your trust in Ben Gunn--Ben Gunn's the manto do it. Would you think it likely, now, that your squire would provea liberal-minded one in case of help--him being in a clove hitch, as youremark?"I told him the squire was the most liberal of men."Aye, but you see," returned Ben Gunn, "I didn't mean giving me a gateto keep, and a suit of livery clothes, and such; that's not my mark,Jim. What I mean is, would he be likely to come down to the toon of, sayone thousand pounds out of money that's as good as a man's own already?""I am sure he would," said I. "As it was, all hands were to share.""AND a passage home?" he added with a look of great shrewdness."Why," I cried, "the squire's a gentleman. And besides, if we got rid ofthe others, we should want you to help work the vessel home.""Ah," said he, "so you would." And he seemed very much relieved."Now, I'll tell you what," he went on. "So much I'll tell you, and nomore. I were in Flint's ship when he buried the treasure; he andsix along--six strong seamen. They was ashore nigh on a week, and usstanding off and on in the old WALRUS. One fine day up went the signal,and here come Flint by himself in a little boat, and his head done up ina blue scarf. The sun was getting up, and mortal white he looked aboutthe cutwater. But, there he was, you mind, and the six all dead--deadand buried. How he done it, not a man aboard us could make out. It wasbattle, murder, and sudden death, leastways--him against six. BillyBones was the mate; Long John, he was quartermaster; and they asked himwhere the treasure was. 'Ah,' says he, 'you can go ashore, if you like,and stay,' he says; 'but as for the ship, she'll beat up for more, bythunder!' That's what he said."Well, I was in another ship three years back, and we sighted thisisland. 'Boys,' said I, 'here's Flint's treasure; let's land and findit.' The cap'n was displeased at that, but my messmates were all of amind and landed. Twelve days they looked for it, and every day they hadthe worse word for me, until one fine morning all hands went aboard. 'Asfor you, Benjamin Gunn,' says they, 'here's a musket,' they says, 'anda spade, and pick-axe. You can stay here and find Flint's money foryourself,' they says."Well, Jim, three years have I been here, and not a bite of Christiandiet from that day to this. But now, you look here; look at me. Do Ilook like a man before the mast? No, says you. Nor I weren't, neither, Isays."And with that he winked and pinched me hard."Just you mention them words to your squire, Jim," he went on. "Nor heweren't, neither--that's the words. Three years he were the man of thisisland, light and dark, fair and rain; and sometimes he would maybethink upon a prayer (says you), and sometimes he would maybe think ofhis old mother, so be as she's alive (you'll say); but the most partof Gunn's time (this is what you'll say)--the most part of his time wastook up with another matter. And then you'll give him a nip, like I do."And he pinched me again in the most confidential manner."Then," he continued, "then you'll up, and you'll say this: Gunn is agood man (you'll say), and he puts a precious sight more confidence--aprecious sight, mind that--in a gen'leman born than in these gen'lemanof fortune, having been one hisself.""Well," I said, "I don't understand one word that you've been saying.But that's neither here nor there; for how am I to get on board?""Ah," said he, "that's the hitch, for sure. Well, there's my boat, thatI made with my two hands. I keep her under the white rock. If the worstcome to the worst, we might try that after dark. Hi!" he broke out."What's that?"For just then, although the sun had still an hour or two to run, all theechoes of the island awoke and bellowed to the thunder of a cannon."They have begun to fight!" I cried. "Follow me."And I began to run towards the anchorage, my terrors all forgotten,while close at my side the marooned man in his goatskins trotted easilyand lightly."Left, left," says he; "keep to your left hand, mate Jim! Under thetrees with you! Theer's where I killed my first goat. They don't comedown here now; they're all mastheaded on them mountings for the fearof Benjamin Gunn. Ah! And there's the cetemery"--cemetery, he must havemeant. "You see the mounds? I come here and prayed, nows and thens, whenI thought maybe a Sunday would be about doo. It weren't quite a chapel,but it seemed more solemn like; and then, says you, Ben Gunn wasshort-handed--no chapling, nor so much as a Bible and a flag, you says."So he kept talking as I ran, neither expecting nor receiving any answer.The cannon-shot was followed after a considerable interval by a volleyof small arms.Another pause, and then, not a quarter of a mile in front of me, Ibeheld the Union Jack flutter in the air above a wood.PART FOUR--The Stockade16Narrative Continued by the Doctor: How the Ship Was AbandonedIT was about half past one--three bells in the sea phrase--that the twoboats went ashore from the HISPANIOLA. The captain, the squire, and Iwere talking matters over in the cabin. Had there been a breath of wind,we should have fallen on the six mutineers who were left aboard withus, slipped our cable, and away to sea. But the wind was wanting; andto complete our helplessness, down came Hunter with the news that JimHawkins had slipped into a boat and was gone ashore with the rest.It never occurred to us to doubt Jim Hawkins, but we were alarmed forhis safety. With the men in the temper they were in, it seemed an evenchance if we should see the lad again. We ran on deck. The pitch wasbubbling in the seams; the nasty stench of the place turned me sick;if ever a man smelt fever and dysentery, it was in that abominableanchorage. The six scoundrels were sitting grumbling under a sail in theforecastle; ashore we could see the gigs made fast and a man sittingin each, hard by where the river runs in. One of them was whistling"Lillibullero."Waiting was a strain, and it was decided that Hunter and I should goashore with the jolly-boat in quest of information.The gigs had leaned to their right, but Hunter and I pulled straight in,in the direction of the stockade upon the chart. The two who wereleft guarding their boats seemed in a bustle at our appearance;"Lillibullero" stopped off, and I could see the pair discussing whatthey ought to do. Had they gone and told Silver, all might have turnedout differently; but they had their orders, I suppose, and decided tosit quietly where they were and hark back again to "Lillibullero."There was a slight bend in the coast, and I steered so as to put itbetween us; even before we landed we had thus lost sight of the gigs.I jumped out and came as near running as I durst, with a big silkhandkerchief under my hat for coolness' sake and a brace of pistolsready primed for safety.I had not gone a hundred yards when I reached the stockade.This was how it was: a spring of clear water rose almost at the top of aknoll. Well, on the knoll, and enclosing the spring, they had clapped astout loghouse fit to hold two score of people on a pinch and loopholedfor musketry on either side. All round this they had cleared a widespace, and then the thing was completed by a paling six feet high,without door or opening, too strong to pull down without time and labourand too open to shelter the besiegers. The people in the log-house hadthem in every way; they stood quiet in shelter and shot the others likepartridges. All they wanted was a good watch and food; for, short of acomplete surprise, they might have held the place against a regiment.What particularly took my fancy was the spring. For though we had a goodenough place of it in the cabin of the HISPANIOLA, with plenty of armsand ammunition, and things to eat, and excellent wines, there had beenone thing overlooked--we had no water. I was thinking this over whenthere came ringing over the island the cry of a man at the point ofdeath. I was not new to violent death--I have served his Royal Highnessthe Duke of Cumberland, and got a wound myself at Fontenoy--but I knowmy pulse went dot and carry one. "Jim Hawkins is gone," was my firstthought.It is something to have been an old soldier, but more still to have beena doctor. There is no time to dilly-dally in our work. And so now I madeup my mind instantly, and with no time lost returned to the shore andjumped on board the jolly-boat.By good fortune Hunter pulled a good oar. We made the water fly, and theboat was soon alongside and I aboard the schooner.I found them all shaken, as was natural. The squire was sitting down, aswhite as a sheet, thinking of the harm he had led us to, the good soul!And one of the six forecastle hands was little better."There's a man," says Captain Smollett, nodding towards him, "new tothis work. He came nigh-hand fainting, doctor, when he heard the cry.Another touch of the rudder and that man would join us."I told my plan to the captain, and between us we settled on the detailsof its accomplishment.We put old Redruth in the gallery between the cabin and the forecastle,with three or four loaded muskets and a mattress for protection. Hunterbrought the boat round under the stern-port, and Joyce and I set to workloading her with powder tins, muskets, bags of biscuits, kegs of pork, acask of cognac, and my invaluable medicine chest.In the meantime, the squire and the captain stayed on deck, and thelatter hailed the coxswain, who was the principal man aboard."Mr. Hands," he said, "here are two of us with a brace of pistols each.If any one of you six make a signal of any description, that man'sdead."They were a good deal taken aback, and after a little consultation oneand all tumbled down the fore companion, thinking no doubt to take uson the rear. But when they saw Redruth waiting for them in the sparredgalley, they went about ship at once, and a head popped out again ondeck."Down, dog!" cries the captain.And the head popped back again; and we heard no more, for the time, ofthese six very faint-hearted seamen.By this time, tumbling things in as they came, we had the jolly-boatloaded as much as we dared. Joyce and I got out through the stern-port,and we made for shore again as fast as oars could take us.This second trip fairly aroused the watchers along shore. "Lillibullero"was dropped again; and just before we lost sight of them behind thelittle point, one of them whipped ashore and disappeared. I had half amind to change my plan and destroy their boats, but I feared that Silverand the others might be close at hand, and all might very well be lostby trying for too much.We had soon touched land in the same place as before and set toprovision the block house. All three made the first journey, heavilyladen, and tossed our stores over the palisade. Then, leaving Joyce toguard them--one man, to be sure, but with half a dozen muskets--Hunterand I returned to the jolly-boat and loaded ourselves once more. Sowe proceeded without pausing to take breath, till the whole cargo wasbestowed, when the two servants took up their position in the blockhouse, and I, with all my power, sculled back to the HISPANIOLA.That we should have risked a second boat load seems more daring than itreally was. They had the advantage of numbers, of course, but we had theadvantage of arms. Not one of the men ashore had a musket, and beforethey could get within range for pistol shooting, we flattered ourselveswe should be able to give a good account of a half-dozen at least.The squire was waiting for me at the stern window, all his faintnessgone from him. He caught the painter and made it fast, and we fell toloading the boat for our very lives. Pork, powder, and biscuit was thecargo, with only a musket and a cutlass apiece for the squire and meand Redruth and the captain. The rest of the arms and powder we droppedoverboard in two fathoms and a half of water, so that we could seethe bright steel shining far below us in the sun, on the clean, sandybottom.By this time the tide was beginning to ebb, and the ship was swinginground to her anchor. Voices were heard faintly halloaing in thedirection of the two gigs; and though this reassured us for Joyce andHunter, who were well to the eastward, it warned our party to be off.Redruth retreated from his place in the gallery and dropped into theboat, which we then brought round to the ship's counter, to be handierfor Captain Smollett."Now, men," said he, "do you hear me?"There was no answer from the forecastle."It's to you, Abraham Gray--it's to you I am speaking."Still no reply."Gray," resumed Mr. Smollett, a little louder, "I am leaving this ship,and I order you to follow your captain. I know you are a good man atbottom, and I dare say not one of the lot of you's as bad as he makesout. I have my watch here in my hand; I give you thirty seconds to joinme in."There was a pause."Come, my fine fellow," continued the captain; "don't hang so long instays. I'm risking my life and the lives of these good gentlemen everysecond."There was a sudden scuffle, a sound of blows, and out burst AbrahamGray with a knife cut on the side of the cheek, and came running to thecaptain like a dog to the whistle."I'm with you, sir," said he.And the next moment he and the captain had dropped aboard of us, and wehad shoved off and given way.We were clear out of the ship, but not yet ashore in our stockade.17Narrative Continued by the Doctor: The Jolly-boat's Last TripTHIS fifth trip was quite different from any of the others. In thefirst place, the little gallipot of a boat that we were in was gravelyoverloaded. Five grown men, and three of them--Trelawney, Redruth, andthe captain--over six feet high, was already more than she was meantto carry. Add to that the powder, pork, and bread-bags. The gunwale waslipping astern. Several times we shipped a little water, and my breechesand the tails of my coat were all soaking wet before we had gone ahundred yards.The captain made us trim the boat, and we got her to lie a little moreevenly. All the same, we were afraid to breathe.In the second place, the ebb was now making--a strong rippling currentrunning westward through the basin, and then south'ard and seaward downthe straits by which we had entered in the morning. Even the rippleswere a danger to our overloaded craft, but the worst of it was that wewere swept out of our true course and away from our proper landing-placebehind the point. If we let the current have its way we should comeashore beside the gigs, where the pirates might appear at any moment."I cannot keep her head for the stockade, sir," said I to the captain.I was steering, while he and Redruth, two fresh men, were at the oars."The tide keeps washing her down. Could you pull a little stronger?""Not without swamping the boat," said he. "You must bear up, sir, if youplease--bear up until you see you're gaining."I tried and found by experiment that the tide kept sweeping us westwarduntil I had laid her head due east, or just about right angles to theway we ought to go."We'll never get ashore at this rate," said I."If it's the only course that we can lie, sir, we must even lie it,"returned the captain. "We must keep upstream. You see, sir," he went on,"if once we dropped to leeward of the landing-place, it's hard to saywhere we should get ashore, besides the chance of being boarded by thegigs; whereas, the way we go the current must slacken, and then we candodge back along the shore.""The current's less a'ready, sir," said the man Gray, who was sitting inthe fore-sheets; "you can ease her off a bit.""Thank you, my man," said I, quite as if nothing had happened, for wehad all quietly made up our minds to treat him like one of ourselves.Suddenly the captain spoke up again, and I thought his voice was alittle changed."The gun!" said he."I have thought of that," said I, for I made sure he was thinking of abombardment of the fort. "They could never get the gun ashore, and ifthey did, they could never haul it through the woods.""Look astern, doctor," replied the captain.We had entirely forgotten the long nine; and there, to our horror, werethe five rogues busy about her, getting off her jacket, as they calledthe stout tarpaulin cover under which she sailed. Not only that, butit flashed into my mind at the same moment that the round-shot and thepowder for the gun had been left behind, and a stroke with an axe wouldput it all into the possession of the evil ones abroad."Israel was Flint's gunner," said Gray hoarsely.At any risk, we put the boat's head direct for the landing-place. Bythis time we had got so far out of the run of the current that we keptsteerage way even at our necessarily gentle rate of rowing, and I couldkeep her steady for the goal. But the worst of it was that with thecourse I now held we turned our broadside instead of our stern to theHISPANIOLA and offered a target like a barn door.I could hear as well as see that brandy-faced rascal Israel Handsplumping down a round-shot on the deck."Who's the best shot?" asked the captain."Mr. Trelawney, out and away," said I."Mr. Trelawney, will you please pick me off one of these men, sir?Hands, if possible," said the captain.Trelawney was as cool as steel. He looked to the priming of his gun."Now," cried the captain, "easy with that gun, sir, or you'll swamp theboat. All hands stand by to trim her when he aims."The squire raised his gun, the rowing ceased, and we leaned over to theother side to keep the balance, and all was so nicely contrived that wedid not ship a drop.They had the gun, by this time, slewed round upon the swivel, and Hands,who was at the muzzle with the rammer, was in consequence the mostexposed. However, we had no luck, for just as Trelawney fired, down hestooped, the ball whistled over him, and it was one of the other fourwho fell.The cry he gave was echoed not only by his companions on board but by agreat number of voices from the shore, and looking in that directionI saw the other pirates trooping out from among the trees and tumblinginto their places in the boats."Here come the gigs, sir," said I."Give way, then," cried the captain. "We mustn't mind if we swamp hernow. If we can't get ashore, all's up.""Only one of the gigs is being manned, sir," I added; "the crew of theother most likely going round by shore to cut us off.""They'll have a hot run, sir," returned the captain. "Jack ashore, youknow. It's not them I mind; it's the round-shot. Carpet bowls! My lady'smaid couldn't miss. Tell us, squire, when you see the match, and we'llhold water."In the meanwhile we had been making headway at a good pace for a boat sooverloaded, and we had shipped but little water in the process. We werenow close in; thirty or forty strokes and we should beach her, for theebb had already disclosed a narrow belt of sand below the clusteringtrees. The gig was no longer to be feared; the little point had alreadyconcealed it from our eyes. The ebb-tide, which had so cruelly delayedus, was now making reparation and delaying our assailants. The onesource of danger was the gun."If I durst," said the captain, "I'd stop and pick off another man."But it was plain that they meant nothing should delay their shot. Theyhad never so much as looked at their fallen comrade, though he was notdead, and I could see him trying to crawl away."Ready!" cried the squire."Hold!" cried the captain, quick as an echo.And he and Redruth backed with a great heave that sent her stern bodilyunder water. The report fell in at the same instant of time. This wasthe first that Jim heard, the sound of the squire's shot not havingreached him. Where the ball passed, not one of us precisely knew, but Ifancy it must have been over our heads and that the wind of it may havecontributed to our disaster.At any rate, the boat sank by the stern, quite gently, in three feet ofwater, leaving the captain and myself, facing each other, on our feet.The other three took complete headers, and came up again drenched andbubbling.So far there was no great harm. No lives were lost, and we could wadeashore in safety. But there were all our stores at the bottom, and tomake things worse, only two guns out of five remained in a state forservice. Mine I had snatched from my knees and held over my head, bya sort of instinct. As for the captain, he had carried his over hisshoulder by a bandoleer, and like a wise man, lock uppermost. The otherthree had gone down with the boat.To add to our concern, we heard voices already drawing near us in thewoods along shore, and we had not only the danger of being cut off fromthe stockade in our half-crippled state but the fear before us whether,if Hunter and Joyce were attacked by half a dozen, they would have thesense and conduct to stand firm. Hunter was steady, that we knew; Joycewas a doubtful case--a pleasant, polite man for a valet and to brushone's clothes, but not entirely fitted for a man of war.With all this in our minds, we waded ashore as fast as we could, leavingbehind us the poor jolly-boat and a good half of all our powder andprovisions.18Narrative Continued by the Doctor: End of the First Day's FightingWE made our best speed across the strip of wood that now divided us fromthe stockade, and at every step we took the voices of the buccaneersrang nearer. Soon we could hear their footfalls as they ran and thecracking of the branches as they breasted across a bit of thicket.I began to see we should have a brush for it in earnest and looked to mypriming."Captain," said I, "Trelawney is the dead shot. Give him your gun; hisown is useless."They exchanged guns, and Trelawney, silent and cool as he had been sincethe beginning of the bustle, hung a moment on his heel to see that allwas fit for service. At the same time, observing Gray to be unarmed, Ihanded him my cutlass. It did all our hearts good to see him spit in hishand, knit his brows, and make the blade sing through the air. It wasplain from every line of his body that our new hand was worth his salt.Forty paces farther we came to the edge of the wood and saw the stockadein front of us. We struck the enclosure about the middle of the southside, and almost at the same time, seven mutineers--Job Anderson, theboatswain, at their head--appeared in full cry at the southwesterncorner.They paused as if taken aback, and before they recovered, not only thesquire and I, but Hunter and Joyce from the block house, had time tofire. The four shots came in rather a scattering volley, but they didthe business: one of the enemy actually fell, and the rest, withouthesitation, turned and plunged into the trees.After reloading, we walked down the outside of the palisade to see tothe fallen enemy. He was stone dead--shot through the heart.We began to rejoice over our good success when just at that moment apistol cracked in the bush, a ball whistled close past my ear, and poorTom Redruth stumbled and fell his length on the ground. Both the squireand I returned the shot, but as we had nothing to aim at, it is probablewe only wasted powder. Then we reloaded and turned our attention to poorTom.The captain and Gray were already examining him, and I saw with half aneye that all was over.I believe the readiness of our return volley had scattered the mutineersonce more, for we were suffered without further molestation to get thepoor old gamekeeper hoisted over the stockade and carried, groaning andbleeding, into the log-house.Poor old fellow, he had not uttered one word of surprise, complaint,fear, or even acquiescence from the very beginning of our troubles tillnow, when we had laid him down in the log-house to die. He had lain likea Trojan behind his mattress in the gallery; he had followed every ordersilently, doggedly, and well; he was the oldest of our party by a scoreof years; and now, sullen, old, serviceable servant, it was he that wasto die.The squire dropped down beside him on his knees and kissed his hand,crying like a child."Be I going, doctor?" he asked."Tom, my man," said I, "you're going home.""I wish I had had a lick at them with the gun first," he replied."Tom," said the squire, "say you forgive me, won't you?""Would that be respectful like, from me to you, squire?" was the answer."Howsoever, so be it, amen!"After a little while of silence, he said he thought somebody might reada prayer. "It's the custom, sir," he added apologetically. And not longafter, without another word, he passed away.In the meantime the captain, whom I had observed to be wonderfullyswollen about the chest and pockets, had turned out a great many variousstores--the British colours, a Bible, a coil of stoutish rope, pen, ink,the log-book, and pounds of tobacco. He had found a longish fir-treelying felled and trimmed in the enclosure, and with the help of Hunterhe had set it up at the corner of the log-house where the trunks crossedand made an angle. Then, climbing on the roof, he had with his own handbent and run up the colours.This seemed mightily to relieve him. He re-entered the log-house and setabout counting up the stores as if nothing else existed. But he had aneye on Tom's passage for all that, and as soon as all was over, cameforward with another flag and reverently spread it on the body."Don't you take on, sir," he said, shaking the squire's hand. "All'swell with him; no fear for a hand that's been shot down in his duty tocaptain and owner. It mayn't be good divinity, but it's a fact."Then he pulled me aside."Dr. Livesey," he said, "in how many weeks do you and squire expect theconsort?"I told him it was a question not of weeks but of months, that if wewere not back by the end of August Blandly was to send to find us, butneither sooner nor later. "You can calculate for yourself," I said."Why, yes," returned the captain, scratching his head; "and making alarge allowance, sir, for all the gifts of Providence, I should say wewere pretty close hauled.""How do you mean?" I asked."It's a pity, sir, we lost that second load. That's what I mean,"replied the captain. "As for powder and shot, we'll do. But the rationsare short, very short--so short, Dr. Livesey, that we're perhaps as wellwithout that extra mouth."And he pointed to the dead body under the flag.Just then, with a roar and a whistle, a round-shot passed high above theroof of the log-house and plumped far beyond us in the wood."Oho!" said the captain. "Blaze away! You've little enough powderalready, my lads."At the second trial, the aim was better, and the ball descended insidethe stockade, scattering a cloud of sand but doing no further damage."Captain," said the squire, "the house is quite invisible from the ship.It must be the flag they are aiming at. Would it not be wiser to take itin?""Strike my colours!" cried the captain. "No, sir, not I"; and as soonas he had said the words, I think we all agreed with him. For it wasnot only a piece of stout, seamanly, good feeling; it was good policybesides and showed our enemies that we despised their cannonade.All through the evening they kept thundering away. Ball after ball flewover or fell short or kicked up the sand in the enclosure, but they hadto fire so high that the shot fell dead and buried itself in the softsand. We had no ricochet to fear, and though one popped in through theroof of the log-house and out again through the floor, we soon got usedto that sort of horse-play and minded it no more than cricket."There is one good thing about all this," observed the captain; "thewood in front of us is likely clear. The ebb has made a good while; ourstores should be uncovered. Volunteers to go and bring in pork."Gray and Hunter were the first to come forward. Well armed, they stoleout of the stockade, but it proved a useless mission. The mutineers werebolder than we fancied or they put more trust in Israel's gunnery. Forfour or five of them were busy carrying off our stores and wading outwith them to one of the gigs that lay close by, pulling an oar or so tohold her steady against the current. Silver was in the stern-sheets incommand; and every man of them was now provided with a musket from somesecret magazine of their own.