World War I
World War I (WWI), which was predominantly called the World War or the Great War 
from its occurrence until 1939, and the First World War or World War I thereafter,[4] was a 
major war centred in Europe that began on 28 July 1914 and lasted until 11 November 1918. 
It involved all the world's great powers,[5] which were assembled in two opposing alliances: 
the Allies (centred around the Triple Entente) and the Central Powers (originally centred 
around the Triple Alliance).[6] More than 70 million military personnel, including 60 million 
Europeans, were mobilised in one of the largest wars in history.[7][8] More than 9 million 
combatants were killed, largely because of great technological advances in firepower without 
corresponding advances in mobility. It was the sixth deadliest conflict in world history.[9]
The assassination on 28 June 1914 of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, the heir to the 
throne of Austria-Hungary, was the proximate trigger of the war. Long-term causes, such as 
imperialistic foreign policies of the great powers of Europe, including the German Empire, the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Ottoman Empire, the Russian Empire, the British Empire, 
France, and Italy, played a major role. Ferdinand's assassination by a Yugoslav nationalist 
resulted in a Habsburg ultimatum against the Kingdom of Serbia.[10][11] Several alliances 
formed over the past decades were invoked, so within weeks the major powers were at war; 
via their colonies, the conflict soon spread around the world.
On 28 July, the conflict opened with the Austro-Hungarian invasion of Serbia,[12][13] followed 
by the German invasion of Belgium, Luxembourg and France; and a Russian attack against 
Germany. After the German march on Paris was brought to a halt, the Western Front settled 
into a static battle of attrition with a trench line that changed little until 1917. In the East, the 
Russian army successfully fought against the Austro-Hungarian forces but was forced back by 
the German army. Additional fronts opened after the Ottoman Empire joined the war in 1914, 
Italy and Bulgaria in 1915 and Romania in 1916. The Russian Empire collapsed in 1917, and 
Russia left the war after the October Revolution later that year. After a 1918 German 
offensive along the western front, United States forces entered the trenches and the Allies 
drove back the German armies in a series of successful offensives. Germany agreed to a cease-
fire on 11 November 1918, later known as Armistice Day.
By the war's end, four major imperial powers-the German, Russian, Austro-Hungarian and 
Ottoman empires-had been militarily and politically defeated and ceased to exist. The 
successor states of the former two lost a great amount of territory, while the latter two were 
dismantled entirely. The map of central Europe was redrawn into several smaller states.[14] The 
League of Nations was formed in the hope of preventing another such conflict. The European 
nationalism spawned by the war and the breakup of empires, the repercussions of Germany's 
defeat and problems with the Treaty of Versailles are generally agreed to be factors in the 
beginning of World War II.
Etymology
During the Interwar period the War was known by a variety of names in English-speaking countries. 
Besides being called the World War and the Great War,.[16] which were the most common names, it 
was also referred to merely as The War, or The War in Europe,[17] the War of Nations,[18] the 1914 
War,[19] or some variation on these and other names. Occasionally different names were used 
interchangeably within a single work, as in this Time article from 1924.[20] After the onset of the 
Second World War in 1939 the terms World War I or the First World War became standard, with 
British and Canadian historians favouring the First World War and Americans World War I. The 
notion that the "World War" was merely the first in a series was not a new idea at the time, 
however; it was first introduced in September 1914 by German biologist and philosopher Ernst 
Haeckel, who claimed that, "there is no doubt that the course and character of the feared 
'European War' ... will become the first world war in the full sense of the word."[21] In France and 
Belgium, the war was sometimes referred to as La Guerre du Droit (the War for Justice) or La 
Guerre Pour la Civilisation / de Oorlog tot de Beschaving (the War to Preserve Civilisation), 
especially on medals and commemorative monuments.
Background
In the 19th Century, the major European powers had gone to great lengths to maintain a 
balance of power throughout Europe, resulting by 1900 in a complex network of political and 
military alliances throughout the continent.[6] These had started in 1815, with the Holy 
Alliance between Prussia, Russia, and Austria. Then, in October 1873, German Chancellor 
Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: Dreikaiserbund) between 
the monarchs of Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany. This agreement failed because 
Austria-Hungary and Russia could not agree over Balkan policy, leaving Germany and 
Austria-Hungary in an alliance formed in 1879, called the Dual Alliance. This was seen as a 
method of countering Russian influence in the Balkans as the Ottoman Empire continued to 
weaken.[6] In 1882, this alliance was expanded to include Italy in what became the Triple 
Alliance.[22]
After 1870, European conflict was averted largely through a carefully planned network of 
treaties between the German Empire and the remainder of Europe orchestrated by Chancellor 
Bismarck. He especially worked to hold Russia at Germany's side to avoid a two-front war 
with France and Russia. When Wilhelm II ascended to the throne as German Emperor 
(Kaiser), Bismarck's alliances were gradually de-emphasised. For example, the Kaiser refused 
to renew the Reinsurance Treaty with Russia in 1890. Two years later, the Franco-Russian 
Alliance was signed to counteract the force of the Triple Alliance. In 1904, the United 
Kingdom sealed an alliance with France, the Entente cordiale and in 1907, the United 
Kingdom and Russia signed the Anglo-Russian Convention. This system of interlocking 
bilateral agreements formed the Triple Entente.[6]
German industrial and economic power had grown greatly after unification and the foundation of 
the Empire in 1870. From the mid-1890s on, the government of Wilhelm II used this base to devote 
significant economic resources to building up the Kaiserliche Marine (Imperial German Navy), 
established by Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz, in rivalry with the British Royal Navy for world naval 
supremacy.[23] As a result, both nations strove to out-build each other in terms of capital ships. With 
the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906, the British Empire expanded on its significant advantage 
over its German rivals.[23] The arms race between Britain and Germany eventually extended to the 
rest of Europe, with all the major powers devoting their industrial base to producing the equipment 
and weapons necessary for a pan-European conflict.[24] Between 1908 and 1913, the military 
spending of the European powers increased by 50 percent.[
Austria-Hungary precipitated the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909 by officially annexing the 
former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878. This 
angered the Kingdom of Serbia and its patron, the Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russian 
Empire.[26] Russian political manoeuvring in the region destabilised peace accords that were 
already fracturing in what was known as "the Powder keg of Europe".[26]
In 1912 and 1913, the First Balkan War was fought between the Balkan League and the 
fracturing Ottoman Empire. The resulting Treaty of London further shrank the Ottoman 
Empire, creating an independent Albanian State while enlarging the territorial holdings of 
Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro and Greece. When Bulgaria attacked both Serbia and Greece on 
16 June 1913, it lost most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece and Southern Dobruja to 
Romania in the 33-day Second Balkan War, further destabilising the region.[2
On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian-Serb student and member of Young Bosnia, 
assassinated the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in 
Sarajevo, Bosnia.[28] This began a period of diplomatic manoeuvring among Austria-Hungary, 
Germany, Russia, France, and Britain called the July Crisis. Wanting to finally end Serbian 
interference in Bosnia, Austria-Hungary delivered the July Ultimatum to Serbia, a series of ten 
demands intentionally made unacceptable, intending to provoke a war with Serbia.[29] When Serbia 
agreed to only eight of the ten demands, Austria-Hungary declared war on 28 July 1914. Strachan 
argues, "Whether an equivocal and early response by Serbia would have made any difference to 
Austria-Hungary's behaviour must be doubtful. Franz Ferdinand was not the sort of personality 
who commanded popularity, and his demise did not cast the empire into deepest mourning
The Russian Empire, unwilling to allow Austria-Hungary to eliminate its influence in the Balkans, and 
in support of its longtime Serb proteges, ordered a partial mobilisation one day later.[22] When the 
German Empire began to mobilise on 30 July 1914, France, angry about the German conquest of 
Alsace-Lorraine during the Franco-Prussian War, ordered French mobilisation on 1 August. 
Germany declared war on Russia on the same day.[31] The United Kingdom declared war on 
Germany, on 4 August 1914, following an "unsatisfactory reply" to the British ultimatum that 
Belgium must be kept neutral.[
Chronology
Opening hostilities
Confusion among the Central Powers
The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication. Germany had promised 
to support Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant 
differed. Previously-tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but never 
tested in exercises. Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern 
flank against Russia.[33] Germany, however, envisioned Austria-Hungary directing most of its 
troops against Russia, while Germany dealt with France. This confusion forced the Austro-
Hungarian Army to divide its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.
On 9 September 1914, the Septemberprogramm, a possible plan which detailed Germany's 
specific war aims and the conditions that Germany sought to force on the Allied Powers, was 
outlined by German Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg. It was never officially 
adopted.
Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French and German colonial forces in Africa. 
On 7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of Togoland. On 10 
August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting 
continued for the rest of the war. The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel 
Paul Emil von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World War I and only 
surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.[
Serbian campaign
The Serbian army fought the Battle of Cer against the invading Austro-Hungarians, beginning on 12 
August, occupying defensive positions on the south side of the Drina and Sava rivers. Over the next 
two weeks Austrian attacks were thrown back with heavy losses, which marked the first major 
Allied victory of the war and dashed Austro-Hungarian hopes of a swift victory. As a result, Austria 
had to keep sizeable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its efforts against Russia.
German forces in Belgium and France
t the outbreak of the First World War, the German army (consisting in the West of seven field 
armies) carried out a modified version of the Schlieffen Plan, designed to quickly attack 
France through neutral Belgium before turning southwards to encircle the French army on the 
German border.[10] The plan called for the right flank of the German advance to converge on 
Paris and initially, the Germans were successful, particularly in the Battle of the Frontiers (14-
24 August). By 12 September, the French with assistance from the British forces halted the 
German advance east of Paris at the First Battle of the Marne (5-12 September). The last days 
of this battle signified the end of mobile warfare in the west.[10] The French offensive into 
Germany launched on 7 August with the Battle of Mulhouse had limited success.
In the east, only one Field Army defended East Prussia and when Russia attacked in this 
region it diverted German forces intended for the Western Front. Germany defeated Russia in 
a series of battles collectively known as the First Battle of Tannenberg (17 August - 2 
September), but this diversion aggravated problems of insufficient speed of advance from rail-
heads not foreseen by the German General Staff. The Central Powers were denied a quick 
victory and forced to fight a war on two fronts. The German army had fought its way into a 
good defensive position inside France and had permanently incapacitated 230,000 more 
French and British troops than it had lost itself. Despite this, communications problems and 
questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of early victory
Asia and the Pacific
New Zealand occupied German Samoa (later Western Samoa) on 30 August. On 11 September, the 
Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of Neu Pommern (later New 
Britain), which formed part of German New Guinea. Japan seized Germany's Micronesian colonies 
and, after the Siege of Tsingtao, the German coaling port of Qingdao in the Chinese Shandong 
peninsula. Within a few months, the Allied forces had seized all the German territories in the 
Pacific; only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea remained
Early stages
Trench warfare begins
Military tactics before World War I had failed to keep pace with advances in technology. 
These advances allowed for impressive defence systems, which out-of-date military tactics 
could not break through for most of the war. Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to 
massed infantry advances. Artillery, vastly more lethal than in the 1870s, coupled with 
machine guns, made crossing open ground extremely difficult.[39] The Germans introduced 
poison gas; it soon became used by both sides, though it never proved decisive in winning a 
battle. Its effects were brutal, causing slow and painful death, and poison gas became one of 
the most-feared and best-remembered horrors of the war. Commanders on both sides failed to 
develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without heavy casualties.
In time, however, technology began to produce new offensive weapons, such as the tank.[40] 
Britain and France were its primary users; the Germans employed captured Allied tanks and 
small numbers of their own design. After the First Battle of the Marne, both Entente and 
German forces began a series of outflanking manoeuvres, in the so-called "Race to the Sea". 
Britain and France soon found themselves facing entrenched German forces from Lorraine to 
Belgium's coast.[10] Britain and France sought to take the offensive, while Germany defended 
the occupied territories; consequently, German trenches were much better constructed than 
those of their enemy. Anglo-French trenches were only intended to be "temporary" before 
their forces broke through German defences.[41] Both sides tried to break the stalemate using 
scientific and technological advances. On 22 April 1915 at the Second Battle of Ypres, the 
Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western 
Front. Algerian troops retreated when gassed and a six-kilometre (four-mile) hole opened in 
the Allied lines that the Germans quickly exploited, taking Kitcheners' Wood. Canadian 
soldiers closed the breach at the Second Battle of Ypres.[42] At the Third Battle of Ypres, 
Canadian and ANZAC troops took the village of Passchendaele.
On 1 July 1916, the British Army endured the bloodiest day in its history, suffering 57,470 
casualties, including 19,240 dead, on the first day of the Battle of the Somme. Most of the 
casualties occurred in the first hour of the attack. The entire Somme offensive cost the British 
Army almost half a million men.[43]
Neither side proved able to deliver a decisive blow for the next two years, though protracted 
German action at Verdun throughout 1916,[44] combined with the bloodletting at the Somme, 
brought the exhausted French army to the brink of collapse. Futile attempts at frontal assault 
came at a high price for both the British and the French poilu (infantry) and led to widespread 
mutinies, especially during the Nivelle Offensive.[45]
Throughout 1915-17, the British Empire and France suffered more casualties than Germany, 
because of both the strategic and tactical stances chosen by the sides. Strategically, while the 
Germans only mounted a single main offensive at Verdun, the Allies made several attempts to 
break through German lines. Tactically, German commander Erich Ludendorff's doctrine of 
"elastic defence" was well suited for trench warfare. This defence had a lightly defended 
forward position and a more powerful main position farther back beyond artillery range, from 
which an immediate and powerful counter-offensive could be launched.[46][47]
Ludendorff wrote on the fighting in 1917,
The 25th of August concluded the second phase of the Flanders battle. It had cost us 
heavily ... The costly August battles in Flanders and at Verdun imposed a heavy strain on the 
Western troops. In spite of all the concrete protection they seemed more or less powerless 
under the enormous weight of the enemy's artillery. At some points they no longer displayed 
the firmness which I, in common with the local commanders, had hoped for. The enemy 
managed to adapt himself to our method of employing counter attacks ... I myself was being 
put to a terrible strain. The state of affairs in the West appeared to prevent the execution of 
our plans elsewhere. Our wastage had been so high as to cause grave misgivings, and had 
exceeded all expectation.[48]
On the battle of the Menin Road Ridge, Ludendorff wrote,
Another terrific assault was made on our lines on the 20 September ... The enemy's onslaught 
on the 20th was successful, which proved the superiority of the attack over the defence. Its 
strength did not consist in the tanks; we found them inconvenient, but put them out of action 
all the same. The power of the attack lay in the artillery, and in the fact that ours did not do 
enough damage to the hostile infantry as they were assembling, and above all, at the actual 
time of the assault.[49]
Around 1.1 to 1.2 million soldiers from the British and Dominion armies were on the Western 
Front at any one time.[50] A thousand battalions, occupying sectors of the line from the North 
Sea to the Orne River, operated on a month-long four-stage rotation system, unless an 
offensive was underway. The front contained over 9,600 kilometres (5,965 mi) of trenches. 
Each battalion held its sector for about a week before moving back to support lines and then 
further back to the reserve lines before a week out-of-line, often in the Poperinge or Amiens 
areas.
In the 1917 Battle of Arras, the only significant British military success was the capture of 
Vimy Ridge by the Canadian Corps under Sir Arthur Currie and Julian Byng. The assaulting 
troops could, for the first time, overrun, rapidly reinforce and hold the ridge defending the 
coal-rich Douai plain.[
Naval war
At the start of the war, the German Empire had cruisers scattered across the globe, some of 
which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant shipping. The British Royal Navy 
systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability 
to protect Allied shipping. For example, the German detached light cruiser SMS Emden, part 
of the East-Asia squadron stationed at Tsingtao, seized or destroyed 15 merchantmen, as well 
as sinking a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer. However, most of the German East-Asia 
squadron-consisting of the armoured cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, light cruisers 
Nurnberg and Leipzig and two transport ships-did not have orders to raid shipping and was 
instead underway to Germany when it met British warships. The German flotilla and Dresden 
sank two armoured cruisers at the Battle of Coronel, but was almost destroyed at the Battle of 
the Falkland Islands in December 1914, with only Dresden and a few auxiliaries escaping, but 
at the Battle of Mas a Tierra these too were destroyed or interned.[53]
Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany. The 
strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, although this 
blockade violated accepted international law codified by several international agreements of 
the past two centuries.[54] Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering 
entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships.[55] Since there was limited 
response to this tactic, Germany expected a similar response to its unrestricted submarine 
warfare.[56]
The 1916 Battle of Jutland (German: Skagerrakschlacht, or "Battle of the Skagerrak") 
developed into the largest naval battle of the war, the only full-scale clash of battleships 
during the war, and one of the largest in history. It took place on 31 May - 1 June 1916, in the 
North Sea off Jutland. The Kaiserliche Marine's High Seas Fleet, commanded by Vice 
Admiral Reinhard Scheer, squared off against the Royal Navy's Grand Fleet, led by Admiral 
Sir John Jellicoe. The engagement was a stand off, as the Germans, outmanoeuvred by the 
larger British fleet, managed to escape and inflicted more damage to the British fleet than 
they received. Strategically, however, the British asserted their control of the sea, and the bulk 
of the German surface fleet remained confined to port for the duration of the war.[57]
German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North America and Britain.[58] The 
nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews 
of the merchant ships little hope of survival.[58][59] The United States launched a protest, and 
Germany changed its rules of engagement. After the notorious sinking of the passenger ship 
RMS Lusitania in 1915, Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while Britain armed 
its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the "cruiser rules" which demanded 
warning and placing crews in "a place of safety" (a standard which lifeboats did not meet).[60] 
Finally, in early 1917 Germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realising 
the Americans would eventually enter the war.[58][61] Germany sought to strangle Allied sea 
lanes before the U.S. could transport a large army overseas, but could maintain only five long-
range U-boats on station, to limited effect.[58]
 
U-155 exhibited near Tower Bridge in London after the First World War.
The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, 
escorted by destroyers. This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find targets, which 
significantly lessened losses; after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, 
accompanying destroyers might attack a submerged submarine with some hope of success. 
Convoys slowed the flow of supplies, since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled. The 
solution to the delays was an extensive program to build new freighters. Troopships were too 
fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic in convoys.[62] The U-boats had 
sunk more than 5,000 Allied ships, at a cost of 199 submarines.[63]
World War I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS Furious launching 
Sopwith Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as 
well as blimps for antisubmarine patrol
Southern theatres
War in the Balkans
Faced with Russia, Austria-Hungary could spare only one-third of its army to attack Serbia. After 
suffering heavy losses, the Austrians briefly occupied the Serbian capital, Belgrade. A Serbian 
counter attack in the battle of Kolubara, however, succeeded in driving them from the country by 
the end of 1914. For the first ten months of 1915, Austria-Hungary used most of its military reserves 
to fight Italy. German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by persuading 
Bulgaria to join in attacking Serbia. The Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia 
provided troops for Austria-Hungary, invading Serbia as well as fighting Russia and Italy. 
Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.[
Serbia was conquered in a little more than a month. The attack began in October, when the Central 
Powers launched an offensive from the north; four days later the Bulgarians joined the attack from 
the east. The Serbian army, fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into Albania, 
halting only once to make a stand against the Bulgarians. The Serbs suffered defeat near modern 
day Gnjilane in the Battle of Kosovo. Montenegro covered the Serbian retreat towards the Adriatic 
coast in the Battle of Mojkovac in 6-7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians conquered 
Montenegro, too. Serbian forces were evacuated by ship to Greece.
In late 1915, a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece, to offer assistance and to 
pressure the government to declare war against the Central Powers. Unfortunately for the 
Allies, the pro-German King Constantine I dismissed the pro-Allied government of 
Eleftherios Venizelos, before the Allied expeditionary force could arrive.[68] The friction 
between the king of Greece and the Allies continued to accumulate with the National Schism, 
which effectively divided Greece between regions still loyal to the king and the new 
provisional government of Venizelos in Salonica. After intensive diplomatic negotiations and 
an armed confrontation in Athens between Allied and royalist forces (an incident known as 
Noemvriana) the king of Greece resigned, and his second son Alexander took his place. 
Venizelos returned to Athens on 29 May 1917 and Greece, now unified, officially joined the 
war on the side of the Allies. The entire Greek army was mobilized and began to participate in 
military operations against the Central Powers on the Macedonian front.
 
 
The Entente in Macedonia. From left to right: soldiers from Indochina, France, Senegal, Great 
Britain, Russia, Italy, Serbia, Greece, and India.
After conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria. Bulgarians 
commenced Bulgarization of the Serbian population in their occupation zone, banishing 
Serbian Cyrillic and the Serbian Orthodox Church.[citation needed] After forced conscription of the 
Serbian population into the Bulgarian army[citation needed] in 1917, the Toplica Uprising began. 
Serbian rebels liberated for a short time the area between the Kopaonik mountains and the 
South Morava river. The uprising was crushed by joint efforts of Bulgarian and Austrian 
forces at the end of March 1917.
The Macedonian Front was mostly static. Serbian forces retook part of Macedonia by 
recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916. Only at the end of the conflict did the Entente 
powers break through, after most of the German and Austro-Hungarian troops had 
withdrawn. The Bulgarians suffered their only defeat of the war at the Battle of Dobro Pole 
but days later, they decisively defeated British and Greek forces at the Battle of Doiran, 
avoiding occupation. Bulgaria signed an armistice on 29 September 1918.[69] Hindenburg and 
Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly 
against the Central Powers and a day after the Bulgarian collapse, during a meeting with 
government officials, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.[70]
The disappearance of the Macedonian front meant that the road to Budapest and Vienna was 
now opened for the 670,000-strong army of general Franchet d'Esperey as the Bulgarian 
surrender deprived the Central Powers of the 278 infantry battalions and 1,500 guns (the 
equivalent of some 25 to 30 German divisions) that were previously holding the line.[71] The 
German high command responded by sending only seven infantry and one cavalry division 
but these forces were far from enough for a front to be reestablished
Ottoman Empire
The Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers in the war, the secret Ottoman-German Alliance 
having been signed in August 1914.[72] It threatened Russia's Caucasian territories and Britain's 
communications with India via the Suez Canal. The British and French opened overseas fronts with 
the Gallipoli (1915) and Mesopotamian campaigns. In Gallipoli, the Ottoman Empire successfully 
repelled the British, French and Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs). In 
Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the disastrous Siege of Kut (1915-16), British Imperial forces 
reorganised and captured Baghdad in March 1917.
Further to the west, the Suez Canal was successfully defended from Ottoman attacks in 1915 and 
1916; in August a joint German and Ottoman force was defeated at the Battle of Romani. Following 
this victory, a British Empire force advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces 
back to the Battle of Magdhaba in December and to the Battle of Rafa on the border between the 
Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in January 1917. In March and April at the First and Second 
Battles of Gaza, German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance but at the end of October the 
Sinai and Palestine Campaign resumed, when Allenby's Egyptian Expeditionary Force won the 
Battle of Beersheba. Two Ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks later at the Battle of 
Mughar Ridge and early in December Jerusalem was captured following another Ottoman defeat at 
the Battle of Jerusalem (1917). About this time Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein was 
relieved of his duties as the Eighth Army's commander, to be replaced by Djevad Pasha and a few 
months later the commander of the Ottoman Army in Palestine Erich von Falkenhayn was replaced 
by Otto Liman von Sanders.
The Egyptian Expeditionary Force, under Field Marshal Edmund Allenby, broke the Ottoman forces 
at the Battle of Megiddo in September 1918. In six weeks, during virtually continuous operations, 
battles were successfully fought by British infantry and Australian, New Zealand and British Light 
Horse, Mounted Rifle and Yeomanry mounted brigades across the Jordan River to Amman in the 
east and northwards to capture Nablus and Tulkarm in the Judean Hills and following the 
Mediterranean coast into the Jezreel Valley (Esdraelon Plain) where Jenin and Nazareth were 
captured along with Daraa on the Hejaz railway, Semakh and Tiberias on to the Sea of Gallilee and 
finally Damascus and Aleppo. The Armistice of Mudros was signed on 30 October when two and a 
half Ottoman armies had been defeated and captured.
Russian armies generally had the best of it in the Caucasus. Enver Pasha, supreme commander of 
the Ottoman armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of re-conquering central Asia, and areas 
that had been lost to Russia previously. He was, however, a poor commander.[73] He launched an 
offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 with 100,000 troops; insisting on a 
frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in winter, he lost 86% of his force at the Battle 
of Sarikamish.[
General Yudenich, the Russian commander from 1915 to 1916, drove the Turks out of most of the 
southern Caucasus with a string of victories.[74] In 1917, Russian Grand Duke Nicholas assumed 
command of the Caucasus front. Nicholas planned a railway from Russian Georgia to the conquered 
territories, so that fresh supplies could be brought up for a new offensive in 1917. However, in 
March 1917, (February in the pre-revolutionary Russian calendar), the Czar was overthrown in the 
February Revolution and the Russian Caucasus Army began to fall apart.
The army corps of Armenian volunteer units realigned under the command of General Tovmas 
Nazarbekian, with Dro as a civilian commissioner of the Administration for Western Armenia. 
The front line had three main divisions commanded by Movses Silikyan, Andranik, and 
Mikhail Areshian. Another regular unit was under Colonel Korganian. More than 40,000 men 
in Armenian partisan guerrilla detachments accompanied the main units.[75]
Instigated by the Arab bureau of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the Arab 
Revolt started with the help of Britain in June 1916 at the Battle of Mecca, led by Sherif 
Hussein of Mecca, and ended with the Ottoman surrender of Damascus. Fakhri Pasha, the 
Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than two and half years during the Siege of 
Medina.[76]
Along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, the Senussi tribe, incited and armed by 
the Turks, waged a small-scale guerrilla war against Allied troops. The British were forced to 
dispatch 12,000 troops to oppose them in the Senussi Campaign. Their rebellion was finally 
crushed in mid-1916.[
German Spring Offensive of 1918
German General Erich Ludendorff drew up plans (codenamed Operation Michael) for the 
1918 offensive on the Western Front. The Spring Offensive sought to divide the British and 
French forces with a series of feints and advances. The German leadership hoped to strike a 
decisive blow before significant U.S. forces arrived. The operation commenced on 21 March 
1918 with an attack on British forces near Amiens. German forces achieved an unprecedented 
advance of 60 kilometres (40 miles).[110]
British and French trenches were penetrated using novel infiltration tactics, also named Hutier 
tactics, after General Oskar von Hutier. Previously, attacks had been characterised by long 
artillery bombardments and massed assaults. However, in the Spring Offensive of 1918, 
Ludendorff used artillery only briefly and infiltrated small groups of infantry at weak points. 
They attacked command and logistics areas and bypassed points of serious resistance. More 
heavily armed infantry then destroyed these isolated positions. German success relied greatly 
on the element of surprise.[111]
The front moved to within 120 kilometres (75 mi) of Paris. Three heavy Krupp railway guns 
fired 183 shells on the capital, causing many Parisians to flee. The initial offensive was so 
successful that Kaiser Wilhelm II declared 24 March a national holiday. Many Germans 
thought victory was near. After heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted. Lacking 
tanks or motorised artillery, the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains. This situation 
was not helped by the supply lines now being stretched as a result of their advance.[112] The 
sudden stop was also a result of the four Australian Imperial Force (AIF) divisions that were 
"rushed" down, thus doing what no other army had done and stopping the German advance in 
its tracks. During that time the first Australian division was hurriedly sent north again to stop 
the second German breakthrough.
General Foch pressed to use the arriving American troops as individual replacements. Pershing 
sought instead to field American units as an independent force. These units were assigned to 
the depleted French and British Empire commands on 28 March. A Supreme War Council of 
Allied forces was created at the Doullens Conference on 5 November 1917.[113] General Foch 
was appointed as supreme commander of the allied forces. Haig, Petain and Pershing retained 
tactical control of their respective armies; Foch assumed a coordinating role, rather than a 
directing role and the British, French and U.S. commands operated largely independently.[113]
Following Operation Michael, Germany launched Operation Georgette against the northern 
English Channel ports. The Allies halted the drive with limited territorial gains for Germany. 
The German Army to the south then conducted Operations Blucher and Yorck, broadly 
towards Paris. Operation Marne was launched on 15 July, attempting to encircle Reims and 
beginning the Second Battle of the Marne. The resulting counterattack, starting the Hundred 
Days Offensive, marked their first successful Allied offensive of the war.
By 20 July the Germans were back across the Marne at their Kaiserschlacht starting lines,[114] 
having achieved nothing. Following this last phase of the war in the West, the German Army 
never again regained the initiative. German casualties between March and April 1918 were 
270,000, including many highly trained stormtroopers.
Meanwhile, Germany was falling apart at home. Anti-war marches became frequent and 
morale in the army fell. Industrial output was 53 percent of 1913 levels.
New states under war zone
In 1918, the internationally recognized[citation needed] Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, 
Democratic Republic of Armenia and Democratic Republic of Georgia bordering the Ottoman 
Empire and Russian Empire were established, as well as the unrecognized Centrocaspian 
Dictatorship and South West Caucasian Republic. Later, these unrecognized states were 
eliminated by Azerbaijan and Turkey.
Further information: Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire
In 1918, the Dashnaks of the Armenian national liberation movement declared the Democratic 
Republic of Armenia (DRA) through the Armenian Congress of Eastern Armenians (unified 
form of Armenian National Councils) after the dissolution of the Transcaucasian Democratic 
Federative Republic. Tovmas Nazarbekian became the first Commander-in-chief of the DRA. 
Enver Pasha ordered the creation of a new army to be named the Army of Islam. He ordered 
the Army of Islam into the DRA, with the goal of taking Baku on the Caspian Sea. This new 
offensive was strongly opposed by the Germans. In early May 1918, the Ottoman army 
attacked the newly declared DRA. Although the Armenians managed to inflict one defeat on 
the Ottomans at the Battle of Sardarabad, the Ottoman army won a later battle and scattered 
the Armenian army. The Republic of Armenia signed the Treaty of Batum in June 1918
Allied victory: summer and autumn 1918
Main articles: Hundred Days Offensive and Weimar Republic
The Allied counteroffensive, known as the Hundred Days Offensive, began on 8 August 
1918. The Battle of Amiens developed with III Corps British Fourth Army on the left, the 
French First Army on the right, and the Australian and Canadian Corps spearheading the 
offensive in the centre through Harbonnieres.[116][117] It involved 414 tanks of the Mark IV and 
Mark V type, and 120,000 men. They advanced 12 kilometres (7 miles) into German-held 
territory in just seven hours. Erich Ludendorff referred to this day as the "Black Day of the 
German army".[116][118]
The Australian-Canadian spearhead at Amiens, a battle that was the beginning of Germany's 
downfall,[49] helped pull the British armies to the north and the French armies to the south 
forward. While German resistance on the British Fourth Army front at Amiens stiffened, after 
an advance as far as 14 miles (23 km) and concluded the battle there, the French Third Army 
lengthened the Amiens front on 10 August, when it was thrown in on the right of the French 
First Army, and advanced 4 miles (6 km) liberating Lassigny in fighting which lasted until 
16 August. South of the French Third Army, General Charles Mangin (The Butcher) drove his 
French Tenth Army forward at Soissons on 20 August to capture eight thousand prisoners, 
two hundred guns and the Aisne heights overlooking and menacing the German position north 
of the Vesle.[119] Another "Black day" as described by Erich Ludendorff.
Meanwhile General Byng of the Third British Army, reporting that the enemy on his front was 
thinning in a limited withdrawal, was ordered to attack with 200 tanks towards Bapaume, 
opening the Battle of Albert, with the specific orders of "To break the enemy's front, in order 
to outflank the enemies present battle front" (opposite the British Fourth Army at Amiens).[49] 
Allied leaders had now realised that to continue an attack after resistance had hardened was a 
waste of lives and it was better to turn a line than to try to roll over it. Attacks were being 
undertaken in quick order to take advantage of the successful advances on the flanks and then 
broken off when that attack lost its initial impetus.[119]
The British Third Army's 15-mile (24 km) front north of Albert progressed after stalling for a 
day against the main resistance line to which the enemy had withdrawn.[120] Rawlinson's 
Fourth British Army was able to battle its left flank forward between Albert and the Somme 
straightening the line between the advanced positions of the Third Army and the Amiens 
front which resulted in recapturing Albert at the same time.[119] On 26 August the British First 
Army on the left of the Third Army was drawn into the battle extending it northward to 
beyond Arras. The Canadian Corps already being back in the vanguard of the First Army 
fought their way from Arras eastward 5 miles (8 km) astride the heavily defended Arras-
Cambrai before reaching the outer defences of the Hindenburg Line, breaching them on the 28 
and 29 August. Bapaume fell on the 29 August to the New Zealand Division of the Third 
Army and the Australians, still leading the advance of the Fourth Army, were again able to 
push forward at Amiens to take Peronne and Mont Saint-Quentin on 31 August. Further south 
the French First and Third Armies had slowly fought forward while the Tenth Army, who had 
by now crossed the Ailette and was east of the Chemin des Dames, was now near to the 
Alberich position of the Hindenburg Line.[121] During the last week of August the pressure 
along a 70-mile (113 km) front against the enemy was heavy and unrelenting. From German 
accounts, "Each day was spent in bloody fighting against an ever and again on-storming 
enemy, and nights passed without sleep in retirements to new lines."[119] Even to the north in 
Flanders the British Second and Fifth Armies during August and September were able to 
make progress taking prisoners and positions that were previously denied them.[121]
On 2 September the Canadian Corps outflanking of the Hindenburg line, with the breaching 
of the Wotan Position, made it possible for the Third Army to advance and sent repercussions 
all along the Western Front. That same day Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL) had no choice but to 
issue orders to six armies for withdrawal back into the Hindenburg Line in the south, behind 
the Canal du Nord on the Canadian-First Army's front and back to a line east of the Lys in the 
north, giving up without a fight the salient seized in the previous April.[122] According to 
Ludendorff "We had to admit the necessity ... to withdraw the entire front from the Scarpe to 
the Vesle."[123]
In nearly four weeks of fighting since 8 August, over 100,000 German prisoners were taken, 
75,000 by the BEF and the rest by the French. Since "The Black Day of the German Army" 
the German High Command realised the war was lost and made attempts for a satisfactory 
end. The day after the battle Ludenforff told Colonel Mertz "We cannot win the war any 
more, but we must not lose it either." On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, 
who refused it and replied, "I see that we must strike a balance. We have nearly reached the 
limit of our powers of resistance. The war must be ended." On 13 August at Spa, Hindenburg, 
Ludendorff, Chancellor and Foreign Minister Hintz agreed that the war could not be ended 
militarily and on the following day the German Crown Council decided victory in the field 
was now most improbable. Austria and Hungary warned that they could only continue the 
war until December and Ludendorff recommended immediate peace negotiations, to which 
the Kaiser responded by instructing Hintz to seek the mediation of the Queen of the 
Netherlands. Prince Rupprecht warned Prince Max of Baden "Our military situation has 
deteriorated so rapidly that I no longer believe we can hold out over the winter; it is even 
possible that a catastrophe will come earlier." On 10 September Hindenburg urged peace 
moves to Emperor Charles of Austria and Germany appealed to the Netherlands for 
mediation. On the 14 September Austria sent a note to all belligerents and neutrals suggesting 
a meeting for peace talks on neutral soil and on 15 September Germany made a peace offer to 
Belgium. Both peace offers were rejected and on 24 September OHL informed the leaders in 
Berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.[
September saw the Germans continuing to fight strong rear guard actions and launching 
numerous counter attacks on lost positions, with only a few succeeding and then only 
temporarily. Contested towns, villages, heights and trenches in the screening positions and 
outposts of the Hindenburg Line continued to fall to the Allies, with the BEF alone taking 
30,441 prisoners in the last week of September. Further small advances eastward would 
follow the Third Army victory at Ivincourt on 12 September, the Fourth Armies at Epheny on 
18 September and the French gain of Essigny-le-Grand a day later. On 24 September a final 
assault by both the British and French on a 4 mile (6 km) front would come within 2 miles 
(3 km) of St. Quentin.[121] With the outposts and preliminary defensive lines of the Siegfried 
and Alberich Positions eliminated the Germans were now completely back in the Hindenburg 
Line. With the Wotan position of that line already breached and the Siegfried position in 
danger of being turned from the north the time had now come for an assault on the whole 
length of the line.
The Allied attack on the Hindenburg Line began on 26 September including U.S. soldiers. The 
still-green American troops suffered problems coping with supply trains for large units on a 
difficult landscape.[124] The following week cooperating French and American units broke 
through in Champagne at the Battle of Blanc Mont Ridge, forcing the Germans off the 
commanding heights, and closing towards the Belgian frontier.[125] The last Belgian town to be 
liberated before the armistice was Ghent, which the Germans held as a pivot until Allied 
artillery was brought up.[126][127] The German army had to shorten its front and use the Dutch 
frontier as an anchor to fight rear-guard actions.
When Bulgaria signed a separate armistice on 29 September, the Allies gained control of 
Serbia and Greece. Ludendorff, having been under great stress for months, suffered 
something similar to a breakdown. It was evident that Germany could no longer mount a 
successful defence.[128][129]
Meanwhile, news of Germany's impending military defeat spread throughout the German 
armed forces. The threat of mutiny was rife. Admiral Reinhard Scheer and Ludendorff 
decided to launch a last attempt to restore the "valour" of the German Navy. Knowing the 
government of Prince Maximilian of Baden would veto any such action, Ludendorff decided 
not to inform him. Nonetheless, word of the impending assault reached sailors at Kiel. Many 
rebelled and were arrested, refusing to be part of a naval offensive which they believed to be 
suicidal. Ludendorff took the blame-the Kaiser dismissed him on 26 October. The collapse 
of the Balkans meant that Germany was about to lose its main supplies of oil and food. The 
reserves had been used up, but U.S. troops kept arriving at the rate of 10,000 per day.[130]
Having suffered over 6 million casualties, Germany moved towards peace. Prince Maximilian 
of Baden took charge of a new government as Chancellor of Germany to negotiate with the 
Allies. Telegraphic negotiations with President Wilson began immediately, in the vain hope 
that better terms would be offered than by the British and French. Instead Wilson demanded 
the abdication of the Kaiser. There was no resistance when the social democrat Philipp 
Scheidemann on 9 November declared Germany to be a republic. Imperial Germany was 
dead; a new Germany had been born: the Weimar Republic.[
The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly. Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice on 
29 September 1918 at Saloniki.[133] On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated at 
Moudros (Armistice of Mudros).[133]
Armistices and capitulations

On 24 October, the Italians began a push which rapidly recovered territory lost after the Battle 
of Caporetto. This culminated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, which marked the end of the 
Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective fighting force. The offensive also triggered the 
disintegration of Austro-Hungarian Empire. During the last week of October declarations of 
independence were made in Budapest, Prague and Zagreb. On 29 October, the imperial 
authorities asked Italy for an armistice. But the Italians continued advancing, reaching Trento, 
Udine and Trieste. On 3 November Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce to ask for an 
Armistice. The terms, arranged by telegraph with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were 
communicated to the Austrian Commander and accepted. The Armistice with Austria was 
signed in the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November. Austria and Hungary signed separate 
armistices following the overthrow of the Habsburg Monarchy.
Following the outbreak of the German Revolution of 1918-1919, a republic was proclaimed 
on 9 November. The Kaiser fled to the Netherlands. On 11 November an armistice with 
Germany was signed in a railroad carriage at Compiegne. At 11 a.m. on 11 November 1918; 
"the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month"; a ceasefire came into effect. 
Opposing armies on the Western Front began to withdraw from their positions. Canadian 
Private George Lawrence Price is traditionally regarded as the last soldier killed in the Great 
War: he was shot by a German sniper at 10:57 and died at 10:58.
Allied superiority and the stab-in-the-back legend, November 1918
In November 1918 the Allies had ample supplies of men and materiel to invade Germany, yet 
at the time of the armistice, no Allied force had crossed the German frontier and Berlin was 
still almost 900 mi (1,400 km) from the Western Front. The Kaiser's armies had also retreated 
from the battlefield in good order which enabled Hindenburg and other senior German leaders 
to spread the story that their armies had not really been defeated. This resulted in the stab-in-
the-back legend[135][136] which attributed Germany's losing the war not to its inability to 
continue fighting (even though up to a million soldiers were suffering from the 1918 flu 
pandemic and unfit to fight), but to the public's failure to respond to its "patriotic calling" and 
the intentional sabotaging of the war effort, particularly by Jews, Socialists and Bolsheviks.
A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven months, until signing 
of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28 June 1919. Later treaties with Austria, 
Hungary, Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire were signed. However, the latter treaty with the 
Ottoman Empire was followed by strife (the Turkish War of Independence) and a final peace 
treaty was signed between the Allied Powers and the country that would shortly become the 
Republic of Turkey, at Lausanne on 24 July 1923.
Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the Versailles treaty was signed in 
1919; by contrast, most commemorations of the war's end concentrate on the armistice of 11 
November 1918. Legally the last formal peace treaties were not signed until the Treaty of 
Lausanne. Under its terms, the Allied forces divested Constantinople on 23 August 1923.




