Etymology
The Old Norse feminine noun viking refers to an expedition overseas. It occurs in Viking Age 
runic inscriptions and in later medieval writings in set expressions such as the phrasal verb fara 
i viking "to go on an expedition". In later texts such as the Icelandic sagas, the phrase "to go 
viking" implies participation in raiding activity or piracy, and not simply seaborne missions of 
trade and commerce. The related Old Norse masculine noun vikingr appears in Viking Age 
skaldic poetry and on several rune stones found in Scandinavia, where it refers to a seaman or 
warrior who takes part in an expedition overseas.[4] The form also occurs as a personal name on 
some Swedish rune stones. There is little indication of any negative connotation in the term 
before the end of the Viking Age. Regardless of its possible origins, the word was used to 
indicate an activity and those who participated in it, and not to any ethnic or cultural group.
In Old English, the word wicing appears first in the Anglo-Saxon poem, "Widsith", which 
probably dates from the 9th century. In Old English, and in the history of the archbishops of 
Hamburg-Bremen written by Adam of Bremen in about 1070, the term is synonymous with 
pirate and a Scandinavian. As in the Old Norse usages, the term is not employed as a name for 
any people or culture in general. The word does not occur in any preserved Middle English 
texts.
There are several theories on the etymology of the word Viking. According to recent research, 
the word dates from before the sail was taken into use by the Germanic peoples of North-
Western Europe, because the Old Frisian spelling shows that the word was pronounced with a 
palatal k and thus in all probability existed in North-Western Germanic before that 
palatalization happened, i.e. in the 5th century of before (in the western branch). In that case 
the word can be explained from the Old Scandinavian maritime distance unit, vika (f.), which 
probably originally referred to the distance covered by one shift of rowers. The Old Norse 
feminine viking (as in the phrase fara i viking) may originally have been a sea journey 
characterized by the shifting of rowers, i.e. a long-distance sea journey, because in the pre-sail 
era, the shifting of rowers would distinguish long-distance sea journeys. A vikingr (the 
masculine) would then originally have been a participant on a sea journey characterized by the 
shifting of rowers. In that case, the word Viking was not originally connected to Scandinavian 
seafarers but assumed this meaning when the Scandinavians begun to dominate the seas. - 
The starting-point of the distance unit vika is the verb that in Old Scandinavian had the form 
vika (Old Icelandic vikja) 'to recede, turn to the side, give way, yield', and the idea behind it 
seems to be that the tired rower moves aside for the rested rower on the thwart when he 
relieves him. At the same time, vika is the same word as a week 'seven days'; in both cases the 
real meaning is 'a shift, a rotation'. A "sea week" really means 'a rotation (of rowers)', and 
seven days really is a rotation of week-day gods - Wednesday is Wodanaz's day, Thursday is 
?unaraz's day, Friday is Frijjo's day, etc.
The idea that the word Viking is connected to the maritime distance unit vika has been put 
forward by at least four persons independently since the early 1980s, and has gained 
substantial support among scholars in recent years. Traditionally, two other explanations have 
been favoured: 1. The word Viking derives from the feminine that in Old Scandinavian had 
the form vik and which means 'a bay'. The idea would then be that the Vikings would seek 
shelter in bays and attack merchant ships from there, or make land raids from there. 2. Viking 
derives from the name Vik(in) 'the Norwegian coast of the Skagerrak Sea'. The idea would 
then be that "Vikings" originally was a term for the peoples of this area, and secondarily 
assumed the meaning 'pirates, sea raiders' because these peoples played a prominent role in the 
Viking raids. Both these explanations are highly problematic. The first is contradicted by the 
fact that all seafarers make for harbour in bays; that can hardly have distinguished the 
Vikings; to the contrary. According to the sources, the Vikings rather made camp on 
headlands and islands, which were more easily defendable from land-based armies. The 
second explanation faces several problems: First, people from Vik(in) are in Old Norse 
manuscripts referred to as vikverir 'Vik dwellers', never as vikingar. Second, no medieval 
source, neither from Scandinavia nor the rest of Europe, connects the Vikings with the 
Norwegian Skagerrak coast. Third, this explanations runs into formal linguistic problems. In 
addition, these explanations could only explain the masculine (Old Scandinavian vikingr) and 
ignore the feminine (Old Scandinavian viking), which is a serious problem because the 
masculine can easily be derived from the feminine but hardly vice versa.
In the modern Scandinavian languages, the word Viking usually refers specifically to those 
people who went on Viking expeditions.[5]
The word Viking was introduced into Modern English during the 18th-century "Viking 
revival", at which point it acquired romanticised heroic overtones of "barbarian warrior" or 
noble savage. During the 20th century, the meaning of the term was expanded to refer not 
only to seaborne raiders from Scandinavia, but secondarily to any Scandinavian who lived 
during the period from the late eighth to the mid-11th centuries, or more loosely from c. 700 
to as late as about 1100. As an adjective, the word is used to refer to ideas, phenomena or 
artefacts connected with Scandinavians and their cultural life in these centuries, producing 
expressions like "Viking age", "Viking culture", "Viking art", "Viking religion", "Viking ship", 
and so on. The people of medieval Scandinavia are also referred to as Norse, although this 
term properly applies only to the Old-Norse-speaking peoples of Scandinavia, and not to the 
Sami.
Literature
The most important primary sources for information on the Vikings are different sorts of 
contemporary evidence from Scandinavia and the various regions in which the Vikings were 
active.[6] Writing in Latin letters was introduced to Scandinavia with Christianity, so there are 
few native documentary sources from Scandinavia before the late 11th and early 12th 
centuries.[7] The Scandinavians did write inscriptions in runes, but these are usually very short 
and formulaic. The contemporary documentary sources upon which modern knowledge is 
based therefore consist mostly of texts written in Christian and Islamic communities overseas, 
that had often been negatively affected by Viking activity. These texts reflect varying degrees 
of bias and reliability, but not more so than is usually the case in early medieval writings, and 
they remain very important. Since the mid-20th century, archaeological sources have helped 
build a more complete and balanced picture.[8] The archaeological record is particularly rich 
and varied, and provides knowledge of rural and urban settlement, crafts and production, 
ships and military equipment, and pagan and Christian religious artefacts and practices. 
Archaeology also provides the main source of evidence for circumstances in Scandinavia 
before the Viking Age.
Evidence from after the Viking Age can also be important for understanding the Vikings, 
although it needs to be treated very cautiously. After the consolidation of the church and the 
assimilation of Scandinavia and its colonies into the mainstream of medieval Christian culture 
in the 11th and 12th centuries, native written sources begin to appear, in Latin and Old Norse. 
In the Viking colony of Iceland, an extraordinary vernacular literature blossomed in the 
twelfth to 14th centuries, and many traditions connected with the Viking Age were written 
down for the first time in the Icelandic sagas. The reliability of these medieval prose narratives 
about the Scandinavian past is often doubtful, but some elements remain worthy of 
consideration, such as the great quantity of skaldic poetry attributed to court poets of the 
tenth and 11th centuries that was included in these writings. The linguistic evidence from 
medieval and later records and Old Norse place-names in Scandinavia and elsewhere also 
provides a vital source of information for the social history of Viking Age Scandinavia and 
the Viking settlements overseas.
A consequence of the available written sources, which may have coloured how we perceive 
the Viking Age as a historical period, is that we know a lot more of the raids to western 
Europe than those to the East. One reason for this is that the peoples living in north-eastern 
Europe at the time were illiterate. Another reason is that the vast majority of the written 
sources from Scandinavia comes from Iceland, a nation originally settled by Norwegian 
colonists. As a result there is much more material from the Viking Age concerning Norway 
than for instance Sweden, which, apart from Runic inscriptions, has almost no written sources 
from the early Middle Ages.
Archaeology
Good-quality written historical sources for Scandinavia during the Viking Period are scarce, 
but the archaeological record is rich.
Runestones
The vast majority of runic inscriptions from the Viking period come from Sweden and date 
from the 11th century. Many runestones in Scandinavia record the names of participants in 
Viking expeditions, such as the Kjula runestone which tells of extensive warfare in Western 
Europe and the Turinge runestone which tells of a warband in Eastern Europe. Other 
runestones mention men who died on Viking expeditions. Among them are around 25 Ingvar 
runestones in the Malardalen district of Sweden, erected to commemorate members of a 
disastrous expedition into present-day Russia in the early 11th century. The runestones are 
important sources in the study of Norse society and early medieval Scandinavia, not only of 
the 'Viking' segment of the population.[10]
Runestones attest to voyages to locations such as Bath,[11] Greece,[12] Khwaresm,[13] 
Jerusalem,[14] Italy (as Langobardland),[15] London,[16] Serkland (i.e. the Muslim world),[17] 
England,[18] and various locations in Eastern Europe.
Ships
There were two distinct classes of Viking ships: the 'longship' (sometimes erroneously called 
"drakkar", a corruption of "dragon" in Norse) and the 'knarr'. The longship, intended for 
warfare and exploration, was designed for speed and agility, and was equipped with oars to 
complement the sail as well as making it able to navigate independently of the wind. The 
longship had a long and narrow hull, as well as a shallow draft, in order to facilitate landings 
and troop deployments in shallow water. The knarr was a dedicated merchant vessel designed 
to carry cargo. It was designed with a broader hull, deeper draft and limited number of oars 
(used primarily to maneuver in harbors and similar situations). One Viking innovation was the 
'beitass', a spar mounted to the sail that allowed their ships to sail effectively against the 
wind.[20]
Longships were used extensively by the Leidang, the Scandinavian defence fleets. The term 
"Viking ships" has entered common usage, however, possibly because of its romantic 
associations (discussed below).
In Roskilde are the well-preserved remains of five ships, excavated from nearby Roskilde 
Fjord in the late 1960s. The ships were scuttled there in the 11th century to block a navigation 
channel, thus protecting the city, which was then the Danish capital, from seaborne assault. 
These five ships represent the two distinct classes of Viking ships, the longship and the knarr. 
The remains of these ships can be found on display at the Viking Ship Museum in Roskilde.
Longships are not to be confused with later-period longboats. It was common for Viking ships 
to tow or carry a smaller boat to transfer crews and cargo from the ship to shore.
Experimental archaeology
On 1 July 2007, the reconstructed Viking ship Skuldelev 2, renamed Sea Stallion,[21] began a 
journey from Roskilde, Denmark to Dublin, Ireland. The remains of that ship and four others 
were discovered during a 1962 excavation in the Roskilde Fjord. This multi-national 
experimental archeology project saw 70 crew members sail the ship back to its home in 
Ireland. Tests of the original wood show that it was made of Irish trees. The Sea Stallion 
arrived outside Dublin's Custom House on 14 August 2007.
The purpose of the voyage was to test and document the seaworthiness, speed and 
maneuverability of the ship on the rough open sea and in coastal waters with treacherous 
currents. The crew tested how the long, narrow, flexible hull withstood the tough ocean 
waves. The expedition also provided valuable new information on Viking longships and 
society. The ship was built using Viking tools, materials and much the same methods as the 
original ship.
Other vessels, often replicas of the Gokstad ship (full- or half-scale) or Skuldelev I have been 
built and tested also. The Snorri (a Skuldelev I Knarr) was sailed from Greenland to 
Newfoundland in 1998, for example. [22]
Viking-age reenactors have undertaken experimental activities such as iron smelting and 
forging using Norse techniques.
The Viking Age
The period from the earliest recorded raids in the 790s until the Norman Conquest of England 
in 1066 is commonly known as the Viking Age of Scandinavian history. Vikings used the 
Norwegian Sea[24] and Baltic Sea for sea routes to the south. The Normans were descended 
from Danish and Norwegian Vikings who were given feudal overlordship of areas in northern 
France - the Duchy of Normandy - in the 10th century.[citation needed] In that respect, 
descendants of the Vikings continued to have an influence in northern Europe. Likewise, 
King Harold Godwinson, the last Anglo-Saxon king of England, had Danish ancestors.
Geographically, a "Viking Age" may be assigned not only to Scandinavian lands (modern 
Denmark, Norway and Sweden), but also to territories under North Germanic dominance, 
mainly the Danelaw, including Scandinavian York, the administrative centre of the remains of 
the Kingdom of Northumbria,[25] parts of Mercia,[26] and East Anglia.[27] Viking navigators 
opened the road to new lands to the north, west and east, resulting in the foundation of 
independent settlements in the Shetland, Orkney, and Faroe Islands; Iceland; Greenland;[28] 
and L'Anse aux Meadows, a short-lived settlement in Newfoundland, circa 1000 A.D.[29] 
Many of these lands, specifically Greenland and Iceland, may have been originally discovered 
by sailors blown off course.[citation needed] They also may well have been deliberately sought out, 
perhaps on the basis of the accounts of sailors who had seen land in the distance. The 
Greenland settlement eventually died out, possibly due to climate change. Vikings also 
explored and settled in territories in Slavic-dominated areas of Eastern Europe, particularly the 
Kievan Rus. By 950 AD these settlements were largely Slavicised.
As early as 839, when Swedish emissaries are first known to have visited Byzantium, 
Scandinavians served as mercenaries in the service of the Byzantine Empire.[30] In the late 10th 
century, a new unit of the imperial bodyguard was formed which traditionally contained large 
numbers of Scandinavians. This was known as the Varangian Guard. The word "Varangian" 
may have originated in Old Norse, but in Slavic and Greek it could refer either to 
Scandinavians or Franks. The most eminent Scandinavian to serve in the Varangian Guard 
was Harald Hardrada, who subsequently established himself as king of Norway (1047-66).
Important trading ports during the period include Birka, Hedeby, Kaupang, Jorvik, Staraya 
Ladoga, Novgorod and Kiev.
There is archaeological evidence that Vikings reached the city of Baghdad, the centre of the 
Islamic Empire.[31] The Norse regularly plied the Volga with their trade goods: furs, tusks, seal 
fat for boat sealant and slaves. However, they were far less successful in establishing 
settlements in the Middle East, due to the more centralised Islamic power.[citation needed]
Generally speaking, the Norwegians expanded to the north and west to places such as Ireland, 
Scotland, Iceland and Greenland; the Danes to England and France, settling in the Danelaw 
(northern/eastern England) and Normandy; and the Swedes to the east, founding the Kievan 
Rus, the original Russia. However, among the Swedish runestones which mention expeditions 
over seas, almost half tell of raids and travels to western Europe. Also, according to the 
Icelandic sagas, many Norwegian Vikings went to eastern Europe. These nations, although 
distinct, were similar in culture and language. The names of Scandinavian kings are known 
only for the later part of the Viking Age. Only after the end of the Viking Age did the 
separate kingdoms acquire distinct identities as nations, which went hand in hand with their 
Christianization. Thus the end of the Viking Age for the Scandinavians also marks the start of 
their relatively brief Middle Ages.
 The Vikings sailed most of the North Atlantic, reaching south to North Africa and east to Russia, 
Constantinople and the Middle East, as looters, traders, colonists, and mercenaries. Vikings under 
Leif Eriksson, heir to Erik the Red, reached North America, and set up a short-lived settlement in 
present-day L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.
The motives driving the Viking expansion form a topic of much debate in Nordic history. One 
common theory posits that Charlemagne "used force and terror to Christianise all pagans", 
leading to "baptism, converting or death by iron and blood", and as a result "Vikings and other 
pagans wanted to avenge".[32][33][34][35][36] Professor Rudolf Simek confirms that "it is not a 
coincidence if the early Viking activity occurred during the reign of Charlemagne".[37][38] 
Because of the penetration of Christianity in Scandinavia, serious conflict divided Norway for 
almost a century.[39]
Another common theory posits that the Norse population had outgrown the agricultural 
potential of their Scandinavian homeland.[citation needed] For a coastal population with superior 
naval technologies, it made sense to expand overseas in the face of a youth bulge effect. 
Raiding by sea may have been easier than trying to carve out new farms in their vast interior 
arboreal forest, which is not highly productive soil. No such rise in population or decline in 
agricultural production has been definitively proven.
Another explanation is that the Vikings exploited a moment of weakness in the surrounding 
regions. For instance, the Danish Vikings were aware of the internal divisions within 
Charlemagne's empire that began in the 830s and resulted in schism.[citation needed] England 
suffered from internal divisions, and was relatively easy prey given the proximity of many 
towns to the sea or to navigable rivers. Lack of organised naval opposition throughout 
Western Europe allowed Viking ships to travel freely, raiding or trading as opportunity 
permitted.
The decline in the profitability of old trade routes could also have played a role. Trade 
between western Europe and the rest of Eurasia suffered a severe blow when the Roman 
Empire fell in the 5th century.[40] The expansion of Islam in the 7th century had also affected 
trade with western Europe.[41] Trade on the Mediterranean Sea was historically at its lowest 
level when the Vikings initiated their expansion.[citation needed] By opening new trade routes in 
Arabic and Frankish lands, the Vikings profited from international trade by expanding beyond 
their traditional boundaries.[citation needed]
The end of the Viking Age
During the Viking Age, Scandinavian men and women travelled to many parts of Europe and 
beyond, in a cultural diaspora that left its traces from Newfoundland to Byzantium. But this 
period of energetic activity also had a pronounced effect in the Scandinavian homelands, 
which were subject to a variety of new influences.[42] In the 300 years from the late 8th 
century, when contemporary chroniclers first commented on the appearance of Viking raiders, 
to the end of the 11th century, Scandinavia underwent profound cultural changes.
In the late 11th century, royal dynasties legitimised by the Church were asserting their power 
with increasing authority and ambition, and the three kingdoms of Denmark, Norway and 
Sweden had taken shape. Towns were appearing which functioned as secular and 
ecclesiastical administrative centres as well as market sites, and monetary economies were 
beginning to emerge based on English and German models.[43] By this time the influx of 
Islamic silver from the East had been absent for more than a century, and the flow of English 
silver had come to an end in the mid-11th century.[44] Christianity had taken root in Denmark 
and Norway with the establishment of dioceses during the 11th century, and the new religion 
was beginning to organise and assert itself more effectively in Sweden. Foreign churchmen 
and native elites were energetic in furthering the interests of Christianity, which was now no 
longer operating simply on a missionary footing, and old ideologies and lifestyles were 
transforming. It was not until 1103, however, that the first archbishopric was founded in 
Scandinavia, at Lund (in the southernmost part of present-day Sweden, previously part of 
Denmark).
The assimilation of the nascent Scandinavian kingdoms into the cultural mainstream of 
European Christendom altered the aspirations of Scandinavian rulers and those Scandinavians 
able to travel overseas, and changed their relations with their neighbours. One of the primary 
sources of profit for the Vikings had been slave-taking. The medieval Church took the 
position that Christians should not own fellow Christians as slaves, so chattel slavery 
diminished as a practice throughout northern Europe. This took much of the economic 
incentive out of raiding, though sporadic slaving activity continued in the 11th century. 
Eventually, outright slavery was outlawed, and replaced with serfdom at the bottom rung of 
medieval society. Scandinavian predation in Christian lands around the North Sea and the 
Irish Sea diminished markedly.
The kings of Norway continued to assert power in parts of northern Britain and Ireland, and 
raids continued into the 12th century, but the military ambitions of Scandinavian rulers were 
now directed toward new paths. In 1107 Sigurd I of Norway sailed for the eastern 
Mediterranean with a host of Norwegian crusaders to fight for the newly established 
Kingdom of Jerusalem, and the Danes and Swedes participated energetically in the Baltic 
Crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries.[45]
Weapons and warfare
Our knowledge about arms and armour of the Viking age is based on relatively sparse 
archaeological finds, pictorial representation, and to some extent on the accounts in the Norse 
sagas and Norse laws recorded in the 13th century.
According to custom, all free Norse men were required to own weapons, as well as permitted 
to carry them all the time. These arms were also indicative of a Viking's social status: a 
wealthy Viking would have a complete ensemble of a helmet, shield, chainmail shirt, and 
sword. A typical bondi (freeman) was more likely to fight with a spear and shield, and most 
also carried a seax as a utility knife and side-arm. Bows were used in the opening stages of 
land battles, and at sea, but tended to be considered less "honourable" than a hand weapon. 
Vikings were relatively unusual for the time in their use of axes as a main battle weapon. The 
Huscarls, the elite guard of King Cnut (and later King Harold II) were armed with two-
handed axes which could split shields or metal helmets with ease.
Legacy
Medieval perceptions of the Vikings
In England the Viking Age began dramatically on 8 June 793 when Norsemen destroyed the 
abbey on the island of Lindisfarne. The devastation of Northumbria's Holy Island shocked 
and alerted the royal Courts of Europe to the Viking presence. "Never before has such an 
atrocity been seen," declared the Northumbrian scholar, Alcuin of York.[citation needed] More than 
any other single event, the attack on Lindisfarne demonised perception of the Vikings for the 
next twelve centuries. Not until the 1890s did scholars outside Scandinavia begin to seriously 
reassess the achievements of the Vikings, recognizing their artistry, technological skills and 
seamanship.[46]
Norse mythology, sagas and literature tell of Scandinavian culture and religion through tales 
of heroic and mythological heroes. However, early transmission of this information was 
primarily oral, and later texts were reliant upon the writings and transcriptions of Christian 
scholars, including the Icelanders Snorri Sturluson and Samundur fro?i. Many of these sagas 
were written in Iceland, and most of them, even if they had no Icelandic provenance, were 
preserved there after the Middle Ages due to the Icelanders' continued interest in Norse 
literature and law codes.
The 200-year Viking influence on European history is filled with tales of plunder and 
colonization, and the majority of these chronicles came from western witnesses and their 
descendants. Less common, though equally relevant, are the Viking chronicles that originated 
in the east, including the Nestor chronicles, Novgorod chronicles, Ibn Fadlan chronicles, Ibn 
Rusta chronicles, and many brief mentions by the Fosio bishop from the first big attack on the 
Byzantine Empire.
Other chroniclers of Viking history include Adam of Bremen, who wrote "There is much gold 
here (in Zealand), accumulated by piracy. These pirates, which are called wichingi by their 
own people, and Ascomanni by our own people, pay tribute to the Danish king" in the fourth 
volume of his Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum.
In 991, the Battle of Maldon between Viking raiders and the inhabitants of the town of 
Maldon in Essex, England was commemorated with a poem of the same name.
Post-medieval perceptions of the Vikings
Early modern publications, dealing with what we now call Viking culture, appeared in the 
16th century, e.g. Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus (Olaus Magnus, 1555), and the first 
edition of the 13th century Gesta Danorum of Saxo Grammaticus in 1514. The pace of 
publication increased during the 17th century with Latin translations of the Edda (notably 
Peder Resen's Edda Islandorum of 1665).
In Scandinavia, the 17th century Danish scholars Thomas Bartholin and Ole Worm, and the 
Swede Olof Rudbeck were the first to set the standard for using runic inscriptions and 
Icelandic sagas as historical sources.[citation needed] During the Age of Enlightenment and the 
Nordic Renaissance, historical scholarship in Scandinavia became more rational and pragmatic, 
as witnessed by the works of the Danish historian Ludvig Holberg and the Swede Olof von 
Dalin.[citation needed]. An important early British contributor to the study of the Vikings was 
George Hicke, who published his Linguarum vett. septentrionalium thesaurus in 1703 - 05. 
During the 18th century, British interest and enthusiasm for Iceland and early Scandinavian 
culture grew dramatically, expressed in English translations of Old Norse texts, and original 
poems which extolled the supposed "Viking virtues".
The word "viking" was first popularised at the beginning of the 19th century by Erik Gustaf 
Geijer in his poem, The Viking. Geijer's poem did much to propagate the new romanticised 
ideal of the Viking, which had little basis in historical fact. The renewed interest of 
Romanticism in the Old North had contemporary political implications. The Geatish Society, 
of which Geijer was a member, popularised this myth to a great extent. Another Swedish 
author who had great influence on the perception of the Vikings was Esaias Tegner, member 
of the Geatish Society, who wrote a modern version of Fri??jofs saga ins frokna, which 
became widely popular in the Nordic countries, the United Kingdom and Germany.
The fascination with the Vikings reached a peak during the so-called Viking Revival in the 
late 18th and 19th centuries. In Britain this took the form of Septentrionalism, in Germany 
that of "Wagnerian" pathos or even Germanic mysticism, and in the Scandinavian countries 
that of Romantic nationalism or Scandinavism. Pioneering 19th-century scholarly editions of 
the Viking Age began to reach a small readership in Britain, archaeologists began to dig up 
Britain's Viking past, and linguistic enthusiasts started to identify the Viking-Age origins for 
rural idioms and proverbs. The new dictionaries of the Old Norse language enabled the 
Victorians to grapple with the primary Icelandic sagas.[47]
Until recently, the history of the Viking Age was largely based on Icelandic sagas, the history 
of the Danes written by Saxo Grammaticus, the Russian Primary Chronicle and The War of 
the Irish with the Foreigners. Although few scholars still accept these texts as reliable sources, 
historians nowadays rely more on archeology and numismatics, disciplines that have made 
valuable contributions toward understanding the period.[48]
The figure of the Viking in twentieth-
century politics
The romanticised idea of the Vikings constructed in scholarly and popular circles in 
northwestern Europe in the nineteenth and early 20th centuries was a potent one, and the 
figure of the Viking became a familiar and malleable symbol in different contexts in the 
politics and political ideologies of 20th-century Europe.[49] In Normandy, which had been 
settled by Vikings, the Viking ship became an uncontroversial regional symbol. In Germany, 
awareness of Viking history in the 19th century had been stimulated by the border dispute 
with Denmark over Schleswig-Holstein and the use of Scandinavian mythology by Richard 
Wagner. The idealised view of the Vikings appealed to Germanic supremacists who 
transformed the figure of the Viking in accordance with the racialist ideology of the Germanic 
master race.[50] Building on the linguistic and cultural connections between Norse-speaking 
Scandinavians and other Germanic groups in the far past, Scandinavian Vikings were 
portrayed in Nazi Germany as a pure Germanic type. The cultural phenomenon of Viking 
expansion was re-interpreted for use as propaganda to support the extreme militant 
nationalism of the Third Reich, and ideologically informed interpretations of Viking paganism 
and the Scandinavian use of runes were employed in the construction of Nazi mysticism. 
Other political organizations of the same ilk, such as the former Norwegian fascist party 
Nasjonal Samling, similarly appropriated elements of the modern Viking cultural myth in their 
symbolism and propaganda. In communist Russia, the ideology of Slavic racial purity led to 
the complete denial that Scandinavians had played a part in the emergence of the principalities 
of the Rus', which was supposed to have been founded by Slavs. Evidence to the contrary 
was suppressed until the 1990s. The city of Novgorod now enthusiastically acknowledges its 
Viking history, and has included a Viking ship in its logo.[51]
The Vikings in modern music, literature, 
and popular culture
Led by the operas of German composer Richard Wagner, such as Der Ring des Nibelungen, 
Vikings and the Romanticist Viking Revival inspired many creative works. These have 
included novels directly based on historical events, such as Frans Gunnar Bengtsson's The 
Long Ships (which was also released as a 1963 film), and historical fantasies such as the film 
The Vikings, Michael Crichton's Eaters of the Dead (movie version called The 13th Warrior) 
and the comedy film Erik the Viking. The vampire Eric Northman, in the HBO TV series True 
Blood, was a Viking prince before being turned into a vampire. Vikings appear in several 
books by the Danish American writer Poul Anderson, while British explorer, historian and 
writer Tim Severin authored a trilogy of novels in 2005 about a young Viking adventurer 
Thorgils Leifsson, who travels around the world.
Since the 1960s, there has been rising enthusiasm for historical reenactment. While the earliest 
groups had little claim for historical accuracy, the seriousness and accuracy of re-enactors has 
increased. The largest such groups include The Vikings and Regia Anglorum, though many 
smaller groups exist in Europe, the UK, North America, New Zealand, and Australia. Many 
reenactor groups participate in live-steel combat, and a few have Viking-style ships or boats.
Modern reconstructions of Viking mythology have shown a persistent influence in late 20th- 
and early 21st-century popular culture in some countries, inspiring comics, role-playing games, 
computer games, and music, including Viking metal, a sub-genre of heavy metal music.
Common misconceptions concerning the 
Vikings
Horned helmets
Apart from two or three representations of (ritual) helmets - with protrusions that may be 
either stylised ravens, snakes or horns - no depiction of Viking Age warriors' helmets, and no 
preserved helmet, has horns. In fact, the formal close-quarters style of Viking combat (either 
in shield walls or aboard "ship islands") would have made horned helmets cumbersome and 
hazardous to the warrior's own side.
Therefore historians believe that Viking warriors did not use horned helmets, but whether or 
not such helmets were used in Scandinavian culture for other, ritual purposes remains 
unproven. The general misconception that Viking warriors wore horned helmets was partly 
promulgated by the 19th century enthusiasts of Gotiska Forbundet, founded in 1811 in 
Stockholm, Sweden. They promoted the use of Norse mythology as the subject of high art 
and other ethnological and moral aims.
The Vikings were often depicted with winged helmets and in other clothing taken from 
Classical antiquity, especially in depictions of Norse gods. This was done in order to legitimise 
the Vikings and their mythology by associating it with the Classical world which had long 
been idealised in European culture.
The latter-day mythos created by national romantic ideas blended the Viking Age with aspects 
of the Nordic Bronze Age some 2,000 years earlier. Horned helmets from the Bronze Age 
were shown in petroglyphs and appeared in archaeological finds (see Bohuslan and Vikso 
helmets). They were probably used for ceremonial purposes.[52]
Cartoons like Hagar the Horrible and Vicky the Viking, and sports uniforms such as those of 
the Minnesota Vikings and Canberra Raiders football teams have perpetuated the mythic 
cliche of the horned helmet.
Viking helmets were conical, made from hard leather with wood and metallic reinforcement 
for regular troops. The iron helmet with mask and chain mail was for the chieftains, based on 
the previous Vendel-age helmets from central Sweden. The only true Viking helmet found is 
that from Gjermundbu in Norway. This helmet is made of iron and has been dated to the 10th 
century.
Use of skulls as drinking vessels
The use of human skulls as drinking vessels-another common motif in popular pictorial 
representations of the Vikings-is also ahistorical. The rise of this legend can be traced to Ole 
Worm's Runer seu Danica literatura antiquissima (1636), in which Danish warriors drinking or 
bjugvi?um hausa [from the curved branches of skulls, i.e. from horns] were rendered as 
drinking ex craniis eorum quos ceciderunt [from the skulls of those whom they had slain]. The 
skull-cup allegation may also have some history in relation with other Germanic tribes and 
Eurasian nomads, such as the Scythians and Pechenegs, and the vivid example of the 
Lombard Alboin, made notorious by Paul the Deacon's History.
There may also be some confusion between "skull" and the Norse/Icelandic word for a 
drinking cup, skal. This is a common toast in Scandinavian countries.
Barbarity
The image of wild-haired, dirty savages sometimes associated with the Vikings in popular 
culture[clarification needed] is a distorted picture of reality.[1] Non-Scandinavian Christians are 
responsible for most surviving accounts of the Vikings and, consequently, a strong possibility 
for bias exists. This attitude is likely attributed to Christian misunderstandings regarding 
paganism. Viking tendencies were often misreported and the work of Adam of Bremen, 
among others, told largely disputable tales of Viking savagery and uncleanliness.[53]
The Anglo-Danes were considered excessively clean by their Anglo-Saxon neighbours, due to 
their custom of bathing every Saturday and combing their hair often. To this day, Saturday is 
referred to as laugardagur / laurdag / lordag / lordag, "washing day" in the Scandinavian 
languages. Icelanders were known to use natural hot springs as baths, and there is a strong 
sauna/bathing culture in Scandinavia to this day.
As for the Vikings in the east, Ibn Rustah notes their cleanliness in carrying clean clothes, 
whereas Ibn Fadlan is disgusted by all of the men sharing the same, used vessel to wash their 
faces and blow their noses in the morning. Ibn Fadlan's disgust is possibly because of the 
contrast to the personal hygiene particular to the Muslim world at the time, such as running 
water and clean vessels. While the example intended to convey his disgust about certain 
customs of the Rus', at the same time it recorded that they did wash every morning.
Genetic legacy
Studies of genetic diversity provide some indication of the origin and expansion of the Viking 
population. The Haplogroup I1 (defined by specific genetic markers on the Y-chomosome) is 
sometimes referred to as the "Viking haplogroup".[citation needed] This mutation occurs with the 
greatest frequency among Scandinavian males: 35 percent in Norway, Denmark and Sweden, 
and peaking at 40 percent within western Finland.[54] It is also common near the southern 
Baltic and North Sea coasts, and then successively decreases the further south geographically.
Genetic studies in the British Isles of the Y-DNA Haplogroup R1a1, seen also across 
Scandinavia, have demonstrated that the Vikings settled in Britain and Ireland as well as 
raiding there. Both male and female descent studies show evidence of Norwegian descent in 
areas closest to Scandinavia, such as the Shetland and Orkney Islands. Inhabitants of lands 
farther away show most Norse descent in the male Y-chromosome lines.[55]
A specialised surname study in Liverpool demonstrated marked Norse heritage, up to 50 
percent of males who belonged to original families, those who lived there before the years of 
industrialization and population expansion.[56] High percentages of Norse inheritance-tracked 
through R1a1 haplotype signatures-were also found among males in Wirral and West 
Lancashire.[57] This was similar to the percentage of Norse inheritance found among males in 
the Orkney Islands.[58]
Recent research suggests that the Scottish warrior Somerled, who drove the Vikings out of 
Scotland and was the progenitor of Clan Donald, may himself have been of Viking descent-
a member of Haplogroup R1a1.[59]
Vikings!


Vikings! The word conjures up images of wild, barbaric, sea faring men, intent on setting their mark 
on their less warlike neighbours with fire and sword. From the land of ice and giants, they swept 
across Europe like a forest fire raping, pillaging and destroying all in their path. Sound familiar? It 
should do, it's the image that the writers of the time recorded.
It is inescapable that in a bloodthirsty age they were more bloodthirsty than most, but the 
mask of enduring ferocity slips a little when you consider that the people that did the writing 
were those that stood between the Vikings and their silver - the clerical staff of churches and 
abbeys.
Let us look briefly at the roots and achievements of the Viking age.
Ships.
When the very distant ancestors of the Vikings reached the end of their long migration from - 
probably - the Indus valley, they ran into a real problem. The sea. They were a nomadic people 
from an area with few areas of open water and certainly with no seaboard. Yet, within a few 
generations, they seem to have invented more or less from scratch a design of hull that became 
common throughout Europe for several centuries. It is possible to follow a line of 
development through previous boat designs found on the European west coast, but around the 
beginning of the seventh century after Christ, some northern genius invented the long narrow 
hull that became known as the Longship.
Construction.
Long, lean and above all flexible, the hulls were usually of oak planks that had been split from felled 
trunks. With axe and adze, the planks were trimmed to shape then riveted together with iron nails. 
At the junction of the planks, a thin rope of twisted hair soaked in pitch (boiled birch tree sap) was 
trapped. This acted as a flexible waterproofing membrane. The hulls were built first, the distortion 
of the planks leading to the upwards curvature of the bow and stern. It was soon found that this 
type of hull was very seaworthy and this aspect of the design was exaggerated to create the 
soaring curve that became such a characteristic of the shape of Northern vessels. When the hull 
was finished, the ribs were tied in with the thin fibrous roots of the Larch tree. At sea, the hulls 
were watertight and because of their flexible nature, would often twist and bend where a more 
solid structure might break.
Uses.
At first, they were only used as rowing boats, but within a hundred years, ships were being built 
that were obviously intended as sailing ships. With their square sail and single mast, they could 
largely only sail down wind, but there is good evidence from ship replicas that they could sail across 
the wind to some extent.
Oars were mostly used for times when the wind did not suit the purposes of the ship master 
and for manoeuvring in port. However, it was quite possible with a big crew to maintain a 
steady pace but crossing the North Sea under oars alone was not practiced by raiding ships as 
it was simply too far.
It is important to understand that there were many different types of ship. There were small 
rowing boats that might be handled by a couple of men each pulling two oars each called 
Faerings. Trading vessels which had a virtually fixed mast and only four oar ports in their 
fifty foot length known as Knarrs. Also the great Drakkars, the warships that were over a 
hundred feet long and had crews of more than a hundred men. There were Karvs, a sort of 
multi purpose ship that could trade and/or raid and it is one of these ships that was found at 
the end of the last century at Gokstad in Norway. This find gave birth to many replicas, based 
upon this well-preserved hull. In the closing years of the nineteenth century, the first of these 
was sailed across the Atlantic to the World's Fair in Chicago. I understand that the hull is still 
to be seen by the shore of Lake Michigan and is itself one of the oldest ships on the North 
American continent!
During this century, several other ship finds have been made, adding to our knowledge of this 
fascinating type of vessel. The importance of the ship to the Scandinavians of a thousand 
years ago cannot be overstated. Truly, without them, there would have been no Viking age 
and Europe would be a very different place today.
Abroad
Trading
The mobility of their shallow draft vessels allowed the Vikings to travel far up the rivers 
which flow into the seas surrounding the European continent. The Swedes seem to have 
specialised in trading down the river systems from the Baltic into central Europe and so to 
Constantinople. They called the place 'Miklagard', literally 'The Great City'. From this trade 
route, luxury goods like silk and spices were brought north and sold in specialist trading 
communities like Birka and Hedeby.
Norwegian and Danish Vikings tended to look more to the west. They traded and raided 
around the western seaboard of Europe and its islands. It was these people who explored and 
settled Iceland, Greenland and finally North America. There is now no doubt that there was a 
Viking settlement in Labrador. However, this represented the limit of reach of their 
settlements and it is unlikely that they stayed there long, possibly only a few years. It is my 
opinion that when Leif Erikson went to North America, he did so knowing that it was there. 
It was likely that the expedition went there for wood more than from the pure spirit of 
exploration. The site in New Foundland known as Lans aux Meadows, is now beginning to 
throw up finds that suggest they even went further south.
There are records of other visits to America, some of whom never returned. Sailing the North 
Atlantic in an open boat - however seaworthy - is a dangerous business and it is more than 
likely that those who never returned were simply lost at sea. It is fun to speculate, though, on 
the report that Cortez brought back. He said he was initially welcomed by the inhabitants of 
South America as a representative of those pale-skinned seafarers who had visited that part of 
the world centuries before........
Raiding.
It must have seemed like a continuing nightmare to the largely peaceful settlements around the 
coasts of Europe and its islands. Suddenly, in the closing years of the eighth century, the 
Viking raids began. They often came in on the morning sea mists, their shallow-draft vessels 
creeping quietly through the reeds of the river mouths or sliding silently up on sandy beaches. 
Quickly, the raiding party would assemble and work its way inland. Their early targets were 
the churches and monasteries, looking for silver, gold and slaves. Soon, these were depleted 
and the raiders attention turned to the more mundane victims of farm and village for food and 
horses to make their getaway. As the years slipped by, so the sea raiders came more and more 
often. Sometimes, they would stay over-winter and gradually the raiders camps turned into 
settlements. At one time, most of England was under the Viking heel and they called this part 
of the country the Danelaw.
The turning point came when Alfred the Great beat Guthrum in a straight fight and forced 
him and his important men to become Christians. After that, every year saw first Alfred and 
then his kin pushing the Danish invaders further and further north. They did this steadily, 
setting up Burhs or fortified towns. (One example of this as place name evidence is 
Middlesbrough.) Eventually, in the reign of Athelstan, the whole of Britain came under his 
kingship.


Around the turn of the millennium there followed a period of state-organised invasion. 
Hundreds of ships would turn up regularly each year with thousands of men. They were intent 
upon making Britain politically part of Scandinavia and they could only be bought off with 
ever increasing sums of Danegeld, as it became known. 20,000 pounds weight of silver was a 
not unusual sum and it proved a crippling load on the economy of the English state. But 
curiously, despite the vast sums of money going out of the country, it held together and only 
fell to Cnut after a large defeat in battle at Ashington in Essex.
Eventually, in 1016, the English Witan turned to Cnut, king of Denmark and asked him to 
become king of England. He proved to be a good king and spent much of his early reign 
settling the affairs of ravaged parts of the kingdom and re-settling them. For instance, there is 
some evidence that he spent a whole year in the Isle of Wight, setting things to rights there.
Substantially, the reign of Cnut (or Canute) represented the end of Viking military incursions 
into England, although there were sporadic raids around the coast for some time. The last 
great fete of Scandinavian arms in this country was in 1066, when king Harold Godwinsson, 
last Saxon king of the English, brought King Harald Hardrada of Norway to open battle at 
Stamford Bridge near York. In a crushing decisive victory, King Harold broke the power of 
the Scandinavian kings to wage overseas war on a large scale. It was the final major Viking 
raid.
At Home
The Law
For a people who were so careless of the rights of the folk they fought against, the Vikings 
were surprisingly organised and careful of their rights at home. There was a strict system of 
law, enforced by the people that lived under it. Regular meetings - called Things or Althings - 
were held at which the Law was read aloud. (This custom survives to this day in the Manx 
Tynwald.) At these meetings, cases were judged and punishments imposed by a council of 
important men who were changed from time to time. Every free man or woman had the right 
to speak at an Althing, and women were generally held to be the equal of men under the law. 
Women retained their rights to manage their own money and property after marriage and 
could obtain a divorce with the same ease - or difficulty - as a man. Women only became 
second-class citizens after the imposition of Norman Law!
Eating And Drinking
The Vikings ate a wide range of foodstuffs, but there are no real surprises. Beef, mutton, pork 
and venison were common meats, and communities close to the coast could expect to widen 
their diets with fish and shellfish. A heavy bread made from barley flour was common, but 
there is evidence that at least some people had wheaten bread available to them. It was often 
the custom to eat gruel - a porridge augmented by scraps of meat as a morning meal. Boiled 
meat was much more common than roasted, something which was normally only eaten during 
ceremonies. Boiled sausages known as 'cauldron snakes', were a special delicacy. Other sought 
after foodstuffs were sun-dried cod, ling and pork that had been preserved in whey, then 
boiled to rags in its juice. Yuk!
It is reasonable to assume that rich folk ate better than poor, but their range of foodstuffs 
would not have been very different.
 

Housing
Their houses were constructed of wood and/or stone. They were long lived structures and - barring 
accidents - might last at least 150 years with normal maintenance. The traditional Longhouse would 
have been a dark, smoky place in which to live and work, but there is emerging evidence that the 
Vikings often used two storey buildings with balconies on the upper floor, much as might be seen in 
rural Scandinavia to this day. The roofs were thatched, turfed or covered in wood shingles, 
depending on available local resources.
To Sum Up
The Vikings were a proud, honourable, law-abiding people who valued warfare and personal 
reputation (they called it 'word fame') above almost anything else. In the latter years of the 
Viking Age, they became involved in their own myth, starting such organisations as the 
Jomsvikings.
They brought the seafaring ship to Europe and, by their constant depredations, spread its use 
far and wide. In only 250 years, they set their mark on the law and language of many 
countries and made many European communities see themselves in the light of a nation state 
for the first time. In terms of human history, if you blinked, you would have missed them! But 
the image the Vikings promoted of the brave, hardy individualist, unafraid of the world in all 
its forms, remains with us all as an example of how a man should conduct himself in adversity.
'Wealth dies, kinsmen die. Cattle die and the wheat, too. 
But this thing never dies: word-fame! 
Word-fame never dies for he that achieves it well.' 

















