Middle-earth
Middle-earth is the fictional setting of the majority of author J. R. R. Tolkien's fantasy 
writings. The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings take place entirely in Middle-earth, as does 
much of The Silmarillion and Unfinished Tales.
Tolkien prepared several maps of Middle-earth and of the regions of Middle-earth where his 
stories took place. Some were published in his lifetime, though some of the earliest maps were 
not published until after his death. The main maps were those published in The Hobbit, The 
Lord of the Rings, The Silmarillion, and Unfinished Tales. Most of the events of the First Age 
took place in the subcontinent Beleriand, which was later engulfed by the ocean at the end of 
the First Age; the Blue Mountains at the right edge of the map of Beleriand are the same Blue 
Mountains that appear on the extreme left of the map of Middle-earth in the Second and 
Third Ages. Tolkien's map of Middle-earth, however, shows only a small part of the world; 
most of the lands of Rhun and Harad are not shown on the map, and there are also other 
continents.
Tolkien wrote many times that Middle-earth is located on our Earth.[1] He described it as an 
imaginary period in Earth's past, not only in The Lord of the Rings,[2] but also in several 
letters.[3] He put the end of the Third Age at about 6,000 years before his own time,[4] and the 
environs of the Shire in what is now northwestern Europe (Hobbiton for example was set at 
the same latitude as Oxford),[5] though in replies to letters he would also describe elements of 
the stories as a "... secondary or sub-creational reality" or "Secondary belief".[6] During an 
interview in January 1971, when asked whether the stories take place in a different era, he 
stated, "No ... at a different stage of imagination, yes."[1][7] However, he did nod to the stories' 
setting on Earth; speaking of Midgard and Middle-earth, he said: "Oh yes, they're the same 
word. Most people have made this mistake of thinking Middle-earth is a particular kind of 
earth or is another planet of the science fiction sort but it's just an old fashioned word for this 
world we live in, as imagined surrounded by the Ocean."[1] He continued to make references 
to its being "... a brief episode of History" of Earth as late as Autumn 1971.[
The stories
Tolkien's stories chronicle the struggle to control the world (called Arda) and the continent of 
Middle-earth: on one side the angelic Valar, the Elves and their allies among Men; on the 
other the demonic Melkor or Morgoth (a Vala fallen into evil) and his minions, mostly Orcs, 
Dragons and enslaved men. In later ages, after Morgoth's defeat and expulsion from Arda, his 
place was taken by his lieutenant Sauron.
The Valar withdrew from direct involvement in the affairs of Middle-earth after the defeat of 
Morgoth, but in later years they sent the wizards or Istari to help in the struggle against 
Sauron. The most important wizards were Gandalf the Grey and Saruman the White. Gandalf 
remained true to his mission and proved crucial in the fight against Sauron. Saruman, 
however, became corrupted and sought to establish himself as a rival to Sauron for absolute 
power in Middle-earth. Other races involved in the struggle against evil were Dwarves, Ents 
and most famously Hobbits. The early stages of the conflict are chronicled in The Silmarillion, 
while the final stages of the struggle to defeat Sauron are told in The Hobbit and the The Lord 
of the Rings.
Conflict over the possession and control of precious or magical objects is a recurring theme in 
the stories. The First Age is dominated by the doomed quest of the Elf Feanor and most of his 
Noldorin clan to recover three precious jewels called the Silmarils that Morgoth stole from 
them (hence the title The Silmarillion). The Second and Third Age are dominated by the 
forging of the Rings of Power, and the fate of the One Ring forged by Sauron, which gives its 
wearer the power to control or influence those wearing the other Rings of Power (hence the 
title The Lord of the Rings).
Etymology
In ancient Germanic mythology, the world of Men is known by several names, such as 
Midgard, Middenheim, Manaheim, and Middengeard. The Old English word middangeard 
descends from an earlier Germanic word and so has cognates in languages related to Old 
English such as the Old Norse word Mi?gar?r from Norse mythology, transliterated to 
modern English as Midgard.[9]
The term "Middle-earth"; also commonly referred to as "middle-world," was therefore not 
invented by Tolkien. It occurs in Early Modern English[10] as a development of the Middle 
English word middel-erde (cf. modern German Mittelerde), which developed in turn, through 
a process of folk etymology,[11] from middangeard (the g being soft, i.e. pronounced like y in 
its modern descendant "yard"[12][13]). By the time of the Middle English period, middangeard 
was being written as middellard, midden-erde, or middel-erde, indicating that the second 
element had been reinterpreted, based on its similarity to the word for "earth".[11] The shift in 
meaning was not great, however: middangeard properly meant "middle enclosure" instead of 
"middle-earth";[14] Nevertheless middangeard has been commonly translated as "middle-earth" 
and Tolkien followed this course.
Use by Tolkien
Tolkien first encountered the term middangeard in an Old English fragment he studied in 
1914:
Eala earendel engla beorhtast / ofer middangeard monnum sended.
Hail Earendel, brightest of angels / above the middle-earth sent unto men.
This quote is from the second of the fragmentary remnants of the Crist poems by Cynewulf. 
The name Earendel was the inspiration for Tolkien's mariner Earendil.[15] who set sail from the 
lands of Middle-earth to ask for aid from the angelic powers, the Valar. Tolkien's earliest 
poem about Earendil, from 1914, the same year he read the Crist poems, refers to "the mid-
world's rim".[16]
The concept of middangeard was considered by Tolkien to be the same as a particular usage 
of the Greek word ????????? - oikoumene (from which the word ecumenical is derived). In 
this usage Tolkien says that the oikoumene is "the abiding place of men";[17] by this he means it 
is the physical world in which man lives out his life and destiny, as opposed to the unseen 
worlds, like Heaven or Hell.
"Middle-earth is ... not my own invention. It is a modernization or alteration ... of an old word for 
the inhabited world of Men, the oikoumene: middle because thought of vaguely as set amidst the 
encircling Seas and (in the northern-imagination) between ice of the North and the fire of the 
South. O. English middan-geard, mediaeval E. midden-erd, middle-erd. Many reviewers seem to 
assume that Middle-earth is another planet!"
-J.R.R. Tolkien, Letters, no. 211[18]
The term Middle-earth is not, however, used in Tolkien's earliest writings about his created 
world: writings that date from the early 1920s and which were later published in The Book of 
Lost Tales (1983-4); nor is the term used in The Hobbit (1937).[16] Tolkien began to use the 
term "Middle-earth" in the latter part of the 1930s, in place of the earlier terms "Great Lands", 
"Outer Lands", and "Hither Lands" that he had used to describe this region in his stories.[16] 
The term Middle-earth appears in the drafts of The Lord of the Rings, and the first published 
appearance of the word "Middle-earth" in Tolkien's works is in the Prologue to that work: 
"...Hobbits had, in fact, lived quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk 
even became aware of them."[19]
Usage and misunderstandings
The term Middle-earth can be also applied as a nickname of the entirety of Tolkien's creation, 
instead of the more appropriate, but less known terms Arda which refers to Tolkien's world 
(including celestial bodies), and Ea, which refers to the universe. This is seen also in the title 
of books such as The Complete Guide to Middle-earth, The Road to Middle-earth, The Atlas of 
Middle-earth, and in particular the series The History of Middle-earth, all of which cover areas 
outside of the strict geographical definition of the term Middle-earth. Tolkien himself used the 
term loosely at times.
A possible explanation is that the word Arda is never mentioned in The Lord of the Rings, and 
it was not until the 1977 publication of The Silmarillion that readers learned of the word.
The term "Middle-earth" is sometimes mis-capitalised as "Middle-Earth"[20] and the hyphen is 
sometimes incorrectly omitted as well, as in "Middle Earth", "Middle earth" and 
"Middleearth".
Geography
Middle-earth cosmology
The easiest way to understand Middle-earth's place in Tolkien's complex system is to see his 
whole creation as a series of worlds within worlds. As the outer layer is the whole universe 
itself, called by Tolkien "Ea". Within Ea are many mysterious and unknown worlds, but the 
events of his stories take place in the world called "Arda". Arda is what we would call Earth, 
called by Tolkien "Imbar" or "Ambar" (meaning 'the Habitation') and the sun, moon and stars 
which revolve around it. Within Arda are the continents of Aman and Middle-earth (which 
was actually two or even more continents), which are separated from each other by the Great 
Sea Belegaer (analogous to the Atlantic Ocean). Within his stories, Tolkien translated the 
name "Middle-earth" as Endor (or sometimes Endore) and Ennor in the Elvish languages 
Quenya and Sindarin respectively, sometimes referring only to the continent that the stories 
take place on, with another southern continent called the Dark Land.
The western continent, Aman, was the home of the Valar and the elves called the Eldar. An 
uninhabited Eastern continent is also mentioned, but does not figure in the stories. The island 
of Numenor lay in Belegaer between Aman and Middle-earth, but was later drowned. In later 
ages Aman was also removed by the creator Eru Iluvatar from Arda completely to prevent 
men from trying to reach it.
In the beginning Ambar was supposed to be a "flat world", in that its habitable land-masses 
were all arranged on one side of the world. Tolkien's sketches show a disc-like face for the 
world which looked up to the stars. However, according to accounts in both The Silmarillion 
and The Lord of the Rings, when the king of Numenor called Ar-Pharazon invaded Aman to 
seize immortality from the Valar, they laid down their guardianship of the world and Iluvatar 
intervened, destroying Numenor, removing Aman "from the circles of the world", and 
reshaping Ambar into the round world of today. The Akallabeth says that the Numenoreans 
who survived the Downfall sailed as far west as they could in search of their ancient home, 
but their travels only brought them around the world back to their starting points. Hence, 
before the end of the Second Age, the transition from "flat Earth" to "round Earth" had been 
completed. New lands were also created in the west, analogous to the New World.
A few years after publishing The Lord of the Rings, in a note associated with the unique 
narrative story "Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth" (which is said to occur in Beleriand during the 
War of the Jewels), Tolkien equated Arda with the Solar System; because Arda by this point 
consisted of more than one heavenly body (Valinor being another planet and the Sun and 
Moon being celestial objects in their own right and not objects orbiting the Earth).
The Beginning of Days
Tolkien wrote that Middle-earth or Endor originally conformed to a largely symmetrical 
scheme that was marred by Melkor. The various conflicts with Melkor (as well as by the action 
of the Valar on one occasion) resulted in the shapes of the lands being distorted.
Originally, Arda began as a single flat world and the Valar created two lamps to illuminate it, 
Illuin and Ormal. The Vala Aule forged great towers, Helcar in the furthest north, and Ringil 
in the deepest south. Illuin was set upon Helcar and Ormal upon Ringil. In the middle, where 
the light of the lamps mingled, the Valar dwelt at the island of Almaren in the midst of a 
Great Lake. When viewed from space, the geography of Arda was thus symmetrical. When 
Melkor destroyed the Lamps of the Valar, two vast inland seas (Helcar and Ringil) and two 
major seas (Belegaer and the Eastern Sea) were created, but Almaren and its lake were 
destroyed.
The Valar left Middle-earth and went to the newly-formed continent of Aman in the west, 
where they created their home called Valinor. To discourage Melkor from assailing Aman, 
they thrust the continent of Middle-earth to the east, thus widening Belegaer at its middle and 
raising five major mountain ranges in Middle-earth which adopted a relatively symmetrical 
distribution, namely the Blue, Red, Grey, Yellow Mountains and the Mountains of the Wind. 
This act, however, ruined the symmetry of the shape of the continents and their intervening 
seas.
Many centuries after Valinor was established, Melkor raised the Misty Mountains to impede 
the progress of the Vala Orome as he hunted Melkor's beasts during the period of darkness in 
Middle-earth prior to the awakening of the Elves.
Additional changes occurred when the Valar assaulted Utumno, some years after the 
Awakening of the Elves. The North-west of Middle-earth, notably the regions west of the 
Blue Mountains (named Beleriand) wherein Melkor met the Valar host, was "much broken". 
Belegaer, the sea between Middle-earth and Aman widened further, creating among other 
bays one which was the Bay of Balar, the confluence of Sirion. The highland of Dorthonion 
and the mountains about Hithlum were also a result of the battles.
In the central region of Middle-earth, a Great Gulf (of Belegaer) was formed (the precursor to 
the later Bay of Belfalas). To the far south, the Inland Sea of Ringil expanded greatly and 
separated the southernmost part of the continent from the mainland, in effect forming the 
Dark Land (Hyarmenor) and the Inner Sea, linking by straits the previously separated 
Belegaer and Eastern Sea.
The First Age
As told in The Silmarillion, most of the events of the First Age took place in the land of 
Beleriand and its environs. Tolkien placed within the bounds of Beleriand the hidden Elven 
kingdoms of Doriath, ruled by King Thingol, and Gondolin, founded by Turgon. Also 
important was the fortress of Nargothrond, founded by the elf Finrod Felagund. In the Blue 
Mountains to the east were the great dwarf halls of Belegost and Nogrod. Beleriand was split 
into eastern and western sections by the great river Sirion. In East Beleriand was the river 
Gelion with its seven tributaries, which defined the Green-elf kingdom of Ossiriand. To the 
north of Beleriand lay the regions of Nevrast, Hithlum and Dor-lomin, and the Iron Mountains 
where Morgoth (Melkor) had his fortress of Angband. The violent struggles during the War of 
Wrath between the Host of the Valar and the armies of Melkor at the end of the First Age 
brought about the destruction of Angband, and changed the shape of Middle-earth so that 
most of Beleriand vanished under the sea.
The Pelori were also raised in the early First Age, along with the Enchanted Isles, to make 
Valinor essentially impassable save by the fortified Calacirya.
The Second and Third Ages
In the Second and Third Ages, during which Tolkien set the events of the Akallabeth, The 
Hobbit, and The Lord of the Rings, the Western regions of Middle-earth contained the lands 
of Eriador, Gondor, the Misty Mountains, and the vales of the great river Anduin. Eriador 
was bordered by the Ered Luin or Blue Mountains to the west, which bordered the sea and 
the Grey Havens, also called Mithlond. To the east of Eriador lay the Misty Mountains, which 
ran from the far north to Isengard, home of the wizard Saruman, in the south. The Misty 
Mountains contained the great Dwarvish hall of Khazad-dum or Moria. Within Eriador lay 
originally the kingdom of Arnor, founded by men who had fled the destruction of Numenor. 
It later split into the kingdoms of Arthedain, Cardolan, and Rhudaur. These kingdoms too had 
long since passed into history by the time of The Lord of the Rings. Eriador also contained The 
Shire, homeland of the Hobbits, and the nearby settlement of Bree. Rivendell or Imladris, the 
home of the Half Elf Elrond also lay in Eriador, close to the western side of the Misty 
Mountains.
East of the Mountains lay the land called Rhovanion and the great river Anduin. On its 
western side, between Anduin and the Misty Mountains, lay the Elvish kingdom of 
Lothlorien, home of the Elf Galadriel, and the forest of Fangorn, home of the Ents. To the 
east of the Anduin lay the great forest of Mirkwood, (formerly Greenwood), and further east 
again were the Lonely Mountain or Erebor, home of the dragon Smaug, the town of Dale, 
Dorwinion, and the Iron Hills. South and East of the Misty Mountains was the kingdom of 
Rohan, inhabited by the allies of Gondor, and further south the kingdom of Gondor, founded 
like Arnor by Men who escaped the destruction of the island of Numenor. East of Gondor, 
and surrounded by high mountains was Mordor, home of Sauron in his fortress of Barad-dur.
South of Gondor lay the lands of Harad and Khand, and the port of Umbar. In the far East 
beyond Rhovanion was the Sea of Rhun, on the eastern side of which dwelt the Easterling 
peoples. The inhabitants of all these lands were traditionally hostile to Gondor, and allied with 
Sauron at the time of The Lord of the Rings.
Maps of Middle-earth
Tolkien never finalized the geography for the world associated with The Hobbit and The Lord 
of the Rings. In The Shaping of Middle-earth, volume IV of The History of Middle-earth, 
Christopher Tolkien published several remarkable maps, of both the original flat earth and 
round world, which his father had created in the latter part of the 1930s. Karen Wynn 
Fonstad drew from these maps to develop detailed, but non-canonical, "whole world maps" 
reflecting a world consistent with the historical ages depicted in The Silmarillion, The Hobbit, 
and The Lord of the Rings.
Maps prepared by Christopher Tolkien and J.R.R. Tolkien for the world encompassing The 
Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings were published as foldouts or illustrations in The Hobbit, 
The Lord of the Rings, The Silmarillion, and Unfinished Tales. Early conceptions of the maps 
provided in The Silmarillion and The Lord of the Rings were included in several volumes, 
including "The First Silmarillion Map" in The Shaping of Middle-earth, "The First Map of the 
Lord of the Rings" in The Treason of Isengard, "The Second Map (West)" and "The Second 
Map (East)" in The War of the Ring, and "The Second Map of Middle-earth west of the Blue 
Mountains" (also known as "The Second Silmarillion Map") in The War of the Jewels.
The Tolkien Estate maintains the position that the geographical layout of Middle-earth or any 
other places in the imaginary universe created by J.R.R. Tolkien was the intellectual property 
of J.R.R. Tolkien and subsequently is that of his heirs. The Tolkien Estate has therefore 
restricted the publishing of maps to those authorized by the Estate and legally pursues anyone 
who publishes any maps, including self-made works, on the internet.
Correspondence with the geography of Earth
Tolkien described the region in which the Hobbits lived as "the North-West of the Old World, 
east of the Sea",[19] which indicates a connection to England and the north-western region of 
Europe (the Old World). However, as he noted in private letters, the geographies do not 
match, and he did not consciously make them match when he was writing:
"As for the shape of the world of the Third Age, I am afraid that was devised 'dramatically' 
rather than geologically, or paleontologically."[22]
"I am historically minded. Middle-earth is not an imaginary world. The name is the modern 
form (appearing in the 13th century) of midden-erd>middel-erd, an ancient name for the 
oikoumene, the abiding place of Men, the objectively real world, in use specifically opposed to 
imaginary worlds (as Fairyland) or unseen worlds (as Heaven or Hell). The theatre of my tale 
is this earth, the one in which we now live, but the historical period is imaginary. The 
essentials of that abiding place are all there (at any rate for inhabitants of N.W. Europe), so 
naturally it feels familiar, even if a little glorified by enchantment of distance in time.(Letters, 
no. 183)[23]
"...if it were 'history', it would be difficult to fit the lands and events (or 'cultures') into such 
evidence as we possess, archaeological or geological, concerning the nearer or remoter part of 
what is now called Europe; though the Shire, for instance, is expressly stated to have been in 
this region...I hope the, evidently long but undefined gap* in time between the Fall of Barad-
dur and our Days is sufficient for 'literary credibility', even for readers acquainted with what 
is known as 'pre-history'. I have, I suppose, constructed an imaginary time, but kept my feet 
on my own mother-earth for place. I prefer that to the contemporary mode of seeking remote 
globes in 'space'. However curious, they are alien, and not loveable with the love of blood-
kin...(Letters, no. 211)
In another letter, he made correspondences in latitude, not equations, between Europe and 
Middle-earth:
"The action of the story takes place in the North-west of 'Middle-earth', equivalent in latitude 
to the coastlands of Europe and the north shores of the Mediterranean. ... If Hobbiton and 
Rivendell are taken (as intended) to be at about the latitude of Oxford, then Minas Tirith, 600 
miles south, is at about the latitude of Florence. The Mouths of Anduin and the ancient city of 
Pelargir are at about the latitude of ancient Troy."[24]
He did confirm, however, that the Shire, the land of his Hobbit heroes, was based on 
England:
"'The Shire' is based on rural England and not any other country in the world..."[25]
In the Prologue to The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien writes: "Those days, the Third Age of 
Middle-earth, are now long past, and the shape of all lands has been changed..."
History
In The Silmarillion the history of Arda is divided into four great time periods, known as the 
Ainulindale, the Years of the Lamps, the Years of the Trees (the Valian years) and the Years 
of the Sun. In Middle-earth recorded history did not begin until the First Age and the 
Awakening of the Elves during the Years of the Trees - the time prior to that is simply known 
as the Beginning of Days. During the First Age the awakening of Men coincided with the first 
rising of the Sun and the beginning of The Years of the Sun, which have lasted from the First 
Age, through the Second, Third and Fourth Ages to the present day.
Ainulindale
In Tolkien's universe, God is called Eru Iluvatar. Tolkien created a cosmogony in which the 
genesis of the world was musical: in the beginning, Iluvatar created spirits named the Ainur 
and taught them to make music. After the Ainur had become proficient in their skills, Iluvatar 
commanded them to make a great music based on a theme of his own design. The most 
powerful Ainu, Melkor (later called Morgoth or "Dark Enemy" by the elves), disrupted the 
theme. In response, Iluvatar introduced new themes that enhanced the music beyond the 
comprehension of the Ainur. The foundation of Tolkien's creation is that the movements of 
their song, and the conflict in themes between Melkor and Iluvatar, laid the seeds of much of 
the history of the as yet unmade universe and the people who were to dwell therein.
Then Iluvatar stopped the music and he revealed its meaning to the Ainur through a vision. 
Moved, many of the Ainur felt a compelling urge to experience its events directly. Iluvatar 
therefore created Ea, the universe itself, and some of the Ainur went into the universe to share 
in its experience. But upon arriving in Ea, the Ainur found it was shapeless because they had 
entered at the beginning of time. The Ainur undertook great labours in these unnamed "ages 
of the stars", in which they shaped the universe and filled it with many things far beyond the 
reach of Men
The Beginning of Days
In time, however, the Ainur formed Arda, the future abiding place of the Children of Iluvatar: 
Elves and Men. Melkor and his followers entered Ea as well, and they set about ruining and 
undoing whatever the others did. The fifteen most powerful Ainur are called the Valar; 
Melkor was the most powerful, but Manwe was the leader. Each of the Valar was attracted to 
a particular aspect of the world that became the focus of their powers. Melkor was drawn to 
terrible extremes and violence - bitter cold, scorching heat, earthquakes, rendings, breakings, 
utter darkness, burning light etc. His power was so great that at first the Valar were unable to 
restrain him, until the Vala Tulkas entered Ea and tipped the balance. Driven out by Tulkas, 
Melkor brooded in the darkness at the outer reaches of Arda. The Valar settled in Arda to 
watch over it and help prepare it for the awakening of the Children.
The Years of the Lamps began shortly after the Valar finished their labours in shaping Arda. 
Arda began as a single flat world and the Valar created two lamps to illuminate it, Illuin and 
Ormal. In the middle, where the light of the lamps mingled, the Valar dwelt at the island of 
Almaren. This period, known as the Spring of Arda, was a time when the Valar had ordered 
the World as they wished and rested upon Almaren, and Melkor lurked beyond the Walls of 
Night. During this time animals first appeared, and forests started to grow. The Spring was 
interrupted when Melkor returned to Arda, and ended completely when he destroyed the 
Lamps of the Valar. Melkor's destruction of the two Lamps marked the end of the Years of 
the Lamps.
The Years of the Trees began after Melkor's destruction of the two lamps, when the Valar 
retreated to the extreme western regions of Arda, where the Vala Yavanna made the Two 
Trees named Telperion and Laurelin to give light to their new homeland of Valinor in the land 
of Aman. The Trees illuminated Aman, leaving the rest of Arda (in what is now Middle-earth) 
in darkness, illuminated only by the stars.
The First Age
The First Age in Tolkien's history of Middle-earth began when the Elves awoke beside Lake 
Cuivienen in the east of Endor (Middle-earth). The Elves were soon approached by the Valar, 
who requested that they come to Aman to live beside them. Many of the Elves were 
persuaded to undertake the Great Journey westwards towards Aman, but not all of them 
completed the journey (see Sundering of the Elves). The Valar had imprisoned Melkor, but he 
appeared to repent and was released on parole. He sowed great discord among the Elves and 
stirred up rivalry between the Elven princes Feanor and Fingolfin. He then slew their father, 
King Finwe, destroyed the Two Trees themselves with the aid of Ungoliant the spider, and 
stole the Silmarils, three extraordinarily precious gems crafted by Feanor that contained light 
of the Two Trees, from their maker's vault.
Feanor persuaded most of his people, the Noldor, to leave Aman in pursuit of Melkor to 
Beleriand, cursing him with the name Morgoth, 'Black Enemy'. He and his sons swore an oath 
to recover the Silmarils at any cost. Feanor led the first of two groups of the Noldor. The 
second and larger group was led by Fingolfin. The Noldor stopped at the Teleri port-city, 
Alqualonde, but the Teleri refused to give them ships to get to Middle-earth. The first 
Kinslaying ensued when Feanor and many of his followers attacked the Teleri and stole their 
ships. Feanor's host sailed on the stolen ships, leaving Fingolfin's behind. The second group 
had little choice but to cross over to Middle-earth through the deadly Helcaraxe (or 'Grinding 
Ice') in the far north. Subsequently Feanor was slain, but most of his sons survived and 
founded realms, as did Fingolfin and his heirs. Meanwhile, the Valar took the last two living 
fruit of the Two Trees and used them to create the Moon and Sun, which remained a part of 
Arda, but were separate from Ambar (the earthly world).
The Years of the Sun began when the Valar made the Sun, and it rose over Ambar, and 
thereafter time in the First Age was counted from the date of its rising. After several great 
battles, a Long Peace ensued for four hundred years, during which time the first Men, the 
Edain, entered Beleriand by crossing over the Blue Mountains. When Morgoth broke the siege 
of Angband, one by one, the Elven kingdoms fell, even the hidden city of Gondolin. The only 
measurable success achieved by Elves and Men came when Beren of the Edain and Luthien, 
daughter of Thingol and Melian, retrieved a Silmaril from the crown of Morgoth. Afterward, 
Beren and Luthien died, and were restored to life by the Valar with the understanding that 
Luthien was to become mortal and Beren should never be seen by Men again.
Thingol quarrelled with the Dwarves of Nogrod and they slew him, stealing the Silmaril. 
Beren waylaid the Dwarves and recovered the Silmaril, which he gave to Luthien. Soon 
afterwards, both Beren and Luthien died again. The Silmaril was given to their son Dior Half-
elven, who had restored the Kingdom of Doriath. The sons of Feanor demanded that Dior 
surrender the Silmaril to them, and he refused. The Feanorians destroyed Doriath and killed 
Dior in the second Kinslaying, but Dior's young daughter Elwing escaped with the jewel. 
Three sons of Feanor - Celegorm, Curufin, and Caranthir - died trying to retake the jewel.
By the end of the age, all that remained of the free Elves and Men in Beleriand was a 
settlement at the mouth of the River Sirion. Among them was Earendil, who married Elwing. 
But the Feanorians again demanded the Silmaril be returned to them, and after their demand 
was rejected they resolved to take the jewel by force, leading to the third Kinslaying. Earendil 
and Elwing took the Silmaril across the Great Sea, to beg the Valar for pardon and aid. The 
Valar responded. Melkor was captured, most of his works were destroyed, and he was 
banished beyond the confines of the world into the Door of Night.
The Silmarils were recovered at a terrible cost, as Beleriand itself was broken and began to 
sink under the sea. Feanor's last remaining sons, Maedhros and Maglor, were ordered to return 
to Valinor. They proceeded to steal the Silmarils from the victorious Valar. But, as with 
Melkor, the Silmarils burned their hands and they then realized they were not meant to 
possess them, and that their oath was null. Each of the brothers met his fate: Maedhros threw 
himself with the Silmaril into a chasm of fire, and Maglor threw his Silmaril into the sea. Thus, 
one Silmaril ended in the sky, worn by Earendil, a second in the earth, and the third in the sea.
The Second Age
At the beginning of the Second Age, the Edain were given the island of Numenor toward the 
west of the Great Sea as their home, while many Elves were welcomed into the West. The 
Numenoreans were blessed by the Valar with long life, three times that of lesser men. They 
became great seafarers, and, in their days of glory, came to Middle-earth to teach the lesser 
men great skills. However, the Numenoreans grew jealous of their immortal brethren, the 
Elves. At the height of their power, the Numenoreans ruled over the Men of Middle-earth, 
instead of helping them. After a few centuries, Sauron, Morgoth's most powerful servant and 
chief captain, began to organize evil creatures in the eastern lands. He persuaded Elven smiths 
in Eregion to create Rings of Power, and secretly forged the One Ring to control the other 
Rings. But the Elves became aware of Sauron's plan as soon as he put the One Ring on his 
hand, and they removed their own Rings before he could master their wills. During this time, 
the Shadow grew over Numenor, as kings no longer laid down their lives when they had lived 
to the fullest, but rather clung greedily to life. Numenor, ever thankful to the Valar and Eru in 
the past, now neglected to pay tribute, growing ever more restless about the Doom of Man, 
the curse of mortality. The people of Numenor became divided between the King's Men, those 
who would see the power and dominion of Numenor grow and their gratitude towards the 
Elves and Valar wane, and the Faithful, who still maintained their ties with the Elves, and still 
paid heed to the words of Eru Iluvatar.
With his newfound might and growing dominion over Middle-earth, Sauron claimed that he 
was the King of Men. Ar-Pharazon, the last king of Numenor, thinking that none but he 
should have this title, sailed to Middle-earth with an army to challenge Sauron's claim. Sauron, 
seeing the might of Numenor at its noontide, knew that he could not stand against them. So 
he allowed himself to be captured and taken back to Numenor as a hostage. Soon, Sauron's 
deceit and fair-seeming words won him favour with the King. He lied to the King, and told 
him that Melkor, Lord of Darkness, was the true God and that Eru was but an invention of 
the Valar. Thus began the persecution of the Faithful, who were sacrificed in the name of 
Melkor. Finally, as Ar-Pharazon grew old, Sauron, using the power of the One Ring, told the 
King that none, not even the Valar of Valinor, could challenge the might of Numenor, and 
that the King should assail Valinor, and by setting foot on the Undying Lands, achieve 
immortality. Ar-Pharazon, fearing death, assembled a massive fleet and set sail for the 
Undying Lands. Amandil, chief of those still faithful to the Valar, remembering the embassy 
of Earendil, set sail to seek mercy from the Valar. To disguise his intent, he sailed first to the 
east, and then sailed west, but was never heard from again. His son Elendil and grandsons 
Isildur and Anarion kept the Faithful out of the coming war and made preparations to flee by 
ship.
Before the end of the Second Age, when the Men of Numenor rebelled against the Valar due 
to the deceits of Sauron, Iluvatar destroyed Numenor, separated Valinor from the rest of 
Arda, and formed new lands, making the world round. When the King's forces landed on 
Aman, the Valar called for Iluvatar to intervene. The world was changed, so that Aman was 
removed from Imbar. From that time onward, Men could no longer find Aman, but Elves 
seeking passage in specially hallowed ships received the grace of using the Straight Road, 
which led from Middle-earth's seas to the seas of Aman. The mighty fleet of Ar-Pharazon and 
the land of Numenor, were utterly destroyed, and with it the fair body of Sauron; but his 
spirit endured and fled back to Middle-earth. Elendil and his sons escaped to Endor and 
founded the realms of Gondor and Arnor.
Sauron soon rose again, but the Elves allied with the Men to form the Last Alliance and 
defeated him. In a siege that lasted years, Gil-galad, High King of the Elves; Elendil, the ruler 
of Gondor and Arnor; and Anarion, son of Elendil; were slain, as was Sauron's body. Elendil's 
other son Isildur finally cut the One Ring from Sauron's hand with his father's sword, 
diminishing Sauron's power and making his spirit flee once again, and thus achieving victory 
and peace for a time. But Isildur refused to destroy the One Ring in the fires of Mount Doom, 
against all advice, and took it as a weregild for his father and brother. However, the Ring soon 
betrayed him when it abandoned him during an ambush of Orcs at the Gladden Fields; Isildur 
was slain and the Ring was lost in the Anduin for a time.
The Third Age
The Third Age saw the rise in power of the realms of Arnor and Gondor, and their decline. By 
the time of The Lord of the Rings, Sauron had recovered much of his former strength, and was 
seeking the One Ring. He learned that it was in the possession of a Hobbit and sent out the 
nine Ringwraiths to retrieve it. The Ring-bearer, Frodo Baggins, travelled to Rivendell, where 
it was decided that the Ring had to be destroyed in the only way possible: casting it into the 
fires of Mount Doom. Frodo set out on the quest with eight companions-the Fellowship of 
the Ring. At the last moment, he failed, but with the intervention of the creature Gollum-
who was saved by the pity of Frodo and Bilbo Baggins-the Ring was nevertheless 
destroyed. Frodo with his companion Sam Gamgee were hailed as heroes. Sauron was 
destroyed and his spirit forever dissipated.
The end of the Third Age marked the end of the dominion of the Elves and the beginning of 
the dominion of Men. As the Fourth Age began, many of the Elves who had lingered in 
Middle-earth left for Valinor, never to return; those who remained behind would "fade" and 
diminish. The Dwarves returned in large numbers to Moria and resettled it, though they 
eventually dwindled away as well. Under King Elessar of Gondor (Aragorn of the Dunedain), 
peace was restored between Gondor and the lands to the south and east.
Languages and peoples
Ainur
The Ainur were angelic beings created by Iluvatar. The cosmological myth called the 
Ainulindale, or "Music of the Ainur", describes how the Ainur sang for Iluvatar, who then 
created Ea to give material form to their music. Many of the Ainur entered Ea, and the 
greatest of these were called the Valar. Melkor, the chief agent of evil in Ea, and later called 
Morgoth, was initially one of the Valar.
With the Valar came lesser spirits of the Ainur, called the Maiar. Melian, the wife of the Elven 
King Thingol in the First Age, was a Maia. There were also evil Maiar, called Umaiar, 
including the Balrogs and the second Dark Lord, Sauron. Sauron devised the Black Speech 
(Burzum) for his slaves (such as Orcs) to speak. In the Third Age, a number of the Maiar were 
embodied and sent to Middle-earth to help the free peoples to overthrow Sauron. These are 
the Istari (or Wise Ones, called Wizards by Men), including Gandalf, Saruman, Radagast, 
Alatar and Pallando.
Elves
The Elves are known as the first born of Iluvatar: intelligent beings created by Iluvatar alone. 
There are many different clans of Elves, but the main distinction is between the Calaquendi or 
Light Elves and the Moriquendi or Dark Elves. Tolkien's work The Silmarillion tells of how 
the Valar came to Middle-earth shortly after the awakening of the Elves, and invited them to 
come and live with them in their home in the land of Aman. Those elves who accepted and 
began the Great Journey to Aman from their birthplace of Cuivienen were called the Eldar or 
the Middle-earth Eldar. The elves who completed the journey were sometimes called the Light 
Elves because they saw the magical Light of the Two Trees, the source of light in Aman. 
Those elves who refused the offer were called the Avari, and the Eldar who tired of the long 
journey west and remained behind in Middle-earth were called the Dark Elves because they 
would never see the Light of the Two Trees. Generally Dark Elves were considered less 
powerful than Light Elves, but the term 'Dark' did not imply they were in any way evil. In 
later years some of the Light Elves (chiefly the Noldor clan) returned to Middle-earth, mainly 
on a quest to retrieve precious jewels called the Silmarils, stolen from them by Morgoth.
Originally elves all spoke the same Common Eldarin ancestral tongue, but after the long 
separation of thousands of years it diverged into different languages. The two main Elven 
languages were Quenya, spoken by the Light Elves, and Sindarin, spoken by the Sindar, the 
Dark Elves who stayed behind in Beleriand as mentioned above. Tolkien compared the use of 
Quenya in Middle-earth as like Latin, with Sindarin as the common speech. The Teleri of 
Valinor spoke Telerin, which was very close to Quenya but generally considered a distinct 
language and not a dialect.
Physically the Elves resemble humans almost identically; indeed, they are arguably the same 
species, as they can marry and have children (though this is extremely rare and the Half-elven 
are very famous as a result). However the Elves have a more ethereal and less visceral nature, 
and their bodies "fade" into their spirits, to the point that any Elves alive today would be 
totally ghostlike and invisible to most Humans.
The Elves are very agile and quick-footed. They are generally somewhat taller than Men. They 
are also extremely coordinated, as is evident in The Fellowship of the Ring, when the elves 
walk across the rope in the woods of Lothlorien. Their eyesight is hawk-like and they are also 
said to glow with light. Another example is when the Fellowship take the pass of Caradhras, 
where Legolas of Mirkwood is able to walk across the deep snow without falling through. 
Though they can be killed, Elves are immortal, and when they reach maturity they appear to 
cease ageing or at least age gracefully (such as in Cirdan's case). They are also re-embodied in 
Valinor if they are slain or die in an accident. Their ears are pointed only to a slight extent.
Men
Men were the second born of the Children of Iluvatar, who awoke in Middle-earth much later 
than the elves and (probably) also after the dwarves. In appearance they are much like elves, 
but unlike them they are mortal, ageing and dying quickly (usually living 40-80 years, though 
the Numenoreans lived several centuries), and also are on average less beautiful. The men 
involved in Tolkien's stories are mainly the three tribes of Men who allied themselves with the 
Elves of Beleriand in the First Age, called the Edain. As a reward for their loyalty and 
suffering in the Wars of Beleriand, the descendants of the Edain were given the island of 
Numenor to be their home. But as described in the section on Middle-earth's history, Numenor 
was eventually destroyed and a remnant of the Numenoreans established realms in the 
northern lands of Endor. Those who remained faithful to the Valar founded the kingdoms of 
Arnor and Gondor. They were then known as the Dunedain. Other Numenorean survivors, 
still devoted to evil but living far to the south, became known as the Black Numenoreans. The 
languages spoken by men include Adunaic - spoken by the Numenoreans, Westron - The 
'Common Speech' - represented by English, and Rohirric - spoken by the Rohirrim - 
represented in The Lord of the Rings by Old English. In the Third Age and the beginning of 
the Fourth, the King of Gondor is Aragorn, son of Arathorn. Other notable Men in The Lord 
of the Rings are Theoden, Eowyn, and Eomer of Rohan, and the brothers Boromir and Faramir 
of Gondor. The term "Man" is used as a gender-neutral racial description, to distinguish 
humans from the other human-like races of Middle-earth.
Dwarves
The Dwarves are said to have been created by the Vala Aule, who offered to destroy them 
when Iluvatar confronted him. When Iluvatar saw that the seven Dwarf fathers were alive, He 
forgave Aule's transgression and adopted the Dwarves as his own. His only condition was 
that they were not allowed to awaken before the elves. Therefore, the Dwarves' creator Aule 
laid them to sleep in hidden mountain locations until the elves awoke. These dwarves were 
known as the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves, who (along with their mates) went on to found 
the seven kindreds of dwarves when they awoke. The first dwarf to awake was Durin the 
father of the Longbeards, the oldest and wisest kindred of Dwarf, and the main focus of 
Tolkien's stories. Durin founded the greatest Dwarf kingdom called Khazad-dum, later known 
as Moria in the Misty Mountains. The Dwarves spread throughout northern Endor and each 
kindred founded its own kingdom. Only two other of these kingdoms are mentioned by 
Tolkien, Nogrod and Belegost in the Ered Luin or Blue Mountains. These were the home of 
the Firebeards and the Broadbeams, who were allies of the Elves of Beleriand against 
Morgoth in the First Age. The language spoken by the Dwarves is called Khuzdul, and was 
kept largely as a secret language for their own use. The dwarves are mortal like Men, but live 
much longer, usually several hundred years. A peculiarity of dwarves is that both males and 
females are bearded, and thus appear identical to outsiders.
Hobbits
Tolkien identified Hobbits as an offshoot of the race of Men. Another name for Hobbit is 
'Halfling', as they were generally only half the size of Men (Men in those times usually grew to 
six feet in height, and a Hobbit would be only three or four feet tall). In their lifestyle and 
habits they closely resemble Men, except for their preference for living in holes underground. 
Although their origins and ancient history are not known, Tolkien implied that they settled in 
the Vales of Anduin early in the Third Age, but after a thousand years the Hobbits began 
migrating west over the Misty Mountains into Eriador. Eventually, many Hobbits settled in 
the Shire and in nearby Bree. Tolkien says that there were three kinds of Hobbit: the Stoors, 
Fallohides and Harfoots. The hobbits who appear most prominently in Tolkien's stories are 
Bilbo Baggins and his nephew Frodo Baggins, who each have an important role in the quest to 
destroy the One Ring of Power forged by Sauron; another is Smeagol, who took the One Ring 
after it was found in the Anduin. Frodo is told by Gandalf that Smeagol was part of a Hobbit-
like riverfolk, but long possession of the ring corrupted and deformed him into the creature 
Gollum. By the time of The Lord of the Rings Hobbits had long spoken the Mannish tongue 
Westron, though their dialect of Westron indicates that they formerly spoke a language akin to 
that of the Men of Rohan.
Other races
Another important race mentioned by Tolkien are the Ents, shepherds of the trees. They were 
created by Iluvatar at the Vala Yavanna's request to protect trees from the depredations of 
Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Despite this, the elves first taught them to speak, as when they first 
awoke, the elves 'desired to converse with all things'. In The Lord of the Rings, the Ents, led 
by the oldest of them, Treebeard, are instrumental in defeating Saruman by destroying his 
fortress of Isengard. The Ents had their own peculiar language 'Entish', which was impossible 
for other races to learn due to its long descriptive nature for even the smallest things, involving 
complex shades of sound and tone. Nevertheless, the ents could learn other races' languages 
and were able to communicate with others that way.
Orcs and Trolls are evil creatures bred by Morgoth. They are not original creations but rather 
"mockeries" of the Children of Iluvatar and Ents, since only Iluvatar has the ability to give 
being to things. The detailed origins of Orcs and Trolls are unclear (Tolkien considered many 
possibilities and frequently changed his mind). It seems most likely that the Orcs were bred 
largely from corrupted Elves or Men or both. Late in the Third Age, the Uruks or Uruk-hai 
appeared: a race of Orcs of great size and strength that, unlike ordinary Orcs, are not hurt by 
daylight. Tolkien also made mention of "Men-orcs" and "Orc-men"; or "half-orcs" or "goblin-
men", but it is not clear if these are the same as the Uruks, or are some other breed. Trolls were 
made out of stone, as the Ents were made out of trees. The Ent Treebeard describes them in 
The Lord of the Rings as "mockeries of Ents, they are stupid creatures, foul mouthed and 
brutal". If they were struck by daylight they turned to stone. In a chapter of The Hobbit, three 
trolls catch Bilbo and his Dwarf companions, and plan on eating them. However they are 
turned back to stone by the light of dawn before they had a chance. Tolkien also describes a 
race of trolls bred by Sauron called the 'Olog-hai' who were larger and stronger than ordinary 
trolls, and who could endure daylight.
Sapient animals also appear, such as the Eagles, Huan the Great Hound from Valinor and the 
wolf-like Wargs. The Eagles were created by Iluvatar along with the Ents, and the Wargs 
were possibly descendants of earlier werewolves, but in general these animals' origins and 
nature are unclear. Some of them might have been Maiar in animal form, or perhaps even the 
offspring of Maiar and normal animals. The giant spiders such as Shelob were descended from 
Ungoliant, who is possibly an Ainu.
Beorn, a huge Man with the ability to transform into a bear, appears in The Hobbit. Beorn 
often left his home, for hours or days at a time, for purposes not completely known. It is 
possible he could have left to drive out or eliminate enemies and other threats from the 
surrounding lands, or to find edible vegetation from further away. Beorn could be nocturnal 
as well, as he seemed to leave at night in bear-form. His origins lay in the distant past, and 
Gandalf the Grey suspected he and his people had originally come from the mountains.
In The Two Towers, when Gandalf returns, he mentions nameless things that dwelt along the 
path he followed under the earth, creatures who gnaw at the roots of the world, no more is 
known about them.
Books
The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings are presented as Tolkien's retelling of events depicted in 
the Red Book of Westmarch, which was written by Bilbo Baggins, Frodo Baggins, and other 
Hobbits, and corrected and annotated by one or more Gondorian scholars. Tolkien wrote 
extensively about the linguistics, mythology and history of the world, which provide back-
story for these stories. Many of these writings were edited and published posthumously by his 
son Christopher.
Notable among them is The Silmarillion, which provides a creation story and description of 
the cosmology that includes Middle-earth. The Silmarillion is the primary source of 
information about Valinor, Numenor, and other lands. Also notable are Unfinished Tales and 
the multiple volumes of The History of Middle-earth, which includes many incomplete stories 
and essays as well as numerous drafts of Tolkien's Middle-earth mythology, from the earliest 
forms down through the last writings of his life.
Middle-earth works by Tolkien
*	1937 The Hobbit 
o	The Hobbit Bilbo Baggins joins a company of Dwarves and the Wizard 
Gandalf in a quest to reclaim an old Dwarvish kingdom from the dragon 
Smaug.
*	1954 The Fellowship of the Ring, part 1 of The Lord of the Rings 
o	Bilbo's cousin and heir Frodo Baggins sets out on a quest to rid Middle-earth 
of the One Ring, joined by the Fellowship of the Ring.
*	1954 The Two Towers, part 2 of The Lord of the Rings 
o	The Fellowship is split apart: while Frodo and his friend Sam continue their 
quest, Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas fight to rescue the hobbits Peregrin Took 
(Pippin) and Meriadoc Brandybuck (Merry) from Orcs and to save the 
Kingdom of Rohan.
*	1955 The Return of the King, part 3 of The Lord of the Rings 
o	Frodo and Sam reach Mordor, while Aragorn arrives in Gondor and reclaims 
his heritage.
*	1962 The Adventures of Tom Bombadil and Other Verses from the Red Book 
o	An assortment of poems, only loosely related to The Lord of the Rings
*	1967 The Road Goes Ever On 
o	A song cycle with the composer Donald Swann (long out of print but reprinted 
in 2002)
Tolkien died in 1973. All further works were edited by Christopher Tolkien and published 
posthumously. Only The Silmarillion, Bilbo's Last Song and The Children of Hurin are 
presented as finished work - the others are collections of notes and draft versions.
*	1977 The Silmarillion 
o	The history of the Elder Days, before The Lord of the Rings, including the 
Downfall of Numenor
*	1980 Unfinished Tales of Numenor and Middle-earth 
o	Stories and essays related to The Silmarillion and The Lord of the Rings, but 
many were never completed.
*	1981 The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien 
o	A compilation of various letters written by Tolkien throughout his lifetime. 
Most pertain to Middle-earth.
*	1990 Bilbo's Last Song 
o	Poem (published on poster in 1974, not released as book until 1990)
*	The History of Middle-earth series: 
o	1983 The Book of Lost Tales 1
o	1984 The Book of Lost Tales 2 
?	The earliest versions of the mythology, from start to finish
o	1985 The Lays of Beleriand 
?	Two long poems (the Lay of Leithian about Beren and Luthien, and the 
Turin saga)
o	1986 The Shaping of Middle-earth 
?	Start of rewriting the mythology from the beginning
o	1987 The Lost Road and Other Writings 
?	Introduction of Numenor to the mythology and continuation of 
rewriting
o	1988 The Return of the Shadow (The History of The Lord of the Rings v.1)
o	1989 The Treason of Isengard (The History of The Lord of the Rings v.2)
o	1990 The War of the Ring (The History of The Lord of the Rings v.3)
o	1992 Sauron Defeated (The History of The Lord of the Rings v.4) 
?	The development of The Lord of the Rings. Sauron Defeated also 
includes another version of the Numenor story.
o	1993 Morgoth's Ring (The Later Silmarillion, part one)
o	1994 The War of the Jewels (The Later Silmarillion, part two) 
?	Post-Lord of the Rings efforts to revise the mythology for publication. 
Includes the controversial 'Myths Transformed' section, which 
documents how Tolkien's thoughts changed radically in the last years of 
his life.
o	1996 The Peoples of Middle-earth 
?	Source material for the appendices in The Lord of the Rings and some 
more late writings related to The Silmarillion and The Lord of the Rings.
*	2007 The Children of Hurin 
o	Retelling of one of the three "Great Tales" of the Silmarillion (the other two 
being the story of Beren and Luthien and the story of the Fall of Gondolin) as 
one single work, meant to increase readability and give more details compared 
to the briefer retelling in The Silmarillion.
*	The History of The Hobbit (in two volumes, edited by John Rateliff) 
o	2007 Mr. Baggins
o	2007 Return to Bag-End
Films
In a letter to his son Christopher Tolkien, J. R. R. Tolkien set out his policy regarding film 
adaptations of his works: "Art or Cash".[26] He sold the film rights for The Hobbit and The 
Lord of the Rings to United Artists in 1969 after being faced with a sudden tax bill. They are 
currently in the hands of Tolkien Enterprises. The Tolkien Estate retains the film rights to The 
Silmarillion and other works.
The first adaptation to be shown was The Hobbit in 1977, made by Rankin-Bass studios. This 
was initially shown on United States television.
The following year (1978), a movie entitled The Lord of the Rings was released, produced and 
directed by Ralph Bakshi; it was an adaptation of the first half of the story, using rotoscope 
animation. Although the film was relatively faithful to the story and a commercial success, its 
critical response (from critics, readers and non-readers alike) was mixed.
In 1980, Rankin-Bass produced a TV special covering roughly the last half of The Lord of the 
Rings, called The Return of the King. However, this did not follow on directly from the end of 
the Bakshi film.
Plans for a live-action version of The Lord of the Rings would wait until the late 1990s to be 
realized. These were directed by Peter Jackson and funded by New Line Cinema with backing 
from the New Zealand government and banking system.
*	The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001)
*	The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002)
*	The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)
The trilogy was a box office and critical success. The three films won seventeen Oscars 
altogether (at least one in each applicable category for a fictional, English language, live-action 
feature film, except in the acting categories).
Two more films, scheduled for release in December 2012 and 2013, are currently in 
production in New Zealand under the direction of Peter Jackson.
*	The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012)
*	The Hobbit: There and Back Again (2013)
Games
The works of Tolkien have been a major influence on role-playing games along with others 
such as Robert E. Howard, Fritz Leiber, H. P. Lovecraft, and Michael Moorcock. Although 
the most famous game to be inspired partially by the setting was Dungeons & Dragons, there 
have been two specifically Middle-earth based and licensed games. These are the Lord of the 
Rings Roleplaying Game from Decipher Inc. and the Middle-earth Role Playing game 
(MERP) and Middle Earth the Wizards CCG from Iron Crown Enterprises. A Middle-earth 
PBM game was originally run by Flying Buffalo and is now produced by M.E. Games Ltd; 
this play-by-email game was inducted into the Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts & 
Design's Hall of Fame in 1997.
Simulations Publications created three war games based on Tolkien's work. War of the Ring 
covered most of the events in The Lord of the Rings. Gondor focused on the battle of 
Pelennor Fields, and Sauron covered the Second Age battle before the gates of Mordor. The 
three games above were then released together as the Middle Earth game trilogy. Iron Crown 
Enterprises published The Fellowship of the Ring, a war/strategy boardgame. The Lord of the 
Rings Strategy Battle Game, a war game based on the Jackson movies, is currently published 
by Games Workshop. A board game also called War of the Ring is currently published by 
Fantasy Flight Games.
EA Games has released games based on the Jackson movies for the gaming consoles and the 
PC. These include the platformers The Two Towers, The Return of the King, the real-time 
strategy game The Battle for Middle-earth, its sequel The Battle for Middle-earth II and its 
expansion The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-King-- which puts you in 
control of the warriors of Angmar, the home of the Witch-king, and the role-playing game The 
Third Age. Also recently, Pandemic Studios, famous creators of the Star Wars: Battlefront 
series worked with EA to create The Lord of the Rings: Conquest, a game with a similar 
system to Battlefront. The game has mixed reviews but overall was successfully accepted.
Book-based games (officially licensed from Tolkien Enterprises) include Vivendi's own 
platformer, The Fellowship of the Ring, and Sierra's own real-time strategy game, War of the 
Ring, both games that proved highly unsuccessful[citation needed], and the many games based on 
The Hobbit.
Turbine released the first Middle-earth-based graphical massively multiplayer online role-
playing game (MMORPG): The Lord of the Rings Online: Shadows of Angmar in April 2007. 
In 2008, an expansion pack entitled The Lord of the Rings Online: Mines of Moria was 
released, and The Lord of the Rings Online: Siege of Mirkwood was released in 2009. Mines 
of Moria was similar to its predecessor but included two new classes and the entire mines of 
Moria, including creatures like the Watcher and the Balrog. Siege of Mirkwood introduced 
the area of Mirkwood and Dol Guldur, and introduced the Skirmish System. A third 
expansion, Rise of Isengard will introduce the area of Isengard and Dunland, including the 
Tower of Orthanc.[citation needed]
Aside from officially licensed games, many Tolkien-inspired mods, custom maps and total 
conversions have been made for many games, such as Warcraft III, Rome: Total War, Medieval 
II: Total War and The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion.
In addition, there are many text-based MMORPGs (known as MU*s) based on Tolkien's 
Middle-earth. The oldest of these dates back to 1991, and was known as Middle-Earth MUD, 
run by using LPMUD.[27] After Middle-Earth MUD ended in 1992, it was followed by 
Elendor [28] and MUME (Multi Users in Middle-earth).[29] A related computer game Angband 
is a free roguelike D&D-style game that features many characters from Tolkien's works.
Middle-earth in other works
There are allusions to concepts similar to, or identical to Middle-earth, in other works by 
Tolkien, and the work of other writers. The oldest example of this is C. S. Lewis's Space 
Trilogy, in which Earth is also called Middle-earth. Lewis's novels, set around World War II 
(with the last novel, That Hideous Strength, taking place in post-war England), specifically 
bring in references to Tolkien's legendarium (at that time largely unpublished) and treats these 
references as primary fact within Lewis's fiction. Merlin, of King Arthur fame, is treated as a 
successor to the Atlantis magic found within "Numinor" (Lewis's unintentional misspelling of 
Numenor), and similarities can also be found in the Quenya name for Numenor, which is 
Atalante, and Lewis specifically references the earth as Middle-earth twice, both in Chapter 
14, "They Have Pulled Down Deep Heaven on Their Head".
Lewis and Tolkien were part of a literary circle of friends that came to be known as The 
Inklings. Some of Tolkien's works, including The Lord of the Rings, were read out to the 
Inklings as they were being written, leading to Lewis's borrowing of the names. Tolkien's 
unpublished and unfinished time travel stories (The Lost Road and The Notion Club Papers), 
set in England, also connected to his world of Middle-earth and to Numenor.


