Elvis Presley
Elvis Aaron Presleya (January 8, 1935 - August 16, 1977) was one of the most popular 
American singers of the 20th century. A cultural icon, he is widely known by the single name 
Elvis. He is often referred to as the "King of Rock and Roll" or simply "the King".
Born in Tupelo, Mississippi, Presley moved to Memphis, Tennessee, with his family at the age 
of 13. He began his career there in 1954 when Sun Records owner Sam Phillips, eager to bring 
the sound of African-American music to a wider audience, saw in Presley the means to realize 
his ambition. Accompanied by guitarist Scotty Moore and bassist Bill Black, Presley was one 
of the originators of rockabilly, an uptempo, backbeat-driven fusion of country and rhythm 
and blues. RCA Victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by Colonel Tom Parker, who 
would manage the singer for over two decades. Presley's first RCA single, "Heartbreak 
Hotel", released in January 1956, was a number one hit. He became the leading figure of the 
newly popular sound of rock and roll with a series of network television appearances and 
chart-topping records. His energized interpretations of songs, many from African American 
sources, and his uninhibited performance style made him enormously popular-and 
controversial. In November 1956, he made his film debut in Love Me Tender.
Conscripted into military service in 1958, Presley relaunched his recording career two years 
later with some of his most commercially successful work. He staged few concerts, however, 
and, guided by Parker, proceeded to devote much of the 1960s to making Hollywood movies 
and soundtrack albums, most of them critically derided. In 1968, after seven years away from 
the stage, he returned to live performance in a celebrated comeback television special that led 
to an extended Las Vegas concert residency and a string of profitable tours. In 1973, Presley 
staged the first concert broadcast globally via satellite, Aloha from Hawaii, seen by 
approximately 1.5 billion viewers. Prescription drug abuse severely compromised his health, 
and he died suddenly in 1977 at the age of 42.
Presley is regarded as one of the most important figures of 20th-century popular culture. He 
had a versatile voice and unusually wide success encompassing many genres, including 
country, pop ballads, gospel, and blues. He is the best-selling solo artist in the history of 
popular music.[1][2][3][4] Nominated for 14 competitive Grammys, he won three, and received 
the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at age 36. He has been inducted into four music 
halls of fame.
Life and career
Early years (1935-53)
Childhood in Tupelo
Elvis Presley was born on January 8, 1935, in Tupelo, Mississippi, to 18-year-old Vernon Elvis 
and 22-year-old Gladys Love Presley.[5] In the two-room shotgun house built by his father in 
readiness for the birth, Jesse Garon Presley, his identical twin brother, was delivered 35 
minutes before him, stillborn. As an only child, Presley became close to both parents and 
formed an unusually tight bond with his mother. The family attended an Assembly of God 
church where he found his initial musical inspiration.[6]
Presley's ancestry was primarily a Western European mix: On his mother's side, he was Scots-
Irish, with some French Norman; one of Gladys's great-great-grandmothers was Cherokee.[7]b 
His father's forebears were of Scottish[8] or German[9] origin. Gladys was regarded by relatives 
and friends as the dominant member of the small family. Vernon moved from one odd job to 
the next, evidencing little ambition.[10][11] The family often relied on help from neighbors and 
government food assistance. In 1938, they lost their home after Vernon was found guilty of 
altering a check written by the landowner. He was jailed for eight months, and Gladys and 
Elvis moved in with relatives.[12]
In September 1941, Presley entered first grade at East Tupelo Consolidated, where his 
instructors regarded him as "average".[13] He was encouraged to enter a singing contest after 
impressing his schoolteacher with a rendition of Red Foley's country song "Old Shep" during 
morning prayers. The contest, held at the Mississippi-Alabama Fair and Dairy Show on 
October 3, 1945, saw his first public performance: dressed as a cowboy, the ten-year-old 
Presley stood on a chair to reach the microphone and sang "Old Shep". He recalled placing 
fifth.[14] A few months later, Presley received for his birthday his first guitar. He had hoped 
for something else-by different accounts, either a bicycle or a rifle.[15][16] Over the following 
year, he received basic guitar lessons from two of his uncles and the new pastor at the family's 
church. Presley recalled, "I took the guitar, and I watched people, and I learned to play a little 
bit. But I would never sing in public. I was very shy about it."[17]
Entering a new school, Milam, for sixth grade in September 1946, Presley was regarded as a 
loner. The following year, he began bringing his guitar in on a daily basis. He would play and 
sing during lunchtime, and was often teased as a "trashy" kid who played hillbilly music. The 
family was by then living in a largely African American neighborhood.[18] A devotee of 
Mississippi Slim's show on the Tupelo radio station WELO, Presley was described as "crazy 
about music" by Slim's younger brother, a classmate of Presley's, who often took him in to the 
station. Slim supplemented Presley's guitar tuition by demonstrating chord techniques.[19] 
When his protege was 12 years old, Slim scheduled him for two on-air performances. Presley 
was overcome by stage fright the first time, but succeeded in performing the following 
week.[20]
Teenage life in Memphis
In November 1948, the family moved to Memphis, Tennessee. After residing for nearly a year 
in rooming houses, they were granted a two-bedroom apartment in the public housing complex 
known as the Courts.[21] Enrolled at Humes High School, Presley received only a C in music in 
eighth grade. When his music teacher told him he had no aptitude for singing, he brought in 
his guitar the next day and sang a recent hit, "Keep Them Cold Icy Fingers Off Me", in an 
effort to prove otherwise. A classmate later recalled that the teacher "agreed that Elvis was 
right when he said that she didn't appreciate his kind of singing."[22] He was generally too shy 
to perform openly, and was occasionally bullied by classmates who viewed him as a "mama's 
boy".[23] In 1950, he began practicing guitar regularly under the tutelage of Jesse Lee Denson, 
a neighbor two-and-a-half years his senior. They and three other boys-including two future 
rockabilly pioneers, brothers Dorsey and Johnny Burnette-formed a loose musical collective 
that played frequently around the Courts.[24] That September, he began ushering at Loew's 
State Theater.[25] Other jobs followed during his school years: Precision Tool, Loew's again, 
and MARL Metal Products.[26]
During his junior year, Presley began to stand out more among his classmates, largely because 
of his appearance: he grew out his sideburns and styled his hair with rose oil and Vaseline. On 
his own time, he would head down to Beale Street, the heart of Memphis's thriving blues 
scene, and gaze longingly at the wild, flashy clothes in the windows of Lansky Brothers. By 
his senior year, he was wearing them.[27] Overcoming his reticence about performing outside 
the Courts, he competed in Humes's Annual "Minstrel" show in April 1953. Singing and 
playing guitar, he opened with "Till I Waltz Again with You", a recent hit for Teresa Brewer. 
Presley recalled that the performance did much for his reputation: "I wasn't popular in school 
... I failed music-only thing I ever failed. And then they entered me in this talent show ... 
when I came onstage I heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth, 'cause 
nobody knew I even sang. It was amazing how popular I became after that."[28]
Presley, who never received formal music training or learned to read music, studied and 
played by ear. He frequented record stores with jukeboxes and listening booths. He knew all 
of Hank Snow's songs[29] and he loved records by other country singers such as Roy Acuff, 
Ernest Tubb, Ted Daffan, Jimmie Rodgers, Jimmie Davis, and Bob Wills.[30] The Southern 
Gospel singer Jake Hess, one of his favorite performers, was a significant influence on his 
ballad-singing style.[31][32] He was a regular audience member at the monthly All-Night 
Singings downtown, where many of the white gospel groups that performed reflected the 
influence of African American spiritual music.[33] He adored the music of black gospel singer 
Sister Rosetta Tharpe.[30] Like some of his peers, he may have attended blues venues-of 
necessity, in the segregated South, only on nights designated for exclusively white 
audiences.[34] He certainly listened to the regional radio stations that played "race records": 
spirituals, blues, and the modern, backbeat-heavy sound of rhythm and blues.[35] Many of his 
future recordings were inspired by local African American musicians such as Arthur Crudup 
and Rufus Thomas.[36][37] B.B. King recalled that he knew Presley before he was popular when 
they both used to frequent Beale Street.[38] By the time he graduated high school in June 1953, 
Presley had already singled out music as his future.[
First recordings (1953-55)
Sam Phillips and Sun Records
In August 1953, Presley walked into the offices of Sun Records. He aimed to pay for a few 
minutes of studio time to record a two-sided acetate disc: "My Happiness" and "That's When 
Your Heartaches Begin". He would later claim he intended the record as a gift for his mother, 
or was merely interested in what he "sounded like", though there was a much cheaper, amateur 
record-making service at a nearby general store. Biographer Peter Guralnick argues that he 
chose Sun in the hope of being discovered. Asked by receptionist Marion Keisker what kind 
of singer he was, Presley responded, "I sing all kinds." When she pressed him on whom he 
sounded like, he repeatedly answered, "I don't sound like nobody." After he recorded, Sun 
boss Sam Phillips asked Keisker to note down the young man's name, which she did along 
with her own commentary: "Good ballad singer. Hold."[41] Presley cut a second acetate in 
January 1954-"I'll Never Stand In Your Way" and "It Wouldn't Be the Same Without 
You"-but again nothing came of it.[42]
Not long after, he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet, the Songfellows. He explained 
to his father, "They told me I couldn't sing."[43] Songfellow Jim Hamill later claimed that he 
was turned down because he did not demonstrate an ear for harmony at the time.[44] In April, 
Presley began working for the Crown Electric company as a truck driver.[45] His friend Ronnie 
Smith, after playing a few local gigs with him, suggested he contact Eddie Bond, leader of 
Smith's professional band, which had an opening for a vocalist. Bond rejected him after a 
tryout, advising Presley to stick to truck driving "because you're never going to make it as a 
singer."
Phillips, meanwhile, was always on the lookout for someone who could bring the sound of the 
black musicians on whom Sun focused to a broader audience. As Keisker reported, "Over and over I 
remember Sam saying, 'If I could find a white man who had the Negro sound and the Negro feel, I 
could make a billion dollars.'"[47] In June, he acquired a demo recording of a ballad, "Without You", 
that he thought might suit the teenaged singer. Presley came by the studio, but was unable to do it 
justice. Despite this, Phillips asked Presley to sing as many numbers as he knew. He was sufficiently 
affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians, guitarist Winfield "Scotty" Moore and 
upright bass player Bill Black, to work something up with Presley for a recording session.
The session, held the evening of July 5, proved entirely unfruitful until late in the night. As they 
were about to give up and go home, Presley took his guitar and launched into a 1946 blues number, 
Arthur Crudup's "That's All Right". Moore recalled, "All of a sudden, Elvis just started singing this 
song, jumping around and acting the fool, and then Bill picked up his bass, and he started acting the 
fool, too, and I started playing with them. Sam, I think, had the door to the control booth open ... 
he stuck his head out and said, 'What are you doing?' And we said, 'We don't know.' 'Well, back up,' 
he said, 'try to find a place to start, and do it again.'" Phillips quickly began taping; this was the 
sound he had been looking for.[50] Three days later, popular Memphis DJ Dewey Phillips played 
"That's All Right" on his Red, Hot, and Blue show.[51] Listeners began phoning in, eager to find out 
who the singer was. The interest was such that Phillips played the record repeatedly during the last 
two hours of his show. Interviewing Presley on-air, Phillips asked him what high school he attended 
in order to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed he was black.[52] During the next 
few days the trio recorded a bluegrass number, Bill Monroe's "Blue Moon of Kentucky", again in a 
distinctive style and employing a jury-rigged echo effect that Sam Phillips dubbed "slapback". A 
single was pressed with "That's All Right" on the A side and "Blue Moon of Kentucky" on the 
reverse
Early live performances and signing to RCA
The trio played publicly for the first time on July 17 at the Bon Air club-Presley still sporting 
his child-size guitar.[54] At the end of the month, they appeared at the Overton Park Shell, with 
Slim Whitman headlining. A combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness at 
playing before a large crowd led Presley to shake his legs as he performed: his wide-cut pants 
emphasized his movements, causing young women in the audience to start screaming.[55] 
Moore recalled, "During the instrumental parts he would back off from the mike and be 
playing and shaking, and the crowd would just go wild".[56] Black, a natural showman, 
whooped and rode his bass, hitting double licks that Presley would later remember as "really a 
wild sound, like a jungle drum or something".[56] Soon after, Moore and Black quit their old 
band to play with Presley regularly, and DJ and promoter Bob Neal became the trio's manager. 
From August through October, they played frequently at the Eagle's Nest club and returned to 
Sun Studio for more recording sessions,[57] and Presley quickly grew more confident on stage. 
According to Moore, "His movement was a natural thing, but he was also very conscious of 
what got a reaction. He'd do something one time and then he would expand on it real 
quick."[58] Presley made what would be his only appearance on Nashville's Grand Ole Opry on 
October 2; after a polite audience response, Opry manager Jim Denny told Phillips that his 
singer was "not bad" but did not suit the program.[59] Two weeks later, Presley was booked on 
Louisiana Hayride, the Opry's chief, and more adventurous, rival. The Shreveport-based show 
was broadcast to 198 radio stations in 28 states. Presley had another attack of nerves during 
the first set, which drew a muted reaction. A more composed and energetic second set 
inspired an enthusiastic response.[60] House drummer D.J. Fontana brought a new element, 
complementing Presley's movements with accented beats that he had mastered playing in strip 
clubs.[61] Soon after the show, the Hayride engaged Presley for a year's worth of Saturday-
night appearances. Trading in his old guitar for $8 (and seeing it promptly dispatched to the 
garbage), he purchased a Martin instrument for $175, and his trio began playing in new locales 
including Houston, Texas, and Texarkana, Arkansas.[62]
By early 1955, Presley's regular Hayride appearances, constant touring, and well-received 
record releases had made him a substantial regional star, from Tennessee to West Texas. In 
January, Neal signed a formal management contract with Presley and brought the singer to the 
attention of Colonel Tom Parker, whom he considered the best promoter in the music 
business. Parker-Dutch-born, though he claimed to be from West Virginia-had acquired an 
honorary colonel's commission from country singer turned Louisiana governor Jimmie Davis. 
Having successfully managed top country star Eddy Arnold, he was now working with the 
new number one country singer, Hank Snow. Parker booked Presley on Snow's February 
tour.[63][64] When the tour reached Odessa, Texas, a 19-year-old Roy Orbison saw Presley for 
the first time: "His energy was incredible, his instinct was just amazing. ... I just didn't know 
what to make of it. There was just no reference point in the culture to compare it."[29] Presley 
made his television debut on March 3 on the KSLA-TV broadcast of Louisiana Hayride. Soon 
after, he failed an audition for Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts on the CBS television network. 
By August, Sun had released ten sides credited to "Elvis Presley, Scotty and Bill"; on the 
latest recordings, the trio were joined by a drummer. Some of the songs, like "That's All 
Right", were in what one Memphis journalist described as the "R&B idiom of negro field 
jazz"; others, like "Blue Moon of Kentucky", were "more in the country field", "but there was 
a curious blending of the two different musics in both".[65] This blend of styles made it 
difficult for Presley's music to find radio airplay. According to Neal, many country music disc 
jockeys would not play it because he sounded too much like a black artist and none of the 
rhythm and blues stations would touch him because "he sounded too much like a hillbilly."[66] 
The blend came to be known as rockabilly. At the time, Presley was variously billed as "The 
King of Western Bop", "The Hillbilly Cat", and "The Memphis Flash".[67]
Presley renewed Neal's management contract in August 1955, simultaneously appointing 
Parker as his special adviser.[68] The group maintained an extensive touring schedule 
throughout the second half of the year.[69] Neal recalled, "It was almost frightening, the 
reaction that came to Elvis from the teenaged boys. So many of them, through some sort of 
jealousy, would practically hate him. There were occasions in some towns in Texas when we'd 
have to be sure to have a police guard because somebody'd always try to take a crack at him. 
They'd get a gang and try to waylay him or something."[70] The trio became a quartet when 
Hayride drummer Fontana joined as a full member. In mid-October, they played a few shows 
in support of Bill Haley, whose "Rock Around the Clock" had been a number one hit the 
previous year. Haley observed that Presley had a natural feel for rhythm, and advised him to 
sing fewer ballads.[71]
At the Country Disc Jockey Convention in early November, Presley was voted the year's most 
promising male artist.[72] Several record companies had by now shown interest in signing him. 
After three major labels made offers of up to $25,000, Parker and Phillips struck a deal with 
RCA Victor on November 21 to acquire Presley's Sun contract for an unprecedented 
$40,000.[73]c Presley, at 20, was still a minor, so his father signed the contract.[74] Parker 
arranged with the owners of Hill and Range Publishing, Jean and Julian Aberbach, to create 
two entities, Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music, to handle all of the new material recorded 
by Presley. Songwriters were obliged to forego one third of their customary royalties in 
exchange for having him perform their compositions.[75]d By December, RCA had begun to 
heavily promote its new singer, and before month's end had reissued many of his Sun 
recordings.
Commercial breakout and controversy (1956-58)
On January 10, 1956, Presley made his first recordings for RCA in Nashville.[79] Extending the singer's 
by now customary backup of Moore, Black, and Fontana, RCA enlisted pianist Floyd Cramer, 
guitarist Chet Atkins, and three background singers, including Gordon Stoker of the popular 
Jordanaires quartet, to fill out the sound.[80] The session produced the moody, unusual "Heartbreak 
Hotel", released as a single on January 27.[79] Parker finally brought Presley to national television, 
booking him on CBS's Stage Show for six appearances over two months. The program, produced in 
New York, was hosted on alternate weeks by big band leaders and brothers Tommy and Jimmy 
Dorsey. After his first appearance, on January 28, Presley stayed in town to record at RCA's New 
York studio. The sessions yielded eight songs, including a cover of Carl Perkins' rockabilly anthem 
"Blue Suede Shoes". In February, Presley's "I Forgot to Remember to Forget", a Sun recording 
initially released the previous August, reached the top of the Billboard country chart.[81] Neal's 
contract was terminated and, on March 2, Parker became Presley's manager.[
RCA Victor released Presley's self-titled debut album on March 23. Joined by five previously 
unreleased Sun recordings, its seven recently recorded tracks were of a broad variety. There were 
two country songs and a bouncy pop tune. The others would centrally define the evolving sound of 
rock and roll: "Blue Suede Shoes"-"an improvement over Perkins' in almost every way", according 
to critic Robert Hilburn-and three R&B numbers that had been part of Presley's stage repertoire 
for some time, covers of Little Richard, Ray Charles, and The Drifters. As described by Hilburn, these 
"were the most revealing of all. Unlike many white artists ... who watered down the gritty edges of 
the original R&B versions of songs in the '50s, Presley reshaped them. He not only injected the 
tunes with his own vocal character but also made guitar, not piano, the lead instrument in all three 
cases."[83] It became the first rock and roll album to top the Billboard chart, a position it held for 10 
weeks.[79] While Presley was not an innovative instrumentalist like Moore or contemporary African 
American rockers Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry, cultural historian Gilbert B. Rodman argues that the 
album's cover image, "of Elvis having the time of his life on stage with a guitar in his hands played a 
crucial role in positioning the guitar...as the instrument that best captured the style and spirit of this 
new music."
Milton Berle Show and "Hound Dog"
Presley made the first of two appearances on NBC's Milton Berle Show on April 3. His performance, 
on the deck of the USS Hancock in San Diego, prompted cheers and screams from an audience of 
sailors and their dates.[85] A few days later, a flight taking Presley and his band to Nashville for a 
recording session left all three badly shaken when an engine died and the plane almost went down 
over Arkansas.[86] Twelve weeks after its original release, "Heartbreak Hotel" became Presley's first 
number one pop hit. In late April, Presley began a two-week residency at the New Frontier Hotel 
and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip. The shows were poorly received by the conservative, middle-
aged hotel guests-"like a jug of corn liquor at a champagne party", wrote a critic for Newsweek.[87] 
Amid his Vegas tenure, Presley, who had serious acting ambitions, signed a seven-year contract 
with Paramount Pictures.[88] He began a tour of the Midwest in mid-May, taking in 15 cities in as 
many days.[89] He had attended several shows by Freddie Bell and the Bellboys in Vegas, and was 
struck by their cover of "Hound Dog", a hit in 1952 for blues singer Big Mama Thornton by 
songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller. It became the new closing number of his act.[90] After a 
show in La Crosse, Wisconsin, an urgent message on the letterhead of the local Catholic diocese's 
newspaper was sent to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. It warned that "Presley is a definite danger to 
the security of the United States. ... [His] actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual 
passions of teenaged youth. ... After the show, more than 1,000 teenagers tried to gang into 
Presley's room at the auditorium. ... Indications of the harm Presley did just in La Crosse were the 
two high school girls ... whose abdomen and thigh had Presley's autograph.
The second Milton Berle Show appearance came on June 5 at NBC's Hollywood studio, amid 
another hectic tour. Berle persuaded the singer to leave his guitar backstage, advising, "Let 'em see 
you, son."[92] During the performance, Presley abruptly halted an uptempo rendition of "Hound 
Dog" with a wave of his arm and launched into a slow, grinding version accentuated with energetic, 
exaggerated body movements.[92] Presley's gyrations created a storm of controversy.[93] Television 
critics were outraged: Jack Gould of The New York Times wrote, "Mr. Presley has no discernible 
singing ability. ... His phrasing, if it can be called that, consists of the stereotyped variations that go 
with a beginner's aria in a bathtub. ... His one specialty is an accented movement of the body ... 
primarily identified with the repertoire of the blond bombshells of the burlesque runway."[94] Ben 
Gross of the New York Daily News opined that popular music "has reached its lowest depths in the 
'grunt and groin' antics of one Elvis Presley. ... Elvis, who rotates his pelvis ... gave an exhibition that 
was suggestive and vulgar, tinged with the kind of animalism that should be confined to dives and 
bordellos".[95] Ed Sullivan, whose own variety show was the nation's most popular, declared him 
"unfit for family viewing".[96] To Presley's displeasure, he soon found himself being referred to as 
"Elvis the Pelvis", which he called "one of the most childish expressions I ever heard, comin' from 
an adult.
Steve Allen Show and first Sullivan appearance
The Berle shows drew such high ratings that Presley was booked for a July 1 appearance on NBC's 
Steve Allen Show in New York. Allen, no fan of rock and roll, introduced a "new Elvis" in a white bow 
tie and black tails. Presley sang "Hound Dog" for less than a minute to a basset hound wearing a top 
hat and bow tie. As described by television historian Jake Austen, "Allen thought Presley was 
talentless and absurd... [he] set things up so that Presley would show his contrition".[98] Allen, for 
his part, later wrote that he found Presley's "strange, gangly, country-boy charisma, his hard-to-
define cuteness, and his charming eccentricity intriguing" and simply worked the singer into the 
customary "comedy fabric" of his program.[99] Presley would refer back to the Allen show as the 
most ridiculous performance of his career.[100] Later that night, he appeared on Hy Gardner Calling, 
a popular local TV show. Pressed on whether he had learned anything from the criticism to which 
he was being subjected, Presley responded, "No, I haven't, I don't feel like I'm doing anything 
wrong. ... I don't see how any type of music would have any bad influence on people when it's only 
music. ... I mean, how would rock 'n' roll music make anyone rebel against their parents?"
The next day, Presley recorded "Hound Dog", along with "Any Way You Want Me" and "Don't Be 
Cruel". The Jordanaires sang harmony, as they had on The Steve Allen Show; they would work with 
Presley through the 1960s. A few days later, the singer made an outdoor concert appearance in 
Memphis at which he announced, "You know, those people in New York are not gonna change me 
none. I'm gonna show you what the real Elvis is like tonight."[101] In August, a judge in Jacksonville, 
Florida, ordered Presley to tame his act. Throughout the following performance, he largely kept 
still, except for wiggling his little finger suggestively in mockery of the order.[102] The single pairing 
"Don't Be Cruel" with "Hound Dog" ruled the top of the charts for 11 weeks-a mark that would not 
be surpassed for 36 years.[103] Recording sessions for Presley's second album took place in 
Hollywood during the first week of September. Leiber and Stoller, the writers of "Hound Dog", 
contributed "Love Me".
Allen's show with Presley had, for the first time, beaten CBS's Ed Sullivan Show in the ratings. 
Sullivan, despite his June pronouncement, booked the singer for three appearances for an 
unprecedented $50,000.[104] The first, on September 9, 1956, was seen by approximately 60 million 
viewers-a record 82.6 percent of the television audience.[105] Actor Charles Laughton hosted the 
show, filling in while Sullivan recuperated from a car accident.[96] Presley appeared in two segments 
that night from CBS Television City in Hollywood. According to Elvis legend, Presley was shot only 
from the waist up. Watching clips of the Allen and Berle shows with his producer, Sullivan had 
opined that Presley "got some kind of device hanging down below the crotch of his pants-so when 
he moves his legs back and forth you can see the outline of his cock. ... I think it's a Coke bottle. ... 
We just can't have this on a Sunday night. This is a family show!"[106] Sullivan publicly told TV Guide, 
"As for his gyrations, the whole thing can be controlled with camera shots."[104] In fact, Presley was 
shown head-to-toe in the first and second shows. Though the camerawork was relatively discreet 
during his debut, with leg-concealing closeups when he danced, the studio audience reacted in 
customary style: screaming.[107][108] Presley's performance of his forthcoming single, the ballad 
"Love Me Tender", prompted a record-shattering million advance orders.[109] More than any other 
single event, it was this first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show that made Presley a national 
celebrity of barely precedented proportions.[96]
Accompanying Presley's rise to fame, a cultural shift was taking place that he both helped inspire 
and came to symbolize. Igniting the "biggest pop craze since Glenn Miller and Frank Sinatra ... 
Presley brought rock'n'roll into the mainstream of popular culture", writes historian Marty Jezer. 
"As Presley set the artistic pace, other artists followed. ... Presley, more than anyone else, gave the 
young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generation-the first in America 
ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture.
Crazed crowds and movie debut
The audience response at Presley's live shows became increasingly fevered. Moore recalled, "He'd 
start out, 'You ain't nothin' but a Hound Dog,' and they'd just go to pieces. They'd always react the 
same way. There'd be a riot every time."[111] At the two concerts he performed in September at the 
Mississippi-Alabama Fair and Dairy Show, 50 National Guardsmen were added to the police security 
to prevent crowd trouble.[112] Elvis, Presley's second album, was released in October and quickly 
rose to number one. Assessing the musical and cultural impact of Presley's recordings from "That's 
All Right" through Elvis, rock critic Dave Marsh wrote that "these records, more than any others, 
contain the seeds of what rock & roll was, has been and most likely what it may foreseeably 
become.
Presley returned to the Sullivan show, hosted this time by its namesake, on October 28. After 
the performance, crowds in Nashville and St. Louis burned him in effigy.[96] His first motion 
picture, Love Me Tender, was released on November 21. Though he was not top billed, the 
film's original title-The Reno Brothers-was changed to capitalize on his latest number one 
record: "Love Me Tender" had hit the top of the charts earlier that month. To further take 
advantage of Presley's popularity, four musical numbers were added to what was originally a 
straight acting role. The movie was panned by the critics but did very well at the box office.[88] 
Presley would receive top billing on every subsequent film he made.
On December 4, Presley dropped into Sun Records where Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis 
were recording and jammed with them. Though Phillips no longer had the right to release any 
Presley material, he made sure the session was captured on tape. The results became legendary 
as the "Million Dollar Quartet" recordings-Johnny Cash was long thought to have played as 
well, but he was present only briefly at Phillips' instigation for a photo opportunity.[114] The 
year ended with a front-page story in The Wall Street Journal reporting that Presley 
merchandise had brought in $22 million on top of his record sales,[115] and Billboard's 
declaration that he had placed more songs in the top 100 than any other artist since records 
were first charted.[116] In his first full year on RCA, one of the music industry's largest 
companies, Presley had accounted for over 50 percent of the label's singles sales.
Leiber and Stoller collaboration and draft notice
Presley made his third and final Ed Sullivan Show appearance on January 6, 1957-on this occasion 
indeed shot only down to the waist. Some commentators have claimed that Parker orchestrated an 
appearance of censorship to generate publicity.[108][117] In any event, as critic Greil Marcus 
describes, Presley "did not tie himself down. Leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the 
first two shows, he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha, if not a harem girl. From the 
make-up over his eyes, the hair falling in his face, the overwhelmingly sexual cast of his mouth, he 
was playing Rudolph Valentino in The Sheik, with all stops out."[96] To close, displaying his range and 
defying Sullivan's wishes, Presley sang a gentle black spiritual, "Peace in the Valley". At the end of 
the show, Sullivan declared Presley "a real decent, fine boy".[118] Two days later, the Memphis draft 
board announced that Presley would be classified 1A and would probably be drafted sometime 
that year
Each of the three Presley singles released in the first half of 1957 went to number one: "Too Much", 
"All Shook Up", and "(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear". Already an international star, he was attracting 
fans even where his music was not officially released. Under the headline "Presley Records a Craze 
in Soviet", The New York Times reported that pressings of his music on discarded X-ray plates were 
commanding high prices in Leningrad.[120] Between film shoots and recording sessions, the singer 
also found time to purchase an 18-room mansion eight miles (13 km) south of downtown Memphis 
for himself and his parents: Graceland.[121] Loving You-the soundtrack to his second film, released 
in July-was Presley's third straight number one album. The title track was written by Leiber and 
Stoller, who were then retained to write four of the six songs recorded at the sessions for Jailhouse 
Rock, Presley's next movie. The songwriting team effectively produced the Jailhouse sessions and 
developed a close working relationship with Presley, who came to regard them as his "good-luck 
charm".[122] The title track was yet another number one hit, as was the Jailhouse Rock EP.
Presley undertook three brief tours during the year, continuing to generate a crazed audience 
response.[123] A Detroit newspaper suggested that "the trouble with going to see Elvis Presley is 
that you're liable to get killed."[124] Villanova students pelted him with eggs in Philadelphia,[124] and 
in Vancouver, the crowd rioted after the end of the show, destroying the stage.[125] Frank Sinatra, 
who had famously inspired the swooning of teenaged girls in the 1940s, condemned the new 
musical phenomenon. In a magazine article, he decried rock and roll as "brutal, ugly, degenerate, 
vicious. ... It fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people. It smells 
phoney and false. It is sung, played and written, for the most part, by cretinous goons. ... This 
rancid-smelling aphrodisiac I deplore."[126] Asked for a response, Presley said, "I admire the man. He 
has a right to say what he wants to say. He is a great success and a fine actor, but I think he 
shouldn't have said it. ... This is a trend, just the same as he faced when he started years ago."
Leiber and Stoller were again in the studio for the recording of Elvis' Christmas Album. Toward the 
end of the session, they wrote a song on the spot at Presley's request: "Santa Claus Is Back In 
Town", an innuendo-laden blues.[128] The holiday release stretched Presley's string of number one 
albums to four and would eventually become the best selling Christmas album of all time.[129][130] 
After the session, Moore and Black-drawing only modest weekly salaries, sharing in none of 
Presley's massive financial success-resigned. Though they were brought back on a per diem basis 
a few weeks later, it was clear that they had not been part of Presley's inner circle for some 
time.[131] On December 20, Presley received his draft notice. He was granted a deferment to finish 
the forthcoming King Creole, in which $350,000 had already been invested by Paramount and 
producer Hal Wallis. A couple of weeks into the new year, "Don't", another Leiber and Stoller tune, 
became Presley's tenth number one seller. It had been only 21 months since "Heartbreak Hotel" 
had brought him to the top for the first time. Recording sessions for the King Creole soundtrack 
were held in Hollywood mid-January. Leiber and Stoller provided three songs and were again on 
hand, but it would be the last time they worked closely with Presley.[132] A studio session on 
February 1 marked another ending: it was the final occasion on which Black was to perform with 
Presley. He died in 1965.
Military service and mother's death (1958-60)
On March 24, Presley was inducted into the U.S. Army as a private at Fort Chaffee, near Fort 
Smith, Arkansas. Captain Arlie Metheny, the information officer, was unprepared for the 
media attention drawn by the singer's arrival. Hundreds of people descended on Presley as he 
stepped from the bus; photographers then accompanied him into the base.[133] Presley 
announced that he was looking forward to his military stint, saying he did not want to be 
treated any differently from anyone else: "The Army can do anything it wants with me."[134] 
Later, at Fort Hood, Texas, Lieutenant Colonel Marjorie Schulten gave the media carte 
blanche for one day, after which she declared Presley off-limits to the press.[135]
Soon after Presley had commenced basic training at Fort Hood, he received a visit from Eddie 
Fadal, a businessman he had met when on tour in Texas. Fadal reported that Presley had 
become convinced his career was finished-"He firmly believed that."[136] During a two-week 
leave in early June, Presley cut five sides in Nashville. He returned to training, but in early 
August his mother was diagnosed with hepatitis and her condition worsened. Presley was 
granted emergency leave to visit her, arriving in Memphis on August 12. Two days later, she 
died of heart failure, aged 46. Presley was devastated;[137] their relationship had remained 
extremely close-even into his adulthood, they would use baby talk with each other and 
Presley would address her with pet names.[138]
After training at Fort Hood, Presley joined the 3rd Armored Division in Friedberg, Germany, 
on October 1.[139] Introduced to amphetamines by a sergeant while on maneuvers, he became 
"practically evangelical about their benefits"-not only for energy, but for "strength" and 
weight loss, as well-and many of his friends in the outfit joined him in indulging.[140] The 
Army also introduced Presley to karate, which he studied seriously, later including it in his 
live performances.[141] Fellow soldiers have attested to Presley's wish to be seen as an able, 
ordinary soldier, despite his fame, and to his generosity while in the service. He donated his 
Army pay to charity, purchased TV sets for the base, and bought an extra set of fatigues for 
everyone in his outfit.[142]
While in Friedberg, Presley met 14-year-old Priscilla Beaulieu. They would eventually marry 
after a seven-and-a-half-year courtship.[143] In her autobiography, Priscilla says that despite his 
worries that it would ruin his career, Parker convinced Presley that to gain popular respect, he 
should serve his country as a regular soldier rather than in Special Services, where he would 
have been able to give some musical performances and remain in touch with the public.[144] 
Media reports echoed Presley's concerns about his career, but RCA producer Steve Sholes and 
Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range had carefully prepared for his two-year hiatus. Armed 
with a substantial amount of unreleased material, they kept up a regular stream of successful 
releases.[145] Between his induction and discharge, Presley had ten top 40 hits, including "Wear 
My Ring Around Your Neck", the best-selling "Hard Headed Woman", and "One Night" in 
1958, and "(Now and Then There's) A Fool Such as I" and the number one "A Big Hunk o' 
Love" in 1959.[146] RCA also managed to generate four albums compiling old material during 
this period, most successfully Elvis' Golden Records (1958), which hit number three on the LP 
chart.
Focus on movies (1960-67)
Presley returned to the United States on March 2, 1960, and was honorably discharged with the 
rank of sergeant on March 5.[148] The train that carried him from New Jersey to Tennessee was 
mobbed all the way, and Presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his 
fans.[149] On the night of March 20, he entered RCA's Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album 
along with a single-"Stuck on You" was rushed into release and swiftly became a number one 
hit.[150] Another Nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of his best-selling singles, the 
ballads "It's Now or Never" and "Are You Lonesome Tonight?", along with the rest of Elvis Is Back! 
The album features several songs described by Greil Marcus as full of Chicago blues "menace, 
driven by Presley's own super-miked acoustic guitar, brilliant playing by Scotty Moore, and demonic 
sax work from Boots Randolph. Elvis's singing wasn't sexy, it was pornographic."[151] As a whole, the 
record "conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things", in the words of music 
historian John Robertson: "a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold; a tempestuous, dangerous 
lover; a gutbucket blues singer; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer; [a] raucous rocker".[152] 
Released only days after recording was complete, it reached number two on the album chart.
Presley returned to television on May 12 as a guest on The Frank Sinatra Timex Special-
ironic for both stars, given Sinatra's not-so-distant excoriation of rock and roll. Also known as 
Welcome Home Elvis, the show had been taped in late March, the only time all year Presley 
performed in front of an audience. Parker secured an unheard-of $125,000 fee for eight 
minutes of singing. The broadcast drew an enormous viewership.[153]
G.I. Blues, the soundtrack to Presley's first film since his return, was a number one album in 
October. His first LP of sacred material, His Hand in Mine, followed two months later. It 
reached number 13 on the U.S. pop chart and number 3 in Great Britain, remarkable figures 
for a gospel album. In February 1961, Presley performed two shows for a benefit event in 
Memphis, on behalf of 24 local charities. During a luncheon preceding the event, RCA 
presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over 75 million records.[154] A 12-
hour Nashville session in mid-March yielded nearly all of Presley's next studio album, 
Something for Everybody.[155] As described by John Robertson, it exemplifies the Nashville 
sound, the restrained, cosmopolitan style that would define country music in the 1960s. 
Presaging much of what was to come from Presley himself over the next half-decade, the 
album is largely "a pleasant, unthreatening pastiche of the music that had once been Elvis's 
birthright."[156] It would be his sixth number one LP. Another benefit concert, raising money 
for a Pearl Harbor memorial, was staged on March 25, in Hawaii. It was to be Presley's last 
public performance for seven years.[
Lost in Hollywood
Parker had by now pushed Presley into a heavy moviemaking schedule, focused on formulaic, 
modestly budgeted musical comedies. Presley at first insisted on pursuing more serious roles, 
but when two films in a more dramatic vein-Flaming Star (1960) and Wild in the Country 
(1961)-were less commercially successful, he reverted to the formula. Among the 27 movies 
he made during the 1960s, there were few further exceptions.[158] His films were almost 
universally panned; one critic dismissed them as a "pantheon of bad taste".[159] Nonetheless, 
they were virtually all profitable. Hal Wallis, who produced nine of them, declared, "A Presley 
picture is the only sure thing in Hollywood."[160]
Of Presley's films in the 1960s, 15 were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another 5 by 
soundtrack EPs. The movies' rapid production and release schedules-he frequently starred in 
three a year-affected his music. According to Jerry Leiber, the soundtrack formula was 
already evident before Presley left for the Army: "three ballads, one medium-tempo [number], 
one up-tempo, and one break blues boogie".[161] As the decade wore on, the quality of the 
soundtrack songs grew "progressively worse".[162] Julie Parrish, who appeared in Paradise, 
Hawaiian Style (1966), says that he hated many of the songs chosen for his films.[163] The 
Jordanaires' Gordon Stoker describes how Presley would retreat from the studio microphone: 
"The material was so bad that he felt like he couldn't sing it."[164] Most of the movie albums 
featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of Doc Pomus and Mort 
Shuman. But by and large, according to biographer Jerry Hopkins, the numbers seemed to be 
"written on order by men who never really understood Elvis or rock and roll."[165] Regardless 
of the songs' quality, it has been argued that Presley generally sang them well, with 
commitment.[166] Critic Dave Marsh heard the opposite: "Presley isn't trying, probably the 
wisest course in the face of material like 'No Room to Rumba in a Sports Car' and 'Rock-a-
Hula Baby.'"
In the first half of the decade, three of Presley's soundtrack albums hit number one on the pop 
charts, and a few of his most popular songs came from his films, such as "Can't Help Falling in 
Love" (1961) and "Return to Sender" (1962). ("Viva Las Vegas", the title track to the 1964 
film, was a minor hit as a B-side, and became truly popular only later.) But, as with artistic 
merit, the commercial returns steadily diminished. During a five-year span-1964 through 
1968-Presley had only one top ten hit: "Crying in the Chapel" (1965), a gospel number 
recorded back in 1960. As for non-movie albums, between the June 1962 release of Pot Luck 
and the November 1968 release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his 
comeback, only one LP of new material by Presley was issued: the gospel album How Great 
Thou Art (1967). It won him his first Grammy Award, for Best Sacred Performance. As 
Marsh described, Presley was "arguably the greatest white gospel singer of his time [and] 
really the last rock & roll artist to make gospel as vital a component of his musical personality 
as his secular songs."[167]
Shortly before Christmas 1966, more than seven years since they first met, Presley proposed to 
Priscilla Beaulieu. They were married on May 1, 1967, in a brief ceremony in their suite at the 
Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas.[168] The flow of formulaic movies and assembly-line soundtracks 
rolled on. It was not until October 1967, when the Clambake soundtrack LP registered record 
low sales for a new Presley album, that RCA executives recognized a problem. "By then, of 
course, the damage had been done", as historians Connie Kirchberg and Marc Hendrickx put 
it. "Elvis was viewed as a joke by serious music lovers and a has-been to all but his most loyal 
fans."[
Comeback (1968-73)
Elvis: the '68 Comeback Special
Presley's only child, Lisa Marie, was born on February 1, 1968, during a period when he had grown 
deeply unhappy with his career.[172] Of the eight Presley singles released between January 1967 
and May 1968, only two charted in the top 40, and none higher than number 28.[173] His forthcoming 
soundtrack album, Speedway, would die at number 82 on the Billboard chart. Parker had already 
shifted his plans to television, where Presley had not appeared since the Sinatra Timex show in 
1960. He maneuvered a deal with NBC that committed the network to both finance a theatrical 
feature and broadcast a Christmas special.
Recorded in late June, the special, called simply Elvis, aired on December 3, 1968. Later known as 
the '68 Comeback Special, the show featured lavishly staged studio productions as well as songs 
performed with a band in front of a small audience-Presley's first live performances since 1961. 
The live segments saw Presley clad in tight black leather, singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited 
style reminiscent of his early rock and roll days. Director and coproducer Steve Binder had worked 
hard to reassure the nervous singer and to produce a show that was far from the hour of Christmas 
songs Parker had originally planned.[175] The show, NBC's highest rated that season, captured 42 
percent of the total viewing audience.[176] Jon Landau of Eye magazine remarked, "There is 
something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home. He sang 
with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock 'n' roll singers. He moved his body with a 
lack of pretension and effort that must have made Jim Morrison green with envy."[177] Dave Marsh 
calls the performance one of "emotional grandeur and historical resonance."
By January 1969, the single "If I Can Dream", written for the special, reached number 12. The 
soundtrack album broke into the top ten. According to friend Jerry Schilling, the special reminded 
Presley of what "he had not been able to do for years, being able to choose the people; being able 
to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack. ... He was out of 
prison, man."[176] Binder said of Presley's reaction, "I played Elvis the 60-minute show, and he told 
me in the screening room, 'Steve, it's the greatest thing I've ever done in my life. I give you my 
word I will never sing a song I don't believe in.'
From Elvis In Memphis and the International
Buoyed by the experience of the Comeback Special, Presley engaged in a prolific series of recording 
sessions at American Sound Studio, which led to the acclaimed From Elvis in Memphis. Released in 
June 1969, it was his first secular, non-soundtrack album from a dedicated period in the studio in 
eight years. As described by Dave Marsh, it is "a masterpiece in which Presley immediately catches 
up with pop music trends that had seemed to pass him by during the movie years. He sings country 
songs, soul songs and rockers with real conviction, a stunning achievement."[180] The album 
featured the hit single "In the Ghetto", issued in April, which reached number three on the pop 
chart-Presley's first non-gospel top ten hit since "Bossa Nova Baby" in 1963. Further hit singles 
were culled from the American Sound sessions: "Suspicious Minds", "Don't Cry Daddy", and 
"Kentucky Rain".
Presley was keen to resume regular live performing. Following the success of the Comeback 
Special, offers came in from around the world. The London Palladium offered Parker $28,000 for a 
one-week engagement. He responded, "That's fine for me, now how much can you get for 
Elvis?"[181] In May, the brand new International Hotel in Las Vegas, boasting the largest showroom 
in the city, announced that it had booked Presley. He was scheduled to perform 57 shows over four 
weeks beginning July 31. Moore, Fontana, and the Jordanaires declined to participate, afraid of 
losing the lucrative session work they had in Nashville. Presley assembled new, top-notch 
accompaniment, led by guitarist James Burton and including two gospel groups, The Imperials and 
Sweet Inspirations.[182] Nonetheless, he was nervous: his only previous Las Vegas engagement, in 
1956, had been dismal. Parker, who intended to make Presley's return the show business event of 
the year, oversaw a major promotional push. For his part, hotel owner Kirk Kerkorian arranged to 
send his own plane to New York to fly in rock journalists for the debut performance
Presley took to the stage without introduction. The audience of 2,200, including many 
celebrities, gave him a standing ovation before he sang a note and another after his 
performance. A third followed his encore, "Can't Help Falling in Love" (a song that would be 
his closing number for much of the 1970s).[184] At a press conference after the show, when a 
journalist referred to him as "The King", Presley gestured toward Fats Domino, who was 
taking in the scene. "No," Presley said, "that's the real king of rock and roll."[185] The next day, 
Parker's negotiations with the hotel resulted in a five-year contract for Presley to play each 
February and August, at an annual salary of $1 million.[186] Newsweek commented, "There are 
several unbelievable things about Elvis, but the most incredible is his staying power in a world 
where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars."[187] Rolling Stone called Presley "supernatural, 
his own resurrection."[188] In November, Presley's final non-concert movie, Change of Habit, 
opened. The double album From Memphis To Vegas/From Vegas To Memphis came out the 
same month; the first LP consisted of live performances from the International, the second of 
more cuts from the American Sound sessions. "Suspicious Minds" reached the top of the 
charts-Presley's first U.S. pop number one in over seven years, and his last.
Cassandra Peterson, later television's Elvira, met Presley during this period in Las Vegas, 
where she was working as showgirl. She recalls of their encounter, "He was so anti-drug when 
I met him. I mentioned to him that I smoked marijuana, and he was just appalled. He said, 
'Don't ever do that again.'"[189] Presley was not only deeply opposed to recreational drugs, he 
also rarely drank. Several of his family members had been alcoholics, a fate he intended to 
avoid
Back on tour and meeting Nixon
Presley returned to the International early in 1970 for the first of the year's two month-long 
engagements, performing two shows a night. Recordings from these shows were issued on the 
album On Stage.[191] In late February, Presley performed six attendance-record-breaking 
shows at the Houston Astrodome.[192] In April, the single "The Wonder of You" was issued-
a number one hit in Great Britain, it topped the U.S. adult contemporary chart, as well. MGM 
filmed rehearsal and concert footage at the International during August for the documentary 
Elvis: That's the Way It Is. Presley was by now performing in a jumpsuit, which would become 
a trademark of his live act. During this engagement, he was threatened with murder unless 
$50,000 was paid. Presley had been the target of many threats since the 1950s, often without 
his knowledge.[193] The FBI took the threat seriously and security was stepped up for the next 
two shows. Presley went onstage with a Derringer in his right boot and a .45 pistol in his 
waistband, but the concerts went off without incident.[194][195]
The album That's the Way It Is, produced to accompany the documentary and featuring both 
studio and live recordings, marked a stylistic shift. As music historian John Robertson notes, 
"The authority of Presley's singing helped disguise the fact that the album stepped decisively 
away from the American-roots inspiration of the Memphis sessions towards a more middle-of-
the-road sound. With country put on the back burner, and soul and R&B left in Memphis, 
what was left was very classy, very clean white pop-perfect for the Las Vegas crowd, but a 
definite retrograde step for Elvis."[196] After the end of his International engagement on 
September 7, Presley embarked on a week-long concert tour, largely of the South, his first 
since 1958. Another week-long tour, of the West Coast, followed in November.
On December 21, 1970, Presley engineered a bizarre meeting with President Richard Nixon at 
the White House, where he expressed his patriotism and his contempt for the hippie drug 
culture. He asked Nixon for a Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs badge, to add to 
similar items he had begun collecting and to signify official sanction of his patriotic efforts. 
Nixon, who apparently found the encounter awkward, expressed a belief that Presley could 
send a positive message to young people and that it was therefore important he "retain his 
credibility". Presley told Nixon that The Beatles, whose songs he regularly performed in 
concert during the era,[198] exemplified what he saw as a trend of anti-Americanism and drug 
abuse in popular culture.[199] (Presley and his friends had had a four-hour get-together with 
The Beatles five years earlier.) On hearing reports of the meeting, Paul McCartney later said 
that he "felt a bit betrayed. ... The great joke was that we were taking [illegal] drugs, and look 
what happened to him", a reference to Presley's death, hastened by prescription drug 
abuse.[200]
The U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Presley one of its annual Ten Most 
Outstanding Young Men of the Nation on January 16, 1971.[201] Not long after, the City of 
Memphis named the stretch of Highway 51 South on which Graceland is located "Elvis 
Presley Boulevard". The same year, Presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded 
the Lifetime Achievement Award (then known as the Bing Crosby Award) by the National 
Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the Grammy Award organization.[202] Three new, 
non-movie Presley studio albums were released in 1971, as many as had come out over the 
previous eight years. Best received by critics was Elvis Country, a concept record that focused 
on genre standards.[203] The biggest seller was Elvis Sings the Wonderful World of Christmas, 
"the truest statement of all", according to Greil Marcus. "In the midst of ten painfully genteel 
Christmas songs, every one sung with appalling sincerity and humility, one could find Elvis 
tom-catting his way through six blazing minutes of 'Merry Christmas, Baby,' a raunchy old 
Charles Brown blues. ... If [Presley's] sin was his lifelessness, it was his sinfulness that brought 
him to life".[
Marriage breakdown and Aloha from Hawaii
MGM again filmed Presley in April 1972, this time for Elvis on Tour, which went on to win the 
Golden Globe Award for Best Documentary Film that year. His gospel album He Touched Me, 
released that month, would earn him his second Grammy Award, for Best Inspirational 
Performance. A 14-date tour commenced with an unprecedented four consecutive sold-out shows 
at New York's Madison Square Garden.[205] The evening concert on July 10 was recorded and issued 
in LP form a week later. Elvis: As Recorded at Madison Square Garden became one of Presley's 
biggest-selling albums. After the tour, the single "Burning Love" was released-Presley's last top 
ten hit on the U.S. pop chart. "The most exciting single Elvis has made since 'All Shook Up'", wrote 
rock critic Robert Christgau. "Who else could make 'It's coming closer, the flames are now licking my 
body' sound like an assignation with James Brown's backup band?"[
Presley and his wife, meanwhile, had become increasingly distant, barely cohabiting. In 1971, an 
affair he had with Joyce Bova resulted-unbeknownst to him-in her pregnancy and an abortion. 
He often raised the possibility of her moving in to Graceland, saying that he was likely to leave 
Priscilla.[208] The Presleys separated on February 23, 1972, after Priscilla disclosed her relationship 
with Mike Stone, a karate instructor Presley had recommended to her. Priscilla relates that when 
she told him, Presley "grabbed ... and forcefully made love to" her, declaring, "This is how a real 
man makes love to his woman."[209] Five months later, Presley's new girlfriend, Linda Thompson, a 
songwriter and one-time Memphis beauty queen, moved in with him.[210] Presley and his wife filed 
for divorce on August 18
In January 1973, Presley performed two benefit concerts for the Kui Lee Cancer Fund in connection 
with a groundbreaking TV special, Aloha from Hawaii. The first show served as a practice run and 
backup should technical problems affect the live broadcast two days later. Aired as scheduled on 
January 14, Aloha from Hawaii was the first global concert satellite broadcast, reaching 
approximately 1.5 billion viewers live and on tape delay.[212][213][214] Presley's costume became the 
most recognized example of the elaborate concert garb with which his latter-day persona became 
closely associated. As described by Bobbie Ann Mason, "At the end of the show, when he spreads 
out his American Eagle cape, with the full stretched wings of the eagle studded on the back, he 
becomes a god figure."[215] The accompanying double album, released in February, went to number 
one and eventually sold over 5 million copies in the United States.[216] It proved to be Presley's last 
U.S. number one pop album during his lifetime
At a midnight show the same month, four men rushed onto the stage in an apparent attack. 
Security men leapt to Presley's defense, and the singer's karate instinct took over as he ejected 
one invader from the stage himself. Following the show, he became obsessed with the idea that 
the men had been sent by Stone to kill him. Though they were shown to have been only 
overexuberant fans, he raged, "There's too much pain in me ... Stone [must] die." His outbursts 
continued with such intensity that a physician was unable to calm him, despite administering large 
doses of medication. After another two full days of raging, Red West, his friend and bodyguard, felt 
compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided, "Aw hell, let's 
just leave it for now. Maybe it's a bit heavy."
Health deterioration and death (1973-77)
Medical crises and last studio sessions
Presley's divorce took effect on October 9, 1973.[218] He was now becoming increasingly 
unwell. Twice during the year he overdosed on barbiturates, spending three days in a coma in 
his hotel suite after the first incident. Toward the end of 1973, he was hospitalized, 
semicomatose from the effects of Demerol addiction. According to his main physician, Dr. 
George C. Nichopoulos, Presley "felt that by getting [drugs] from a doctor, he wasn't the 
common everyday junkie getting something off the street."[219] Since his comeback, he had 
staged more live shows with each passing year, and 1973 saw 168 concerts, his busiest 
schedule ever.[220] Despite his failing health, in 1974 he undertook another intensive touring 
schedule.[221]
Presley's condition declined precipitously in September. Keyboardist Tony Brown remembers 
the singer's arrival at a University of Maryland concert: "He fell out of the limousine, to his 
knees. People jumped to help, and he pushed them away like, 'Don't help me.' He walked on 
stage and held onto the mike for the first thirty minutes like it was a post. Everybody's 
looking at each other like, Is the tour gonna happen?"[222] Guitarist John Wilkinson recalled, 
"He was all gut. He was slurring. He was so fucked up. ... It was obvious he was drugged. It 
was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body. It was so bad the words to the 
songs were barely intelligible. ... I remember crying. He could barely get through the 
introductions".[223] Wilkinson recounted that a few nights later in Detroit, "I watched him in 
his dressing room, just draped over a chair, unable to move. So often I thought, 'Boss, why 
don't you just cancel this tour and take a year off...?' I mentioned something once in a 
guarded moment. He patted me on the back and said, 'It'll be all right. Don't you worry about 
it.'"[223] Presley continued to play to sellout crowds. As cultural critic Marjorie Garber 
describes, he was now widely seen as a garish pop crooner: "in effect he had become Liberace. 
Even his fans were now middle-aged matrons and blue-haired grandmothers."[224]
On July 13, 1976, Vernon Presley-who had become deeply involved in his son's financial 
affairs-fired "Memphis Mafia" bodyguards Red West (Presley's friend since the 1950s), 
Sonny West, and David Hebler, citing the need to "cut back on expenses".[225][226][227] Presley 
was in Palm Springs at the time, and some suggest the singer was too cowardly to face the 
three himself. Another associate of Presley's, John O'Grady, argued that the bodyguards were 
dropped because their rough treatment of fans had prompted too many lawsuits.[228] However, 
Presley's stepbrother David Stanley has claimed that the bodyguards were fired because they 
were becoming more outspoken about Presley's drug dependency.[229] Presley and Linda 
Thompson split in November, and he took up with a new girlfriend, Ginger Alden.[230] He 
proposed to Alden and gave her an engagement ring two months later, though several of his 
friends later claimed that he had no serious intention of marrying again.
RCA, which had enjoyed a steady stream of product from Presley for over a decade, grew anxious 
as his interest in spending time in the studio waned. After a December 1973 session that produced 
18 songs, enough for almost two albums, he did not enter the studio in 1974.[232] Parker sold RCA on 
another concert record, Elvis: As Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis.[233] Recorded on March 20, it 
included a version of "How Great Thou Art" that would win Presley his third and final competitive 
Grammy Award.[234] (All three of his competitive Grammy wins-out of 14 total nominations-were 
for gospel recordings.) Presley returned to the studio in Hollywood in March 1975, but Parker's 
attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful.[235] In 1976, 
RCA sent a mobile studio to Graceland that made possible two full-scale recording sessions at 
Presley's home.[236] Even in that comfortable context, the recording process was now a struggle for 
him.
For all the concerns of his label and manager, in studio sessions between July 1973 and October 
1976, Presley recorded virtually the entire contents of six albums. Though he was no longer a major 
presence on the pop charts, five of those albums entered the top five of the country chart, and 
three went to number one: Promised Land (1975), From Elvis Presley Boulevard, Memphis, 
Tennessee (1976), and Moody Blue (1977).[239] The story was similar with his singles-there were no 
major pop hits, but Presley was a significant force in not just the country market, but on adult 
contemporary radio as well. Eight studio singles from this period released during his lifetime were 
top ten hits on one or both charts, four in 1974 alone. "My Boy" was a number one AC hit in 1975, 
and "Moody Blue" topped the country chart and reached the second spot on the AC in 1976.[240] 
Perhaps his most critically acclaimed recording of the era came that year, with what Greil Marcus 
described as his "apocalyptic attack" on the soul classic "Hurt".[241] "If he felt the way he sounded", 
Dave Marsh wrote of Presley's performance, "the wonder isn't that he had only a year left to live 
but that he managed to survive that long.
Final year and death
Journalist Tony Scherman writes that by early 1977, "Elvis Presley had become a grotesque 
caricature of his sleek, energetic former self. Hugely overweight, his mind dulled by the 
pharmacopoeia he daily ingested, he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated 
concerts."[243] In Alexandria, Louisiana, the singer was on stage for less than an hour and "was 
impossible to understand".[244] Presley failed to appear in Baton Rouge; he was unable to get out of 
his hotel bed, and the rest of the tour was cancelled.[244] Despite the accelerating deterioration of 
his health, he stuck to most touring commitments. In Rapid City, South Dakota, "he was so nervous 
on stage that he could hardly talk", according to Presley historian Samuel Roy, and unable to 
"perform any significant movement."[245] Guralnick relates that fans "were becoming increasingly 
voluble about their disappointment, but it all seemed to go right past Elvis, whose world was now 
confined almost entirely to his room and his spiritualism books."[246] A cousin, Billy Smith, recalled 
how Presley would sit in his room and chat for hours, sometimes recounting favorite Monty Python 
sketches and his own past escapades, but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions that 
reminded Smith of Howard Hughes.[247] "Way Down", Presley's last single issued during his lifetime, 
came out on June 6. His final concert was held in Indianapolis at the Market Square Arena, on June 
26.
The book Elvis: What Happened?, cowritten by the three bodyguards fired the previous year, 
was published on August 1.[248] It was the first expose to detail Presley's years of drug misuse. 
He was devastated by the book and tried unsuccessfully to halt its release by offering money 
to the publishers.[249] By this point, he suffered from multiple ailments-glaucoma, high blood 
pressure, liver damage, and an enlarged colon, each aggravated, and possibly caused, by drug 
abuse.[219]
Presley was scheduled to fly out of Memphis on the evening of August 16, 1977, to begin 
another tour. That afternoon, Alden discovered him unresponsive on his bathroom floor. 
Attempts to revive him failed, and death was officially pronounced at 3:30 pm at Baptist 
Memorial Hospital
President Jimmy Carter issued a statement that credited Presley with having "permanently 
changed the face of American popular culture".[251] Thousands of people gathered outside 
Graceland to view the open casket. One of Presley's cousins, Billy Mann, accepted $18,000 to 
secretly photograph the corpse; the picture appeared on the cover of the National Enquirer's 
biggest-selling issue ever.[252] Alden struck a $105,000 deal with the Enquirer for her story, but 
settled for less when she broke her exclusivity agreement.[253] Presley left her nothing in his will
Presley's funeral was held at Graceland, on Thursday, August 18. Outside the gates, a car plowed 
into a group of fans, killing two women and critically injuring a third.[255] Approximately 80,000 
people lined the processional route to Forest Hill Cemetery, where Presley was buried next to his 
mother.[256] Within a few days, "Way Down" topped the country and UK pop charts.[240][257] 
Following an attempt to steal the singer's body in late August, the remains of both Elvis Presley and 
his mother were reburied in Graceland's Meditation Garden on October 2.[
