Mythology
he term mythology can refer either to the study of myths, or to a body of 
myths.[1] For example, 
comparative mythology is the study of connections between myths from 
different cultures,[2] 
whereas Greek mythology is the body of myths from ancient Greece. In the 
academic field of 
folkloristics, a myth is defined as a sacred narrative explaining how the 
world and humankind came 
to be in their present form.[3][4][5] Many scholars in other fields use the 
term "myth" in somewhat 
different ways.[5][6][7] In a very broad sense, the word can refer to any 
traditional story.[8
Nature of myths
Typical characteristics
The main characters in myths are usually gods, supernatural heroes and 
humans.[9][10][11] As 
sacred stories, myths are often endorsed by rulers and priests and closely 
linked to religion or 
spirituality.[9] In the society in which it is told, a myth is usually 
regarded as a true account of 
the remote past.[9][10][12][13] In fact, many societies have two categories 
of traditional narrative, 
"true stories" or myths, and "false stories" or fables.[14] Myths generally 
take place in a 
primordial age, when the world had not yet achieved its current form,[9] and 
explain how the 
world gained its current form[3][4][5][15] and how customs, institutions and 
taboos were 
established
Related concepts
Closely related to myth are legend and folktale. Myths, legends, and 
folktales are different 
types of traditional story.[16] Unlike myths, folktales can be set in any 
time and any place, and 
they are not considered true or sacred by the societies that tell them.[9] 
Like myths, legends are 
stories that are traditionally considered true, but are set in a more recent 
time, when the world 
was much as it is today.[9] Legends generally feature humans as their main 
characters, whereas 
myths generally focus on superhuman characters.[9]
The distinction between myth, legend, and folktale is meant simply as a 
useful tool for 
grouping traditional stories.[17] In many cultures, it is hard to draw a 
sharp line between myths 
and legends.[18] Instead of dividing their traditional stories into myths, 
legends, and folktales, 
some cultures divide them into two categories, one that roughly corresponds 
to folktales, and 
one that combines myths and legends.[19] Even myths and folktales are not 
completely distinct. 
A story may be considered true (and therefore a myth) in one society, but 
considered fictional 
(and therefore a folktale) in another society.[20][21] In fact, when a myth 
loses its status as part 
of a religious system, it often takes on traits more typical of folktales, 
with its formerly divine 
characters reinterpreted as human heroes, giants, or fairies.[10]
Myth, legend, and folktale are only a few of the categories of traditional 
stories. Other 
categories include anecdotes and some kinds of jokes.[17] Traditional 
stories, in turn, are only 
one category within folklore, which also includes items such as gestures, 
costumes, and music.
Origins of myth
Euhemerism
One theory claims that myths are distorted accounts of real historical 
events.[22][23] According to this 
theory, storytellers repeatedly elaborated upon historical accounts until the 
figures in those 
accounts gained the status of gods.[22][23] For example, one might argue that 
the myth of the wind-
god Aeolus evolved from a historical account of a king who taught his people 
to use sails and 
interpret the winds.[22] Herodotus (5th century BC) and Prodicus made claims 
of this kind.[23] This 
theory is named "euhemerism" after the mythologist Euhemerus (c.320 BC), who 
suggested that 
the Greek gods developed from legends about human beings
Allegory
Some theories propose that myths began as allegories. According to one 
theory, myths began as 
allegories for natural phenomena: Apollo represents fire, Poseidon represents 
water, and so on.[23] 
According to another theory, myths began as allegories for philosophical or 
spiritual concepts: 
Athena represents wise judgment, Aphrodite represents desire, etc.[23] The 
19th century 
Sanskritist Max Muller supported an allegorical theory of myth. He believed 
that myths began as 
allegorical descriptions of nature, but gradually came to be interpreted 
literally: for example, a 
poetic description of the sea as "raging" was eventually taken literally, and 
the sea was then 
thought of as a raging god.[
Personification
Some thinkers believe that myths resulted from the personification of 
inanimate objects and 
forces. According to these thinkers, the ancients worshipped natural 
phenomena such as fire and 
air, gradually coming to describe them as gods.[26] For example, according to 
the theory of 
mythopoeic thought, the ancients tended to view things as persons, not as 
mere objects;[27] thus, 
they described natural events as acts of personal gods, thus giving rise to 
myths.[
The myth-ritual theory
According to the myth-ritual theory, the existence of myth is tied to 
ritual.[29] In its most extreme 
form, this theory claims that myths arose to explain rituals.[30] This claim 
was first put forward by the 
biblical scholar William Robertson Smith.[31] According to Smith, people 
begin performing rituals for 
some reason that is not related to myth; later, after they have forgotten the 
original reason for a 
ritual, they try to account for the ritual by inventing a myth and claiming 
that the ritual 
commemorates the events described in that myth.[32] The anthropologist James 
Frazer had a similar 
theory. Frazer believed that primitive man starts out with a belief in 
magical laws; later, when man 
begins to lose faith in magic, he invents myths about gods and claims that 
his formerly magical 
rituals are religious rituals intended to appease the gods
Functions of myth
Mircea Eliade argued that one of the foremost functions of myth is to 
establish models for 
behavior[34][35] and that myths may also provide a religious experience. By 
telling or reenacting 
myths, members of traditional societies detach themselves from the present 
and return to the 
mythical age, thereby bringing themselves closer to the divine.[12][35][36]
Lauri Honko asserts that, in some cases, a society will reenact a myth in an 
attempt to 
reproduce the conditions of the mythical age. For example, it will reenact 
the healing 
performed by a god at the beginning of time in order to heal someone in the 
present.[37] 
Similarly, Roland Barthes argues that modern culture explores religious 
experience. Because it 
is not the job of science to define human morality, a religious experience is 
an attempt to 
connect with a perceived moral past, which is in contrast with the 
technological present.[38]
Joseph Campbell defined myths as having four basic functions: the Mystical 
Function-
experiencing the awe of the universe; the Cosmological Function-explaining 
the shape of the 
universe; the Sociological Function-supporting and validating a certain 
social order; and the 
Pedagogical Function-how to live a human lifetime under any circumstances
The study of mythology: a historical overview
Historically, the important approaches to the study of mythology have been 
those of Vico, 
Schelling, Schiller, Jung, Freud, Levy-Bruhl, Levi-Strauss, Frye, the Soviet 
school, and the Myth and 
Ritual School.[
Pre-modern theories
The critical interpretation of myth goes back as far as the Presocratics.[41] 
Euhemerus was one 
of the most important pre-modern mythologists. He interpreted myths as 
accounts of actual 
historical events, distorted over many retellings. This view of myths and 
their origin is 
criticised by Plato in the Phaedrus (229d), in which Socrates says that this 
approach is the 
province of one who is "vehemently curious and laborious, and not entirely 
happy . . ." The 
Platonists generally had a more profound and comprehensive view of the 
subject. Sallustius,[42] 
for example, divides myths into five categories - theological, physical (or 
concerning natural 
laws), animastic (or concerning soul), material and mixed. This last being 
those myths which 
show the interaction between two or more of the previous categories and 
which, he says, are 
particularly used in initiations.
Although Plato famously condemned poetic myth when discussing the education 
of the 
young in the Republic, primarily on the grounds that there was a danger that 
the young and 
uneducated might take the stories of Gods and heroes literally, nevertheless 
he constantly 
refers to myths of all kinds throughout his writings. As Platonism developed 
in the phases 
commonly called 'middle Platonism' and neoplatonism, such writers as 
Plutarch, Porphyry, 
Proclus, Olympiodorus and Damascius wrote explicitly about the symbolic 
interpretation of 
traditional and Orphic myths.[43]
Interest in polytheistic mythology revived in the Renaissance, with early 
works on 
mythography appearing in the 16th century, such as the Theologia mythologica 
(1532).
19th-century theories
The first scholarly theories of myth appeared during the second half of the 
19th century.[41] In 
general, these 19th-century theories framed myth as a failed or obsolete mode 
of thought, 
often by interpreting myth as the primitive counterpart of modern 
science.[44]
For example, E. B. Tylor interpreted myth as an attempt at a literal 
explanation for natural 
phenomena: unable to conceive of impersonal natural laws, early man tried to 
explain natural 
phenomena by attributing souls to inanimate objects, giving rise to 
animism.[45] According to 
Tylor, human thought evolves through various stages, starting with 
mythological ideas and 
gradually progressing to scientific ideas. Not all scholars - not even all 
19th century scholars 
- have agreed with this view. For example, Lucien Levy-Bruhl claimed that 
"the primitive 
mentality is a condition of the human mind, and not a stage in its historical 
development."[46]
Max Muller called myth a "disease of language". He speculated that myths 
arose due to the 
lack of abstract nouns and neuter gender in ancient languages: 
anthropomorphic figures of 
speech, necessary in such languages, were eventually taken literally, leading 
to the idea that 
natural phenomena were conscious beings, gods.[47]
The anthropologist James Frazer saw myths as a misinterpretation of magical 
rituals; which 
were themselves based on a mistaken idea of natural law.[48] According to 
Frazer, man begins 
with an unfounded belief in impersonal magical laws. When he realizes that 
his applications of 
these laws don't work, he gives up his belief in natural law, in favor of a 
belief in personal 
gods controlling nature - thus giving rise to religious myths. Meanwhile, man 
continues 
practicing formerly magical rituals through force of habit, reinterpreting 
them as reenactments 
of mythical events. Finally, Frazer contends, man realizes that nature does 
follow natural laws, 
but now he discovers their true nature through science. Here, again, science 
makes myth 
obsolete: as Frazer puts it, man progresses "from magic through religion to 
science".[33]
Robert Segal asserts that by pitting mythical thought against modern 
scientific thought, such 
theories implied that modern man must abandon myth.
20th century theories
Many 20th century theories of myth rejected the 19th-century theories' 
opposition of myth 
and science. In general, "twentieth-century theories have tended to see myth 
as almost 
anything but an outdated counterpart to science [...] Consequently, moderns 
are not obliged 
to abandon myth for science."[49]
Swiss psychologist Carl Jung (1873-1961) tried to understand the psychology 
behind world 
myths. Jung asserted that all humans share certain innate unconscious 
psychological forces, 
which he called archetypes. Jung believed that the similarities between the 
myths from 
different cultures reveals the existence of these universal archetypes.[50]
Joseph Campbell believed that there were two different orders of mythology: 
that there are 
myths that, "are metaphorical of spiritual potentiality in the human being", 
and that there are 
myths, "that have to do with specific societies".[51]
Claude Levi-Strauss believed that myths reflect patterns in the mind and 
interpreted those 
patterns more as fixed mental structures - specifically, pairs of opposites 
(i.e. good/evil, 
compassionate/callous) - than as unconscious feelings or urges.[52]
In his appendix to Myths, Dreams and Mysteries, and in The Myth of the 
Eternal Return, 
Mircea Eliade attributed modern man's anxieties to his rejection of myths and 
the sense of the 
sacred.
In the 1950s, Roland Barthes published a series of essays examining modern 
myths and the 
process of their creation in his book Mythologies.
Examples of myths
Creation of man by Prometheus (Greek)
Prometheus and Epimetheus were spared imprisonment in Tartarus because they 
had not 
fought with their fellow Titans during the war with the Olympians. They were 
given the task 
of creating man. Prometheus shaped man out of mud, and Athena breathed life 
into his clay 
figure.
Prometheus had assigned Epimetheus the task of giving the creatures of the 
earth their various 
qualities, such as swiftness, cunning, strength, fur, wings. Unfortunately, 
by the time he got to 
man Epimetheus had given all the good qualities out and there were none left 
for man. So 
Prometheus decided to make man stand upright as the gods did and to give them 
fire.
Prometheus loved man more than the Olympians, who had banished most of his 
family to 
Tartarus. So when Zeus decreed that man must present a portion of each animal 
they 
sacrificed to the gods Prometheus decided to trick Zeus. He created two 
piles, one with the 
bones wrapped in juicy fat, the other with the good meat hidden in the hide. 
He then bade 
Zeus to pick. Zeus picked the bones. Since he had given his word, Zeus had to 
accept that as 
his share for future sacrifices. In his anger over the trick, Zeus took fire 
away from man. 
However, Prometheus lit a torch from the sun and brought it back again to 
man. Zeus was 
enraged that man again had fire. He decided to inflict a terrible punishment 
on both man and 
Prometheus.
To punish man, Zeus had Hephaestus create a mortal of stunning beauty. The 
gods gave the 
mortal many gifts of wealth. He then had Hermes give the mortal a deceptive 
heart and a 
lying tongue. This creation was Pandora, the first women. A final gift was a 
jar which Pandora 
was forbidden to open. Thus, completed Zeus sent Pandora down to Epimetheus 
who was 
staying amongst the men.
Prometheus had warned Epimetheus not to accept gifts from Zeus but, Pandora's 
beauty was 
too great and he allowed her to stay. Eventually, Pandora's curiosity about 
the jar she was 
forbidden to open became too great. She opened the jar and out flew all manor 
of evils, 
sorrows, plagues, and misfortunes. However, the bottom of the jar held one 
good thing - hope.
Zeus was angry at Prometheus for three things: being tricked on sacrifices, 
stealing fire for 
man, and for refusing to tell Zeus which of Zeus's children would dethrone 
him. Zeus had his 
servants, Force and Violence, seize Prometheus, take him to the Caucasus 
Mountains, and 
chain him to a rock with unbreakable adamanite chains. Here he was tormented 
day and night 
by a giant eagle tearing at his liver. Zeus gave Prometheus two ways out of 
this torment. He 
could tell Zeus who the mother of the child that would dethrone him was. Or 
meet two 
conditions: First, that an immortal must volunteer to die for Prometheus. 
Second, that a mortal 
must kill the eagle and unchain him. Eventually, Chiron the Centaur agreed to 
die for him and 
Heracles killed the eagle and unbounded him.
Birth of Athena (Greek)
Zeus came to lust after Metis and chased her in his direct way. Metis tried 
to escape, going so 
far as to change her form many times by turning into various creatures, such 
as hawks, fish, 
and serpents. However, Zeus was both determined and equally proficient in 
changing form. 
He continued his pursuit until she relented.
An Oracle of Gaea then prophesied that Metis' first child would be a girl, 
but her second child 
would be a boy that would overthrow Zeus as had happened to his father and 
grandfather. 
Zeus took this warning to heart. When he next saw Metis, he flattered her and 
put her at her 
ease. Then, with Metis off guard Zeus, suddenly opened his mouth and 
swallowed her. This 
was the end of Metis, but possibly the beginning of Zeus' wisdom.
After a time Zeus developed the mother of all headaches. He howled so loudly 
it could be 
heard throughout the earth. The other gods came to see what the problem was. 
Hermes 
realized what needed to be done and directed Hephaestus to take a wedge and 
split open 
Zeus's skull. Out of the skull sprang Athena, full grown and in a full set of 
armour. Due to her 
manner of birth, Athena has dominion over all things of the intellect.
Comparative mythology
Comparative mythology is the systematic comparison of myths from different 
cultures.[2] It 
seeks to discover underlying themes that are common to the myths of multiple 
cultures.[2] In 
some cases, comparative mythologists use the similarities between different 
mythologies to 
argue that those mythologies have a common source. This common source may be 
a common 
source of inspiration (e.g. a certain natural phenomenon that inspired 
similar myths in different 
cultures) or a common "protomythology" that diverged into the various 
mythologies we see 
today.[2]
Nineteenth-century interpretations of myth were often highly comparative, 
seeking a common 
origin for all myths.[53] However, modern-day scholars tend to be more 
suspicious of 
comparative approaches, avoiding overly general or universal statements about 
mythology.[54] 
One exception to this modern trend is Joseph Campbell's book The Hero With a 
Thousand 
Faces (1949), which claims that all hero myths follow the same underlying 
pattern. This 
theory of a "monomyth" is out of favor with the mainstream study of mythology
Mythography
A mythographer, or a mythologist is a compiler of myths. The word derives 
from the Greek 
(mythografia), "writing of fables",[1] from  (mythos), "speech, word, fact, 
story, narrative"[2] + 
"?????" (graph?), "to write, to inscribe".[3] Mythography is then the 
rendering of myths in the 
arts. In the 20th century, the mythographer might also be a scholarly 
interpreter, sometimes 
drawing on field work, often with the aim of contributing to the fields of 
cultural anthropology, 
religious studies, or a myth theory.
Rationalistic approaches
One of the first Western attempts at rationalization of mythology, and more 
generally of 
religious beliefs, can be traced to Euhemerus. This Greek mythographer at the 
court of 
Macedon in the late 4th century BC held that myths were actually true stories 
of historical 
persons, twisted and amplified. This doctrine is called Euhemerism. Even 
today, the Ancient 
astronaut theories has been described as "neo-Euhemerism" by French 
sociologist Jean-Bruno 
Renard.
The philosophes, such as Voltaire, were interested in dispelling myths, not 
explaining their 
existence. While the basic understandings of the Western world were informed 
by Christianity 
in all areas of study, the term mythographer referred to someone who 
attempted to explain 
pagan myths in terms of misremembering the events of the Old Testament or 
wilfully altering 
them. Some of the theories of explanation from classical times were also 
used, such as the 
apotheosis of a local hero. This was before the Enlightenment, or, speaking 
more precisely, 
before the arrival of historicism.
Romanticism
It has been a consistent strand of Romanticism, to insist on a level of 
validity of myth, and these 
arguments have often connected myth with the creative imagination. These 
notions come 
together in the concept of mythopoeic imagination, which has been articulated 
in the 
anthropological work of Jadran Mimica,[4] among others. Theories with an 
academic basis which 
support this thinking have been popular, in the sense of receiving much 
attention; without ever 
being able to support claims of reliability acceptable to more rationalistic 
perspectives.
Myth theories
Already in the 19th century there was a tendency to produce large-scale myth 
theories, such as 
those of Max Muller with emphasis on solar myths (shared with Adalbert Kuhn 
the 
philologist), Andrew Lang, Wilhelm Mannhardt, and James Frazer. The work of 
Muller and 
Frazer, in particular, was seen by others as a contribution to comparative 
religion, and a myth 
theory was an implicit commentary on Christianity. This aspect of mythography 
was certainly 
controversial, and those who worked in the area tended to make the inclusion 
of Christian 
sacred narratives within the theory only tacitly. The scope of theories also 
expanded to cover 
myth from all parts of the world, where the initial field was mainly 
classical mythology and 
myths from areas adjacent to the Roman Empire. Mythography reached both into 
the past, for 
example with the background of all Indo-European languages, and wherever in 
the 
contemporary world anthropologists were working. Cyril Charles Martin, 
writing in the 
Catholic Encyclopedia of 1913 on paganism, summed up theories as follows:

Historians of religion usually assume that religions developed upwards from 
some 
common germ which they call Totemism, Animism, Solar or Astral Myth, Nature 
Worship in general or Agrarian in particular, or some other name implying a 
systematic 
interpretation of the facts.[5]

Scholars such as Carl Jung, Georges Dumezil, James Hillman and Claude Levi-
Strauss 
continued this tradition in the 20th century. The direction of comparative 
religion is 
represented by Mircea Eliade, and also to some extent by the literary critic 
Rene Girard. The 
French sociological school has argued in terms of myths having social 
function.
There were numerous other mythographic 'schools' in the first half of the 
20th century. Ernst 
Cassirer's approach was through philosophy, specifically the so-called 
Marburg School of 
Kantian thought; it had a direct influence on Susanne Langer, and has been 
traced as an 
influence on Mikhail Bakhtin.
Mythography is the study of the study of myths (the study of myths itself 
being mythology), 
as well. In examining how mythology has been studied, one can see the 
differences and 
similarities readily, as evidenced by William Doty's Mythography: The Study 
of Myths and 
Rituals.
Myth criticism
Besides the anthropologist's reason - better understanding of a particular 
culture in its own 
terms, that is, for the purposes of cultural anthropology - there are very 
varied reasons 
behind the interest of the mythographer. The origins of Greek drama were the 
immediate 
cause of the rise of the myth-ritual school, of Jane Harrison, Gilbert Murray 
and others. Karl 
Kerenyi, also involved in Greek mythology, was an associate of Carl Jung, who 
adopted 
mythological material in his psychological theories.
In general literary criticism, myth criticism was put forward by Maud Bodkin, 
Philip 
Wheelwright, and others such as Francis Fergusson, Leslie Fiedler, and G. 
Wilson Knight. The 
critic Northrop Frye, working from Blake and the Bible as fundamental, always 
wished to 
distinguish himself from the myth-ritual school, but is often seen as in some 
sense having 
summed up the whole tendency. Robert Graves was interested in poetic theory, 
and supported 
his celebrated White Goddess with analysis harking back to Muller and Frazer, 
as well as the 
myth-ritual tendency.
Universal myth theories
The old idea of a universal myth theory, derided by Voltaire, is in modern 
times most 
famously represented by Joseph Campbell. There were many books written in the 
17th century 
purporting to explain all myths. But Voltaire was deriding a Christian myth 
theory, while 
Campbell proposes a psychological one.
Perhaps the last work which employed this earlier use of the term mythography 
was George 
Eliot's novel Middlemarch. Its character Casaubon was involved in such a 
project in the mid-
19th century. The story tells of a woman who proved unable to finish the 
project after his 
death and abandoned it. Casaubon's character is a satire on academic pedantry 
and hubris.
Geomythology
"Geomythology indicates every case in which the origin of myths and legends 
can be 
shown to contain references to geological phenomena and aspects, in a broad 
sense 
including astronomical ones (comets, eclipses, meteor impacts, etc.). As 
indicated by 
Vitaliano (1973) 'primarily, there are two kinds of geologic folklore, that 
in which 
some geologic feature or the occurrence of some geologic phenomenon has 
inspired a 
folklore explanation, and that which is the garbled explanation of some 
actual geologic 
event, usually a natural catastrophe'."[1]
The claim is that oral traditions about nature are often expressed in 
mythological language and 
may contain genuine and perceptive natural knowledge based on careful 
observation of 
physical evidence. Geomythology alleges to provide valuable information about 
past 
earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, impact events, fossil discoveries, and other 
events, which are 
otherwise scientifically unknown or difficult to trace.
To be distinguished from this are plainly aitiological tales that account for 
geological features 
without any connection to their formation; an example is the Native American 
legend of a 
giant bear chasing a couple who were saved when the land rose beneath their 
feet; the bear's 
claws left gouge marks on the sides of the uplift known today as Devils 
Tower, Wyoming.
National myth
A national myth is an inspiring narrative or anecdote about a nation's past. 
Such myths often 
serve as an important national symbol and affirm a set of national values. A 
national myth may 
sometimes take the form of a national epic. A considerable amount of related 
material is at 
civil religion.
A national myth may be a legend or fictionalized narrative, which has been 
elevated to serious 
mythological, symbolical and esteemed level so as to be true to the nation 
(Renan 1882). It 
might simply over-dramatize true incidents, omit important historical 
details, or add details for 
which there is no evidence; or it might simply be a fictional story that no 
one takes to be true 
literally (see Abizadeh 2004), but contains a symbolic meaning for the 
nation. The national 
folklore of many nations includes a founding myth, which may involve a 
struggle against 
colonialism or a war of independence. In some cases, the meaning of the 
national myth may 
become disputed among different parts of the population.
In some places, the national myth may be spiritual in tone and refer to 
stories of the nation's 
founding at the hands of God, the gods, leaders favored by gods, and other 
supernatural 
beings.
National myths serve many social and political purposes. In totalitarian 
dictatorships, national 
myths often exist only for the purpose of state-sponsored propaganda. The 
leader might be 
given, for example, a mythical supernatural life history in order to make him 
or her seem god-
like and supra-powerful (see also cult of personality). However, national 
myths exist in every 
society. In liberal regimes they can serve the purpose of inspiring civic 
virtue and self-sacrifice 
(see Miller 1995), or of shoring up the power of dominant groups and 
legitimizing their rule.
Origin of death myth
The origin of death is a theme in the myths of many cultures. Death is a 
universal feature of human 
life, so stories about its origin appear to be universal in human 
cultures.[1] As such it is a form of 
cosmological myth (a type of myth that explains the origins of a culture and 
the problems that faces 
it).[2] No one type of these myths is universal, but each region has its own 
characteristic types.[3][4] 
Such myths have therefore been a frequent topic of study in the field of 
comparative mythology.[
Africa
Pervasively in the myths of African cultures, in the beginning there was no 
death. This can be 
because a supreme being makes people young again when they grow old; people 
die but are 
reborn; or go to heaven to live. In some stories eternal life is lost through 
some flaw (such as greed, 
curiosity, stubbornness or arrogance), or as a punishment for disobedience, 
or as the result of 
human indifference. Other themes are the failure of a message to be delivered 
to humans, or a 
severing of the link between heaven and Earth. Sometimes it is as a result of 
an accident.
North America
The origin of death is a common theme in Native American mythology.[7][8] The 
myths of the 
plateau tribes blame its origin on the interference of the trickster figure 
Coyote.[7] The 
Chiricahua Apache myth also blames Coyote.[9] The plains tribes ascribe it to 
the result of 
unfavorable chance. For example, in the Blackfeet account, Old Man and Old 
Woman arguing 
over whether people should die, with Old Woman using magic to ensure that the 
sign that 
they agreed upon gave her desired result.[10]
Among the native peoples of the Western United States, a common explanation 
of death was 
that it was the result of a debate between two people or animals in which one 
would favour 
death and the other immortality. For example, the story of the Thompson 
Indians was that 
Raven wanted death as there would otherwise be too many men. Coyote preferred 
sleep to 
death but was outvoted by Crow, Fly and Maggot, who sided with Raven. Raven's 
daughter 
was then the first to die and so Raven wanted to reverse his choice. But 
Coyote, the trickster, 
said that the decision was now irrevocable.
Oceania
In Oceania, the most common myth is that originally people had the power to 
rejuvenate 
themselves by shedding their skin like a snake. However, when somebody, 
usually an old woman, 
does this, she frightens her grandchildren, who cry until she resumes her old 
skin, an act which 
mandates death for future generations.
Polynesia
In Polynesian mythology, death is the result of the hero Maui being swallowed 
up by Hades or 
Night. If he had escaped, mankind would be immortal, however one of the birds 
that accompanied 
him burst out laughing, awakening Hine-nui-te-po who crushed Maui to death, 
ending hopes of 
immortality with him.
Western civilisation
In the Book of Genesis, the origin myth of Western civilisation, death is a 
consequence of the Fall of 
Man from a prior state of innocence.
Greek mythology
In an early Greek myth, death is a consequence of the disagreement between 
Zeus and 
Prometheus. As a result of this quarrel, Zeus creates woman, in the form of 
Pandora and presents 
her to Prometheus' brother Epimetheus, with death being one of the results of 
his opening of 
Pandora's box, which she brought with her
Greek mythology
Greek mythology is the body of myths and legends belonging to the ancient 
Greeks 
concerning their gods and heroes, the nature of the world, and the origins 
and significance of 
their own cult and ritual practices. They were a part of religion in ancient 
Greece. Modern 
scholars refer to and study the myths in an attempt to throw light on the 
religious and political 
institutions of Ancient Greece, its civilization, and to gain understanding 
of the nature of 
myth-making itself.[1]
Greek mythology is embodied explicitly in a large collection of narratives 
and implicitly in 
Greek representational arts, such as vase-paintings and votive gifts. Greek 
myth attempts to 
explain the origins of the world and details the lives and adventures of a 
wide variety of gods, 
goddesses, heroes, heroines, and mythological creatures. These accounts 
initially were 
disseminated in an oral-poetic tradition; today the Greek myths are known 
primarily from 
Greek literature.
The oldest known Greek literary sources, the epic poems Iliad and Odyssey, 
focus on events 
surrounding the Trojan War. Two poems by Homer's near contemporary Hesiod, 
the Theogony 
and the Works and Days, contain accounts of the genesis of the world, the 
succession of 
divine rulers, the succession of human ages, the awesome origin of human 
woes, and the 
origin of sacrificial practices. Myths also are preserved in the Homeric 
Hymns, in fragments of 
epic poems of the Epic Cycle, in lyric poems, in the works of the tragedians 
of the fifth 
century BC, in writings of scholars and poets of the Hellenistic Age and in 
texts from the time 
of the Roman Empire by writers such as Plutarch and Pausanias.
Archaeological findings provide a principal source of detail about Greek 
mythology, with 
gods and heroes featured prominently in the decoration of many artifacts. 
Geometric designs 
on pottery of the eighth century BC depict scenes from the Trojan cycle as 
well as the 
adventures of Heracles. In the succeeding Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic 
periods, Homeric 
and various other mythological scenes appear, supplementing the existing 
literary evidence.[2]
Greek mythology has exerted an extensive influence on the culture, the arts, 
and the literature 
of Western civilization and remains part of Western heritage and language. 
Poets and artists 
from ancient times to the present have derived inspiration from Greek 
mythology and have 
discovered contemporary significance and relevance in these mythological 
themes
Era of gods
"Myths of origin" or "creation myths" represent an attempt to render the 
universe 
comprehensible in human terms and explain the origin of the world.[22] The 
most widely 
accepted version at the time, although a philosophical account of the 
beginning of things, is 
reported by Hesiod, in his Theogony. He begins with Chaos, a yawning 
nothingness. Out of 
the void emerged Gaia (the Earth) and some other primary divine beings: Eros 
(Love), the 
Abyss (the Tartarus), and the Erebus.[23] Without male assistance, Gaia gave 
birth to Uranus 
(the Sky) who then fertilized her. From that union were born first the 
Titans-six males: 
Coeus, Crius, Cronus, Hyperion, Iapetus, and Oceanus; and six females: 
Mnemosyne, Phoebe, 
Rhea, Theia, Themis, and Tethys. After Cronus was born, Gaia and Oranos 
decreed no more 
Titans were to be born. They were followed by the one-eyed Cyclopes and the 
Hecatonchires 
or Hundred-Handed Ones. Cronus ("the wily, youngest and most terrible of 
Gaia's children" 
[23]) castrated his father and became the ruler of the gods with his sister-
wife Rhea as his 
consort, and the other Titans became his court.
A motif of father-against-son conflict was repeated when Cronus was 
confronted by his son, 
Zeus. Because Cronus had betrayed his father, he feared that his offspring 
would do the 
same, and so each time Rhea gave birth, he snatched up the child and ate it. 
Rhea hated this 
and tricked him by hiding Zeus and wrapping a stone in a baby's blanket, 
which Cronus ate. 
When Zeus was full grown, he fed Cronus a drugged drink which caused him to 
vomit, 
throwing up Rhea's other children and the stone, which had been sitting in 
Cronus's stomach 
all along. Zeus then challenged Cronus to war for the kingship of the gods. 
At last, with the 
help of the Cyclopes (whom Zeus freed from Tartarus), Zeus and his siblings 
were victorious, 
while Cronus and the Titans were hurled down to imprisonment in Tartarus.[
Zeus was plagued by the same concern and, after a prophecy that the offspring 
of his first 
wife, Metis, would give birth to a god "greater than he"-Zeus swallowed her. 
She was 
already pregnant with Athena, however, and they made him miserable until 
Athena burst forth 
from his head-fully-grown and dressed for war. This "rebirth" from Zeus was 
used as an 
excuse for why he was not "superseded" by a child of the next generation of 
gods, but 
accounted for the presence of Athena. It is likely that cultural changes 
already in progress 
absorbed the long-standing local cult of Athena at Athens into the changing 
Olympic 
pantheon without conflict because it could not be overcome.[citation needed]
The earliest Greek thought about poetry considered the theogonies to be the 
prototypical 
poetic genre-the prototypical mythos-and imputed almost magical powers to it. 
Orpheus, 
the archetypal poet, also was the archetypal singer of theogonies, which he 
uses to calm seas 
and storms in Apollonius' Argonautica, and to move the stony hearts of the 
underworld gods 
in his descent to Hades. When Hermes invents the lyre in the Homeric Hymn to 
Hermes, the 
first thing he does is sing about the birth of the gods.[25] Hesiod's 
Theogony is not only the 
fullest surviving account of the gods, but also the fullest surviving account 
of the archaic 
poet's function, with its long preliminary invocation to the Muses. Theogony 
also was the 
subject of many lost poems, including those attributed to Orpheus, Musaeus, 
Epimenides, 
Abaris, and other legendary seers, which were used in private ritual 
purifications and mystery-
rites. There are indications that Plato was familiar with some version of the 
Orphic 
theogony.[26] A silence would have been expected about religious rites and 
beliefs, however, 
and that nature of the culture would not have been reported by members of the 
society while 
the beliefs were held. After they ceased to become religious beliefs, few 
would have known 
the rites and rituals. Allusions often existed, however, to aspects that were 
quite public.
Images existed on pottery and religious artwork that were interpreted and 
more likely, 
misinterpreted in many diverse myths and tales. A few fragments of these 
works survive in 
quotations by Neoplatonist philosophers and recently unearthed papyrus 
scraps. One of these 
scraps, the Derveni Papyrus now proves that at least in the fifth century BC 
a theogonic-
cosmogonic poem of Orpheus was in existence. This poem attempted to outdo 
Hesiod's 
Theogony and the genealogy of the gods was extended back to Nyx (Night) as an 
ultimate 
female beginning before Eurynome,[citation needed] Uranus, Cronus, and 
Zeus.[27] Night and 
Darkness could equate with Chaos.
The first philosophical cosmologists reacted against, or sometimes built 
upon, popular mythical 
conceptions that had existed in the Greek world for some time. Some of these 
popular conceptions 
can be gleaned from the poetry of Homer and Hesiod. In Homer, the Earth was 
viewed as a flat disk 
afloat on the river of Oceanus and overlooked by a hemispherical sky with 
sun, moon, and stars. 
The Sun (Helios) traversed the heavens as a charioteer and sailed around the 
Earth in a golden bowl 
at night. Sun, earth, heaven, rivers, and winds could be addressed in prayers 
and called to witness 
oaths. Natural fissures were popularly regarded as entrances to the 
subterranean house of Hades 
and his predecessors, home of the dead.[28] Influences from other cultures 
always afforded new 
themes.
Greek pantheon
According to Classical-era mythology, after the overthrow of the Titans, the 
new pantheon of 
gods and goddesses was confirmed. Among the principal Greek gods were the 
Olympians, 
residing atop Mount Olympus under the eye of Zeus. (The limitation of their 
number to twelve 
seems to have been a comparatively modern idea.)[29] Besides the Olympians, 
the Greeks 
worshipped various gods of the countryside, the satyr-god Pan, Nymphs 
(spirits of rivers), 
Naiads (who dwelled in springs), Dryads (who were spirits of the trees), 
Nereids (who 
inhabited the sea), river gods, Satyrs, and others. In addition, there were 
the dark powers of 
the underworld, such as the Erinyes (or Furies), said to pursue those guilty 
of crimes against 
blood-relatives.[30] In order to honor the Ancient Greek pantheon, poets 
composed the 
Homeric Hymns (a group of thirty-three songs).[31] Gregory Nagy regards "the 
larger Homeric 
Hymns as simple preludes (compared with Theogony), each of which invokes one 
god".[32]
In the wide variety of myths and legends that Greek mythology consists of, 
the gods that 
were native to the Greek peoples are described as having essentially 
corporeal but ideal 
bodies. According to Walter Burkert, the defining characteristic of Greek 
anthropomorphism 
is that "the Greek gods are persons, not abstractions, ideas or 
concepts".[33] Regardless of their 
underlying forms, the Ancient Greek gods have many fantastic abilities; most 
significantly, 
the gods are not affected by disease, and can be wounded only under highly 
unusual 
circumstances. The Greeks considered immortality as the distinctive 
characteristic of their 
gods; this immortality, as well as unfading youth, was insured by the 
constant use of nectar 
and ambrosia, by which the divine blood was renewed in their veins.[34]
Each god descends from his or her own genealogy, pursues differing interests, 
has a certain 
area of expertise, and is governed by a unique personality; however, these 
descriptions arise 
from a multiplicity of archaic local variants, which do not always agree with 
one another. 
When these gods are called upon in poetry, prayer or cult, they are referred 
to by a 
combination of their name and epithets, that identify them by these 
distinctions from other 
manifestations of themselves (e.g. Apollo Musagetes is "Apollo, [as] leader 
of the Muses"). 
Alternatively the epithet may identify a particular and localized aspect of 
the god, sometimes 
thought to be already ancient during the classical epoch of Greece.
Most gods were associated with specific aspects of life. For example, 
Aphrodite was the 
goddess of love and beauty, Ares was the god of war, Hades the god of the 
dead, and 
Athena the goddess of wisdom and courage.[35] Some gods, such as Apollo and 
Dionysus, 
revealed complex personalities and mixtures of functions, while others, such 
as Hestia 
(literally "hearth") and Helios (literally "sun"), were little more than 
personifications. The most 
impressive temples tended to be dedicated to a limited number of gods, who 
were the focus 
of large pan-Hellenic cults. It was, however, common for individual regions 
and villages to 
devote their own cults to minor gods. Many cities also honored the more well-
known gods 
with unusual local rites and associated strange myths with them that were 
unknown 
elsewhere. During the heroic age, the cult of heroes (or demi-gods) 
supplemented that of the 
gods.
Age of gods and mortals
Bridging the age when gods lived alone and the age when divine interference 
in human affairs was 
limited was a transitional age in which gods and mortals moved together. 
These were the early days 
of the world when the groups mingled more freely than they did later. Most of 
these tales were 
later told by Ovid's Metamorphoses and they are often divided into two 
thematic groups: tales of 
love, and tales of punishment.[36]
Tales of love often involve incest, or the seduction or rape of a mortal 
woman by a male god, 
resulting in heroic offspring. The stories generally suggest that 
relationships between gods and 
mortals are something to avoid; even consenting relationships rarely have 
happy endings.[37] In 
a few cases, a female divinity mates with a mortal man, as in the Homeric 
Hymn to Aphrodite, 
where the goddess lies with Anchises to produce Aeneas.[38]
The second type (tales of punishment) involves the appropriation or invention 
of some 
important cultural artifact, as when Prometheus steals fire from the gods, 
when Tantalus steals 
nectar and ambrosia from Zeus' table and gives it to his own subjects-
revealing to them the 
secrets of the gods, when Prometheus or Lycaon invents sacrifice, when 
Demeter teaches 
agriculture and the Mysteries to Triptolemus, or when Marsyas invents the 
aulos and enters 
into a musical contest with Apollo. Ian Morris considers Prometheus' 
adventures as "a place 
between the history of the gods and that of man".[39] An anonymous papyrus 
fragment, dated 
to the third century, vividly portrays Dionysus' punishment of the king of 
Thrace, Lycurgus, 
whose recognition of the new god came too late, resulting in horrific 
penalties that extended 
into the afterlife.[40] The story of the arrival of Dionysus to establish his 
cult in Thrace was also 
the subject of an Aeschylean trilogy.[41] In another tragedy, Euripides' The 
Bacchae, the king 
of Thebes, Pentheus, is punished by Dionysus, because he disrespected the god 
and spied on 
his Maenads, the female worshippers of the god.
In another story, based on an old folktale-motif,[43] and echoing a similar 
theme, Demeter was 
searching for her daughter, Persephone, having taken the form of an old woman 
called Doso, and 
received a hospitable welcome from Celeus, the King of Eleusis in Attica. As 
a gift to Celeus, 
because of his hospitality, Demeter planned to make his son Demophon a god, 
but she was unable 
to complete the ritual because his mother Metanira walked in and saw her son 
in the fire and 
screamed in fright, which angered Demeter, who lamented that foolish mortals 
do not understand 
the concept and ritual
Heroic age
The age in which the heroes lived is known as the heroic age.[45] The epic 
and genealogical 
poetry created cycles of stories clustered around particular heroes or events 
and established 
the family relationships between the heroes of different stories; they thus 
arranged the stories 
in sequence. According to Ken Dowden, "there is even a saga effect: we can 
follow the fates 
of some families in successive generations".[17]
After the rise of the hero cult, gods and heroes constitute the sacral sphere 
and are invoked 
together in oaths and prayers which are addressed to them.[19] In contrast to 
the age of gods, 
during the heroic age the roster of heroes is never given fixed and final 
form; great gods are 
no longer born, but new heroes can always be raised up from the army of the 
dead. Another 
important difference between the hero cult and the cult of gods is that the 
hero becomes the 
centre of local group identity.[19]
The monumental events of Heracles are regarded as the dawn of the age of 
heroes. To the 
Heroic Age are also ascribed three great events: the Argonautic expedition, 
the Theban Cycle 
and the Trojan War
Heracles and the Heracleidae
Some scholars believe[47] that behind Heracles' complicated mythology there 
was probably a 
real man, perhaps a chieftain-vassal of the kingdom of Argos. Some scholars 
suggest the story 
of Heracles is an allegory for the sun's yearly passage through the twelve 
constellations of the 
zodiac.[48] Others point to earlier myths from other cultures, showing the 
story of Heracles as a 
local adaptation of hero myths already well established. Traditionally, 
Heracles was the son of 
Zeus and Alcmene, granddaughter of Perseus.[49] His fantastic solitary 
exploits, with their 
many folk-tale themes, provided much material for popular legend. He is 
portrayed as a 
sacrificier, mentioned as a founder of altars, and imagined as a voracious 
eater himself; it is in 
this role that he appears in comedy, while his tragic end provided much 
material for tragedy 
- Heracles is regarded by Thalia Papadopoulou as "a play of great 
significance in 
examination of other Euripidean dramas".[50] In art and literature Heracles 
was represented as 
an enormously strong man of moderate height; his characteristic weapon was 
the bow but 
frequently also the club. Vase paintings demonstrate the unparalleled 
popularity of Heracles, 
his fight with the lion being depicted many hundreds of times.[51]
Heracles also entered Etruscan and Roman mythology and cult, and the 
exclamation 
"mehercule" became as familiar to the Romans as "Herakleis" was to the 
Greeks.[51] In Italy he 
was worshipped as a god of merchants and traders, although others also prayed 
to him for his 
characteristic gifts of good luck or rescue from danger.[49]
Heracles attained the highest social prestige through his appointment as 
official ancestor of the 
Dorian kings. This probably served as a legitimation for the Dorian 
migrations into the 
Peloponnese. Hyllus, the eponymous hero of one Dorian phyle, became the son 
of Heracles 
and one of the Heracleidae or Heraclids (the numerous descendants of 
Heracles, especially 
the descendants of Hyllus - other Heracleidae included Macaria, Lamos, Manto, 
Bianor, 
Tlepolemus, and Telephus). These Heraclids conquered the Peloponnesian 
kingdoms of 
Mycenae, Sparta and Argos, claiming, according to legend, a right to rule 
them through their 
ancestor. Their rise to dominance is frequently called the "Dorian invasion". 
The Lydian and 
later the Macedonian kings, as rulers of the same rank, also became 
Heracleidae.[52]
Other members of this earliest generation of heroes, such as Perseus, 
Deucalion, Theseus and 
Bellerophon, have many traits in common with Heracles. Like him, their 
exploits are solitary, 
fantastic and border on fairy tale, as they slay monsters such as the Chimera 
and Medusa. 
Bellerophon's adventures are commonplace types, similar to the adventures of 
Heracles and 
Theseus. Sending a hero to his presumed death is also a recurrent theme of 
this early heroic 
tradition, used in the cases of Perseus and Bellerophon

Argonauts
The only surviving Hellenistic epic, the Argonautica of Apollonius of Rhodes 
(epic poet, scholar, and director of the Library of Alexandria) tells the 
myth of the voyage of Jason and the Argonauts to retrieve the Golden Fleece 
from the mythical land of Colchis. In the Argonautica, Jason is impelled on 
his quest by king Pelias, who receives a prophecy that a man with one sandal 
would be his nemesis. Jason loses a sandal in a river, arrives at the court 
of Pelias, and the epic is set in motion. Nearly every member of the next 
generation of heroes, as well as Heracles, went with Jason in the ship Argo 
to fetch the Golden Fleece. This generation also included Theseus, who went 
to Crete to slay the Minotaur; Atalanta, the female heroine; and Meleager, 
who once had an epic cycle of his own to rival the Iliad and Odyssey. Pindar, 
Apollonius and Apollodorus endeavor to give full lists of the Argonauts.[54]
Although Apollonius wrote his poem in the 3rd century BC, the composition of 
the story of the Argonauts is earlier than Odyssey, which shows familiarity 
with the exploits of Jason (the wandering of Odysseus may have been partly 
founded on it).[55] In ancient times the expedition was regarded as a 
historical fact, an incident in the opening up of the Black Sea to Greek 
commerce and colonization.[56] It was also extremely popular, forming a cycle 
to which a number of local legends became attached. The story of Medea, in 
particular, caught the imagination of the tragic poets.
House of Atreus and Theban Cycle
In between the Argo and the Trojan War, there was a generation known chiefly 
for its horrific crimes. This includes the doings of Atreus and Thyestes at 
Argos. Behind the myth of the house of Atreus (one of the two principal 
heroic dynasties with the house of Labdacus) lies the problem of the 
devolution of power and of the mode of accession to sovereignty. The twins 
Atreus and Thyestes with their descendants played the leading role in the 
tragedy of the devolution of power in Mycenae.[58]
The Theban Cycle deals with events associated especially with Cadmus, the 
city's founder, and later with the doings of Laius and Oedipus at Thebes; a 
series of stories that lead to the eventual pillage of that city at the hands 
of the Seven Against Thebes and Epigoni.[59] (It is not known whether the 
Seven Against Thebes figured in early epic.) As far as Oedipus is concerned, 
early epic accounts seem to have him continuing to rule at Thebes after the 
revelation that Iokaste was his mother, and subsequently marrying a second 
wife who becomes the mother of his children   markedly different from the 
tale known to us through tragedy (e.g. Sophocles' Oedipus the King) and later 
mythological accounts
Trojan War and aftermath
Greek mythology culminates in the Trojan War, fought between the Greeks and 
Troy, and its aftermath. In Homer's works, such as the Iliad, the chief 
stories have already taken shape and substance, and individual themes were 
elaborated later, especially in Greek drama. The Trojan War also elicited 
great interest in the Roman culture because of the story of Aeneas, a Trojan 
hero whose journey from Troy led to the founding of the city that would one 
day become Rome, as recounted in Virgil's Aeneid (Book II of Virgil's Aeneid 
contains the best-known account of the sack of Troy).[61] Finally there are 
two pseudo-chronicles written in Latin that passed under the names of Dictys 
Cretensis and Dares Phrygius.[62]
The Trojan War cycle, a collection of epic poems, starts with the events 
leading up to the war: Eris and the golden apple of Kallisti, the Judgement 
of Paris, the abduction of Helen, the sacrifice of Iphigenia at Aulis. To 
recover Helen, the Greeks launched a great expedition under the overall 
command of Menelaus' brother, Agamemnon, king of Argos or Mycenae, but the 
Trojans refused to return Helen. The Iliad, which is set in the tenth year of 
the war, tells of the quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles, who was the 
finest Greek warrior, and the consequent deaths in battle of Achilles' 
beloved comrade Patroclus and Priam's eldest son, Hector. After Hector's 
death the Trojans were joined by two exotic allies, Penthesilea, queen of the 
Amazons, and Memnon, king of the Ethiopians and son of the dawn-goddess 
Eos.[63] Achilles killed both of these, but Paris then managed to kill 
Achilles with an arrow in the heel. Achilles' heel was the only part of his 
body which was not invulnerable to damage by human weaponry. Before they 
could take Troy, the Greeks had to steal from the citadel the wooden image of 
Pallas Athena (the Palladium). Finally, with Athena's help, they built the 
Trojan Horse. Despite the warnings of Priam's daughter Cassandra, the Trojans 
were persuaded by Sinon, a Greek who feigned desertion, to take the horse 
inside the walls of Troy as an offering to Athena; the priest Laocoon, who 
tried to have the horse destroyed, was killed by sea-serpents. At night the 
Greek fleet returned, and the Greeks from the horse opened the gates of Troy. 
In the total sack that followed, Priam and his remaining sons were 
slaughtered; the Trojan women passed into slavery in various cities of 
Greece. The adventurous homeward voyages of the Greek leaders (including the 
wanderings of Odysseus and Aeneas (the Aeneid), and the murder of Agamemnon) 
were told in two epics, the Returns (the lost Nostoi) and Homer's 
Odyssey.[64] The Trojan cycle also includes the adventures of the children of 
the Trojan generation (e.g. Orestes and Telemachus).[63]
The Trojan War provided a variety of themes and became a main source of 
inspiration for Ancient Greek artists (e.g. metopes on the Parthenon 
depicting the sack of Troy); this artistic preference for themes deriving 
from the Trojan Cycle indicates its importance to the Ancient Greek 
civilization.[64] The same mythological cycle also inspired a series of 
posterior European literary writings. For instance, Trojan Medieval European 
writers, unacquainted with Homer at first hand, found in the Troy legend a 
rich source of heroic and romantic storytelling and a convenient framework 
into which to fit their own courtly and chivalric ideals. 12th century 
authors, such as Benont de Sainte-Maure (Roman de Troie [Romance of Troy, 
1154 60]) and Joseph of Exeter (De Bello Troiano [On the Trojan War, 1183]) 
describe the war while rewriting the standard version they found in Dictys 
and Dares. They thus follow Horace's advice and Virgil's example: they 
rewrite a poem of Troy instead of telling something completely new.
Greek and Roman conceptions of myth
Mythology was at the heart of everyday life in Ancient Greece.[66] Greeks 
regarded mythology as a part of their history. They used myth to explain 
natural phenomena, cultural variations, traditional enmities and friendships. 
It was a source of pride to be able to trace one's leaders' descent from a 
mythological hero or a god. Few ever doubted that there was truth behind the 
account of the Trojan War in the Iliad and Odyssey. According to Victor Davis 
Hanson, a military historian, columnist, political essayist and former 
Classics professor, and John Heath, associate professor of Classics at Santa 
Clara University, the profound knowledge of the Homeric epos was deemed by 
the Greeks the basis of their acculturation. Homer was the "education of 
Greece" (??????? ?????????), and his poetry "the Book"
Hanson and Heath estimate that Plato's rejection of the Homeric tradition was 
not favorably received by the grassroots Greek civilization.[67] The old 
myths were kept alive in local cults; they continued to influence poetry and 
to form the main subject of painting and sculpture.[68]
More sportingly, the 5th century BC tragedian Euripides often played with the 
old traditions, mocking them, and through the voice of his characters 
injecting notes of doubt. Yet the subjects of his plays were taken, without 
exception, from myth. Many of these plays were written in answer to a 
predecessor's version of the same or similar myth. Euripides mainly impugns 
the myths about the gods and begins his critique with an objection similar to 
the one previously expressed by Xenocrates: the gods, as traditionally 
represented, are far too crassly anthropomorphic.

Philosophy and myth
After the rise of philosophy, history, prose and rationalism in the late 5th 
century BC, the fate of myth became uncertain, and mythological genealogies 
gave place to a conception of history which tried to exclude the supernatural 
(such as the Thucydidean history).[68] While poets and dramatists were 
reworking the myths, Greek historians and philosophers were beginning to 
criticize them.[6]
A few radical philosophers like Xenophanes of Colophon were already beginning 
to label the poets' tales as blasphemous lies in the 6th century BC; 
Xenophanes had complained that Homer and Hesiod attributed to the gods "all 
that is shameful and disgraceful among men; they steal, commit adultery, and 
deceive one another".[69] This line of thought found its most sweeping 
expression in Plato's Republic and Laws. Plato created his own allegorical 
myths (such as the vision of Er in the Republic), attacked the traditional 
tales of the gods' tricks, thefts and adulteries as immoral, and objected to 
their central role in literature.[6] Plato's criticism was the first serious 
challenge to the Homeric mythological tradition,[67] referring to the myths 
as "old wives' chatter".[70] For his part Aristotle criticized the Pre-
socratic quasi-mythical philosophical approach and underscored that "Hesiod 
and the theological writers were concerned only with what seemed plausible to 
themselves, and had no respect for us ... But it is not worth taking 
seriously writers who show off in the mythical style; as for those who do 
proceed by proving their assertions, we must cross-examine them".[68]
Nevertheless, even Plato did not manage to wean himself and his society from 
the influence of myth; his own characterization for Socrates is based on the 
traditional Homeric and tragic patterns, used by the philosopher to praise 
the righteous life of his teacher:
But perhaps someone might say: "Are you then not ashamed, Socrates, of having 
followed such a pursuit, that you are now in danger of being put to death as 
a result?" But I should make to him a just reply: "You do not speak well, 
Sir, if you think a man in whom there is even a little merit ought to 
consider danger of life or death, and not rather regard this only, when he 
does things, whether the things he does are right or wrong and the acts of a 
good or a bad man. For according to your argument all the demigods would be 
bad who died at Troy, including the son of Thetis, who so despised danger, in 
comparison with enduring any disgrace, that when his mother (and she was a 
goddess) said to him, as he was eager to slay Hector, something like this, I 
believe, 
My son, if you avenge the death of your friend Patroclus and kill Hector, you 
yourself shall die; for straightway, after Hector, is death appointed unto 
you. (Hom. Il. 18.96)
he, when he heard this, made light of death and danger, and feared much more 
to live as a coward and not to avenge his friends, and said,
Straightway may I die, after doing vengeance upon the wrongdoer, that I may 
not stay here, jeered at beside the curved ships, a burden of the earth.

