PIRATES
Introduction to Piracy
The history of piracy dates back more than 3000 years, but its accurate account depends on 
the actual meaning of the word ‘pirate’. In English, the word piracy has many different 
meanings and its usage is still relatively new. Today, some uses of the word have no particular 
meaning at all. A meaning was first ascribed to the word piracy sometime before the XVII 
century. It appears that the word pirate (peirato) was first used in about 140 BC by the Roman 
historian Polybius. The Greek historian Plutarch, writing in about 100 A.D., gave the oldest 
clear definition of piracy. He described pirates as those who attack without legal authority not 
only ships, but also maritime cities. Piracy was described for the first time, among others, in 
Homer's The Iliad and The Odyssey. For a great many years there remained no unambiguous 
definition of piracy. Norse riders of the 9th and 11th century AD were not considered pirates 
but rather, were called "Danes" or "Vikings". Another popular meaning of the word in 
medieval England was "sea thieves". The meaning of the word pirate most closely tied to the 
contemporary was established in the XVIII century AD. This definition dubbed pirates 
"outlaws" whom even persons who were not soldiers could kill. The first application of 
international law actually involved anti-pirate legislation. This is due to the fact that most 
pirate acts were committed outside the borders of any country. 
Sometimes governments gave rights to the pirates to represent them in their wars. The most 
popular form was to give a license to a private sailor to attack enemy shipping on behalf of a 
specific king – Privateer. Very often a privateer when caught by the enemy was tried as an 
outlaw notwithstanding the license. Below we tried to outline a selective history of piracy, 
selective and arbitrary because there is so much that can be said about piracy and it is 
impossible to tell all. We hope that even this brief introduction will show the spirit and truth 
about the piracy the way we see it.
Middle Age Piracy
The most notorious of the Medieval prates were Vikings . Vikings was the name of the Nordic 
people—Danes, Swedes, Norwegians—who explored abroad during a period of dynamic 
Scandinavian expansion from about AD 800 to 1100. 
The first recorded Viking raid was a seaborne assault in 793 by Vikings on the Holy Island of 
Lindisfarne, off the northeast coast of England. Growing evidence indicates that considerable 
overseas Viking migration occurred long before then. Vikings went deep into the Russian 
hinterland, founding city-states and opening the way to Constantinople (Istanbul). Vikings 
also fought the Carolingian Empire until in 911 they accepted by treaty the area of Normandy 
in northern France and settled there. 
In the 11th century Vikings briefly established a Scandinavian empire of the North Sea, 
composed of England, Denmark, and Norway. On the other hand piracy was also the problem 
in the Far East. 
With the decline of central authority in China toward the end of the 13th century, piracy 
began to increase along the China coast. Using ships large enough to carry 300 men, the 
pirates would land and sometimes plunder whole villages. For instance during the 1550s 
corsair fleets looted the Shanghai-Ning-po region almost annually, sometimes sending raiding 
parties far inland to terrorize cities and villages throughout the whole Yangtze Delta. 
Although coastal raiding was not totally suppressed, it was brought under control in the 1560s 
As we already said in the Far East operated wako pirates, in Japan's civil wars during the early 
part of this period. any of the groups of marauders who raided the Korean and Chinese coasts 
between the 13th and 16th centuries. When denied trading privileges, the Japanese were quick 
to resort to violence to ensure their profits. By the 14th century, piracy had reached serious 
proportions in Korean waters. It gradually declined after 1443, when the Koreans made a 
treaty with various Japanese feudal leaders, permitting the entry of 50 Japanese trade ships a 
year, a number that was gradually increased. 
Originally mainly Japanese, in later times the pirates were of mixed origin; by the early 16th 
century, the majority of them were probably Chinese. Basing themselves on islands off the 
Chinese coast, the pirates eventually made their main headquarters on the island of Taiwan, 
where they remained for over a century. 
Contemporary Piracy
British couple was attacked, in Summer 1996, while sailing around Corfu Island (Greece) with 
assault rifles and grenades, months earlier armed men attacked tanker Succi when she was 
only few hours from Singapore. The pirates tied up the crew and put it in a life boat and sailed 
off. The crew was rescued but the tanker disappeared. 
According to London based International Maritime Bureau, there were 224 incidents of piracy 
and armed robbery of ships. 
According to Time Magazine article: A Plague of Pirates (Time Magazine, August 18, 1997) 
modern pirates operate differently depending on geographic location. Arabian Sea pirates use 
the most modern weapons while West Africans use knives and dugout canoes. 
Brazilian pirates take advantage of the fact that Brazil does not have the Coast Guard. In the 
Far East piracy is controlled by organized crime and pirates kidnap the whole ships and cargo. 
South China Sea is almost as dangerous place, as it was in the ancient times. Chinese pirates 
are perhaps the most blatant often operating under the protection of the Chinese government. 
Ancient Piracy
One of the oldest documents (inscription on a clay tablet) describing pirates dates back to 
Pharo Echnaton (1350 BC). The report mentions notorious free lance Mediterranean shipping 
attacks in North Africa.
 
Greek merchants who were trading with ports in Phoenicia and Anatolia occasionally allude 
casually to piracy, a classic by-product of such trading activity. There is epigraphic evidence 
for piracy as well: in the 340s Athens honored Cleomis, tyrant of Methymna on Lesbos, for 
ransoming a number of Athenians captured by pirates.
 
The Aethiopica one of the ancient Greek novels by Heliodorus of Emesa (3rd century AD) 
tells the story of an Ethiopian princess and a Thessalian prince who undergo a series of perils 
(battles, voyages, piracy, abductions, robbery, and torture) before their eventual happy 
marriage in the heroine's homeland.
 
Polycrates (Greek tyrant) seized control of the city of Samos during a celebration of a festival 
of Hera outside the city walls. After eliminating his two brothers, who had at first shared his 
power, he established despotism, and ships from his 100-vessel fleet committed acts of piracy 
that made him notorious throughout Greece.
Piracy and America
The mere mention of the words “pirate” or “privateer” conjures up images of daring 
swashbucklers, bloodthirsty scoundrels and wicked rogues of the sea. As a nation, we have 
been reared on the media’s portrayal of pirates as either improbably romantic and dashing 
heroes or incorrigible villains. There has been no in-between. Those that explore the history of 
piracy in deeper detail find themselves exposed to a much more complex world than had 
previously been suspected. Often, many of these would-be scholars stop when they learn the 
truth of the gruesome and horrible deeds of some pirates. Unfortunately, they stop too soon. 
While it is true that there were several pirates and privateers that more than lived up to this 
reputation for evil, it is also true that as a nation we owe a great deal of our history to those 
very same pirates. In fact, the vast majority of historical pirates were nowhere close to the 
levels of villainy that have been attributed to them. During the so-called “Golden Age” of 
piracy, in the mid to late 18th century and early 19th century, the deeds of many pirates and 
privateers would prove to be invaluable to the development of the United States as an 
emerging world power. To understand the ramifications of this statement, one must first 
understand exactly what it is to be a pirate. Webster’s dictionary defines piracy simply as “an 
act of robbery on the high seas; also: an act resembling such robbery.” A pirate is someone 
who conducts such acts. There is another term that is often confused in its relation to that 
definition. Whereas a pirate commits such acts for personal gain, a privateer commits them 
ostensibly for the good of a patron nation. As Admiral Ernest Eller points out, “Privateering, 
on the other hand, was a distinguished practice whereby a sovereign power granted its 
commission and recognition to private armed vessels to prey on enemy shipping, i.e., ‘to grieve 
the enemy by sea’” (262).
Other terms that are often confused and misused as they regard to piracy are common in the 
English language. Pirates, corsairs and buccaneers are commonly lumped together as one and 
the same, although they mean different things. Corsairs were pirates who operated exclusively 
in the waters of the eastern Mediterranean Sea, while buccaneers, or “boucaniers” were 
actually runaway sailors and deserters who made their way to the waters of the Caribbean 
Sea, where they kept themselves alive by roasting stolen cattle on makeshift grills called 
“boucans” by the French (Rankin 151). Considering how much confusion we experience 
merely in using the proper names for pirates, it is easy to see that most people actually know 
very little about the truth of pirates and privateers.
Lest anyone think that all our conceptions are wrong, it must be pointed out that many pirates 
were indeed very wicked men. In fact, the city of Port Royal, Jamaica was pronounced to be 
“the wickedest city on Earth” (Rankin 118). It had become known across the world as a den 
and haven for pirates. They off-loaded their ill-gotten gains there, and spent many nights in a 
state of drunken debauchery over the years, until the sea swallowed the entire city in the 
aftermath of an underwater earthquake. The modern United States Marines were given a 
ceremonial sword to thank them for their defeat of the Barbary pirates. It is a symbol they still 
wear today, representing their triumph over those particularly evil men. The reputation of 
piracy is not undeserved. But it must be tempered with the knowledge that, as is so in many 
other cases, the reputation of some does not represent the facts of all.
The vast majority of pirates, although they could not be described as kind, were more than fair 
in their treatment of their crew and their captives. In fact, most pirate crews operated under a 
code of rules and laws referred to as “articles” that were remarkably democratic. Since most 
pirates came from mutinous crews of naval warships and merchant vessels, they had no desire 
to return to the often-tyrannical rule of a ship’s captain. Instead, most pirate captains achieved 
their command by vote. Even though punishments were gruesome and nearly always fatal, 
they were meted out with a very strict eye for fairness and discipline. Torture was rarely used 
by any but the most vicious of pirates, because it was simply pointless. Nobody ever really 
walked the plank.
The economic benefit of pirates to the colonial outposts of the European world was substantial 
as well. In fact, the colonial government of North Carolina enjoyed a string of beneficial 
arrangements with pirates. “It is true that as long as the pirates preyed on Spanish ships, and 
were free in spending Spanish gold and silver in Charleston, they were welcomed here, at least 
by those who were beneficiaries"”(anon. qtd. in Maclay 30). One of the earliest pirates to 
enjoy such an arrangement was perhaps the most famous of them all. Edward Teach, known 
as Blackbeard, was known to have special considerations with the governor of North Carolina 
allowing him safe passage into Carolinian harbors provided he left English shipping alone. 
Despite this, he was eventually hunted down and killed by a British Navy lieutenant named 
Robert Maynard (Lane 207).
As the American Revolutionary War raged, the role of privateers could not be underestimated. 
In fact, strictly speaking, one of the first acts of American defiance was an act of piracy. The 
Boston Tea Party could technically be defined as piracy. During the whole of the 
Revolutionary War from the years 1776 to 1782, the total number of privateering ships 
outnumbered the ships of the Continental Navy by a factor of eleven to one (Maclay VIII). 
The Continental Congress even issued a proclamation authorizing large-scale privateering 
against English ships.
You may, by Force of arms, attack, subdue, and take all Ships and other Vessels belonging to 
Subjects of the King of Great-Britain, on the High Seas, or between High-water and Low-
water Marks, except… Friends to the American Cause, which you shall suffer to pass 
unmolested, the Commanders thereof permitting a peaceable Search, and giving satisfactory 
information of the Contents of Ladings, and Definitions of the Voyages.
One of the most famous privateers of the Revolutionary War was a former sailor in the 
Continental Navy named Joshua Barney. While in command of his slooop Pomona, he sunk or 
captured many English raiders and ships of war, attaining a fair amount of personal wealth 
while doing so (Maclay 117). It is this personal wealth that often made the deciding factor 
between joining the Navy and becoming a privateer. Privateers “combined patriotism with the 
hope of profit” (Eller 262).
The influence of privateers and pirates on the developing United States did not stop at the 
War of Independence. Twenty-eight years later, during the War of 1812, one of the most 
significant battles of that conflict was decided by the deeds of well-known pirate and his 
band. Jean Lafitte had been extremely active and successful in the waters of the Gulf of 
Mexico, near New Orleans. He had been conducting raids against Spanish and French 
shipping in the Caribbean for years, and had become quite wealthy doing it. He had over 100 
pirates under his command, headquartered in the self-styled Kingdom of Barataria, hidden 
away on some forgotten islands off the coast of Louisiana. After he had stolen goods from 
the Spanish and French, he sold them to the Americans in makeshift black markets. He was 
actually considered a local hero by the populace, as Remini points out. “Through this efficient 
operation the people of the city had a steady and relatively inexpensive supply of dry goods, 
wine, all sorts of manufactured items, and iron” (29). He was also a fervent patriot.
When the British became intent on capturing the city of New Orleans in 1812, they first 
approached Lafitte and tried to bribe him to aid their cause. Instead, Lafitte went straight to 
the governor of Louisiana to inform him of the British plan. Indeed, he offered his assistance 
to the American cause by saying “…I am the stray sheep, wishing to return to the sheepfold” 
(qtd. in Remini 34). Governor Claiborne did not believe him and had him jailed, along with 
over eighty of his Baratarian pirates. When Andrew Jackson came to lead the defense of the 
city, he released Lafitte and accepted his offer of assistance.
Lafitte delivered, providing enough ammunition and supplies that the American artillery was 
able to maintain a constant bombardment of English forces and prevent them from building 
any type of fortification or barricade. Lafitte even fought personally, leading groups of scouts 
and raiding parties through the swamps and bayous against the British. Without Lafitte’s aid, 
it is plain that the United States would have lost control of the city of New Orleans (Ward 
250).
In light of all the influence and benefit provided to the fledgling United States during the 
18th and 19th centuries on the part of pirates and privateers, it is hard to understand why we 
condemn them so thoroughly. Again, it should not be overlooked that many pirates were 
vicious killers and torturers, like the infamous Francois L’Ollonais who forced one of his 
prisoners to eat the heart he had just cut out of another prisoner. Men like that should be 
heroes to no one. Men like Jean Lafitte, Joshua Barney and even to an extent the notorious 
Blackbeard deserve little of history’s condemnation. They were not saints. They were not 
necessarily role models in their choice of life, either. But they were invaluable to our country, 
and should be remembered fairly for the roles they played. Without men such as these, our 
nation might very well not exist.
Was Robinson Crusoe a Pirate
An article published recently ( December 2008) in the Journal of Post-Medieval Archaeology   
renewed an interest in the famous character from the 18th century  novel:  Robinson Crusoe 
by Daniel Defoe.
The authors of the article undertook an archeological expedition to research theory that 
Alexander Selkirk a privateer, who very likely was a prototype of Robinson Crusoe character, 
actually lived on the Robinson Crusoe Island (formerly Aguas Buenas) off the coast of Chile.  
The authors provide archeological evidence that at the beginning of the 18th century (around 
the time Selkirk was marooned there) a European actually lived there.
Selkirk, was a lowborn son of a shoemaker from Scotland who escaped to sea to become a 
privateer under the patronage of the British Crown. England was at that time engaged in so 
called Queen Anne’s War with the French and all sort of privateers, including infamous 
Edward Teach (Blackbeard) were helping with the war effort as privateers.  Selkirk decided, 
as a result of a quarrel with his captain, during a privateering voyage on the Cinque Ports, to 
leave the ship and stay on an uninhabited tropical island (Aguas Buenas).  Cinque Ports was 
visiting the island for resupply and some maintenance (worm infestation) and Selkirk was 
already a ship’s navigator – a highly skilled and experienced sailor.  From the ship he took all 
he thought would aid him in survival on the island. This included gun and powder as well as  
his navigational instruments. A part of a contemporary to Selkirk navigational instrument 
was unearthed by the latest expedition.  
During his almost five years of solitude on the island Selkirk would kill goats (introduced 
there by the Spaniards) and catch fish and crabs to stay alive. He would also build himself a 
habitation which, as confirmed by the aforementioned dig, was surrounded by a palisade. 
When he was discovered by the British privateer Duke, he was covered in a goat’s  skin and 
mumbling unrecognizable words. The captain of the Duke, Woodes Rogers, gave a detailed 
account of the encounter including description of Selkirk’s possessions.  Selkirk was accepted 
by Rogers as a worthy sailor and served on the Duke’s crew as a privateer navigator before 
returning to England where his story became very popular. It was during his stay in England 
(he later enlisted as a lieutenant in the English navy) when he probably met the author of 
Robinson Crusoe and relayed to him his unusual story. Anyway, Defoe must have heard the 
story which was very popular at the time. Defoe, obviously, left out Selkirk's past as a 
privateer, but apparently used many other details, from his story, to create his immortal 
character.
Selkirk died, aged 45, from a yellow fever which he contracted during his last sea voyage. He 
was buried at sea.
Golden Age Piracy
Starting in XVI century piracy was gaining in popularity. Thanks to the progress of 
technology better, bigger and faster ships were built. Colonial expansion was beginning with 
all the shipping it created carrying gold and other goods. Competing interests and ambitions 
of colonial powers made it easy for ambitious sailors to always find a way to legalize the most 
cruel acts of piracy. English privateers could for instance attack and rob, with impunity, 
Spanish shipping. On the other hand North African pirates had a license to rob English ships 
and Madagascar pirates of the XVIII century represented French king’s interests. The 
continually, since ancient times, notorious was so called Barbary Coast , name formerly 
applied to the coast of North Africa from the western border of Egypt to the Atlantic Ocean. 
From the 1500s to the 1800s the coast was occupied by independent Islamic states under the 
sovereignty of the Ottoman Empire. In the early 1500s, these states became centers for pirates. 
Barbery pirates were any of the Muslim pirates operating from the coast of North Africa. 
Captains, who formed a class in Algiers and Tunis, commanded cruisers outfitted by wealthy 
backers, who then received 10 percent of the value of the prizes. The pirates used galleys until 
the 17th century, when Simon Danser, a Flemish renegade, taught them the advantage of 
using sailing ships. North African piracy had very ancient origins as we described above. It 
gained a political significance during the 16th century, many of the Muslim pirates operating 
from the coast of North Africa, at their most powerful during the 17th century but still active 
until the 19th century. Most notable leader of North Africa was Barbarossa, who united 
Algeria and Tunisia as military states under the Ottoman sultanate and maintained his 
revenues by piracy. With the arrival of powerful Moorish bands in Rabat and Tétouan (1609), 
Morocco became a new center for the pirates and for the 'Alawi sultans, who quickly gained 
control of the two republics and encouraged piracy as a valuable source of revenue. During the 
17th century, the Algerian and Tunisian pirates joined forces, and by 1650 more than 30,000 
of their captives were imprisoned in Algiers alone. Piratical practices were the cause of several 
wars between Tripolitania and the United States in the 19th century. The British made two 
attempts to suppress Algerian piracy after 1815, and the French finally ended it in 1830. 
After the American Revolution (1775-1783), the United States agreed to pay money for 
immunity from attack, but it later attacked several Barbary states and helped end the Piracy. 
During the remainder of the 1800s and in the early 1900s, European nations gained 
sovereignty over the Barbary Coast. 
Another category of pirates (at least by name only) has emerged. They were so called 
Buccaneers hired by their governments to fight in the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-
1714). Buccaneer title was applied to English, Dutch, and French seafaring adventurers of the 
17th century. Buccaneers and they were usually distinguished from privateers, who had 
official government commissions; buccaneers rarely had valid commissions. They are also 
distinguished from pirates, who attacked ships of all nations.
The buccaneers were pirates who, during the 16th and 17th centuries, preyed mainly on 
Spanish commerce with the Spanish American colonies. Piracy decreased with the 
development of the steam engine and the growth of the British and American navies in the 
late 18th century and early 19th. At first the headquarters of the buccaneers was on the island 
of Tortuga, off the northwestern coast of Hispaniola (now Haiti). The buccaneers later used 
Jamaica as a base of operations. They captured Panama in 1671. 
The term buccaneer comes from the French boucan, a grill for the smoking of viande 
boucanée, or dried meat, for use in ships at sea. The early buccaneers were usually escaped 
servants, former soldiers, and wood cutters mainly from Mexico. The historical importance of 
the buccaneers lies chiefly in the influence that they had on the founding of the abortive 
Scottish colony at Darién, on the Isthmus of Panama (1698). Their stories also influenced such 
important authors as Jonathan Swift, Daniel Defoe, and Robert Louis Stevenson. The 
buccaneers were largely inspired by the example of 16th-century seamen, such as Sir Francis 
Drake, but they are to be distinguished from genuine privateers because the commissions that 
they held were seldom valid. They are also to be distinguished from the outlawed pirates of 
the 18th century, although many of the buccaneers' actions can be called piratical. The earliest 
buccaneers went under assumed names, such as L'Olonnais (Jean-David Nau) or Rock 
Brasiliano, a Dutchman who had lived in Brazil. With the appearance of Henry Morgan, an 
outstanding leader, they began to organize themselves into powerful bands that captured 
Portobelo in 1668 and Panama in 1671. As the Treaty of Madrid (1670) had only recently 
been signed to compose Anglo-Spanish differences in those parts, the news of his success at 
Panama was not officially welcome. Morgan was brought back to England under arrest, but, 
on the renewal of trouble with Spain, he was knighted and sent out as deputy governor of 
Jamaica. He and his superiors attempted to suppress buccaneering, a task impossible without 
adequate naval patrols. The last great buccaneering enterprise was the unsuccessful attack on 
Panama in about 1685 by a force of about 3,000 men led by Edward Davis, John Eaton, 
Charles Swan, and others. On the outbreak of the War of the Grand Alliance in 1689, these 
freebooters became legitimate privateers in the service of their respective nations, and 
buccaneering came to an end. 
Quite a few pirates were operating during the Elizabethan years when England and Spain 
fought over world domination. One of the famous pirates was Sir Francis Drake who 
circumnavigated the Earth, during which Spanish shipping was looted, Spanish California 
plundered even though England was not officially at war with Spain. When Drake and 
another pirate John Hawkins were almost captured during the Battle of San Juan de Ulúa in 
September the English cried foul treachery but the Spanish dismissed the action as sensible 
tactics when dealing with pirates. 
During XVII and XVIII centuries piracy has peaked and many infamous pirates were 
operating at that time (Blackbeard, Morgan, Lafitte to mention only few) and this is the era 
we concentrate on in our Web page. 
The less known but also very active were pirates of the Far East. Pinyin Zheng Zhilong (XVII 
century), was a Chinese pirate leader who achieved great power in the transitional period 
between the Ming and Ch'ing dynasties. As a boy, Cheng found employment with the 
Europeans in the Portuguese settlement at Macau, where he was baptized and given the 
Christian name of Nicholas Gaspard. After leaving Macau, he joined a pirate band that preyed 
on Dutch and Chinese trade. In 1628 he was induced by the government to help defend the 
coast against both the Dutch and the pirates . He soon acquired great wealth and power.
Another notorious pirate Cheng Ch'eng-kung (also known as Koxinga), controlled the island 
of Formosa (Taiwan), and refused to surrender to official forces for long period of time. 
By the end of the 17th century, with the growth of a strong central power in Japan under the 
Tokugawa shogunate (1603-1867) and in China under the Ch'ing dynasty, most of the piracy 
was eliminated.
Also, the increased size of merchant vessels, communications technology and naval patrolling 
of most ocean highways, the regular administration of most islands and land areas of the 
world, and the general recognition by governments of piracy as an international offense 
resulted in a great decline in piracy in the 19th and 20th centuries. Piracy has, however, 
occurred in the 20th century in traditional places like the South China Sea, and the practice of 
hijacking ships or airplanes has developed into a new form of piracy. 
Historiography of the Golden Era of Anglo-
American Piracy in the Atlantic 1680-1730
"Yo Ho, Yo Ho, A Pirate's Life For Me"
          There once was a mythical time when brave and dangerous pirates sailed the seas in 
search of both fortune and fame. In this time heroic villains rose to fame, figures like 
Blackbeard, Captain Kidd, Captain Avery, Captain Morgan and others became household 
names. They were the famous anti-heroes of their time, much like rock stars today. There was 
also a historical period from roughly 1680 - 1730 when large numbers of Anglo-American 
mariners were engaged in piracy and privateering, often against Spanish or other targets of 
opportunity in the Atlantic Ocean. A great challenge for modern historians is to separate fact 
from fiction, since the mythical time and the historical time of this Golden Age of Piracy are 
so intertwined in both historical sources and the collective consciousness of our culture.
             In this paper I will trace a number of works of history produced over the last 300 
years to examine how historians approach to this subject has changed over the years. I will 
attempt to answer two questions. Why did the Golden Age of Piracy exist, and how have 
historians studied this period over time? Throughout this paper, I will use the terms piracy and 
privateering. Piracy was the outlaw practice of preying on merchant ships and raiding coastal 
towns for profit. Privateering consisted of the same actions, but they were sanctioned by a 
government to be conducted against an enemy during war.  Many mariners engaged in both 
activities, during times of war, they were legitimate naval axillaries and if captures were 
treated as prisoners of war. In times of peace, they were outlaws and if captured were treated 
as criminals. There is another distinction that sometimes existed between the two. Privateers 
were often, but not always, commercial ventures, financed by merchants and investors, with 
captains that worked for the ship owner. Pirates were often, but not always, mariner subalterns 
who had illegally obtained their ship and the captains were selected by the crew, and could be 
replaced at any time with a majority vote. 
             As historian Michel-Rolph Trouillot noted, it is not just historians who write history, 
movies, novels, television and the popular press all greatly influence what the public knows 
about history.[i] The historiography of this period is the story of a struggle between pop 
culture and scholars to understand this era. It is very telling to note that the Walt Disney 
exhibit Pirates of the Caribbean has been one of the most popular attractions at Disney Land 
since its opening in 1967, and that fictional works like Treasure Island and Peter Pan that are 
based on early 18th Century pirates have become an important part of our culture. The 
mythical pirates from this period are deeply engrained in popular cultural in England and 
English speaking North America and have been for 300 years. 
The Golden Age
            One could ague that as long as goods have been transported by sea, there have been 
pirates. The accent Greek historian Herodotus, in his history of the Persian wars, starts with a 
tale of piracy.[ii] And we know that pirates exist today in parts of Southeast Asia. So what 
made this roughly fifty-year period from 1680 - 1730 stand out as a unique phase in the 
history of piracy that has gained the reputation as the Golden Age of Piracy? 
             Like most historical phenomenon, it was the convergence of a number of factors that 
came together to make this period and the myth that shrouds it. One factor was the high level 
of legitimacy that privateering and piracy had in England. It is interesting that an island nation 
like England did not have a strong professional navy for a very long time. Instead, much of 
England's naval power rested in its merchant fleet, which was called into service as privateers. 
This practice goes back to 1243 when King Henry III licensed three private merchant ships to 
wage war on France.[iii]  English national pride and wealth both raised as a result of Sir 
Francis Drake's privateering career against the Spanish from 1570 - 1587.[iv] 
             Another key background issue was the expansion and competition between European 
empires. Ever since Christopher Columbus, the Spanish had the strongest hold on the wealth 
of the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central America. England, Holland and France all wanted 
what Spain had, and employed pirates and privateers to set up colonies in the Caribbean and 
take by force some of Spain's wealth. 
             With this backdrop of legitimacy of piracy and privateering in English society, and the 
competition to build national wealth and empires, there were several forces that converged in 
the late 17th Century that built both the myth and reality of the Golden Age. First was the 
book that cast the image of the swashbuckling pirate that is still with us today. The book was 
The Buccaneers of America by John Esqemeling, published in Dutch in 1678, in Spanish in 
1681 and in English in 1684. Esquemeling presents this book as a first hand account of the 
daring deeds of French, Dutch and English pirates raiding against Spanish ships and colonies 
in the Caribbean. This book was very popular at the time and elevated Captain Morgan and 
others to hero status in England. This highly romanticized work has been used as a primary 
source ever since in many other historical works on pirates. Because of the very positive and 
heroic portrayal of the pirate captains featured in this work, it both elevated the popular image 
of pirates at the time and forever made it difficult to sort out the historical from the mythic 
pirates of this time.
             While religious competition between England and Spain (Protestant vs. Catholic) had 
been an issue in Drake's day, after the English Civil War, strident Calvinism was in vogue 
under the Cromwell administration. In 1688, King William III became monarch of both 
England and Holland. In 1689 William III declared war on France. By having England and 
Holland, both Protestant countries allied at war with France and Spain, both Catholic 
countries, piracy and privateering against Spanish and French targets gained further legitimacy 
as part of a wider religious war.[v]  
             In addition to a new religious legitimacy for piracy that came out to the English Civil 
War, I think the radical egalitarianism that was part of the Roundhead movement was put to 
practice aboard pirate ships. I have not found any sources that make this connection, but it 
seems the only logical explanation for the radical egalitarianism that existed among many 
pirate crews of this time. Nearly 100 years before the American and French Revolutions, 
experiments in egalitarian democracy were being carried out on the decks of hundreds of 
pirate ships. It was common aboard pirate ships to have the crew elect the captain and make 
most decisions outside of combat situations with majority vote. Under such governance, 
captains often had few rights or perk beyond that of a common crewman, and could be 
replaced at any time with a vote.[vi]
            Another factor that pushed many patriot privateers into outlaw piracy was the peace 
treaties between England, France and Spain that came in 1697. Although low-grade hostilities 
never stopped, it would be another 40 years before war was declared again against Spain. 
Without official war, there was a surplus in mariner labor, since the Royal Navy was no longer 
needed to fill its ranks. Wages for sailors dropped in times of peace and many mariners had 
become accustomed to the financial gains that could come from plunder.[vii] These factors 
lead many to a career in piracy. 
             While different authors use slightly different dates for the start of this period, from 
Alexander Winston's 1665 to Marcus Rediker's 1716. I think the factors of national 
competition, religious competition, egalitarian ideology, pop culture, and the end of 
sanctioned war came together in the period from 1684-1697 to create what has became known 
as the Golden Age of Piracy.
             The end of this Golden Age of Anglo-American piracy in the Atlantic is much harder 
to define. For one thing, much like piracy existed long before this age, it continued to exist 
long after any of the definitions of this era. While pirates were active worldwide during this 
time, one of the distinctive characteristics of this period was the concentration of pirate 
activities in both the Caribbean and Africa. During this time, these areas were key hubs of 
merchant shipping that were at the edges of control by the Royal Navy. As a result, many of 
the Governors of Caribbean colonies welcomed the military protection that pirate and 
privateers could offer, that the Royal Navy could not. By the 1720's and 1730's the reach of 
the British Empire and various efforts to bring the pirates under control, were pushing many 
pirates to other bases of operation in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Part of the reason for the 
growing interest in pushing the pirates out of the Caribbean was that the English colonies 
there were transitioning from raiding colonies to major sugar producers.[viii] As the Caribbean 
colonies began to produce their own wealth, the pirates became a problem to be dealt with. 
From the beginning of the Golden Age in the 1680's some pirates were beginning to make this 
migration to "greener pastures" of less controlled areas of the seas.[ix]  
 	I believe that much of the romantic myth of pirates that is central to this Golden Age is 
connected to the Caribbean base of operations that many pirates had during this time. As the 
pirates were pushed out of these bases, the Golden Age came to an end, although piracy at the 
fringes of government control continued. This connection between the popular pirate and the 
Caribbean may be due largely to two books that defined this age and stand like bookend to 
the period itself. John Esquemeling's popular book The Buccaneers of America  focused on 
Caribbean pirates in the period just before it is published in 1678. The second bookend was 
Charles Johnson's defining work A General History of the Robberies and Murders of the most 
Notorious Pyrates published in 1724. As much as any other reason, the Golden Age exists 
because these two books gave us the romantic vision of daring and dangerous pirate captains 
of this period and place. During the same time frame, many of the same pirates also operated 
out of bases in Africa, and even set up a pirate government in Madagascar.[x] Yet the 
Madagascar pirates never became as popular a subject as their Caribbean colleagues. 
Historical Approaches to the Study of Piracies Golden Age
             It is ironic that although radical egalitarianism was practiced on many pirate ships, so 
much of the historical work on the subject falls into the great man model of history. From 
John Esquemeling seminal work in 1678 until the late 20th Century, most of the scholarly and 
popular books on the subject have focused almost exclusively on the role of heroic ship 
captains. John Esqemeling's 1678 work recorded the first generation of captains with a 
particular focus on Henry Morgan, Charles Johnson's 1724 work recorded the deeds of the 
next generation of pirate captains including, William Kidd, Blackbeard, Woodes Rogers and 
others. These two books really defined the era and have been used as key sources for most 
scholarly and popular works written on the subject since. As a result, many of the books and 
articles on pirates of this period essentially retell the same stories that Esquemeling and 
Johnson initially recorded. This is true of Alexander Winston's book No Man Knows My 
Grave published in 1969, and Robert Richie's Captain Kidd and the War against the Pirates 
published in 1986. This does not mean that these two authors and others have not added to 
the historical understanding of this era, and brought in other sources. They have. My point is 
just that they do not venture far from the safe harbor of great man theory interpretation of 
history (do you like the nautical metaphor?). One of the problems with this historical approach 
is that it blurs the distinction between the outlaw ships ruled more by the majority vote of the 
crew than their captains, and the semi-legitimate ships financed by merchants and run with the 
iron fisted hierarchy of merchant ship of that day. This is a very important distinction, and one 
that is completely lost in focusing solely on the captains. Blackbeard was an outlaw pirate who 
was elected by his crews. Henry Morgan and William Kidd started out as rouge pirate 
captains elected by their crews. Both suffered the reversal of having their command taken 
away from them by dissatisfied crews, and later were given command of other ships by 
wealthy and politically connected government and merchant interests. 
             Another historical approach can be seen in William Thomas Morgan's article "The 
British West Indies during King William's War (1689 - 97)" which was published in the 
Journal of Modern History in 1930. Morgan takes a military historical approach and focused 
on the pirates and privateers as naval axillaries to the British Navy. Morgan sees the geo-
political forces of empire building as the engine of history and puts a great focus on actual 
naval combat and the numbers of ships, cannons etc. engaged in these battles.
 
            The two most compelling and intellectually challenging works I have examined were 
both written by Marcus Rediker, they are "Under the Banner of King Death: The Social 
World of Anglo-American Pirates, 1716 to 1726" published in William and Mary Quarterly in 
1981, and Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea published in 1987. Rediker writes 'bottom 
up' histories that focus on the social conditions that the common mariner worked under. 
Moving far beyond Esquemeling and Johnson as sources, Rediker uses linguistics, sociology, 
economics, anthropology and ethnography to paint a picture of the conditions that sailors, 
commonly known as Jack Tar, lived under. This approach is very similar to the French Annals 
historians, and is striking because it is such a radical departure from what came before. With 
Rediker, history is not driven by the deeds of great men, but by the social and economic 
forces that lead the lowest and most oppressed class of workers to revolt against dictatorial 
merchant captains and seek the relative freedom of outlaw piracy. Rediker employs both a 
social and Marxist historical perspectives. All romanticism is striped away in the stark and 
gritty details of life aboard early 18th Century ships, and the oppressive social order that was 
common on merchant and naval vessels. Using a method similar to that of Larry Levin, 
Rediker examines sea shanties as one type of source to gain insights into a group of workers 
that is not well documented. Rediker sees the attraction of piracy as a workers revolt against 
the brutal and oppressive working conditions of life on a merchant ship. The egalitarianism 
that was so prevalent on pirate ships is portrayed as a result of a workers revolt.
             A quite unique historical perspective on pirates is given by Hans Turley in his book 
Rum, Sodomy, and the Lash: Piracy, Sexuality, and the Masculine Identity published in 1999. 
Turley studies the popular myth of pirates, both fact and fiction and draws connections 
between society's fascination with pirates as economic and social transgressors and the 
scorned position in society of sodomites. Turley states, "I shall argue, then, that English 
society's dialectic of fear and admiration of the pirate indicates a conflict between the pirate's 
representation as legal or economic criminal and his portrayal as a literary antihero. More 
broadly, this dialectic is a conflict between normative sexuality - private domesticity - and 
sexually deviant subjectivity."[xi] Turley tries to make the point that because pirates broke 
with the cultural, legal and economic norms of the day, and because they lived almost 
exclusively in the company of similar men, that they were most likely homosexual, and further 
that the popular fascination with pirates, is a hidden fascination with homosexuality. 
             While Turley certainly brings an original and different perspective to the study of 
Anglo-American piracy, I think he failed in a number of ways to add much to the historical 
discourse. First, with pirate homosexuality as a central theme, he fails to offer even one source 
of historical documentation to support this central theme. While pirate homosexuality seems 
very plausible, without proof, the central premise of his book falls apart. Secondly, he does 
not use a wide variety of sources. For historical sources he rests heavily on Charles Johnson's 
General History of Pyrates, from 1724, and the various novels of Daniel Defoe including, 
King of Pyrates, Robinson Crusoe, Moll Flanders, and The Life, Adventures, and Pyracies, of 
the Famous Captain Singleton.  Johnson's work is not very scholarly, and Defoe's works are 
pure fiction.
             Although none of the books or articles examined in this paper explore these theories or 
approaches to history, I believe the study of piracy would benefit form further study in the 
following areas: gender history, piracy as a means of social mobility, and an intellectual history 
of the origins of radical egalitarianism as practiced on pirate ships. 
             While Turley explored the hyper-masculine image of the pirate, he did not look at it 
through the lens of gender history. I think historians Joan Scott or Ana Alonso would have 
seen the early 18th Century mariner as the least powerful group in society, a group that 
cultivated a hyper-masculine persona to gain power and prestige in society. This strategy of 
using gender identity to gain status in society worked. Pirates became folk heroes at the time. 
They also perpetuated folklore about an outlaw code of honor that protected women such as 
how "Black Bart" Roberts would protect that chastity of his women prisoners.[xii]   This is 
very similar to how another lower class population of men gained social standing through the 
use of a hyper-masculine code of honor in Ana Alonso's book Thread of Blood about the 
Chihuahuan frontier. 
             Another possible historical approach would be piracy as a means of social mobility in 
the late 17th and early 18th Centuries. During a time of rigid social structure, some common 
mariners were able to use both the popular image of piracy and the wealth potential to move 
from the lowest rungs of society to the highest. Henry Morgan was able to go from an outlaw 
pirate to being knighted and made Governor of Jamaica. William Kidd went from lower class 
mariner, to pirate, to privateer, to being both wealthy and politically connected at the highest 
levels in the Tory Party in London. Because pirates operated outside the law, they were also 
outside the social confines of society, and therefore could move more easily than most from 
one social class to another.
             The last and for me, the most interesting historical approach that I would like to see 
applied to this subject, is an intellectual history of the democratic social order that existed on 
many pirate ship of this time. It is fascinating that 100 years before the American and French 
Revolutions, the lowest social class in Anglo-American society was setting up entirely new 
and radical social orders on board these outlaw ships. Not only did they elect their captains, 
but also they drew up articles at the beginning of the voyage that defined the social contract 
that all the sailors agreed to abide. They used the command structure of the captain only when 
engaged in battle, and for most other decisions were ruled be majority vote. They also 
distributed the loot from their raiding very evenly. I strongly suspect that these ideas must 
have come from the egalitarian ideology of the Roundheads during the English Civil War, but 
I do not have any proof. This intellectual history is what I was hoping to find when I selected 
the Golden Age of piracy as the subject for this historiographic essay. I hope someone will fill 
in this missing piece of history, through further research.
             Pirates reside in a mystical place in Anglo-American history. It is often hard to 
separate fact from fiction, since so much fiction has been written about this subject and even 
some of the early sources of "facts" are questionable in their accuracy. Yet what we do know, 
or think we know, is intriguing to say the least. Why mariners in the bottom rungs of society 
would step outside the law and existing social structure and risk execution if caught is 
fascinating. It is even more fascinating that through their actions they became the anti-heroes 
of their time and our. I do not fully understand why this period of piracy is such an important 
part of our society even today. But I fully admit, that I am and have always been intrigued 
and drawn to both the myth and reality of Anglo-American pirates of the Golden Age. 
 
Mariner Fact
Thus after Dangers past, now safe and well
The Story to our Friends we often tell,
And they to Recompense us for our Tale
Do Strive to Drown us in a Cup of Ale.
"The Third Journal of Jeremy Roch" (1699)
 
 
Mariner Fiction
 
Yo ho, yo ho, a pirate's life for me
We pillage, we plunder, we rifle and loot
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
We kidnap and ravage and don't give a hoot
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
 
Yo ho, yo ho, a pirate's life for me
We extort, we pilfer we filch and sack
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
Maraud and embezzle and even high-jack
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
 
Yo ho, yo ho, a pirate's life for me
We kindel and char inflame and ignite
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
We burn up the city we're really a fright
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
 
We're rascals, scoundrels villains and knaves
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
We're devils and black sheep - really bad eggs
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
 
Yo ho, yo ho, a pirate's life for me
We're beggars and blighters and ne'er-do-well cads
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
Aye, but we'er loved by our mommies and dads
Drink up me hearties, yo ho
America's was against Cuban Pirates
 A great deal of popular pirate literature and historical examination is devoted to what's 
known as the Golden Age of piracy—roughly from the 1650s to around 1725. This is the era 
of Henry Morgan, Blackbeard, Anne Bonny and Calico Jack, Black Bart Roberts, and Captain 
Kidd. Romantic in legend, if not in deed, the famous pirates of this era maintain their grip on 
the popular imagination. As colorful as these real-life pirated were in fact, their standard-
bearer may be that fictional dandy Captain Hook, in his long, curly wig and high-heeled, 
silver-buckled shoes, expensive lace dripping from his sleeves.
 But piracy, of course, has existed in all eras and taken many forms. A less well-known, but no 
less fascinating chapter of pirate history is the rise of the so-called Cuban or West Indian 
pirates operating in Caribbean waters a century after the end of the Golden Age. Largely 
stripped of the romance of the earlier pirates, the Cuban pirates of the 1820s are remembered 
as a far grittier lot of desperados, most significant for the actions taken to rout them out by the 
fledgling United States Navy. Occurring in a cultural period much closer to our own, 
America's war against the Cuban pirates has eerie similarities to our own time.
 At the end of the War of 1812 and the Napoleonic wars, international maritime commerce 
began to thrive once again in the waters of the Caribbean Sea. This coincided with the revolt 
of the South American colonies against Spain, led by visionary patriots like Simon Bolivar. 
This ongoing revolution provided lucrative opportunities not only for South American seamen 
in revolt against Spain, but seafaring rogues of all nations to sign on as privateers out of rebel 
ports like Caracas and Buenos Aires. Much of their activity was centered around the islands 
of Cuba, Hispaniola, and Puerto Rico. The passages between these islands were the principal 
shipping lanes to and from Europe, and since few of these privateering vessels bothered to 
confine their looting to the merchant shipping of Spain alone, they were tacitly protected by 
the authorities in Havana, who often earned a tidy commission on plunder sold there at 
auction. Wrote one Lt. Joseph W. Revere in his memoir, Forty Years of Military and Naval 
Service, "It was very difficult to secure the trial and conviction of the corsairs in Havana, 
however evident their guilt, for the Spanish authorities were notoriously interested in the 
profits of their nefarious calling."
 The trade became so brisk, the privateering ships were joined by growing numbers of runaway 
slaves, fisher folk and other poor, dispossessed island peasants on their own account mounting 
guerilla attacks from hidden lagoons and shallows along the Cuban coast. Fancy fighting ships 
were not required; often attacks were mounted from a small boat going alongside an 
unsuspecting merchantman with a crowd of desperate men concealed on board, drawing in 
close enough to board their prey and overwhelm the merchant crew.
With exotic names like Raphaelina and Domingo (along with a few expatriate Europeans and 
Yankees, like infamous Rhode Island native Charle Gibbs), Cuban-based  pirate captains 
earned reputations for villainy of almost mythic proportions—especially as reported in the 
eyewitness accounts of intended victims who had escaped their clutches. Conflicting reports 
about the death of a notorious pirate captain called Diabolito ("Little Devil"), variously 
reported as having taken place in April, and again in July of 1823, might be chalked up to 
erroneous news accounts of the day, or dubious scholarship in collecting and interpreting the 
data later on. But it might also suggest that more than one pirate adopted this celebrated name 
for himself—or was so called by his victims.
The targets of these pirates were not the richly laden treasure flotillas of a century earlier, but 
ordinary merchant vessels carrying lumber or manufactured goods into the Indies, and sugar, 
rum, dye, and coffee out. Pickings were often scarce, and the Cuban pirates robbed them not 
only of whatever lucrative cargo and specie might be on board (if any), they also demanded 
the clothing of the crew, food from the galley (along with the cooking utensils), spare rigging, 
masts, and spars, flags, nautical instruments, and anything else that was not bolted down. 
The brutality of the pirate crews during the commission of these robberies further enflamed 
the public; surviving captains and even passengers reported being beaten and threatened with 
torture and murder if they did not produce money supposed to be secreted somewhere in the 
ship: men were hammered over the head with the flat sides of cutlasses, stabbed and bled, 
hung by the neck until almost dead, or trailed over the side by ropes to encourage them to 
reveal the whereabouts of the hidden money. In his 1824 memoir The Atrocities Of The 
Pirates, English seaman Aaron Smith wrote of his captivity on board a Cuban pirate schooner 
two years earlier. Smith recounts how the master of his merchant ship was taken below decks 
and lashed to the pumps with combustibles piled round him by the pirates in order to extort a 
confession from him of where the money was hidden. (At one point the pyre was actually lit, 
although it was later doused when the pirates deemed the master had given them all the 
money he had.) Stripped of their valuables, ships were often disabled or set adrift, or set afire 
with their crews locked in the hold—although it's significant to remember that these 
sensational incidents were reported by surviving crews who had in fact managed to escape 
with their lives, along with their broken ships (if not their valuables). Even Smith's fiendish 
captor allowed the rest of the merchant crew to sail off in their plundered ship without further 
injury.
In counterpoint to the most hair-raising tales is the experience of Jacob Dunham, master of the 
merchant schooner Combine out of New York. Included in his memoir Journal Of Voyages, 
Dunham writes of pirates who captured his ship off Cape Antonio, Cuba, in October of 1821. 
Dunham found the pirates no less brutal in their threats and beatings, but he also reported an 
elaborate ruse staged by his captors in which the men were locked in the forecastle, brought 
up one-by-one, and questioned as to the ship's valuables. When their answers were not to the 
pirates' liking, the men below heard an ominous pistol blast and assumed their comrades had 
been killed. But when it was Dunham's turn to go above and face his bitter end, he found the 
pistol balls had been fired into the sea and all the crewmen had been bundled into the cabin 
still alive, all in hopes of terrifying those still below into divulging the whereabouts of the 
imagined money. After the Combine had been stripped of all valuables and provisions, with 
no secret money in evidence, the pirates let their victims sail off.
Like pirates in any era, the Cuban pirates were expert terrorists, unleashing devastating 
psychological and physical tortures on their captives in hopes of extracting information about 
money. But while all of them were certainly capable of terrorizing their intended victims into 
submission, the evidence suggests that not all of them were bloodthirsty murderers. 
Impoverished and opportunistic, most were in the trade for profit, more interested in cash than 
cold-blooded killing for its own sake. In many accounts, the bloodiest mayhem more often 
occurred within the ranks of the pirates themselves, or was directed at armed merchant crews 
who dared to fight back, or the warships that pursued them so doggedly.
 However tall the tales might have been surrounding the Cuban pirates, one fact was clear: the 
United States saw its commercial interests in the West Indies imperiled by the pirates of Cuba. 
At the same time its newborn Navy, overstocked with heroes from the late war and facing 
drastic postwar cutbacks in ships, materials, and funding, found itself with nothing much to 
do. An undeclared war on the pirates seemed like the perfect solution to both problems. 
Spurred on by America's shipping interests, Congress enacted a series of drastic anti-piracy 
laws, including the death penalty for convicted pirates. What's more, the Executive was 
granted exceptional leeway in pursuing pirates or anyone even suspected of piracy; U. S. ships 
were empowered to search "suspicious" vessels, and ferret out suspected piratical nests along 
bays and coasts beyond American territorial jurisdiction. Pirates were the terrorists of their 
day, and no law was considered too sacred to be bent in pursuing them.
But still the deprivations continued, and more muscular solutions were sought. The first West 
India Squadron, consisting of three ships, was sent out by President James Monroe in 1819 
under the command of Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry, the hero of Lake Erie in the War of 
1812. However, after two months in the service, while cruising up the Orinoco River in 
Venezuela searching for pirates, the 34-year-old Perry succumbed to the deadly yellow fever 
that was rapidly spreading among his crew. 
 Commodore David Porter was another war hero, famed for capturing British warships off the 
coast of South America aboard the frigate Essex during the War of 1812. In February of 
1823, he resigned his office as Navy Commissioner to take command of the West India 
Squadron. Naval ships and officers had continued to skirmish against pirates since 1819, but 
in 1822, Acts of Congress were passed to appropriate $500,000 to fit out an expedition to 
destroy the Cuban pirates. Porter set out with a most impressive fleet, many of whose ships 
were paid for out of his own pocket. The most noteworthy vessel was a steamship (a "steam 
galliot" in the parlance of the day) called Sea Gull, carrying three guns, the second steam 
vessel in the U. S. Navy, and "the first steam-propelled man-of-war engaged in actual 
warfare," according to Francis B. C. Bradlee in Piracy In The West Indies And It's 
Suppression. 
In addition, Porter sailed with eight schooners of between 47 to 65 tons, each of which 
carried three guns and a crew of 31 men, and the transport ship Decoy, with six guns. 
Rounding out the Squadron were five river barges aptly named Gnat, Midge, Mosquito, 
Sandfly, and Gallinipper, for chasing pirate boats upriver into shallow water and pursuing 
their crews directly into their inland hideaways. Collectively, these vessels were referred to as 
the "Mosquito Fleet," a more appropriate name than anyone imagined at the time. They joined 
another six U. S. warships already operating in Caribbean waters, along with a fleet of British 
naval warships. The Americans set up a base on Thompson's Island (now Key West, Florida), 
from which to patrol the coastal waters of the Spanish islands.
 The Yankee crews, however, were unprepared for the nature of the warfare that awaited 
them, let alone the inhospitable climate and diseases of the tropics. As Edward Ellis suggests 
in his article, Perry, Porter, and the Pirates, in Sea Classics magazine (August, 1988), 
American naval maneuvers against the West Indian pirates was as thankless a task as the U. S. 
army campaign in Vietnam in the 1960s. Sea battles were rare; instead there was a great deal 
of marching on foot through steaming swamps and insect-infested jungles to hidden pirate 
lairs on shore, working up shallow waters in barges, the constant threat of ambush, and savage 
hand-to-hand combat. 
 The mobility of Porter's ships allowed naval crews to pursue pirates directly into the coastal 
swamps and marshes that concealed their bases of operation. A typically hazardous, but less 
bloody than usual encounter of this kind was recorded in the journal of Lieutenant David G. 
Farragut, later the renowned Civil War Admiral, who was a junior officer on the expedition 
and Porter’s young protégé. In July of 1823, after searching for pirates in coastal waters, two 
squadron ships, Greyhound with Farragut aboard, and Beagle, anchored off Cabo Cruz on the 
southern coast of Cuba and sent a boat ashore to look for game. The shore party was fired 
upon by pirates hidden behind the dense scrub and chaparral. A grueling subsequent patrol on 
foot through thickets of thorny bramble and across a hidden lagoon brought the seamen under 
fire from "a volley of musketry and a discharge from a 4-pound swivel." When one of the 
naval schooners worked in near enough to return fire, the pirates scattered into the 
underbrush. But Farragut and his men found a hastily abandoned pirate settlement of several 
wooden houses, a dozen boats, and equipment for turtling and fishing. Nearby was a vast 
cave containing all manner of pirate plunder, "many articles marked with English labels," 
saddles and clothing. Farragut and his men carried off the plunder and the cannon, then 
burned the village and boats to the ground. "My only prize on this occasion was a large black 
monkey, which I took in single combat," Farragut wrote. "He bit me through the arm, but had 
to surrender at discretion."
But it was yellow fever, transmitted by the ever-present mosquito (although no one knew it at 
the time), that proved to be at least as formidable and treacherous an enemy as the pirates 
themselves. In his 21 months in the service, Porter survived two bouts of the deadly fever that 
decimated his crews, crippled his fleet, and sent him home to the States twice to recuperate. 
 It was not fever, however, but his temper and a touch of hubris that cost Porter his command 
of the West India Squadron. In October of 1824, an American-owned warehouse on the 
island of St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands was raided by unknown marauders, who carried off 
a great many goods and supplies. One of Porter’s squadron ships, the Beagle, sailed off in 
pursuit across the channel to the town of Fajardo on the coast of Puerto Rico. Lt. Platt of the 
Beagle, accompanied by a midshipman, went ashore in civilian clothing and was detained for 
an entire day by the Alcalde (or governor) of the place, denounced as a pirate, and threatened 
with imprisonment before finally being ordered to depart the island. When Porter heard of this 
outrage against his officer, he sailed himself to Fajardo with three warships, and sent a letter 
to the Alcalde demanding an apology. Waiting for his reply, Porter saw suspicious activity on 
one of the shore batteries overlooking the beach that protected the town. Further outraged, he 
sent a party on shore to spike the guns in the battery, then marched into the town and forced 
the Alcalde to write and sign a formal apology. 
Although effective under the circumstances, Porter’s impulsive action was considered 
arrogant back home, where it blossomed into a diplomatic scandal known as the "Foxardo 
Affair." (The contemporary misspelling of "Fajardo" in that era.) Porter was recalled from his 
command in December of 1824, tried by court martial, and suspended from the service for six 
months. Rather than accept this sentence, he resigned from the navy altogether. He accepted a 
commission as Commander-in-Chief of the Mexican Navy, an office in which he served for 
another five years.
But by this ignominious end to Porter's command of the West India Squadron, the heyday of 
Cuban piracy was coming to a close. Shortly after the incident at Fajardo, there was an 
upsurge of bloody piratical activity, shocking for the wholesale cruelty of the perpetrators. 
Most notorious were incidents involving the American merchant brig Betsey, wrecked off the 
coast of Cuba in December, 1824, and the New Brunswick merchant sloop Eliza Ann, 
overtaken by a pirate schooner en route to Antigua in March, 1825. In both cases, the 
merchant crews were unceremoniously butchered by their pirate captors. A lone survivor 
reported that one pirate called the Betsey crewmen his "prisoners of war," suggesting a sea 
change in the attitude of the pirates, who had come to consider merchant crews as legitimate 
enemies in the war waged against them by the U. S. Navy. 
Captain Lewis Warrington took command of the Squadron after Porter's departure, and the 
fleet was maintained in West Indian waters for a few more years, but by then their work was 
more of a peacekeeping action. The Squadron steamship Sea Gull and the barge Gallinipper 
joined a party of British warships in capturing pirates off the Cuban coast and pursuing their 
boats on the 24th and 25th of March, 1825, the last notable action in the American naval 
campaign against the West Indian pirates.
 
AUTHOR BIO: Lisa Jensen is a newspaper columnist and film critic in Santa Cruz, 
California. For 13 years she also reviewed historical fiction for the San Francisco Chronicle. 
She spent 12 years researching the Cuban pirates for her historical novel The Witch From The 
Sea, published in 2001.
Cesar and the Pirates
Cesar, escaping persecution by Sylla, Roman dictator, went to Bithynia (a Roman province, 
now Turkey) where he spent some time hosted by the king Nicomedes. However, upon 
returning home around 76 BC he was captured, near the Island Pharmacusa 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Farmakos, by the Cilician pirates.
Pirates demanded, according to Plutarch, 20 talents for his release. Cesar convinced them that 
he was worth at least 50 talents. Subsequently, Cesar sent almost all his friends and attendants 
to close by Asian cities to collect money for his release.  He was at last left with only two 
attendants and one friend (physician) among as Plutarch calls them: "... the most bloodthirsty 
people in the world.."
For thirty eight days, when in captivity, as Plutarch says:"...with all the freedom in the 
world.." he was free do what he wanted, writing verses and speeches, exercising and playing 
games with the pirates.
 
Finally his ransom arrived and Cesar was free to go. He immediately went to Miletus, the 
closest Asian (Roman) port (now part of Turkey). There he organized a fleet of ships and went 
after the pirates, who not expecting this, were easily captured and put to prison. After being 
dissatisfied with the delay in their punishment by the Roman official in charge of criminal 
offenses, Cesar personally gave orders to crucify pirates, the punishment he often threatened 
them when he was in their captivity.
Roman Piracy
The piracy threat which came to a head in the decade of the 60's BC was in part due to 
Rome's complacency about the issue. Rather than stamping out small pockets of pirates early 
on, they allowed piracy to flourish into a large force of marauders. A poor economy and 
oppressive social conditions also fed the pirate forces as men who were on the verge of 
bankruptcy discovered more profit as robbers and pillagers. Rome was unwilling to act 
conclusively toward the reduction of pirate forces because those forces, along with tax 
companies, provided slaves for the large luxury markets. The pirates did not attack Rome as 
an enemy, but treated all targets equally, as opportunities for profit. 
Vandal and, later, Muslim piracy disrupted the vital sea routes to Africa and the East; on land 
the impotence of local government made communications dangerous; and ever-heavier 
taxation crippled trade. 
As a result of the weakening of Rhodes, piracy became rampant in the eastern Mediterranean 
(the young Julius Caesar was captured by pirates). During the next century Roman senators 
did not find the political will to suppress the piracy, perhaps in part because it served their 
interests; pirates supplied tens of thousands of slaves for their Italian estates and disrupted the 
grain trade, thus raising prices for their produce in Rome. 
Although the pirates ranged over much of the navigable Mediterranean, they concentrated 
their raids on major shipping lanes. Upon these lanes goods were transported between the far 
western provinces of Spain and Africa, Rome and the rest of Italy, and the eastern provinces 
including Macedonia, Greece, Syria and Egypt. Preferred area to set base or home port, was 
on the coast of present day Turkey, in an area known as Cicilia Tracheia. This area afforded 
great protection for the pirates. The coastline was complicated and full of twists and turns and 
hidden ports. As Roman influence rose the influence of the native powers, such as Seleucid 
Syria and Rhodes, declined. These were the people who patrolled coastal waters and 
controlled pirate populations. As their power was replaced by that of the Romans, their patrols 
were not, and the pirates grew unchecked. With Rome reluctant to crack down on the pirates 
Mediterranean cities began to form alliances with the pirates to avoid being plundered and 
terrorized since they received little protection from Rome. Many port cities provided their 
services and facilities to the pirates, while others paid tribute as if they were conquered. In 
effect, these cities became centers of piracy. 
Interestingly there was a Piracy Law during Roman Times. An inscription found at Delphi is a 
100BC document that set the rules for dealing with pirates. The law stated that Roman 
citizens should be able to "conduct, without peril, whatever business they desire," presumably 
wherever they desire. A copy of the law was to be sent by messengers of Rhodes to the kings 
of Cyprus, Alexandria, Egypt, Cyrene, and Syria informing them that no pirate is to "use the 
kingdom, land, or territory of any Roman ally as a base of operation. No official or garrison 
will harbor pirates and should be considered zealous collaborators for the safety of all ".
Another inscription found at Cnidos seems to be either an extension or a lost portion of the 
Delphi text. The Cnidos text is quite broken in the beginning, but does exhibit certain 
similarities. This text states that the kings of Syria, Alexandria, Egypt, Cyrene and Cyprus 
were to prevent the harboring of pirates. There was even a fine of 200,000 sestertii for non 
compliance with the law. This law gave Rome the basis for prosecution of pirates. 
According to Roman writer Plutarch in 102BC, Marcus Antonius was given a command to 
reduce the pirates. It seemed to be more an effort to reduce capture of Romans and 
provincials by pirates primarily by making a deal with a certain pirate known as Nicomedes . 
Between the years of 77BC and 75BC, Servilius Roman commander was sent to assist the 
allies of Roman province Lycia in another attempt by Rome to curtail piratical escapades. 
However he did not do much to damage the hard core pirates in the area of Cilicia Tracheia 
because little evidence has been found to support him even entering the waters off that coast 
(Roman writer Ormerod). In 74BC preparations were made for an all-out assault on the 
Cilician coast under the command of Marc Antonius. These were abandoned with the coming 
of the third Mithradatic War ( according to Plutarch). 
The number of pirates grew substantially during the wars created by Mithradates. While 
Mithradates was fighting on land, his navy and the pirates under his influence roamed the sea, 
plundering and pillaging. During his first war against Rome, Mithradates assisted the pirates 
by providing materials and expertise to begin coastal raiding . After the conclusion of the 
conflict, Mithradates' influence with the pirates declined, but the pirate menace continued. 
However, Mithradates surfaced twice more, and each time was closely allied with pirate 
forces. By the third war, the pirates were organized more like regular fleets, and less like 
bands of robbers. During that time, the pirates captured Iassus, Samos, Clazomenae, and 
Samothrace. They even plundered the temple at Samothrace and received the equivalent of 
1000 talents. 
Roman historian Appian suggests that the oppressive conditions set up by Rome's constant 
warfare prompted many to renounce their hopeless lives and join the pirate forces . Thus 
pirates gained detailed knowledge of many ports and coastlines, providing a wider range of 
profitable raids. The pirates had become quite brash by this point, owning garrisons and supply 
depots manned by "fine crews and expert pilots" (Plutarch). 
During the turbulent 70's, the Romans were engaged in various civil wars. While the Romans 
were thus employed, pirates grew bolder still, leaving the water they knew so well and 
venturing onto land, raiding islands and coastal cites. They marched up Roman roads and 
captured those they encountered. These included the two praetors Sextilius and Bellinus with 
their lictors and servants on the Appian Way (Plutarch). A ransom was demanded (and 
delivered) for the return of the daughter of Antonius. This was the very same Antonius who 
led the first campaign against the pirates (Cicero). 
Caesar too, was captured by the pirates near the island of Pharmcusa shortly after escaping 
from Sulla's soldiers in 75BC. For some reason, the pirates took a liking to Caesar and instead 
of executing him for his insolence, they tolerated his posturing. When the pirates set a ransom 
of 20 talents, Caesar scoffed them and set it at 50, claiming he was worth more. During the 
month and a half he was detained, Caesar joined the pirates in their revels. He wrote poetry 
and presented it to the pirates. If they didn't respond properly, he would chastise them. When 
he wanted to sleep, he ordered them to be quiet. Indeed, he hardly seemed a prisoner. He 
even joked that he would come back and kill them all. After his release, Caesar took ships 
from the harbor of Moletus, and captured those pirates as they lay on the beach. Caesar didn't 
agree with Junius, governor of Asia, as to the fate of those pirates and therefore went off and 
did as he wished. He crucified the lot, although Ormerod says Caesar first slit their throats in 
an apparent act of mercy (Plutarch). 
Men of "wealth and good family," in the words of Plutarch, joined the pirate forces as 
"soldiers of fortune" gained a reputation of glory and wealth. Ships with gilded sails, purple 
draping and silvered oars became the mark of the pirate ship as their standard of living rose. 
Plutarch's Life of Crassus describes an event whereby the pirates managed to help the Romans 
and profit at the same time. The slave uprise leader Spartacus booked passage for himself and 
2,000 of his troops with pirates to the island of Sicily, where he planned to lead a slave revolt. 
According to Plutarch after being paid, or "receiving gifts" the pirates skipped town and no 
doubt celebrated their deception. 
The supremacy of Rome was threatened by "drunken revels and flute playing" of the pirates 
(Plutarch). The pirates were so prevalent that trade throughout the Mediterranean was virtually 
halted. With 1,000 ships in service, the pirates captured or raided 400 cities, including Ostia. 
Finally Rome had to do something. Roman commander Pompey was given the task to get rid 
of pirates. All allies were compelled to submit to his authority. He was given twenty-four 
proprietors and the authority to raise 120,000 troops, 4,000 cavalry, commission 270 ships, 
and had 6,000 talents at his disposal. Pompey devised an excellent plan to squash the pirate 
threat. He set up thirteen districts designed to isolate the various segments of the pirate 
population. The praetor, or commander, of each district was responsible for the reduction of 
pirates in his own district. In forty days, according to Appian, Pompey swept through the 
western blocks and headed to the eastern waters. His name and reputation traveled faster 
though, and the pirates became terrified. They quickly ceased their pillaging and fled to their 
garrisons. The thirteen praetors easily able to subdue their regions. Pompey chased the die-
hards to their large strongholds of Cragus and Anticragus. Appian reports that most pirates 
surrendered quickly, lending credence to the slogan "the sea was cleared without a fight". 
Pompey completely eliminated the pirate threat in a mere three months time. Clearly the 
pirates were not a threat to the naval forces of Rome. 
Some historians argue that because Romans destroyed Mediterranean kingdoms there was 
nobody to keep law and order on the seas. Especially after Romans destroyed the powerful 
fleet of Carthage which kept in check piracy on the shores of North Africa pirates flourished 
and practically dominated big parts of Mediterranean. They even began to intercept the 
Roman shipments especially grain from Africa and in one instance destroyed Roman fleet in 
Ostia. At last in 67 BC Roman dictator Pompey had swept the pirates from the Western 
Mediterranean and eventually captured their strongholds in Cilicia and hunted them from the 
waters east of Italy. 
Another account of piracy is given first hand by Pliny's (the elder) whose last assignment was 
that of commander of the fleet in the Bay of Naples, where he was charged with the 
suppression of piracy. 
Pre Roman and Roman pirates were mainly (except for the English Channel) confined to 
Mediterranean Sea. However, in early Middle Ages the most notorious pirates operated in the 
North. 





