So far so good. My friends, then, were still alive, and though I partlybelieved the truth of Silver's statement, that the cabin party wereincensed at me for my desertion, I was more relieved than distressed bywhat I heard."I don't say nothing as to your being in our hands," continued Silver,"though there you are, and you may lay to it. I'm all for argyment; Inever seen good come out o' threatening. If you like the service, well,you'll jine; and if you don't, Jim, why, you're free to answer no--freeand welcome, shipmate; and if fairer can be said by mortal seaman,shiver my sides!""Am I to answer, then?" I asked with a very tremulous voice. Through allthis sneering talk, I was made to feel the threat of death that overhungme, and my cheeks burned and my heart beat painfully in my breast."Lad," said Silver, "no one's a-pressing of you. Take your bearings.None of us won't hurry you, mate; time goes so pleasant in your company,you see.""Well," says I, growing a bit bolder, "if I'm to choose, I declare Ihave a right to know what's what, and why you're here, and where myfriends are.""Wot's wot?" repeated one of the buccaneers in a deep growl. "Ah, he'dbe a lucky one as knowed that!""You'll perhaps batten down your hatches till you're spoke to, myfriend," cried Silver truculently to this speaker. And then, inhis first gracious tones, he replied to me, "Yesterday morning, Mr.Hawkins," said he, "in the dog-watch, down came Doctor Livesey with aflag of truce. Says he, 'Cap'n Silver, you're sold out. Ship's gone.'Well, maybe we'd been taking a glass, and a song to help it round. Iwon't say no. Leastways, none of us had looked out. We looked out, andby thunder, the old ship was gone! I never seen a pack o' fools lookfishier; and you may lay to that, if I tells you that looked thefishiest. 'Well,' says the doctor, 'let's bargain.' We bargained, himand I, and here we are: stores, brandy, block house, the firewood youwas thoughtful enough to cut, and in a manner of speaking, the wholeblessed boat, from cross-trees to kelson. As for them, they've tramped;I don't know where's they are."He drew again quietly at his pipe."And lest you should take it into that head of yours," he went on, "thatyou was included in the treaty, here's the last word that was said: 'Howmany are you,' says I, 'to leave?' 'Four,' says he; 'four, and one of uswounded. As for that boy, I don't know where he is, confound him,' sayshe, 'nor I don't much care. We're about sick of him.' These was hiswords."Is that all?" I asked."Well, it's all that you're to hear, my son," returned Silver."And now I am to choose?""And now you are to choose, and you may lay to that," said Silver."Well," said I, "I am not such a fool but I know pretty well what I haveto look for. Let the worst come to the worst, it's little I care. I'veseen too many die since I fell in with you. But there's a thing or twoI have to tell you," I said, and by this time I was quite excited; "andthe first is this: here you are, in a bad way--ship lost, treasure lost,men lost, your whole business gone to wreck; and if you want to know whodid it--it was I! I was in the apple barrel the night we sighted land,and I heard you, John, and you, Dick Johnson, and Hands, who is now atthe bottom of the sea, and told every word you said before the hour wasout. And as for the schooner, it was I who cut her cable, and it was Ithat killed the men you had aboard of her, and it was I who brought herwhere you'll never see her more, not one of you. The laugh's on my side;I've had the top of this business from the first; I no more fear youthan I fear a fly. Kill me, if you please, or spare me. But one thingI'll say, and no more; if you spare me, bygones are bygones, and whenyou fellows are in court for piracy, I'll save you all I can. It is foryou to choose. Kill another and do yourselves no good, or spare me andkeep a witness to save you from the gallows."I stopped, for, I tell you, I was out of breath, and to my wonder, nota man of them moved, but all sat staring at me like as many sheep. Andwhile they were still staring, I broke out again, "And now, Mr. Silver,"I said, "I believe you're the best man here, and if things go to theworst, I'll take it kind of you to let the doctor know the way I tookit.""I'll bear it in mind," said Silver with an accent so curious that Icould not, for the life of me, decide whether he were laughing at myrequest or had been favourably affected by my courage."I'll put one to that," cried the old mahogany-faced seaman--Morganby name--whom I had seen in Long John's public-house upon the quays ofBristol. "It was him that knowed Black Dog.""Well, and see here," added the sea-cook. "I'll put another again tothat, by thunder! For it was this same boy that faked the chart fromBilly Bones. First and last, we've split upon Jim Hawkins!""Then here goes!" said Morgan with an oath.And he sprang up, drawing his knife as if he had been twenty."Avast, there!" cried Silver. "Who are you, Tom Morgan? Maybe youthought you was cap'n here, perhaps. By the powers, but I'll teach youbetter! Cross me, and you'll go where many a good man's gone before you,first and last, these thirty year back--some to the yard-arm, shivermy timbers, and some by the board, and all to feed the fishes. There'snever a man looked me between the eyes and seen a good day a'terwards,Tom Morgan, you may lay to that."Morgan paused, but a hoarse murmur rose from the others."Tom's right," said one."I stood hazing long enough from one," added another. "I'll be hanged ifI'll be hazed by you, John Silver.""Did any of you gentlemen want to have it out with ME?" roared Silver,bending far forward from his position on the keg, with his pipe stillglowing in his right hand. "Put a name on what you're at; you ain'tdumb, I reckon. Him that wants shall get it. Have I lived this manyyears, and a son of a rum puncheon cock his hat athwart my hawse at thelatter end of it? You know the way; you're all gentlemen o' fortune, byyour account. Well, I'm ready. Take a cutlass, him that dares, and I'llsee the colour of his inside, crutch and all, before that pipe's empty."Not a man stirred; not a man answered."That's your sort, is it?" he added, returning his pipe to his mouth."Well, you're a gay lot to look at, anyway. Not much worth to fight, youain't. P'r'aps you can understand King George's English. I'm cap'n hereby 'lection. I'm cap'n here because I'm the best man by a long sea-mile.You won't fight, as gentlemen o' fortune should; then, by thunder,you'll obey, and you may lay to it! I like that boy, now; I never seena better boy than that. He's more a man than any pair of rats of you inthis here house, and what I say is this: let me see him that'll lay ahand on him--that's what I say, and you may lay to it."There was a long pause after this. I stood straight up against the wall,my heart still going like a sledge-hammer, but with a ray of hopenow shining in my bosom. Silver leant back against the wall, his armscrossed, his pipe in the corner of his mouth, as calm as though he hadbeen in church; yet his eye kept wandering furtively, and he kept thetail of it on his unruly followers. They, on their part, drew graduallytogether towards the far end of the block house, and the low hiss oftheir whispering sounded in my ear continuously, like a stream. Oneafter another, they would look up, and the red light of the torch wouldfall for a second on their nervous faces; but it was not towards me, itwas towards Silver that they turned their eyes."You seem to have a lot to say," remarked Silver, spitting far into theair. "Pipe up and let me hear it, or lay to.""Ax your pardon, sir," returned one of the men; "you're pretty free withsome of the rules; maybe you'll kindly keep an eye upon the rest. Thiscrew's dissatisfied; this crew don't vally bullying a marlin-spike; thiscrew has its rights like other crews, I'll make so free as that; and byyour own rules, I take it we can talk together. I ax your pardon, sir,acknowledging you for to be captaing at this present; but I claim myright, and steps outside for a council."And with an elaborate sea-salute, this fellow, a long, ill-looking,yellow-eyed man of five and thirty, stepped coolly towards the door anddisappeared out of the house. One after another the rest followed hisexample, each making a salute as he passed, each adding some apology."According to rules," said one. "Forecastle council," said Morgan. Andso with one remark or another all marched out and left Silver and mealone with the torch.The sea-cook instantly removed his pipe."Now, look you here, Jim Hawkins," he said in a steady whisper that wasno more than audible, "you're within half a plank of death, and what'sa long sight worse, of torture. They're going to throw me off. But, youmark, I stand by you through thick and thin. I didn't mean to; no, nottill you spoke up. I was about desperate to lose that much blunt, andbe hanged into the bargain. But I see you was the right sort. I says tomyself, you stand by Hawkins, John, and Hawkins'll stand by you. You'rehis last card, and by the living thunder, John, he's yours! Back toback, says I. You save your witness, and he'll save your neck!"I began dimly to understand."You mean all's lost?" I asked."Aye, by gum, I do!" he answered. "Ship gone, neck gone--that's thesize of it. Once I looked into that bay, Jim Hawkins, and seen noschooner--well, I'm tough, but I gave out. As for that lot and theircouncil, mark me, they're outright fools and cowards. I'll save yourlife--if so be as I can--from them. But, see here, Jim--tit for tat--yousave Long John from swinging."I was bewildered; it seemed a thing so hopeless he was asking--he, theold buccaneer, the ringleader throughout."What I can do, that I'll do," I said."It's a bargain!" cried Long John. "You speak up plucky, and by thunder,I've a chance!"He hobbled to the torch, where it stood propped among the firewood, andtook a fresh light to his pipe."Understand me, Jim," he said, returning. "I've a head on my shoulders,I have. I'm on squire's side now. I know you've got that ship safesomewheres. How you done it, I don't know, but safe it is. I guess Handsand O'Brien turned soft. I never much believed in neither of THEM. Nowyou mark me. I ask no questions, nor I won't let others. I know whena game's up, I do; and I know a lad that's staunch. Ah, you that'syoung--you and me might have done a power of good together!"He drew some cognac from the cask into a tin cannikin."Will you taste, messmate?" he asked; and when I had refused: "Well,I'll take a drain myself, Jim," said he. "I need a caulker, for there'strouble on hand. And talking o' trouble, why did that doctor give me thechart, Jim?"My face expressed a wonder so unaffected that he saw the needlessness offurther questions."Ah, well, he did, though," said he. "And there's something under that,no doubt--something, surely, under that, Jim--bad or good."And he took another swallow of the brandy, shaking his great fair headlike a man who looks forward to the worst.29The Black Spot AgainTHE council of buccaneers had lasted some time, when one of themre-entered the house, and with a repetition of the same salute, whichhad in my eyes an ironical air, begged for a moment's loan of the torch.Silver briefly agreed, and this emissary retired again, leaving ustogether in the dark."There's a breeze coming, Jim," said Silver, who had by this timeadopted quite a friendly and familiar tone.I turned to the loophole nearest me and looked out. The embers of thegreat fire had so far burned themselves out and now glowed so low andduskily that I understood why these conspirators desired a torch. Abouthalf-way down the slope to the stockade, they were collected in a group;one held the light, another was on his knees in their midst, and I sawthe blade of an open knife shine in his hand with varying colours inthe moon and torchlight. The rest were all somewhat stooping, as thoughwatching the manoeuvres of this last. I could just make out that hehad a book as well as a knife in his hand, and was still wondering howanything so incongruous had come in their possession when the kneelingfigure rose once more to his feet and the whole party began to movetogether towards the house."Here they come," said I; and I returned to my former position, for itseemed beneath my dignity that they should find me watching them."Well, let 'em come, lad--let 'em come," said Silver cheerily. "I'vestill a shot in my locker."The door opened, and the five men, standing huddled together justinside, pushed one of their number forward. In any other circumstancesit would have been comical to see his slow advance, hesitating as he setdown each foot, but holding his closed right hand in front of him."Step up, lad," cried Silver. "I won't eat you. Hand it over, lubber. Iknow the rules, I do; I won't hurt a depytation."Thus encouraged, the buccaneer stepped forth more briskly, and havingpassed something to Silver, from hand to hand, slipped yet more smartlyback again to his companions.The sea-cook looked at what had been given him."The black spot! I thought so," he observed. "Where might you have gotthe paper? Why, hillo! Look here, now; this ain't lucky! You've gone andcut this out of a Bible. What fool's cut a Bible?""Ah, there!" said Morgan. "There! Wot did I say? No good'll come o'that, I said.""Well, you've about fixed it now, among you," continued Silver. "You'llall swing now, I reckon. What soft-headed lubber had a Bible?""It was Dick," said one."Dick, was it? Then Dick can get to prayers," said Silver. "He's seenhis slice of luck, has Dick, and you may lay to that."But here the long man with the yellow eyes struck in."Belay that talk, John Silver," he said. "This crew has tipped you theblack spot in full council, as in dooty bound; just you turn it over, asin dooty bound, and see what's wrote there. Then you can talk.""Thanky, George," replied the sea-cook. "You always was brisk forbusiness, and has the rules by heart, George, as I'm pleased to see.Well, what is it, anyway? Ah! 'Deposed'--that's it, is it? Very prettywrote, to be sure; like print, I swear. Your hand o' write, George? Why,you was gettin' quite a leadin' man in this here crew. You'll be cap'nnext, I shouldn't wonder. Just oblige me with that torch again, willyou? This pipe don't draw.""Come, now," said George, "you don't fool this crew no more. You're afunny man, by your account; but you're over now, and you'll maybe stepdown off that barrel and help vote.""I thought you said you knowed the rules," returned Silvercontemptuously. "Leastways, if you don't, I do; and I wait here--and I'mstill your cap'n, mind--till you outs with your grievances and I reply;in the meantime, your black spot ain't worth a biscuit. After that,we'll see.""Oh," replied George, "you don't be under no kind of apprehension; WE'REall square, we are. First, you've made a hash of this cruise--you'll bea bold man to say no to that. Second, you let the enemy out o' this heretrap for nothing. Why did they want out? I dunno, but it's pretty plainthey wanted it. Third, you wouldn't let us go at them upon the march.Oh, we see through you, John Silver; you want to play booty, that'swhat's wrong with you. And then, fourth, there's this here boy.""Is that all?" asked Silver quietly."Enough, too," retorted George. "We'll all swing and sun-dry for yourbungling.""Well now, look here, I'll answer these four p'ints; one after anotherI'll answer 'em. I made a hash o' this cruise, did I? Well now, you allknow what I wanted, and you all know if that had been done that we'd'a been aboard the HISPANIOLA this night as ever was, every man of usalive, and fit, and full of good plum-duff, and the treasure in the holdof her, by thunder! Well, who crossed me? Who forced my hand, as was thelawful cap'n? Who tipped me the black spot the day we landed and beganthis dance? Ah, it's a fine dance--I'm with you there--and looks mightylike a hornpipe in a rope's end at Execution Dock by London town, itdoes. But who done it? Why, it was Anderson, and Hands, and you, GeorgeMerry! And you're the last above board of that same meddling crew;and you have the Davy Jones's insolence to up and stand for cap'n overme--you, that sank the lot of us! By the powers! But this tops thestiffest yarn to nothing."Silver paused, and I could see by the faces of George and his latecomrades that these words had not been said in vain."That's for number one," cried the accused, wiping the sweat from hisbrow, for he had been talking with a vehemence that shook the house."Why, I give you my word, I'm sick to speak to you. You've neither sensenor memory, and I leave it to fancy where your mothers was that let youcome to sea. Sea! Gentlemen o' fortune! I reckon tailors is your trade.""Go on, John," said Morgan. "Speak up to the others.""Ah, the others!" returned John. "They're a nice lot, ain't they? Yousay this cruise is bungled. Ah! By gum, if you could understand how badit's bungled, you would see! We're that near the gibbet that my neck'sstiff with thinking on it. You've seen 'em, maybe, hanged in chains,birds about 'em, seamen p'inting 'em out as they go down with the tide.'Who's that?' says one. 'That! Why, that's John Silver. I knowed himwell,' says another. And you can hear the chains a-jangle as you goabout and reach for the other buoy. Now, that's about where we are,every mother's son of us, thanks to him, and Hands, and Anderson, andother ruination fools of you. And if you want to know about number four,and that boy, why, shiver my timbers, isn't he a hostage? Are we a-goingto waste a hostage? No, not us; he might be our last chance, and Ishouldn't wonder. Kill that boy? Not me, mates! And number three? Ah,well, there's a deal to say to number three. Maybe you don't count itnothing to have a real college doctor to see you every day--you, John,with your head broke--or you, George Merry, that had the ague shakesupon you not six hours agone, and has your eyes the colour of lemon peelto this same moment on the clock? And maybe, perhaps, you didn't knowthere was a consort coming either? But there is, and not so long tillthen; and we'll see who'll be glad to have a hostage when it comes tothat. And as for number two, and why I made a bargain--well, you camecrawling on your knees to me to make it--on your knees you came, you wasthat downhearted--and you'd have starved too if I hadn't--but that's atrifle! You look there--that's why!"And he cast down upon the floor a paper that I instantlyrecognized--none other than the chart on yellow paper, with the threered crosses, that I had found in the oilcloth at the bottom of thecaptain's chest. Why the doctor had given it to him was more than Icould fancy.But if it were inexplicable to me, the appearance of the chart wasincredible to the surviving mutineers. They leaped upon it like catsupon a mouse. It went from hand to hand, one tearing it from another;and by the oaths and the cries and the childish laughter with which theyaccompanied their examination, you would have thought, not only theywere fingering the very gold, but were at sea with it, besides, insafety."Yes," said one, "that's Flint, sure enough. J. F., and a score below,with a clove hitch to it; so he done ever.""Mighty pretty," said George. "But how are we to get away with it, andus no ship."Silver suddenly sprang up, and supporting himself with a hand againstthe wall: "Now I give you warning, George," he cried. "One more wordof your sauce, and I'll call you down and fight you. How? Why, how do Iknow? You had ought to tell me that--you and the rest, that lost me myschooner, with your interference, burn you! But not you, you can't; youhain't got the invention of a cockroach. But civil you can speak, andshall, George Merry, you may lay to that.""That's fair enow," said the old man Morgan."Fair! I reckon so," said the sea-cook. "You lost the ship; I found thetreasure. Who's the better man at that? And now I resign, by thunder!Elect whom you please to be your cap'n now; I'm done with it.""Silver!" they cried. "Barbecue forever! Barbecue for cap'n!""So that's the toon, is it?" cried the cook. "George, I reckon you'llhave to wait another turn, friend; and lucky for you as I'm not arevengeful man. But that was never my way. And now, shipmates, thisblack spot? 'Tain't much good now, is it? Dick's crossed his luck andspoiled his Bible, and that's about all.""It'll do to kiss the book on still, won't it?" growled Dick, who wasevidently uneasy at the curse he had brought upon himself."A Bible with a bit cut out!" returned Silver derisively. "Not it. Itdon't bind no more'n a ballad-book.""Don't it, though?" cried Dick with a sort of joy. "Well, I reckonthat's worth having too.""Here, Jim--here's a cur'osity for you," said Silver, and he tossed methe paper.It was around about the size of a crown piece. One side was blank,for it had been the last leaf; the other contained a verse or two ofRevelation--these words among the rest, which struck sharply home uponmy mind: "Without are dogs and murderers." The printed side had beenblackened with wood ash, which already began to come off and soil myfingers; on the blank side had been written with the same material theone word "Depposed." I have that curiosity beside me at this moment, butnot a trace of writing now remains beyond a single scratch, such as aman might make with his thumb-nail.That was the end of the night's business. Soon after, with a drink allround, we lay down to sleep, and the outside of Silver's vengeance wasto put George Merry up for sentinel and threaten him with death if heshould prove unfaithful.It was long ere I could close an eye, and heaven knows I had matterenough for thought in the man whom I had slain that afternoon, in my ownmost perilous position, and above all, in the remarkable game that I sawSilver now engaged upon--keeping the mutineers together with one handand grasping with the other after every means, possible and impossible,to make his peace and save his miserable life. He himself sleptpeacefully and snored aloud, yet my heart was sore for him, wicked as hewas, to think on the dark perils that environed and the shameful gibbetthat awaited him.30On ParoleI WAS wakened--indeed, we were all wakened, for I could see even thesentinel shake himself together from where he had fallen against thedoor-post--by a clear, hearty voice hailing us from the margin of thewood:"Block house, ahoy!" it cried. "Here's the doctor."And the doctor it was. Although I was glad to hear the sound, yet mygladness was not without admixture. I remembered with confusion myinsubordinate and stealthy conduct, and when I saw where it had broughtme--among what companions and surrounded by what dangers--I felt ashamedto look him in the face.He must have risen in the dark, for the day had hardly come; and when Iran to a loophole and looked out, I saw him standing, like Silver oncebefore, up to the mid-leg in creeping vapour."You, doctor! Top o' the morning to you, sir!" cried Silver, broad awakeand beaming with good nature in a moment. "Bright and early, to be sure;and it's the early bird, as the saying goes, that gets the rations.George, shake up your timbers, son, and help Dr. Livesey over the ship'sside. All a-doin' well, your patients was--all well and merry."So he pattered on, standing on the hilltop with his crutch under hiselbow and one hand upon the side of the log-house--quite the old John invoice, manner, and expression."We've quite a surprise for you too, sir," he continued. "We've a littlestranger here--he! he! A noo boarder and lodger, sir, and looking fitand taut as a fiddle; slep' like a supercargo, he did, right alongsideof John--stem to stem we was, all night."Dr. Livesey was by this time across the stockade and pretty near thecook, and I could hear the alteration in his voice as he said, "NotJim?""The very same Jim as ever was," says Silver.The doctor stopped outright, although he did not speak, and it was someseconds before he seemed able to move on."Well, well," he said at last, "duty first and pleasure afterwards, asyou might have said yourself, Silver. Let us overhaul these patients ofyours."A moment afterwards he had entered the block house and with one grimnod to me proceeded with his work among the sick. He seemed under noapprehension, though he must have known that his life, among thesetreacherous demons, depended on a hair; and he rattled on to hispatients as if he were paying an ordinary professional visit in a quietEnglish family. His manner, I suppose, reacted on the men, for theybehaved to him as if nothing had occurred, as if he were still ship'sdoctor and they still faithful hands before the mast."You're doing well, my friend," he said to the fellow with the bandagedhead, "and if ever any person had a close shave, it was you; your headmust be as hard as iron. Well, George, how goes it? You're a prettycolour, certainly; why, your liver, man, is upside down. Did you takethat medicine? Did he take that medicine, men?""Aye, aye, sir, he took it, sure enough," returned Morgan."Because, you see, since I am mutineers' doctor, or prison doctor as Iprefer to call it," says Doctor Livesey in his pleasantest way, "I makeit a point of honour not to lose a man for King George (God bless him!)and the gallows."The rogues looked at each other but swallowed the home-thrust insilence."Dick don't feel well, sir," said one."Don't he?" replied the doctor. "Well, step up here, Dick, and let mesee your tongue. No, I should be surprised if he did! The man's tongueis fit to frighten the French. Another fever.""Ah, there," said Morgan, "that comed of sp'iling Bibles.""That comes--as you call it--of being arrant asses," retorted thedoctor, "and not having sense enough to know honest air from poison,and the dry land from a vile, pestiferous slough. I think it mostprobable--though of course it's only an opinion--that you'll all havethe deuce to pay before you get that malaria out of your systems. Campin a bog, would you? Silver, I'm surprised at you. You're less of a foolthan many, take you all round; but you don't appear to me to have therudiments of a notion of the rules of health."Well," he added after he had dosed them round and they had takenhis prescriptions, with really laughable humility, more like charityschoolchildren than blood-guilty mutineers and pirates--"well, that'sdone for today. And now I should wish to have a talk with that boy,please."And he nodded his head in my direction carelessly.George Merry was at the door, spitting and spluttering over somebad-tasted medicine; but at the first word of the doctor's proposal heswung round with a deep flush and cried "No!" and swore.Silver struck the barrel with his open hand."Si-lence!" he roared and looked about him positively like a lion."Doctor," he went on in his usual tones, "I was a-thinking of that,knowing as how you had a fancy for the boy. We're all humbly gratefulfor your kindness, and as you see, puts faith in you and takes the drugsdown like that much grog. And I take it I've found a way as'll suit all.Hawkins, will you give me your word of honour as a young gentleman--fora young gentleman you are, although poor born--your word of honour notto slip your cable?"I readily gave the pledge required."Then, doctor," said Silver, "you just step outside o' that stockade,and once you're there I'll bring the boy down on the inside, and Ireckon you can yarn through the spars. Good day to you, sir, and all ourdooties to the squire and Cap'n Smollett."The explosion of disapproval, which nothing but Silver's black looks hadrestrained, broke out immediately the doctor had left the house. Silverwas roundly accused of playing double--of trying to make a separatepeace for himself, of sacrificing the interests of his accomplices andvictims, and, in one word, of the identical, exact thing that he wasdoing. It seemed to me so obvious, in this case, that I could notimagine how he was to turn their anger. But he was twice the manthe rest were, and his last night's victory had given him a hugepreponderance on their minds. He called them all the fools and doltsyou can imagine, said it was necessary I should talk to the doctor,fluttered the chart in their faces, asked them if they could afford tobreak the treaty the very day they were bound a-treasure-hunting."No, by thunder!" he cried. "It's us must break the treaty when the timecomes; and till then I'll gammon that doctor, if I have to ile his bootswith brandy."And then he bade them get the fire lit, and stalked out upon his crutch,with his hand on my shoulder, leaving them in a disarray, and silencedby his volubility rather than convinced."Slow, lad, slow," he said. "They might round upon us in a twinkle of aneye if we was seen to hurry."Very deliberately, then, did we advance across the sand to where thedoctor awaited us on the other side of the stockade, and as soon as wewere within easy speaking distance Silver stopped."You'll make a note of this here also, doctor," says he, "and the boy'lltell you how I saved his life, and were deposed for it too, and youmay lay to that. Doctor, when a man's steering as near the wind asme--playing chuck-farthing with the last breath in his body, like--youwouldn't think it too much, mayhap, to give him one good word? You'llplease bear in mind it's not my life only now--it's that boy's into thebargain; and you'll speak me fair, doctor, and give me a bit o' hope togo on, for the sake of mercy."Silver was a changed man once he was out there and had his back to hisfriends and the block house; his cheeks seemed to have fallen in, hisvoice trembled; never was a soul more dead in earnest."Why, John, you're not afraid?" asked Dr. Livesey."Doctor, I'm no coward; no, not I--not SO much!" and he snapped hisfingers. "If I was I wouldn't say it. But I'll own up fairly, I've theshakes upon me for the gallows. You're a good man and a true; I neverseen a better man! And you'll not forget what I done good, not any morethan you'll forget the bad, I know. And I step aside--see here--andleave you and Jim alone. And you'll put that down for me too, for it's along stretch, is that!"So saying, he stepped back a little way, till he was out of earshot, andthere sat down upon a tree-stump and began to whistle, spinning roundnow and again upon his seat so as to command a sight, sometimes of meand the doctor and sometimes of his unruly ruffians as they went to andfro in the sand between the fire--which they were busy rekindling--andthe house, from which they brought forth pork and bread to make thebreakfast."So, Jim," said the doctor sadly, "here you are. As you have brewed, soshall you drink, my boy. Heaven knows, I cannot find it in my heart toblame you, but this much I will say, be it kind or unkind: when CaptainSmollett was well, you dared not have gone off; and when he was ill andcouldn't help it, by George, it was downright cowardly!"I will own that I here began to weep. "Doctor," I said, "you might spareme. I have blamed myself enough; my life's forfeit anyway, and I shouldhave been dead by now if Silver hadn't stood for me; and doctor,believe this, I can die--and I dare say I deserve it--but what I fear istorture. If they come to torture me--""Jim," the doctor interrupted, and his voice was quite changed, "Jim, Ican't have this. Whip over, and we'll run for it.""Doctor," said I, "I passed my word.""I know, I know," he cried. "We can't help that, Jim, now. I'll take iton my shoulders, holus bolus, blame and shame, my boy; but stay here,I cannot let you. Jump! One jump, and you're out, and we'll run for itlike antelopes.""No," I replied; "you know right well you wouldn't do the thingyourself--neither you nor squire nor captain; and no more will I. Silvertrusted me; I passed my word, and back I go. But, doctor, you did notlet me finish. If they come to torture me, I might let slip a word ofwhere the ship is, for I got the ship, part by luck and part by risking,and she lies in North Inlet, on the southern beach, and just below highwater. At half tide she must be high and dry.""The ship!" exclaimed the doctor.Rapidly I described to him my adventures, and he heard me out insilence."There is a kind of fate in this," he observed when I had done. "Everystep, it's you that saves our lives; and do you suppose by any chancethat we are going to let you lose yours? That would be a poor return, myboy. You found out the plot; you found Ben Gunn--the best deed thatever you did, or will do, though you live to ninety. Oh, by Jupiter, andtalking of Ben Gunn! Why, this is the mischief in person. Silver!" hecried. "Silver! I'll give you a piece of advice," he continued asthe cook drew near again; "don't you be in any great hurry after thattreasure.""Why, sir, I do my possible, which that ain't," said Silver. "I canonly, asking your pardon, save my life and the boy's by seeking for thattreasure; and you may lay to that.""Well, Silver," replied the doctor, "if that is so, I'll go one stepfurther: look out for squalls when you find it.""Sir," said Silver, "as between man and man, that's too much and toolittle. What you're after, why you left the block house, why you givenme that there chart, I don't know, now, do I? And yet I done yourbidding with my eyes shut and never a word of hope! But no, this here'stoo much. If you won't tell me what you mean plain out, just say so andI'll leave the helm.""No," said the doctor musingly; "I've no right to say more; it's not mysecret, you see, Silver, or, I give you my word, I'd tell it you. ButI'll go as far with you as I dare go, and a step beyond, for I'll havemy wig sorted by the captain or I'm mistaken! And first, I'll give you abit of hope; Silver, if we both get alive out of this wolf-trap, I'll domy best to save you, short of perjury."Silver's face was radiant. "You couldn't say more, I'm sure, sir, not ifyou was my mother," he cried."Well, that's my first concession," added the doctor. "My second is apiece of advice: keep the boy close beside you, and when you need help,halloo. I'm off to seek it for you, and that itself will show you if Ispeak at random. Good-bye, Jim."And Dr. Livesey shook hands with me through the stockade, nodded toSilver, and set off at a brisk pace into the wood.31The Treasure-hunt--Flint's Pointer"JIM," said Silver when we were alone, "if I saved your life, you savedmine; and I'll not forget it. I seen the doctor waving you to run forit--with the tail of my eye, I did; and I seen you say no, as plain ashearing. Jim, that's one to you. This is the first glint of hope I hadsince the attack failed, and I owe it you. And now, Jim, we're to go infor this here treasure-hunting, with sealed orders too, and I don't likeit; and you and me must stick close, back to back like, and we'll saveour necks in spite o' fate and fortune."Just then a man hailed us from the fire that breakfast was ready, andwe were soon seated here and there about the sand over biscuit and friedjunk. They had lit a fire fit to roast an ox, and it was now grown sohot that they could only approach it from the windward, and even therenot without precaution. In the same wasteful spirit, they had cooked,I suppose, three times more than we could eat; and one of them, with anempty laugh, threw what was left into the fire, which blazed and roaredagain over this unusual fuel. I never in my life saw men so careless ofthe morrow; hand to mouth is the only word that can describe their wayof doing; and what with wasted food and sleeping sentries, though theywere bold enough for a brush and be done with it, I could see theirentire unfitness for anything like a prolonged campaign.Even Silver, eating away, with Captain Flint upon his shoulder, had nota word of blame for their recklessness. And this the more surprised me,for I thought he had never shown himself so cunning as he did then."Aye, mates," said he, "it's lucky you have Barbecue to think for youwith this here head. I got what I wanted, I did. Sure enough, they havethe ship. Where they have it, I don't know yet; but once we hit thetreasure, we'll have to jump about and find out. And then, mates, usthat has the boats, I reckon, has the upper hand."Thus he kept running on, with his mouth full of the hot bacon; thus herestored their hope and confidence, and, I more than suspect, repairedhis own at the same time."As for hostage," he continued, "that's his last talk, I guess, withthem he loves so dear. I've got my piece o' news, and thanky to himfor that; but it's over and done. I'll take him in a line when we gotreasure-hunting, for we'll keep him like so much gold, in case ofaccidents, you mark, and in the meantime. Once we got the ship andtreasure both and off to sea like jolly companions, why then we'll talkMr. Hawkins over, we will, and we'll give him his share, to be sure, forall his kindness."It was no wonder the men were in a good humour now. For my part, Iwas horribly cast down. Should the scheme he had now sketched provefeasible, Silver, already doubly a traitor, would not hesitate to adoptit. He had still a foot in either camp, and there was no doubt hewould prefer wealth and freedom with the pirates to a bare escape fromhanging, which was the best he had to hope on our side.Nay, and even if things so fell out that he was forced to keep his faithwith Dr. Livesey, even then what danger lay before us! What a momentthat would be when the suspicions of his followers turned to certaintyand he and I should have to fight for dear life--he a cripple and I aboy--against five strong and active seamen!Add to this double apprehension the mystery that still hung over thebehaviour of my friends, their unexplained desertion of the stockade,their inexplicable cession of the chart, or harder still to understand,the doctor's last warning to Silver, "Look out for squalls when youfind it," and you will readily believe how little taste I found in mybreakfast and with how uneasy a heart I set forth behind my captors onthe quest for treasure.We made a curious figure, had anyone been there to see us--all in soiledsailor clothes and all but me armed to the teeth. Silver had two gunsslung about him--one before and one behind--besides the great cutlassat his waist and a pistol in each pocket of his square-tailed coat.To complete his strange appearance, Captain Flint sat perched upon hisshoulder and gabbling odds and ends of purposeless sea-talk. I had aline about my waist and followed obediently after the sea-cook, whoheld the loose end of the rope, now in his free hand, now between hispowerful teeth. For all the world, I was led like a dancing bear.The other men were variously burthened, some carrying picks andshovels--for that had been the very first necessary they brought ashorefrom the HISPANIOLA--others laden with pork, bread, and brandy for themidday meal. All the stores, I observed, came from our stock, and Icould see the truth of Silver's words the night before. Had he notstruck a bargain with the doctor, he and his mutineers, deserted by theship, must have been driven to subsist on clear water and the proceedsof their hunting. Water would have been little to their taste; a sailoris not usually a good shot; and besides all that, when they were soshort of eatables, it was not likely they would be very flush of powder.Well, thus equipped, we all set out--even the fellow with the brokenhead, who should certainly have kept in shadow--and straggled, one afteranother, to the beach, where the two gigs awaited us. Even these boretrace of the drunken folly of the pirates, one in a broken thwart, andboth in their muddy and unbailed condition. Both were to be carriedalong with us for the sake of safety; and so, with our numbers dividedbetween them, we set forth upon the bosom of the anchorage.As we pulled over, there was some discussion on the chart. The red crosswas, of course, far too large to be a guide; and the terms of the noteon the back, as you will hear, admitted of some ambiguity. They ran, thereader may remember, thus:     Tall tree, Spy-glass shoulder, bearing a point to     the N. of N.N.E.     Skeleton Island E.S.E. and by E.     Ten feet.A tall tree was thus the principal mark. Now, right before us theanchorage was bounded by a plateau from two to three hundred feet high,adjoining on the north the sloping southern shoulder of the Spy-glassand rising again towards the south into the rough, cliffy eminencecalled the Mizzen-mast Hill. The top of the plateau was dotted thicklywith pine-trees of varying height. Every here and there, one of adifferent species rose forty or fifty feet clear above its neighbours,and which of these was the particular "tall tree" of Captain Flint couldonly be decided on the spot, and by the readings of the compass.Yet, although that was the case, every man on board the boats hadpicked a favourite of his own ere we were half-way over, Long John aloneshrugging his shoulders and bidding them wait till they were there.We pulled easily, by Silver's directions, not to weary the handsprematurely, and after quite a long passage, landed at the mouth ofthe second river--that which runs down a woody cleft of the Spy-glass.Thence, bending to our left, we began to ascend the slope towards theplateau.At the first outset, heavy, miry ground and a matted, marish vegetationgreatly delayed our progress; but by little and little the hill beganto steepen and become stony under foot, and the wood to change itscharacter and to grow in a more open order. It was, indeed, a mostpleasant portion of the island that we were now approaching. Aheavy-scented broom and many flowering shrubs had almost taken the placeof grass. Thickets of green nutmeg-trees were dotted here and there withthe red columns and the broad shadow of the pines; and the first mingledtheir spice with the aroma of the others. The air, besides, was freshand stirring, and this, under the sheer sunbeams, was a wonderfulrefreshment to our senses.The party spread itself abroad, in a fan shape, shouting and leaping toand fro. About the centre, and a good way behind the rest, Silver andI followed--I tethered by my rope, he ploughing, with deep pants, amongthe sliding gravel. From time to time, indeed, I had to lend him a hand,or he must have missed his footing and fallen backward down the hill.We had thus proceeded for about half a mile and were approaching thebrow of the plateau when the man upon the farthest left began to cryaloud, as if in terror. Shout after shout came from him, and the othersbegan to run in his direction."He can't 'a found the treasure," said old Morgan, hurrying past us fromthe right, "for that's clean a-top."Indeed, as we found when we also reached the spot, it was somethingvery different. At the foot of a pretty big pine and involved in a greencreeper, which had even partly lifted some of the smaller bones, a humanskeleton lay, with a few shreds of clothing, on the ground. I believe achill struck for a moment to every heart."He was a seaman," said George Merry, who, bolder than the rest, hadgone up close and was examining the rags of clothing. "Leastways, thisis good sea-cloth.""Aye, aye," said Silver; "like enough; you wouldn't look to find abishop here, I reckon. But what sort of a way is that for bones to lie?'Tain't in natur'."Indeed, on a second glance, it seemed impossible to fancy that the bodywas in a natural position. But for some disarray (the work, perhaps, ofthe birds that had fed upon him or of the slow-growing creeper that hadgradually enveloped his remains) the man lay perfectly straight--hisfeet pointing in one direction, his hands, raised above his head like adiver's, pointing directly in the opposite."I've taken a notion into my old numbskull," observed Silver. "Here'sthe compass; there's the tip-top p'int o' Skeleton Island, stickin'out like a tooth. Just take a bearing, will you, along the line of thembones."It was done. The body pointed straight in the direction of the island,and the compass read duly E.S.E. and by E."I thought so," cried the cook; "this here is a p'inter. Right up thereis our line for the Pole Star and the jolly dollars. But, by thunder!If it don't make me cold inside to think of Flint. This is one of HISjokes, and no mistake. Him and these six was alone here; he killed 'em,every man; and this one he hauled here and laid down by compass, shivermy timbers! They're long bones, and the hair's been yellow. Aye, thatwould be Allardyce. You mind Allardyce, Tom Morgan?""Aye, aye," returned Morgan; "I mind him; he owed me money, he did, andtook my knife ashore with him.""Speaking of knives," said another, "why don't we find his'n lyinground? Flint warn't the man to pick a seaman's pocket; and the birds, Iguess, would leave it be.""By the powers, and that's true!" cried Silver."There ain't a thing left here," said Merry, still feeling round amongthe bones; "not a copper doit nor a baccy box. It don't look nat'ral tome.""No, by gum, it don't," agreed Silver; "not nat'ral, nor not nice, saysyou. Great guns! Messmates, but if Flint was living, this would be a hotspot for you and me. Six they were, and six are we; and bones is whatthey are now.""I saw him dead with these here deadlights," said Morgan. "Billy took mein. There he laid, with penny-pieces on his eyes.""Dead--aye, sure enough he's dead and gone below," said the fellow withthe bandage; "but if ever sperrit walked, it would be Flint's. Dearheart, but he died bad, did Flint!""Aye, that he did," observed another; "now he raged, and now he holleredfor the rum, and now he sang. 'Fifteen Men' were his only song, mates;and I tell you true, I never rightly liked to hear it since. It wasmain hot, and the windy was open, and I hear that old song comin' out asclear as clear--and the death-haul on the man already.""Come, come," said Silver; "stow this talk. He's dead, and he don'twalk, that I know; leastways, he won't walk by day, and you may lay tothat. Care killed a cat. Fetch ahead for the doubloons."We started, certainly; but in spite of the hot sun and the staringdaylight, the pirates no longer ran separate and shouting through thewood, but kept side by side and spoke with bated breath. The terror ofthe dead buccaneer had fallen on their spirits.32The Treasure-hunt--The Voice Among the TreesPARTLY from the damping influence of this alarm, partly to rest Silverand the sick folk, the whole party sat down as soon as they had gainedthe brow of the ascent.The plateau being somewhat tilted towards the west, this spot on whichwe had paused commanded a wide prospect on either hand. Before us,over the tree-tops, we beheld the Cape of the Woods fringed with surf;behind, we not only looked down upon the anchorage and Skeleton Island,but saw--clear across the spit and the eastern lowlands--a great fieldof open sea upon the east. Sheer above us rose the Spyglass, here dottedwith single pines, there black with precipices. There was no sound butthat of the distant breakers, mounting from all round, and the chirp ofcountless insects in the brush. Not a man, not a sail, upon the sea; thevery largeness of the view increased the sense of solitude.Silver, as he sat, took certain bearings with his compass."There are three 'tall trees'" said he, "about in the right line fromSkeleton Island. 'Spy-glass shoulder,' I take it, means that lower p'intthere. It's child's play to find the stuff now. I've half a mind to dinefirst.""I don't feel sharp," growled Morgan. "Thinkin' o' Flint--I think itwere--as done me.""Ah, well, my son, you praise your stars he's dead," said Silver."He were an ugly devil," cried a third pirate with a shudder; "that bluein the face too!""That was how the rum took him," added Merry. "Blue! Well, I reckon hewas blue. That's a true word."Ever since they had found the skeleton and got upon this train ofthought, they had spoken lower and lower, and they had almost got towhispering by now, so that the sound of their talk hardly interruptedthe silence of the wood. All of a sudden, out of the middle of the treesin front of us, a thin, high, trembling voice struck up the well-knownair and words:     "Fifteen men on the dead man's chest--     Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"I never have seen men more dreadfully affected than the pirates. Thecolour went from their six faces like enchantment; some leaped to theirfeet, some clawed hold of others; Morgan grovelled on the ground."It's Flint, by ----!" cried Merry.The song had stopped as suddenly as it began--broken off, you would havesaid, in the middle of a note, as though someone had laid his hand uponthe singer's mouth. Coming through the clear, sunny atmosphere among thegreen tree-tops, I thought it had sounded airily and sweetly; and theeffect on my companions was the stranger."Come," said Silver, struggling with his ashen lips to get the word out;"this won't do. Stand by to go about. This is a rum start, and I can'tname the voice, but it's someone skylarking--someone that's flesh andblood, and you may lay to that."His courage had come back as he spoke, and some of the colour to hisface along with it. Already the others had begun to lend an ear to thisencouragement and were coming a little to themselves, when the samevoice broke out again--not this time singing, but in a faint distanthail that echoed yet fainter among the clefts of the Spy-glass."Darby M'Graw," it wailed--for that is the word that best describes thesound--"Darby M'Graw! Darby M'Graw!" again and again and again; and thenrising a little higher, and with an oath that I leave out: "Fetch aftthe rum, Darby!"The buccaneers remained rooted to the ground, their eyes starting fromtheir heads. Long after the voice had died away they still stared insilence, dreadfully, before them."That fixes it!" gasped one. "Let's go.""They was his last words," moaned Morgan, "his last words above board."Dick had his Bible out and was praying volubly. He had been well broughtup, had Dick, before he came to sea and fell among bad companions.Still Silver was unconquered. I could hear his teeth rattle in his head,but he had not yet surrendered."Nobody in this here island ever heard of Darby," he muttered; "not onebut us that's here." And then, making a great effort: "Shipmates,"he cried, "I'm here to get that stuff, and I'll not be beat by man ordevil. I never was feared of Flint in his life, and, by the powers, I'llface him dead. There's seven hundred thousand pound not a quarter of amile from here. When did ever a gentleman o' fortune show his stern tothat much dollars for a boozy old seaman with a blue mug--and him deadtoo?"But there was no sign of reawakening courage in his followers, rather,indeed, of growing terror at the irreverence of his words."Belay there, John!" said Merry. "Don't you cross a sperrit."