Game
A game is structured playing, usually undertaken for enjoyment and sometimes used as an 
educational tool. Games are distinct from work, which is usually carried out for remuneration, 
and from art, which is more often an expression of aesthetic or ideological elements. However, 
the distinction is not clear-cut, and many games are also considered to be work (such as 
professional players of spectator sports/games) or art (such as jigsaw puzzles or games 
involving an artistic layout such as Mahjong, solitaire, or some video games).
Key components of games are goals, rules, challenge, and interaction. Games generally involve 
mental or physical stimulation, and often both. Many games help develop practical skills, serve 
as a form of exercise, or otherwise perform an educational, simulational, or psychological role. 
According to Chris Crawford, the requirement for player interaction puts activities such as 
jigsaw puzzles and solitaire "games" into the category of puzzles rather than games.[1]
Attested as early as 2600 BC,[2][3] games are a universal part of human experience and present 
in all cultures. The Royal Game of Ur, Senet, and Mancala are some of the oldest known 
games.[4]
Definitions
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Ludwig Wittgenstein was probably the first academic philosopher to address the definition of 
the word game. In his Philosophical Investigations,[5] Wittgenstein demonstrated that the 
elements of games, such as play, rules, and competition, all fail to adequately define what 
games are. Wittgenstein concluded that people apply the term game to a range of disparate 
human activities that bear to one another only what one might call family resemblances.
Roger Caillois
French sociologist Roger Caillois, in his book Les jeux et les hommes (Games and Men),[6] 
defined a game as an activity that must have the following characteristics:
*	fun: the activity is chosen for its light-hearted character
*	separate: it is circumscribed in time and place
*	uncertain: the outcome of the activity is unforeseeable
*	non-productive: participation does not accomplish anything useful
*	governed by rules: the activity has rules that are different from everyday life
*	fictitious: it is accompanied by the awareness of a different reality

Chris Crawford
Computer game designer Chris Crawford attempted to define the term game[1] using a series 
of dichotomies:
1.	Creative expression is art if made for its own beauty, and entertainment if made for 
money.
2.	A piece of entertainment is a plaything if it is interactive. Movies and books are cited as 
examples of non-interactive entertainment.
3.	If no goals are associated with a plaything, it is a toy. (Crawford notes that by his definition, 
(a) a toy can become a game element if the player makes up rules, and (b) The Sims and 
SimCity are toys, not games.) If it has goals, a plaything is a challenge.
4.	If a challenge has no "active agent against whom you compete," it is a puzzle; if there is one, 
it is a conflict. (Crawford admits that this is a subjective test. Video games with noticeably 
algorithmic artificial intelligence can be played as puzzles; these include the patterns used to 
evade ghosts in Pac-Man.)
5.	Finally, if the player can only outperform the opponent, but not attack them to interfere 
with their performance, the conflict is a competition. (Competitions include racing and 
figure skating.) However, if attacks are allowed, then the conflict qualifies as a game.
Crawford's definition may thus be rendered as: an interactive, goal-oriented activity, with 
active agents to play against, in which players (including active agents) can interfere with each 
other.
Other definitions
*	"A game is a system in which players engage in an artificial conflict, defined by rules, that 
results in a quantifiable outcome." (Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman)[7]
*	"A game is a form of art in which participants, termed players, make decisions in order to 
manage resources through game tokens in the pursuit of a goal." (Greg Costikyan)[8] 
According to this definitions, some "games" that do not involve choices, such as Chutes and 
Ladders, Candy Land, and War (card game) are not technically games any more than a slot 
machine is.
*	"A game is an activity among two or more independent decision-makers seeking to achieve 
their objectives in some limiting context." (Clark C. Abt)[9]
*	"At its most elementary level then we can define game as an exercise of voluntary control 
systems in which there is an opposition between forces, confined by a procedure and rules 
in order to produce a disequilibrial outcome." (Elliot Avedon and Brian Sutton-Smith)[10]
"A game is a form of play with goals and structure." (Kevin Maroney)[11] 
Gameplay elements and classification
Games can be characterized by "what the player does."[1] This is often referred to as gameplay. 
Major key elements identified in this context are tools and rules that define the overall context 
of game and that in turn produce skill, strategy, and chance.[clarification needed]
Tools
Games are often classified by the components required to play them (e.g. miniatures, a ball, 
cards, a board and pieces, or a computer). In places where the use of leather is well 
established, the ball has been a popular game piece throughout recorded history, resulting in a 
worldwide popularity of ball games such as rugby, basketball, football, cricket, tennis, and 
volleyball. Other tools are more idiosyncratic to a certain region. Many countries in Europe, 
for instance, have unique standard decks of playing cards. Other games such as chess may be 
traced primarily through the development and evolution of its game pieces.
Many game tools are tokens, meant to represent other things. A token may be a pawn on a 
board, play money, or an intangible item such as a point scored.
Games such as hide-and-seek or tag do not utilise any obvious tool; rather, their interactivity is 
defined by the environment. Games with the same or similar rules may have different 
gameplay if the environment is altered. For example, hide-and-seek in a school building 
differs from the same game in a park; an auto race can be radically different depending on the 
track or street course, even with the same cars.
Rules
Whereas games are often characterized by their tools, they are often defined by their rules. 
While rules are subject to variations and changes, enough change in the rules usually results in 
a "new" game. For instance, baseball can be played with "real" baseballs or with wiffleballs. 
However, if the players decide to play with only three bases, they are arguably playing a 
different game. There are exceptions to this in that some games deliberately involve the 
changing of their own rules, but even then there are often immutable meta-rules.
Rules generally determine turn order, the rights and responsibilities of the players, and each 
player's goals. Player rights may include when they may spend resources or move tokens. 
Common win conditions are being first to amass a certain quota of points or tokens (as in 
Settlers of Catan), having the greatest number of tokens at the end of the game (as in 
Monopoly), or some relationship of one's game tokens to those of one's opponent (as in 
chess's checkmate).
Skill, strategy, and chance
A game's tools and rules will result in its requiring skill, strategy, luck, or a combination 
thereof, and are classified accordingly.
Games of skill include games of physical skill, such as wrestling, tug of war, hopscotch, target 
shooting, and stake, and games of mental skill such as checkers and chess. Games of strategy 
include checkers, chess, go, arimaa, and tic-tac-toe, and often require special equipment to 
play them. Games of chance include gambling games (blackjack, mah-jongg, roulette, etc.), as 
well as snakes and ladders and rock, paper, scissors; most require equipment such as cards or 
dice. However, most games contain two or all three of these elements. For example, American 
football and baseball involve both physical skill and strategy while tiddlywinks, poker, and 
Monopoly combine strategy and chance. Many card and board games combine all three; most 
trick-taking games involve mental skill, strategy, and an element of chance, as do many 
strategic board games such as Risk, Settlers of Catan, and Carcassonne.
Single-player games
Most games require multiple players. However, single-player games are unique in respect to 
the type of challenges a player faces. Unlike a game with multiple players competing with or 
against each other to reach the game's goal, a one-player game is a battle solely against an 
element of the environment (an artificial opponent), against one's own skills, against time, or 
against chance. Playing with a yo-yo or playing tennis against a wall is not generally 
recognized as playing a game due to the lack of any formidable opposition.
It is not valid to describe a computer game as single-player where the computer provides 
opposition. If the computer is merely record-keeping, then the game may be validly single-
player.
Many games described as "single-player" may be termed actually puzzles or recreations.
Types
Sports
Many sports require special equipment and dedicated playing fields, leading to the 
involvement of a community much larger than the group of players. A city or town may set 
aside such resources for the organization of sports leagues.
Popular sports may have spectators who are entertained just by watching games. A community 
will often align itself with a local sports team that supposedly represents it (even if the team or 
most of its players only recently moved in); they often align themselves against their 
opponents or have traditional rivalries. The concept of fandom began with sports fans.
Stanley Fish cited[citation needed] the balls and strikes of baseball as a clear example of social 
construction, the operation of rules on the game's tools. While the strike zone target is 
governed by the rules of the game, it epitomizes the category of things that exist only because 
people have agreed to treat them as real. No pitch is a ball or a strike until it has been labeled 
as such by an appropriate authority, the plate umpire, whose judgment on this matter cannot 
be challenged within the current game.
Certain competitive sports, such as racing and gymnastics, are not games by definitions such 
as Crawford's (see above) - despite the inclusion of many in the Olympic Games - because 
competitors do not interact with their opponents; they simply challenge each other in indirect 
ways.
Lawn games
Lawn games are outdoor games that can be played on a lawn; an area of mowed grass (or 
alternately, on graded soil) generally smaller than a "field" or pitch. Variations of many games 
that are traditionally played on a pitch are marketed as "lawn games" for home use in a front 
or back yard. Common lawn games include horseshoes, sholf, croquet, bocce, lawn bowls, and 
stake.
Tabletop games
Main article: Tabletop game
A tabletop game generally refers to any game where the elements of play are confined to a 
small area and that require little physical exertion, usually simply placing, picking up and 
moving game pieces. Most of these games are, thus, played at a table around which the players 
are seated and on which the game's elements are located. A variety of major game types 
generally fall under the heading of tabletop games. It is worth noting that many games falling 
into this category, particularly party games, are more free-form in their play and can involve 
physical activity such as mime, however the basic premise is still that the game does not 
require a large area in which to play it, large amounts of strength or stamina, or specialized 
equipment other than what comes in the box (games sometimes require additional materials 
like pencil and paper that are easy to procure).
Dexterity/coordination games
This class of games includes any game in which the skill element involved relates to manual 
dexterity or hand-eye coordination, but excludes the class of video games (see below). Games 
such as jacks, paper football, and Jenga require only very portable or improvised equipment 
and can be played on any flat level surface, while other examples, such as pinball, billiards, air 
hockey, foosball, and table hockey require specialized tables or other self-contained modules 
on which the game is played. The advent of home video game systems largely replaced some 
of these, such as table hockey, however air hockey, billiards, pinball and foosball remain 
popular fixtures in private and public game rooms. These games and others, as they require 
reflexes and coordination, are generally performed more poorly by intoxicated persons but are 
unlikely to result in injury because of this; as such the games are popular as drinking games. In 
addition, dedicated drinking games such as quarters also involve physical coordination and are 
popular for similar reasons.
Board games
Board games use as a central tool a board on which the players' status, resources, and progress 
are tracked using physical tokens. Many also involve dice and/or cards. Most games that 
simulate war are board games (though a large number of video games have been created to 
simulate strategic combat; see "Video Games" below), and the board may be a map on which 
the players' tokens move. Virtually all board games involve "turn-based" play; one player 
contemplates and then makes a move, then the next player does the same, and a player can 
only act on their turn. This is opposed to "real-time" play as is found in some card games, most 
sports and most video games.
Some games, such as chess and Go, are entirely deterministic, relying only on the strategy 
element for their interest. Children's games, on the other hand, tend to be very luck-based, 
with games such as Candy Land and Chutes and Ladders having virtually no decisions to be 
made. By some definitions, such as that by (Greg Costikyan), they are not games since there 
are no decisions to make to effect the outcome.[12] Most other board games combine strategy 
and luck factors; the game of backgammon requires players to decide the best strategic move 
based on the roll of two dice. Trivia games have a great deal of randomness based on the 
questions a person gets. German-style board games are notable for often having rather less of a 
luck factor than many board games.
Board game groups include race games, roll-and-move games, abstract strategy games, word 
games, and wargames, as well as the trivia and German-style board games mentioned above. 
Some board games fall into multiple groups and even incorporate elements of other genres: 
Cranium is one popular example, where players must succeed in each of four main skills: 
artistry, live performance, trivia, and language skill.
Card games
Main article: Card game
Further information: Collectible card game
Card games use a deck of cards as their central tool. These cards may be a standard Anglo-
American (52-card) deck of playing cards (such as for bridge, poker, Rummy, etc.), a regional 
deck using 32, 36 or 40 cards and different suit signs (such as for the popular German game 
skat), a tarot deck of 78 cards (used in Europe to play a variety of trick-taking games 
collectively known as Tarot, Tarock, and/or Tarocchi games), or a deck specific to the 
individual game (such as Set or 1000 Blank White Cards). Uno and Rook are examples of 
games that were originally played with a standard deck and have since been commercialized 
with customized decks. Some collectible card games such as Magic: The Gathering are played 
with a small selection of cards that have been collected or purchased individually from large 
available sets.
Some board games include a deck of cards as a gameplay element, normally for randomization 
and/or to keep track of game progress. Conversely, some card games such as Cribbage use a 
board with movers, normally to keep score. The differentiation between the two genres in 
such cases depends on which element of the game is foremost in its play; a board game using 
cards for random actions can usually use some other method of randomization, while Cribbage 
can just as easily be scored on paper. These elements as used are simply the traditional and 
easiest methods to achieve their purpose.
Dice games
Main article: Dice game
Dice games use a number of dice as their central element. Board games often use dice for a 
randomization element, and thus each roll of the dice has a profound impact on the outcome 
of the game, however dice games are differentiated in that the dice do not determine the 
success or failure of some other element of the game; they instead are the central indicator of 
the person's standing in the game. Popular dice games include Yahtzee, Farkle, Bunco, Liar's 
dice/Perudo, and Poker dice. As dice are, by their very nature, designed to produce apparently 
random numbers, these games usually involve a high degree of luck, which can be directed to 
some extent by the player through more strategic elements of play and through tenets of 
probability theory. Such games are thus popular as gambling games; the game of Craps is 
perhaps the most famous example, though Liar's dice and Poker dice were originally 
conceived of as gambling games.
Domino and tile games
Main articles: Tile-based game and Dominoes
Domino games are similar in many respects to card games, but the generic device is instead a 
set of tiles called dominoes, which traditionally each have two ends, each with a given number 
of dots, or "pips", and each combination of two possible end values as it appears on a tile is 
unique in the set. The games played with dominoes largely center around playing a domino 
from the player's "hand" onto the matching end of another domino, and the overall object 
could be to always be able to make a play, to make all open endpoints sum to a given number 
or multiple, or simply to play all dominoes from one's hand onto the board. Sets vary in the 
number of possible dots on one end, and thus of the number of combinations and pieces; the 
most common set historically is double-six, though in more recent times "extended" sets such 
as double-nine have been introduced to increase the number of dominoes available, which 
allows larger hands and more players in a game. Muggins, Mexican Train, and Chicken Foot 
are very popular domino games. Texas 42 is a domino game more similar in its play to a "trick-
taking" card game.
Variations of traditional dominoes abound: Triominoes are similar in theory but are triangular 
and thus have three values per tile. Similarly, a game known as Quad-Ominos uses four-sided 
tiles.
Some other games use tiles in place of cards; Rummikub is a variant of the Rummy card game 
family that uses tiles numbered in ascending rank among four colors, very similar to Anglo-
American playing cards. Mah-Jongg is another game very similar to Rummy that uses a set of 
tiles with card-like values and art.
Lastly, some games use graphical tiles to form a board layout, on which other elements of the 
game are played. Settlers of Catan and Carcassonne are examples. In each, the "board" is 
made up of a series of tiles; in Settlers of Catan the starting layout is random but static, while 
in Carcassonne the game is played by "building" the board tile-by-tile. Hive, an abstract 
strategy game using tiles as moving pieces, has mechanical and strategic elements similar to 
chess, although it has no board; the pieces themselves both form the layout and can move 
within it.
Pencil and paper games
Pencil and paper games require little or no specialized equipment other than writing materials, 
though some such games have been commercialized as board games (Scrabble, for instance, is 
based on the idea of a crossword puzzle, and tic-tac-toe sets with a boxed grid and pieces are 
available commercially). These games vary widely, from games centering on a design being 
drawn such as Pictionary and "connect-the-dots" games like sprouts, to letter and word games 
such as Boggle and Scattergories, to solitaire and logic puzzle games such as Sudoku and 
crossword puzzles.
Guessing games
A guessing game has as its core a piece of information that one player knows, and the object is 
to coerce others into guessing that piece of information without actually divulging it in text or 
spoken word. Charades is probably the most well-known game of this type, and has spawned 
numerous commercial variants that involve differing rules on the type of communication to be 
given, such as Catch Phrase, Taboo, Pictionary, and similar. The genre also includes many 
game shows such as Win, Lose or Draw, Password and $25,000 Pyramid.
Video games
Main article: Video game
Video games are computer- or microprocessor-controlled games. Computers can create virtual 
tools to be used in a game between human (or simulated human) opponents, such as cards or 
dice, or can simulate far more elaborate worlds where mundane or fantastic things can be 
manipulated through gameplay.
A computer or video game uses one or more input devices, typically a button/joystick 
combination (on arcade games); a keyboard, mouse and/or trackball (computer games); or a 
controller or a motion sensitive tool. (console games). More esoteric devices such as paddle 
controllers have also been used for input. In computer games, the evolution of user interfaces 
from simple keyboard to mouse, joystick or joypad has profoundly changed the nature of 
game development.[citation needed]
There are many genres of video game; the first commercial video game, Pong, was a simple 
simulation of table tennis. As processing power increased, new genres such as adventure and 
action games were developed that involved a player guiding a character from a third person 
perspective through a series of obstacles. This "real-time" element cannot be easily reproduced 
by a board game, which is generally limited to "turn-based" strategy; this advantage allows 
video games to simulate situations such as combat more realistically. Additionally, the playing 
of a video game does not require the same physical skill, strength and/or danger as a real-
world representation of the game, and can provide either very realistic, exaggerated or 
impossible physics, allowing for elements of a fantastical nature, games involving physical 
violence, or simulations of sports. Lastly, a computer can, with varying degrees of success, 
simulate one or more human opponents in traditional table games such as chess, leading to 
simulations of such games that can be played by a single player.
In more open-ended computer simulations, also known as sandbox-style games, the game 
provides a virtual environment in which the player may be free to do whatever they like within 
the confines of this universe. Sometimes, there is a lack of goals or opposition, which has 
stirred some debate on whether these should be considered "games" or "toys". (Crawford 
specifically mentions Will Wright's SimCity as an example of a toy.[1])
Online games
Main article: Online game
From the very earliest days of networked and time-shared computers, online games have been 
part of the culture. Early commercial systems such as Plato were at least as widely famous for 
their games as for their strictly educational value. In 1958, Tennis for Two dominated Visitor's 
Day and drew attention to the oscilloscope at the Brookhaven National Laboratory; during the 
1980s, Xerox PARC was known mainly for Maze War, which was offered as a hands-on 
demo to visitors.
Modern online games are played using an Internet connection; some have dedicated client 
programs, while others require only a web browser. Some simpler browser games appeal to 
demographic groups (notably women and the middle-aged) that otherwise play very few 
video games.[citation needed]
Media audiences' characteristic has been changing in consequence of the social changes and 
development. They are becoming active and interact more than ever before. The players of the 
game in this phenomenon are just like the social formation in our society. They are both self-
regulating, creating their own social norms and subject to regulation and constraint through 
the code of the game and sometimes through the policing of the game by those who run it. 
The values that are policed vary from game to game. Many of the values encoded into game 
cultures reflect offline cultural values, but games also offer a chance to emphasise alternative 
or subjugated values in the name of fantasy and play. The players of the game at the new 
century are now apparently expressing their profound self through the game. When they can 
play with their anonymous status, they are found to be more confident to express and to step 
out from the position they have never been out from. It offers new experiences and pleasures 
based in the interactive and immersible possibilities of computer technologies.[citation needed]
Role-playing games
Main article: Role-playing game
Role-playing games, often abbreviated as RPGs, are a type of game in which the participants 
(usually) assume the roles of characters acting in a fictional setting. The original role playing 
games-or at least those explicitly marketed as such-are played with a handful of 
participants, usually face-to-face, and keep track of the developing fiction with pen and paper. 
Together, the players may collaborate on a story involving those characters; create, develop, 
and "explore" the setting; or vicariously experience an adventure outside the bounds of 
everyday life. Pen-and-paper role-playing games include, for example, Dungeons & Dragons 
and GURPS.
The term role-playing game has also been appropriated by the video game industry to describe 
a genre of video games. These may be single-player games where one player experiences a 
programmed environment and story, or they may allow players to interact through the internet. 
The experience is usually quite different from traditional role-playing games. Single-player 
games include Final Fantasy, Fable, The Elder Scrolls, and Mass Effect. Online multi-player 
games, often referred to as Massively Multiplayer Online role playing games, or MMORPGs, 
include RuneScape, EverQuest 2, Guild Wars, MapleStory, Anarchy Online, and Dofus. As of 
2009, the most successful MMORPG has been World of Warcraft, which controls the vast 
majority of the market.[13]
Business games
Main article: Team building
Business games can take a variety of forms, from interactive board games to interactive games 
involving different props (balls, ropes, hoops, etc.) and different kinds of activities. The 
purpose of these games is to link to some aspect of organizational performance and to generate 
discussions about business improvement. Many business games focus on torganizational 
behaviors. Some of these are computer simulations while others are simple designs for play 
and debriefing. Team building is a common focus of such activities.
Simulation
Main article: Simulation game
The term "game" can include simulation[14][15] or re-enactment of various activities or use in 
"real life" for various purposes: e.g., training, analysis, prediction. Well-known examples are 
war games and roleplaying. The root of this meaning may originate in the human prehistory of 
games deduced by anthropology from observing primitive cultures, in which children's games 
mimic the activities of adults to a significant degree: hunting, warring, nursing, etc. These 
kinds of games are preserved in modern times
Game classification
Physical education
There are four basic approaches to classifying the games used in physical education:[1]
Game categories
This is a classification scheme proposed by Nicols, which classifies games according to three 
major categories: the game's physical requirements (i.e. what the game requires in addition 
to the players - equipment, size and nature of playing field, and so forth), the structure of 
the game (i.e. number of players, groupings of players, strategies, and so forth), and the 
game's personal requirements (i.e. what the game requires of the player - motor skills, 
fitness levels, numeracy, social skills, and so forth).
Games for understanding
This is a classification scheme proposed by Werner and Alomond that classifies games 
according to their strategies. It divides games into target games (e.g. archery); net or wall 
games (e.g. tennis); striking and field games (e.g. cricket); and invasion games (e.g. 
football).
Core content
This is a classification scheme proposed by Allison and Barrett[2]
that categorizes games by their form (i.e. whether they are novel games proposed by the 
teacher or children, or whether they are existing games already widely played), by the 
movement skills that they require, by the "movement concepts" and game tactics that they 
require, and by the educational results of the game.
Developmental games
This is a classification scheme proposed by Gallahue and Celand that classifies games into 
four developmental levels, as part of an overall educational strategy of applying, 
reinforcing, and implementing movement and sports skills. The levels, in ascending order, 
are "low-level", "complex", "lead-up", and "official sports".
Electronic games
There are several methods of classifying electronic games (i.e. video games and computer 
games).
Solomon[3] puts forward a "commonsense, but broad" classification of electronic games, in 
particular computer games, into simulations (The game reflects reality.), abstract games (The 
game itself is the focus of interest.), and sports. In addition to these he points out that games 
(in general, not just electronic games) fall into classes according to numbers of players. Games 
with two players encompass board games such as chess. Games with multiple players 
encompass card games such as poker, and marketed family games such as Monopoly and 
Scrabble. Puzzles and Solitaire are one-player games. He also includes zero-player games, such 
as Conway's Game of Life, although acknowledging that others argue that such games do not 
constitute a game, because they lack any element of competition. He asserts that such zero-
player games are nonetheless games because they are used recreationally.
Another method, developed by Wright, divides games into the following categories: 
educational or informative, sports, sensorimotor (e.g. action games, arcade games, fighting and 
shoot-em-up games, and driving and racing simulators), other vehicular simulators (not 
covered by driving and racing), strategy games (e.g. adventure games, war games, strategic 
simulations, role-playing games, and puzzles), and "other".[4]
A third method, developed by Funk and Buchman, and refined by others, classifies electronic 
games into six categories: general entertainment (no fighting or destruction), educational 
(learning or problem solving), fantasy violence (cartoon characters that must fight or destroy 
things, and risk being killed, in order to achieve a goal), human violence (like fantasy violence, 
but with human rather than cartoon characters), nonviolent sports (no fighting or destruction), 
and sports violence (fighting or destruction involved).[4]
Game theory
Within math, game theory reflects calculated circumstances (games) where a person's success 
is based upon the choices of others (Myerson, 1991). It is mainly used in economics, political 
science, and psychology, and other, more prescribed sciences, like logic or biology. While at 
first designed to investigate contests where an individual does better at another's outlay, or 
zero-sum games, game theory applies a wide range of class relations, and has developed into 
an umbrella term for the logical side of science, to include both human and non-humans, like 
computers. Classic uses include a sense of balance in numerous games, where each person has 
found or developed a tactic that cannot successfully better his results, given the other 
approach.
Mathematical game theory had beginnings with some publications by Emile Borel, which led 
to his book Applications aux Jeux de Hasard. However, his results were limited, and the 
theory regarding the non-existence of blended-strategy equilibrum in two-player games was 
incorrect. Modern game theory began with the idea regarding the existence of mixed-strategy 
equilibria in two-person zero-sum games and its proof by John von Neumann. Von Neumann's 
original proof used Brouwer's fixed-point theorem on continuous mappings into compact 
convex sets, which became a standard method in game theory and mathematical economics. 
His paper was followed by his 1944 book Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, with 
Oskar Morgenstern, which considered cooperative games of several players. The second 
edition of this book provided an axiomatic theory of expected utility, which allowed 
mathematical statisticians and economists to treat decision-making under uncertainty.
This theory was developed extensively in the 1950s by many scholars. Game theory was later 
explicitly applied to biology in the 1970s, although similar developments go back at least as 
far as the 1930s. Game theory has been widely recognized as an important tool in many fields. 
Eight game-theorists have won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, and John 
Maynard Smith was awarded the Crafoord Prize for his application of game theory to biology.
History
Early discussions of examples of two-person games occurred long before the rise of modern, 
mathematical game theory. The first known discussion of game theory occurred in a letter 
written by James Waldegrave in 1713. In this letter, Waldegrave provides a minimax mixed 
strategy solution to a two-person version of the card game le Her. James Madison made what 
we now recognize as a game-theoretic analysis of the ways states can be expected to behave 
under different systems of taxation.[1][2] In his 1838 Recherches sur les principes 
mathematiques de la theorie des richesses (Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the 
Theory of Wealth), Antoine Augustin Cournot considered a duopoly and presents a solution 
that is a restricted version of the Nash equilibrium.
The Danish mathematician Zeuthen proved that a mathematical model has a winning strategy 
by using Brouwer's fixed point theorem. In his 1938 book Applications aux Jeux de Hasard 
and earlier notes, Emile Borel 1938 book proved a minimax theorem for two-person zero-sum 
matrix games only when the pay-off matrix was symmetric. Borel conjectured that non-
existence of a mixed-strategy equilibria in two-person zero-sum games would occur, a 
conjecture that was proved false.
Game theory did not really exist as a unique field until John von Neumann published a paper 
in 1928.[3] Von Neumann's original proof used Brouwer's fixed-point theorem on continuous 
mappings into compact convex sets, which became a standard method in game theory and 
mathematical economics. His paper was followed by his 1944 book Theory of Games and 
Economic Behavior, with Oskar Morgenstern, which considered cooperative games of several 
players. The second edition of this book provided an axiomatic theory of expected utility, 
which allowed mathematical statisticians and economists to treat decision-making under 
uncertainty. Von Neumann's work in game theory culminated in the 1944 book Theory of 
Games and Economic Behavior by von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. This foundational 
work contains the method for finding mutually consistent solutions for two-person zero-sum 
games. During this time period, work on game theory was primarily focused on cooperative 
game theory, which analyzes optimal strategies for groups of individuals, presuming that they 
can enforce agreements between them about proper strategies.[4]
In 1950, the first discussion of the prisoner's dilemma appeared, and an experiment was 
undertaken on this game at the RAND corporation. Around this same time, John Nash 
developed a criterion for mutual consistency of players' strategies, known as Nash equilibrium, 
applicable to a wider variety of games than the criterion proposed by von Neumann and 
Morgenstern. This equilibrium is sufficiently general to allow for the analysis of non-
cooperative games in addition to cooperative ones.
Game theory experienced a flurry of activity in the 1950s, during which time the concepts of 
the core, the extensive form game, fictitious play, repeated games, and the Shapley value were 
developed. In addition, the first applications of Game theory to philosophy and political 
science occurred during this time.
In 1965, Reinhard Selten introduced his solution concept of subgame perfect equilibria, which 
further refined the Nash equilibrium (later he would introduce trembling hand perfection as 
well). In 1967, John Harsanyi developed the concepts of complete information and Bayesian 
games. Nash, Selten and Harsanyi became Economics Nobel Laureates in 1994 for their 
contributions to economic game theory.
In the 1970s, game theory was extensively applied in biology, largely as a result of the work 
of John Maynard Smith and his evolutionarily stable strategy. In addition, the concepts of 
correlated equilibrium, trembling hand perfection, and common knowledge[5] were introduced 
and analyzed.
In 2005, game theorists Thomas Schelling and Robert Aumann followed Nash, Selten and 
Harsanyi as Nobel Laureates. Schelling worked on dynamic models, early examples of 
evolutionary game theory. Aumann contributed more to the equilibrium school, introducing an 
equilibrium coarsening, correlated equilibrium, and developing an extensive formal analysis of 
the assumption of common knowledge and of its consequences.
In 2007, Roger Myerson, together with Leonid Hurwicz and Eric Maskin, was awarded the 
Nobel Prize in Economics "for having laid the foundations of mechanism design theory." 
Myerson's contributions include the notion of proper equilibrium, and an important graduate 
text: Game Theory, Analysis of Conflict (Myerson 1997).
Representation of games
The games studied in game theory are well-defined mathematical objects. A game consists of 
a set of players, a set of moves (or strategies) available to those players, and a specification of 
payoffs for each combination of strategies. Most cooperative games are presented in the 
characteristic function form, while the extensive and the normal forms are used to define 
noncooperative games.
Extensive form
An extensive form game
The extensive form can be used to formalize games with a time sequencing of moves. Games 
here are played on trees (as pictured to the left). Here each vertex (or node) represents a point 
of choice for a player. The player is specified by a number listed by the vertex. The lines out of 
the vertex represent a possible action for that player. The payoffs are specified at the bottom 
of the tree. The extensive form can be viewed as a multi-player generalization of a decision 
tree. (Fudenberg & Tirole 1991, p. 67)
In the game pictured to the left, there are two players. Player 1 moves first and chooses either 
F or U. Player 2 sees Player 1's move and then chooses A or R. Suppose that Player 1 chooses 
U and then Player 2 chooses A, then Player 1 gets 8 and Player 2 gets 2.
The extensive form can also capture simultaneous-move games and games with imperfect 
information. To represent it, either a dotted line connects different vertices to represent them 
as being part of the same information set (i.e., the players do not know at which point they 
are), or a closed line is drawn around 
Normal form
The normal (or strategic form) game is usually represented by a matrix which shows the 
players, strategies, and payoffs (see the example to the right). More generally it can be 
represented by any function that associates a payoff for each player with every possible 
combination of actions. In the accompanying example there are two players; one chooses the 
row and the other chooses the column. Each player has two strategies, which are specified by 
the number of rows and the number of columns. The payoffs are provided in the interior. The 
first number is the payoff received by the row player (Player 1 in our example); the second is 
the payoff for the column player (Player 2 in our example). Suppose that Player 1 plays Up 
and that Player 2 plays Left. Then Player 1 gets a payoff of 4, and Player 2 gets 3.
When a game is presented in normal form, it is presumed that each player acts simultaneously 
or, at least, without knowing the actions of the other. If players have some information about 
the choices of other players, the game is usually presented in extensive form.
Every extensive-form game has an equivalent normal-form game, however the transformation 
to normal form may result in an exponential blowup in the size of the representation, making it 
computationally impractical. (Leyton-Brown & Shoham 2008, p. 35)
Characteristic function form
In games that possess removable utility separate rewards are not given; rather, the 
characteristic function decides the payoff of each unity. The idea is that the unity that is 
'empty', so to speak, does not receive a reward at all.
The origin of this form is to be found in John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern's book; 
when looking at these instances, they guessed that when a union C appears, it works against 
the fraction (N/C) as if two individuals were playing a normal game. The balanced payoff of 
C is a basic function. Although there are differing examples that help determine coalitional 
amounts from normal games, not all appear that in their function form can be derived from 
such.
Formally, a characteristic function is seen as: (N,v), where N represents the group of people 
and v:2^N-->R is a normal utility.
Such characteristic functions have expanded to describe games where there is no removable 
utility.
Partition function form
The characteristic function form ignores the possible externalities of coalition formation. In the 
partition function form the payoff of a coalition depends not only on its members, but also on 
the way the rest of the players are partitioned (Thrall & Lucas 1963).
General and applied uses
As a method of applied mathematics, game theory has been used to study a wide variety of 
human and animal behaviors. It was initially developed in economics to understand a large 
collection of economic behaviors, including behaviors of firms, markets, and consumers. The 
use of game theory in the social sciences has expanded, and game theory has been applied to 
political, sociological, and psychological behaviors as well.
Game-theoretic analysis was initially used to study animal behavior by Ronald Fisher in the 
1930s (although even Charles Darwin makes a few informal game-theoretic statements). This 
work predates the name "game theory", but it shares many important features with this field. 
The developments in economics were later applied to biology largely by John Maynard Smith 
in his book Evolution and the Theory of Games.
In addition to being used to describe, predict, and explain behavior, game theory has also been 
used to develop theories of ethical or normative behavior and to prescribe such behavior.[6] In 
economics and philosophy, scholars have applied game theory to help in the understanding of 
good or proper behavior. Game-theoretic arguments of this type can be found as far back as 
Plato.[7]
Description and modeling
The first known use is to describe and model how human populations behave. Some scholars 
believe that by finding the equilibria of games they can predict how actual human populations 
will behave when confronted with situations analogous to the game being studied. This 
particular view of game theory has come under recent criticism. First, it is criticized because 
the assumptions made by game theorists are often violated. Game theorists may assume 
players always act in a way to directly maximize their wins (the Homo economicus model), 
but in practice, human behavior often deviates from this model. Explanations of this 
phenomenon are many; irrationality, new models of deliberation, or even different motives 
(like that of altruism). Game theorists respond by comparing their assumptions to those used in 
physics. Thus while their assumptions do not always hold, they can treat game theory as a 
reasonable scientific ideal akin to the models used by physicists. However, additional criticism 
of this use of game theory has been levied because some experiments have demonstrated that 
individuals do not play equilibrium strategies. For instance, in the centipede game, guess 2/3 
of the average game, and the dictator game, people regularly do not play Nash equilibria. 
There is an ongoing debate regarding the importance of these experiments.[8]
Alternatively, some authors claim that Nash equilibria do not provide predictions for human 
populations, but rather provide an explanation for why populations that play Nash equilibria 
remain in that state. However, the question of how populations reach those points remains 
open.
Some game theorists have turned to evolutionary game theory in order to resolve these 
worries. These models presume either no rationality or bounded rationality on the part of 
players. Despite the name, evolutionary game theory does not necessarily presume natural 
selection in the biological sense. Evolutionary game theory includes both biological as well as 
cultural evolution and also models of individual learning (for example, fictitious play 
dynamics).
Prescriptive or normative analysis
On the other hand, some scholars see game theory not as a predictive tool for the behavior of 
human beings, but as a suggestion for how people ought to behave. Since a Nash equilibrium 
of a game constitutes one's best response to the actions of the other players, playing a strategy 
that is part of a Nash equilibrium seems appropriate. However, this use for game theory has 
also come under criticism. First, in some cases it is appropriate to play a non-equilibrium 
strategy if one expects others to play non-equilibrium strategies as well. For an example, see 
Guess 2/3 of the average.
Second, the Prisoner's dilemma presents another potential counterexample. In the Prisoner's 
Dilemma, each player pursuing his own self-interest leads both players to be worse off than 
had they not pursued their own self-interests.
Economics and business
Game theory is a major method used in mathematical economics and business for modeling 
competing behaviors of interacting agents.[9] Applications include a wide array of economic 
phenomena and approaches, such as auctions, bargaining, fair division, duopolies, oligopolies, 
social network formation, general equilibrium, mechanism design,[10] and voting systems,[11] 
and across such broad areas as behavioral economics,[12] information economics,[13] industrial 
organization,[14] and political economy.[15][16]
This research usually focuses on particular sets of strategies known as equilibria in games. 
These "solution concepts" are usually based on what is required by norms of rationality. In 
non-cooperative games, the most famous of these is the Nash equilibrium. A set of strategies is 
a Nash equilibrium if each represents a best response to the other strategies. So, if all the 
players are playing the strategies in a Nash equilibrium, they have no unilateral incentive to 
deviate, since their strategy is the best they can do given what others are doing.
The payoffs of the game are generally taken to represent the utility of individual players. 
Often in modeling situations the payoffs represent money, which presumably corresponds to 
an individual's utility. This assumption, however, can be faulty.
A prototypical paper on game theory in economics begins by presenting a game that is an 
abstraction of some particular economic situation. One or more solution concepts are chosen, 
and the author demonstrates which strategy sets in the presented game are equilibria of the 
appropriate type. Naturally one might wonder to what use should this information be put. 
Economists and business professors suggest two primary uses (noted above): descriptive and 
prescriptive.[6]
Political science
The application of game theory to political science is focused in the overlapping areas of fair 
division, political economy, public choice, war bargaining, positive political theory, and social 
choice theory. In each of these areas, researchers have developed game-theoretic models in 
which the players are often voters, states, special interest groups, and politicians.
For early examples of game theory applied to political science, see the work of Anthony 
Downs. In his book An Economic Theory of Democracy (Downs 1957), he applies the 
Hotelling firm location model to the political process. In the Downsian model, political 
candidates commit to ideologies on a one-dimensional policy space. The theorist shows how 
the political candidates will converge to the ideology preferred by the median voter.
A game-theoretic explanation for democratic peace is that public and open debate in 
democracies send clear and reliable information regarding their intentions to other states. In 
contrast, it is difficult to know the intentions of nondemocratic leaders, what effect 
concessions will have, and if promises will be kept. Thus there will be mistrust and 
unwillingness to make concessions if at least one of the parties in a dispute is a non-democracy 
(Levy & Razin 2003).
Biology
Unlike economics, the payoffs for games in biology are often interpreted as corresponding to 
fitness. In addition, the focus has been less on equilibria that correspond to a notion of 
rationality, but rather on ones that would be maintained by evolutionary forces. The best 
known equilibrium in biology is known as the evolutionarily stable strategy (or ESS), and was 
first introduced in (Smith & Price 1973). Although its initial motivation did not involve any of 
the mental requirements of the Nash equilibrium, every ESS is a Nash equilibrium.
In biology, game theory has been used to understand many different phenomena. It was first 
used to explain the evolution (and stability) of the approximate 1:1 sex ratios. (Fisher 1930) 
suggested that the 1:1 sex ratios are a result of evolutionary forces acting on individuals who 
could be seen as trying to maximize their number of grandchildren.
Additionally, biologists have used evolutionary game theory and the ESS to explain the 
emergence of animal communication (Harper & Maynard Smith 2003). The analysis of 
signaling games and other communication games has provided some insight into the evolution 
of communication among animals. For example, the mobbing behavior of many species, in 
which a large number of prey animals attack a larger predator, seems to be an example of 
spontaneous emergent organization. Ants have also been shown to exhibit feed-forward 
behavior akin to fashion, see Butterfly Economics.
Biologists have used the game of chicken to analyze fighting behavior and territoriality
Maynard Smith, in the preface to Evolution and the Theory of Games, writes, "paradoxically, 
it has turned out that game theory is more readily applied to biology than to the field of 
economic behaviour for which it was originally designed". Evolutionary game theory has been 
used to explain many seemingly incongruous phenomena in nature.[17]
One such phenomenon is known as biological altruism. This is a situation in which an organism 
appears to act in a way that benefits other organisms and is detrimental to itself. This is 
distinct from traditional notions of altruism because such actions are not conscious, but appear 
to be evolutionary adaptations to increase overall fitness. Examples can be found in species 
ranging from vampire bats that regurgitate blood they have obtained from a night's hunting 
and give it to group members who have failed to feed, to worker bees that care for the queen 
bee for their entire lives and never mate, to Vervet monkeys that warn group members of a 
predator's approach, even when it endangers that individual's chance of survival.[18] All of 
these actions increase the overall fitness of a group, but occur at a cost to the individual.
Evolutionary game theory explains this altruism with the idea of kin selection. Altruists 
discriminate between the individuals they help and favor relatives. Hamilton's rule explains 
the evolutionary reasoning behind this selection with the equation c<b*r where the cost ( c ) to 
the altruist must be less than the benefit ( b ) to the recipient multiplied by the coefficient of 
relatedness ( r ). The more closely related two organisms are causes the incidences of altruism 
to increase because they share many of the same alleles. This means that the altruistic 
individual, by ensuring that the alleles of its close relative are passed on, (through survival of 
its offspring) can forgo the option of having offspring itself because the same number of 
alleles are passed on. Helping a sibling for example (in diploid animals), has a coefficient of 1/2, 
because (on average) an individual shares 1/2 of the alleles in its sibling's offspring. Ensuring 
that enough of a sibling's offspring survive to adulthood precludes the necessity of the 
altruistic individual producing offspring.[18] The coefficient values depend heavily on the 
scope of the playing field; for example if the choice of whom to favor includes all genetic 
living things, not just all relatives, we assume the discrepancy between all humans only 
accounts for approximately 1% of the diversity in the playing field, a co-efficient that was 1/2 
in the smaller field becomes 0.995. Similarly if it is considered that information other than that 
of a genetic nature (e.g. epigenetics, religion, science, etc.) persisted through time the playing 
field becomes larger still, and the discrepancies smaller.
Computer science and logic
Game theory has come to play an increasingly important role in logic and in computer science. 
Several logical theories have a basis in game semantics. In addition, computer scientists have 
used games to model interactive computations. Also, game theory provides a theoretical basis 
to the field of multi-agent systems.
Separately, game theory has played a role in online algorithms. In particular, the k-server 
problem, which has in the past been referred to as games with moving costs and request-
answer games (Ben David, Borodin & Karp et al. 1994). Yao's principle is a game-theoretic 
technique for proving lower bounds on the computational complexity of randomized 
algorithms, and especially of online algorithms.
The field of algorithmic game theory combines computer science concepts of complexity and 
algorithm design with game theory and economic theory. The emergence of the internet has 
motivated the development of algorithms for finding equilibria in games, markets, 
computational auctions, peer-to-peer systems, and security and information markets.[19]
Philosophy
Game theory has been put to several uses in philosophy. Responding to two papers by W.V.O. 
Quine (1960, 1967), Lewis (1969) used game theory to develop a philosophical account of 
convention. In so doing, he provided the first analysis of common knowledge and employed it 
in analyzing play in coordination games. In addition, he first suggested that one can 
understand meaning in terms of signaling games. This later suggestion has been pursued by 
several philosophers since Lewis (Skyrms (1996), Grim, Kokalis, and Alai-Tafti et al. (2004)). 
Following Lewis (1969) game-theoretic account of conventions, Ullmann Margalit (1977) and 
Bicchieri (2006) have developed theories of social norms that define them as Nash equilibria 
that result from transforming a mixed-motive game into a coordination game.[20]
Game theory has also challenged philosophers to think in terms of interactive epistemology: 
what it means for a collective to have common beliefs or knowledge, and what are the 
consequences of this knowledge for the social outcomes resulting from agents' interactions. 
Philosophers who have worked in this area include Bicchieri (1989, 1993),[21] Skyrms 
(1990),[22] and Stalnaker (1999).[23]
In ethics, some authors have attempted to pursue the project, begun by Thomas Hobbes, of 
deriving morality from self-interest. Since games like the Prisoner's dilemma present an 
apparent conflict between morality and self-interest, explaining why cooperation is required 
by self-interest is an important component of this project. This general strategy is a component 
of the general social contract view in political philosophy (for examples, see Gauthier (1986) 
and Kavka (1986).[24]
Other authors have attempted to use evolutionary game theory in order to explain the 
emergence of human attitudes about morality and corresponding animal behaviors. These 
authors look at several games including the Prisoner's dilemma, Stag hunt, and the Nash 
bargaining game as providing an explanation for the emergence of attitudes about morality 
(see, e.g., Skyrms (1996, 2004) and Sober and Wilson (1999)).
Cooperative or non-cooperative
A game is cooperative if the players are able to form binding commitments. For instance the 
legal system requires them to adhere to their promises. In noncooperative games this is not 
possible.
Often it is assumed that communication among players is allowed in cooperative games, but 
not in noncooperative ones. This classification on two binary criteria has been rejected 
(Harsanyi 1974).
Of the two types of games, noncooperative games are able to model situations to the finest 
details, producing accurate results. Cooperative games focus on the game at large. 
Considerable efforts have been made to link the two approaches. The so-called Nash-
programme[clarification needed] has already established many of the cooperative solutions as 
noncooperative equilibria.
Hybrid games contain cooperative and non-cooperative elements. For instance, coalitions of 
players are formed in a cooperative game, but these play in a non-cooperative fashion.
Symmetric and asymmetric
A symmetric game is a game where the payoffs for playing a particular strategy depend only 
on the other strategies employed, not on who is playing them. If the identities of the players 
can be changed without changing the payoff to the strategies, then a game is symmetric. Many 
of the commonly studied 2?2 games are symmetric. The standard representations of chicken, 
the prisoner's dilemma, and the stag hunt are all symmetric games. Some scholars would 
consider certain asymmetric games as examples of these games as well. However, the most 
common payoffs for each of these games are symmetric.
Most commonly studied asymmetric games are games where there are not identical strategy 
sets for both players. For instance, the ultimatum game and similarly the dictator game have 
different strategies for each player. It is possible, however, for a game to have identical 
strategies for both players, yet be asymmetric. For example, the game pictured to the right is 
asymmetric despite having identical strategy sets for both players.
Zero-sum and non-zero-sum
Zero-sum games are a special case of constant-sum games, in which choices by players can 
neither increase nor decrease the available resources. In zero-sum games the total benefit to all 
players in the game, for every combination of strategies, always adds to zero (more informally, 
a player benefits only at the equal expense of others). Poker exemplifies a zero-sum game 
(ignoring the possibility of the house's cut), because one wins exactly the amount one's 
opponents lose. Other zero-sum games include matching pennies and most classical board 
games including Go and chess.
Many games studied by game theorists (including the famous prisoner's dilemma) are non-
zero-sum games, because some outcomes have net results greater or less than zero. Informally, 
in non-zero-sum games, a gain by one player does not necessarily correspond with a loss by 
another.
Constant-sum games correspond to activities like theft and gambling, but not to the 
fundamental economic situation in which there are potential gains from trade. It is possible to 
transform any game into a (possibly asymmetric) zero-sum game by adding an additional 
dummy player (often called "the board"), whose losses compensate the players' net winnings.
Simultaneous and sequential
Simultaneous games are games where both players move simultaneously, or if they do not 
move simultaneously, the later players are unaware of the earlier players' actions (making them 
effectively simultaneous). Sequential games (or dynamic games) are games where later players 
have some knowledge about earlier actions. This need not be perfect information about every 
action of earlier players; it might be very little knowledge. For instance, a player may know 
that an earlier player did not perform one particular action, while he does not know which of 
the other available actions the first player actually performed.
The difference between simultaneous and sequential games is captured in the different 
representations discussed above. Often, normal form is used to represent simultaneous games, 
and extensive form is used to represent sequential ones. The transformation of extensive to 
normal form is one way, meaning that multiple extensive form games correspond to the same 
normal form. Consequently, notions of equilibrium for simultaneous games are insufficient for 
reasoning about sequential games; see subgame perfection.
Perfect information and imperfect information
An important subset of sequential games consists of games of perfect information. A game is 
one of perfect information if all players know the moves previously made by all other players. 
Thus, only sequential games can be games of perfect information, since in simultaneous games 
not every player knows the actions of the others. Most games studied in game theory are 
imperfect-information games, although there are some interesting examples of perfect-
information games, including the ultimatum game and centipede game. Recreational games of 
perfect information games include chess, go, and mancala. Many card games are games of 
imperfect information, for instance poker or contract bridge.
Perfect information is often confused with complete information, which is a similar concept. 
Complete information requires that every player know the strategies and payoffs available to 
the other players but not necessarily the actions taken. Games of incomplete information can 
be reduced, however, to games of imperfect information by introducing "moves by nature" 
(Leyton-Brown & Shoham 2008, p. 60).
Combinatorial games
Games in which the difficulty of finding an optimal strategy stems from the multiplicity of 
possible moves are called combinatorial games. Examples include chess and go. Games that 
involve imperfect or incomplete information may also have a strong combinatorial character, 
for instance backgammon. There is no unified theory addressing combinatorial elements in 
games. There are, however, mathematical tools that can solve particular problems and answer 
some general questions.[25]
Games of perfect information have been studied in combinatorial game theory, which has 
developed novel representations, e.g. surreal numbers, as well as combinatorial and algebraic 
(and sometimes non-constructive) proof methods to solve games of certain types, including 
some "loopy" games that may result in infinitely long sequences of moves. These methods 
address games with higher combinatorial complexity than those usually considered in 
traditional (or "economic") game theory.[26][27] A typical game that has been solved this way is 
hex. A related field of study, drawing from computational complexity theory, is game 
complexity, which is concerned with estimating the computational difficulty of finding 
optimal strategies.[28]
Research in artificial intelligence has addressed both perfect and imperfect (or incomplete) 
information games that have very complex combinatorial structures (like chess, go, or 
backgammon) for which no provable optimal strategies have been found. The practical 
solutions involve computational heuristics, like alpha-beta pruning or use of artificial neural 
networks trained by reinforcement learning, which make games more tractable in computing 
practice
Infinitely long games
Games, as studied by economists and real-world game players, are generally finished in 
finitely many moves. Pure mathematicians are not so constrained, and set theorists in 
particular study games that last for infinitely many moves, with the winner (or other payoff) 
not known until after all those moves are completed.
The focus of attention is usually not so much on what is the best way to play such a game, but 
simply on whether one or the other player has a winning strategy. (It can be proven, using the 
axiom of choice, that there are games-even with perfect information, and where the only 
outcomes are "win" or "lose"-for which neither player has a winning strategy.) The existence 
of such strategies, for cleverly designed games, has important consequences in descriptive set 
theory.
Discrete and continuous games
Much of game theory is concerned with finite, discrete games, that have a finite number of 
players, moves, events, outcomes, etc. Many concepts can be extended, however. Continuous 
games allow players to choose a strategy from a continuous strategy set. For instance, Cournot 
competition is typically modeled with players' strategies being any non-negative quantities, 
including fractional quantities.
Differential games such as the continuous pursuit and evasion game are continuous games.
Many-player and population games
Games with an arbitrary, but finite, number of players are often called n-person games (Luce 
& Raiffa 1957). Evolutionary game theory considers games involving a population of decision 
makers, where the frequency with which a particular decision is made can change over time in 
response to the decisions made by all individuals in the population. In biology, this is intended 
to model (biological) evolution, where genetically programmed organisms pass along some of 
their strategy programming to their offspring. In economics, the same theory is intended to 
capture population changes because people play the game many times within their lifetime, 
and consciously (and perhaps rationally) switch strategies (Webb 2007).
Stochastic outcomes (and relation to other fields)
Individual decision problems with stochastic outcomes are sometimes considered "one-player 
games". These situations are not considered game theoretical by some authors.[by whom?] They 
may be modeled using similar tools within the related disciplines of decision theory, 
operations research, and areas of artificial intelligence, particularly AI planning (with 
uncertainty) and multi-agent system. Although these fields may have different motivators, the 
mathematics involved are substantially the same, e.g. using Markov decision processes 
(MDP).[citation needed]
Stochastic outcomes can also be modeled in terms of game theory by adding a randomly 
acting player who makes "chance moves", also known as "moves by nature" (Osborne & 
Rubinstein 1994). This player is not typically considered a third player in what is otherwise a 
two-player game, but merely serves to provide a roll of the dice where required by the game.
For some problems, different approaches to modeling stochastic outcomes may lead to 
different solutions. For example, the difference in approach between MDPs and the minimax 
solution is that the latter considers the worst-case over a set of adversarial moves, rather than 
reasoning in expectation about these moves given a fixed probability distribution. The 
minimax approach may be advantageous where stochastic models of uncertainty are not 
available, but may also be overestimating extremely unlikely (but costly) events, dramatically 
swaying the strategy in such scenarios if it is assumed that an adversary can force such an 
event to happen.[30] (See black swan theory for more discussion on this kind of modeling issue, 
particularly as it relates to predicting and limiting losses in investment banking.)
General models that include all elements of stochastic outcomes, adversaries, and partial or 
noisy observability (of moves by other players) have also been studied. The "gold standard" is 
considered to be partially observable stochastic game (POSG), but few realistic problems are 
computationally feasible in POSG representation.
Metagames
These are games the play of which is the development of the rules for another game, the target 
or subject game. Metagames seek to maximize the utility value of the rule set developed. The 
theory of metagames is related to mechanism design theory.
The term metagame analysis is also used to refer to a practical approach developed by Nigel 
Howard (Howard 1971) whereby a situation is framed as a strategic game in which 
stakeholders try to realise their objectives by means of the options available to them. 
Subsequent developments have led to the formulation of drama theory.
These are games the play of which is the development of the rules for another game, the target 
or subject game. Metagames seek to maximize the utility value of the rule set developed. The 
theory of metagames is related to mechanism design theory.
The term metagame analysis is also used to refer to a practical approach developed by Nigel 
Howard (Howard 1971) whereby a situation is framed as a strategic game in which 
stakeholders try to realise their objectives by means of the options available to them. 
Subsequent developments have led to the formulation of drama theory.
















