Now, to tell you the truth, from the very first mention of Long John inSquire Trelawney's letter I had taken a fear in my mind that he mightprove to be the very one-legged sailor whom I had watched for so long atthe old Benbow. But one look at the man before me was enough. I had seenthe captain, and Black Dog, and the blind man, Pew, and I thought I knewwhat a buccaneer was like--a very different creature, according to me,from this clean and pleasant-tempered landlord.I plucked up courage at once, crossed the threshold, and walked right upto the man where he stood, propped on his crutch, talking to a customer."Mr. Silver, sir?" I asked, holding out the note."Yes, my lad," said he; "such is my name, to be sure. And who may yoube?" And then as he saw the squire's letter, he seemed to me to givesomething almost like a start."Oh!" said he, quite loud, and offering his hand. "I see. You are ournew cabin-boy; pleased I am to see you."And he took my hand in his large firm grasp.Just then one of the customers at the far side rose suddenly and madefor the door. It was close by him, and he was out in the street in amoment. But his hurry had attracted my notice, and I recognized him atglance. It was the tallow-faced man, wanting two fingers, who had comefirst to the Admiral Benbow."Oh," I cried, "stop him! It's Black Dog!""I don't care two coppers who he is," cried Silver. "But he hasn't paidhis score. Harry, run and catch him."One of the others who was nearest the door leaped up and started inpursuit."If he were Admiral Hawke he shall pay his score," cried Silver; andthen, relinquishing my hand, "Who did you say he was?" he asked. "Blackwhat?""Dog, sir," said I. "Has Mr. Trelawney not told you of the buccaneers?He was one of them.""So?" cried Silver. "In my house! Ben, run and help Harry. One of thoseswabs, was he? Was that you drinking with him, Morgan? Step up here."The man whom he called Morgan--an old, grey-haired, mahogany-facedsailor--came forward pretty sheepishly, rolling his quid."Now, Morgan," said Long John very sternly, "you never clapped your eyeson that Black--Black Dog before, did you, now?""Not I, sir," said Morgan with a salute."You didn't know his name, did you?""No, sir.""By the powers, Tom Morgan, it's as good for you!" exclaimed thelandlord. "If you had been mixed up with the like of that, you wouldnever have put another foot in my house, you may lay to that. And whatwas he saying to you?""I don't rightly know, sir," answered Morgan."Do you call that a head on your shoulders, or a blessed dead-eye?"cried Long John. "Don't rightly know, don't you! Perhaps you don'thappen to rightly know who you was speaking to, perhaps? Come, now, whatwas he jawing--v'yages, cap'ns, ships? Pipe up! What was it?""We was a-talkin' of keel-hauling," answered Morgan."Keel-hauling, was you? And a mighty suitable thing, too, and you maylay to that. Get back to your place for a lubber, Tom."And then, as Morgan rolled back to his seat, Silver added to me in aconfidential whisper that was very flattering, as I thought, "He'squite an honest man, Tom Morgan, on'y stupid. And now," he ran on again,aloud, "let's see--Black Dog? No, I don't know the name, not I. Yet Ikind of think I've--yes, I've seen the swab. He used to come here with ablind beggar, he used.""That he did, you may be sure," said I. "I knew that blind man too. Hisname was Pew.""It was!" cried Silver, now quite excited. "Pew! That were his name forcertain. Ah, he looked a shark, he did! If we run down this Black Dog,now, there'll be news for Cap'n Trelawney! Ben's a good runner; fewseamen run better than Ben. He should run him down, hand over hand, bythe powers! He talked o' keel-hauling, did he? I'LL keel-haul him!"All the time he was jerking out these phrases he was stumping up anddown the tavern on his crutch, slapping tables with his hand, and givingsuch a show of excitement as would have convinced an Old Bailey judgeor a Bow Street runner. My suspicions had been thoroughly reawakened onfinding Black Dog at the Spy-glass, and I watched the cook narrowly. Buthe was too deep, and too ready, and too clever for me, and by the timethe two men had come back out of breath and confessed that they had lostthe track in a crowd, and been scolded like thieves, I would have gonebail for the innocence of Long John Silver."See here, now, Hawkins," said he, "here's a blessed hard thing on aman like me, now, ain't it? There's Cap'n Trelawney--what's he to think?Here I have this confounded son of a Dutchman sitting in my own housedrinking of my own rum! Here you comes and tells me of it plain; andhere I let him give us all the slip before my blessed deadlights! Now,Hawkins, you do me justice with the cap'n. You're a lad, you are, butyou're as smart as paint. I see that when you first come in. Now, hereit is: What could I do, with this old timber I hobble on? When I was anA B master mariner I'd have come up alongside of him, hand over hand,and broached him to in a brace of old shakes, I would; but now--"And then, all of a sudden, he stopped, and his jaw dropped as though hehad remembered something."The score!" he burst out. "Three goes o' rum! Why, shiver my timbers,if I hadn't forgotten my score!"And falling on a bench, he laughed until the tears ran down his cheeks.I could not help joining, and we laughed together, peal after peal,until the tavern rang again."Why, what a precious old sea-calf I am!" he said at last, wiping hischeeks. "You and me should get on well, Hawkins, for I'll take my davyI should be rated ship's boy. But come now, stand by to go about. Thiswon't do. Dooty is dooty, messmates. I'll put on my old cockerel hat,and step along of you to Cap'n Trelawney, and report this here affair.For mind you, it's serious, young Hawkins; and neither you nor me's comeout of it with what I should make so bold as to call credit. Nor youneither, says you; not smart--none of the pair of us smart. But dash mybuttons! That was a good un about my score."And he began to laugh again, and that so heartily, that though I did notsee the joke as he did, I was again obliged to join him in his mirth.On our little walk along the quays, he made himself the most interestingcompanion, telling me about the different ships that we passed by,their rig, tonnage, and nationality, explaining the work that was goingforward--how one was discharging, another taking in cargo, and a thirdmaking ready for sea--and every now and then telling me some littleanecdote of ships or seamen or repeating a nautical phrase till I hadlearned it perfectly. I began to see that here was one of the best ofpossible shipmates.When we got to the inn, the squire and Dr. Livesey were seated together,finishing a quart of ale with a toast in it, before they should goaboard the schooner on a visit of inspection.Long John told the story from first to last, with a great deal of spiritand the most perfect truth. "That was how it were, now, weren't it,Hawkins?" he would say, now and again, and I could always bear himentirely out.The two gentlemen regretted that Black Dog had got away, but we allagreed there was nothing to be done, and after he had been complimented,Long John took up his crutch and departed."All hands aboard by four this afternoon," shouted the squire after him."Aye, aye, sir," cried the cook, in the passage."Well, squire," said Dr. Livesey, "I don't put much faith in yourdiscoveries, as a general thing; but I will say this, John Silver suitsme.""The man's a perfect trump," declared the squire."And now," added the doctor, "Jim may come on board with us, may henot?""To be sure he may," says squire. "Take your hat, Hawkins, and we'll seethe ship."9Powder and ArmsTHE HISPANIOLA lay some way out, and we went under the figureheads andround the sterns of many other ships, and their cables sometimes gratedunderneath our keel, and sometimes swung above us. At last, however,we got alongside, and were met and saluted as we stepped aboard by themate, Mr. Arrow, a brown old sailor with earrings in his ears and asquint. He and the squire were very thick and friendly, but I soonobserved that things were not the same between Mr. Trelawney and thecaptain.This last was a sharp-looking man who seemed angry with everything onboard and was soon to tell us why, for we had hardly got down into thecabin when a sailor followed us."Captain Smollett, sir, axing to speak with you," said he."I am always at the captain's orders. Show him in," said the squire.The captain, who was close behind his messenger, entered at once andshut the door behind him."Well, Captain Smollett, what have you to say? All well, I hope; allshipshape and seaworthy?""Well, sir," said the captain, "better speak plain, I believe, even atthe risk of offence. I don't like this cruise; I don't like the men; andI don't like my officer. That's short and sweet.""Perhaps, sir, you don't like the ship?" inquired the squire, veryangry, as I could see."I can't speak as to that, sir, not having seen her tried," said thecaptain. "She seems a clever craft; more I can't say.""Possibly, sir, you may not like your employer, either?" says thesquire.But here Dr. Livesey cut in."Stay a bit," said he, "stay a bit. No use of such questions as that butto produce ill feeling. The captain has said too much or he has said toolittle, and I'm bound to say that I require an explanation of his words.You don't, you say, like this cruise. Now, why?""I was engaged, sir, on what we call sealed orders, to sail this shipfor that gentleman where he should bid me," said the captain. "So farso good. But now I find that every man before the mast knows more than Ido. I don't call that fair, now, do you?""No," said Dr. Livesey, "I don't.""Next," said the captain, "I learn we are going after treasure--hearit from my own hands, mind you. Now, treasure is ticklish work; I don'tlike treasure voyages on any account, and I don't like them, above all,when they are secret and when (begging your pardon, Mr. Trelawney) thesecret has been told to the parrot.""Silver's parrot?" asked the squire."It's a way of speaking," said the captain. "Blabbed, I mean. It's mybelief neither of you gentlemen know what you are about, but I'll tellyou my way of it--life or death, and a close run.""That is all clear, and, I dare say, true enough," replied Dr. Livesey."We take the risk, but we are not so ignorant as you believe us. Next,you say you don't like the crew. Are they not good seamen?""I don't like them, sir," returned Captain Smollett. "And I think Ishould have had the choosing of my own hands, if you go to that.""Perhaps you should," replied the doctor. "My friend should, perhaps,have taken you along with him; but the slight, if there be one, wasunintentional. And you don't like Mr. Arrow?""I don't, sir. I believe he's a good seaman, but he's too free withthe crew to be a good officer. A mate should keep himself tohimself--shouldn't drink with the men before the mast!""Do you mean he drinks?" cried the squire."No, sir," replied the captain, "only that he's too familiar.""Well, now, and the short and long of it, captain?" asked the doctor."Tell us what you want.""Well, gentlemen, are you determined to go on this cruise?""Like iron," answered the squire."Very good," said the captain. "Then, as you've heard me very patiently,saying things that I could not prove, hear me a few words more. They areputting the powder and the arms in the fore hold. Now, you have a goodplace under the cabin; why not put them there?--first point. Then, youare bringing four of your own people with you, and they tell me some ofthem are to be berthed forward. Why not give them the berths here besidethe cabin?--second point.""Any more?" asked Mr. Trelawney."One more," said the captain. "There's been too much blabbing already.""Far too much," agreed the doctor."I'll tell you what I've heard myself," continued Captain Smollett:"that you have a map of an island, that there's crosses on the map toshow where treasure is, and that the island lies--" And then he namedthe latitude and longitude exactly."I never told that," cried the squire, "to a soul!""The hands know it, sir," returned the captain."Livesey, that must have been you or Hawkins," cried the squire."It doesn't much matter who it was," replied the doctor. And I couldsee that neither he nor the captain paid much regard to Mr. Trelawney'sprotestations. Neither did I, to be sure, he was so loose a talker; yetin this case I believe he was really right and that nobody had told thesituation of the island."Well, gentlemen," continued the captain, "I don't know who has thismap; but I make it a point, it shall be kept secret even from me and Mr.Arrow. Otherwise I would ask you to let me resign.""I see," said the doctor. "You wish us to keep this matter dark and tomake a garrison of the stern part of the ship, manned with my friend'sown people, and provided with all the arms and powder on board. In otherwords, you fear a mutiny.""Sir," said Captain Smollett, "with no intention to take offence, Ideny your right to put words into my mouth. No captain, sir, would bejustified in going to sea at all if he had ground enough to say that. Asfor Mr. Arrow, I believe him thoroughly honest; some of the men are thesame; all may be for what I know. But I am responsible for the ship'ssafety and the life of every man Jack aboard of her. I see things going,as I think, not quite right. And I ask you to take certain precautionsor let me resign my berth. And that's all.""Captain Smollett," began the doctor with a smile, "did ever you hearthe fable of the mountain and the mouse? You'll excuse me, I dare say,but you remind me of that fable. When you came in here, I'll stake mywig, you meant more than this.""Doctor," said the captain, "you are smart. When I came in here I meantto get discharged. I had no thought that Mr. Trelawney would hear aword.""No more I would," cried the squire. "Had Livesey not been here I shouldhave seen you to the deuce. As it is, I have heard you. I will do as youdesire, but I think the worse of you.""That's as you please, sir," said the captain. "You'll find I do myduty."And with that he took his leave."Trelawney," said the doctor, "contrary to all my notions, I believedyou have managed to get two honest men on board with you--that man andJohn Silver.""Silver, if you like," cried the squire; "but as for that intolerablehumbug, I declare I think his conduct unmanly, unsailorly, and downrightun-English.""Well," says the doctor, "we shall see."When we came on deck, the men had begun already to take out the arms andpowder, yo-ho-ing at their work, while the captain and Mr. Arrow stoodby superintending.The new arrangement was quite to my liking. The whole schooner had beenoverhauled; six berths had been made astern out of what had been theafter-part of the main hold; and this set of cabins was only joined tothe galley and forecastle by a sparred passage on the port side. It hadbeen originally meant that the captain, Mr. Arrow, Hunter, Joyce, thedoctor, and the squire were to occupy these six berths. Now Redruth andI were to get two of them and Mr. Arrow and the captain were to sleepon deck in the companion, which had been enlarged on each side till youmight almost have called it a round-house. Very low it was still, ofcourse; but there was room to swing two hammocks, and even the mateseemed pleased with the arrangement. Even he, perhaps, had been doubtfulas to the crew, but that is only guess, for as you shall hear, we hadnot long the benefit of his opinion.We were all hard at work, changing the powder and the berths, whenthe last man or two, and Long John along with them, came off in ashore-boat.The cook came up the side like a monkey for cleverness, and as soon ashe saw what was doing, "So ho, mates!" says he. "What's this?""We're a-changing of the powder, Jack," answers one."Why, by the powers," cried Long John, "if we do, we'll miss the morningtide!""My orders!" said the captain shortly. "You may go below, my man. Handswill want supper.""Aye, aye, sir," answered the cook, and touching his forelock, hedisappeared at once in the direction of his galley."That's a good man, captain," said the doctor."Very likely, sir," replied Captain Smollett. "Easy with that,men--easy," he ran on, to the fellows who were shifting the powder; andthen suddenly observing me examining the swivel we carried amidships,a long brass nine, "Here you, ship's boy," he cried, "out o' that! Offwith you to the cook and get some work."And then as I was hurrying off I heard him say, quite loudly, to thedoctor, "I'll have no favourites on my ship."I assure you I was quite of the squire's way of thinking, and hated thecaptain deeply.10The VoyageALL that night we were in a great bustle getting things stowed in theirplace, and boatfuls of the squire's friends, Mr. Blandly and the like,coming off to wish him a good voyage and a safe return. We never hada night at the Admiral Benbow when I had half the work; and I wasdog-tired when, a little before dawn, the boatswain sounded his pipeand the crew began to man the capstan-bars. I might have been twiceas weary, yet I would not have left the deck, all was so new andinteresting to me--the brief commands, the shrill note of the whistle,the men bustling to their places in the glimmer of the ship's lanterns."Now, Barbecue, tip us a stave," cried one voice."The old one," cried another."Aye, aye, mates," said Long John, who was standing by, with his crutchunder his arm, and at once broke out in the air and words I knew sowell:"Fifteen men on the dead man's chest--"And then the whole crew bore chorus:--"Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!"And at the third "Ho!" drove the bars before them with a will.Even at that exciting moment it carried me back to the old AdmiralBenbow in a second, and I seemed to hear the voice of the captain pipingin the chorus. But soon the anchor was short up; soon it was hangingdripping at the bows; soon the sails began to draw, and the land andshipping to flit by on either side; and before I could lie down tosnatch an hour of slumber the HISPANIOLA had begun her voyage to theIsle of Treasure.I am not going to relate that voyage in detail. It was fairlyprosperous. The ship proved to be a good ship, the crew were capableseamen, and the captain thoroughly understood his business. But beforewe came the length of Treasure Island, two or three things had happenedwhich require to be known.Mr. Arrow, first of all, turned out even worse than the captain hadfeared. He had no command among the men, and people did what theypleased with him. But that was by no means the worst of it, for after aday or two at sea he began to appear on deck with hazy eye, red cheeks,stuttering tongue, and other marks of drunkenness. Time after timehe was ordered below in disgrace. Sometimes he fell and cut himself;sometimes he lay all day long in his little bunk at one side of thecompanion; sometimes for a day or two he would be almost sober andattend to his work at least passably.In the meantime, we could never make out where he got the drink. Thatwas the ship's mystery. Watch him as we pleased, we could do nothing tosolve it; and when we asked him to his face, he would only laugh ifhe were drunk, and if he were sober deny solemnly that he ever tastedanything but water.He was not only useless as an officer and a bad influence amongstthe men, but it was plain that at this rate he must soon kill himselfoutright, so nobody was much surprised, nor very sorry, when one darknight, with a head sea, he disappeared entirely and was seen no more."Overboard!" said the captain. "Well, gentlemen, that saves the troubleof putting him in irons."But there we were, without a mate; and it was necessary, of course, toadvance one of the men. The boatswain, Job Anderson, was the likeliestman aboard, and though he kept his old title, he served in a way asmate. Mr. Trelawney had followed the sea, and his knowledge made himvery useful, for he often took a watch himself in easy weather. And thecoxswain, Israel Hands, was a careful, wily, old, experienced seaman whocould be trusted at a pinch with almost anything.He was a great confidant of Long John Silver, and so the mention ofhis name leads me on to speak of our ship's cook, Barbecue, as the mencalled him.Aboard ship he carried his crutch by a lanyard round his neck, to haveboth hands as free as possible. It was something to see him wedge thefoot of the crutch against a bulkhead, and propped against it, yieldingto every movement of the ship, get on with his cooking like someone safeashore. Still more strange was it to see him in the heaviest of weathercross the deck. He had a line or two rigged up to help him across thewidest spaces--Long John's earrings, they were called; and he would handhimself from one place to another, now using the crutch, now trailing italongside by the lanyard, as quickly as another man could walk. Yet someof the men who had sailed with him before expressed their pity to seehim so reduced."He's no common man, Barbecue," said the coxswain to me. "He had goodschooling in his young days and can speak like a book when so minded;and brave--a lion's nothing alongside of Long John! I seen him grapplefour and knock their heads together--him unarmed."All the crew respected and even obeyed him. He had a way of talkingto each and doing everybody some particular service. To me he wasunweariedly kind, and always glad to see me in the galley, which he keptas clean as a new pin, the dishes hanging up burnished and his parrot ina cage in one corner."Come away, Hawkins," he would say; "come and have a yarn with John.Nobody more welcome than yourself, my son. Sit you down and hear thenews. Here's Cap'n Flint--I calls my parrot Cap'n Flint, after thefamous buccaneer--here's Cap'n Flint predicting success to our v'yage.Wasn't you, cap'n?"And the parrot would say, with great rapidity, "Pieces of eight! Piecesof eight! Pieces of eight!" till you wondered that it was not out ofbreath, or till John threw his handkerchief over the cage."Now, that bird," he would say, "is, maybe, two hundred yearsold, Hawkins--they live forever mostly; and if anybody's seen morewickedness, it must be the devil himself. She's sailed with England,the great Cap'n England, the pirate. She's been at Madagascar, and atMalabar, and Surinam, and Providence, and Portobello. She was at thefishing up of the wrecked plate ships. It's there she learned 'Piecesof eight,' and little wonder; three hundred and fifty thousand of 'em,Hawkins! She was at the boarding of the viceroy of the Indies out ofGoa, she was; and to look at her you would think she was a babby. Butyou smelt powder--didn't you, cap'n?""Stand by to go about," the parrot would scream."Ah, she's a handsome craft, she is," the cook would say, and give hersugar from his pocket, and then the bird would peck at the bars andswear straight on, passing belief for wickedness. "There," John wouldadd, "you can't touch pitch and not be mucked, lad. Here's this poor oldinnocent bird o' mine swearing blue fire, and none the wiser, you maylay to that. She would swear the same, in a manner of speaking, beforechaplain." And John would touch his forelock with a solemn way he hadthat made me think he was the best of men.In the meantime, the squire and Captain Smollett were still on prettydistant terms with one another. The squire made no bones about thematter; he despised the captain. The captain, on his part, never spokebut when he was spoken to, and then sharp and short and dry, and not aword wasted. He owned, when driven into a corner, that he seemed to havebeen wrong about the crew, that some of them were as brisk as he wantedto see and all had behaved fairly well. As for the ship, he had taken adownright fancy to her. "She'll lie a point nearer the wind than a manhas a right to expect of his own married wife, sir. But," he would add,"all I say is, we're not home again, and I don't like the cruise."The squire, at this, would turn away and march up and down the deck,chin in air."A trifle more of that man," he would say, "and I shall explode."We had some heavy weather, which only proved the qualities of theHISPANIOLA. Every man on board seemed well content, and they must havebeen hard to please if they had been otherwise, for it is my beliefthere was never a ship's company so spoiled since Noah put to sea.Double grog was going on the least excuse; there was duff on odd days,as, for instance, if the squire heard it was any man's birthday, andalways a barrel of apples standing broached in the waist for anyone tohelp himself that had a fancy."Never knew good come of it yet," the captain said to Dr. Livesey."Spoil forecastle hands, make devils. That's my belief."But good did come of the apple barrel, as you shall hear, for if it hadnot been for that, we should have had no note of warning and might allhave perished by the hand of treachery.This was how it came about.We had run up the trades to get the wind of the island we were after--Iam not allowed to be more plain--and now we were running down for itwith a bright lookout day and night. It was about the last day of ouroutward voyage by the largest computation; some time that night, or atlatest before noon of the morrow, we should sight the Treasure Island.We were heading S.S.W. and had a steady breeze abeam and a quiet sea.The HISPANIOLA rolled steadily, dipping her bowsprit now and then witha whiff of spray. All was drawing alow and aloft; everyone was in thebravest spirits because we were now so near an end of the first part ofour adventure.Now, just after sundown, when all my work was over and I was on my wayto my berth, it occurred to me that I should like an apple. I ran ondeck. The watch was all forward looking out for the island. The man atthe helm was watching the luff of the sail and whistling away gentlyto himself, and that was the only sound excepting the swish of the seaagainst the bows and around the sides of the ship.In I got bodily into the apple barrel, and found there was scarce anapple left; but sitting down there in the dark, what with the sound ofthe waters and the rocking movement of the ship, I had either fallenasleep or was on the point of doing so when a heavy man sat down withrather a clash close by. The barrel shook as he leaned his shouldersagainst it, and I was just about to jump up when the man began to speak.It was Silver's voice, and before I had heard a dozen words, I wouldnot have shown myself for all the world, but lay there, trembling andlistening, in the extreme of fear and curiosity, for from these dozenwords I understood that the lives of all the honest men aboard dependedupon me alone.11What I Heard in the Apple Barrel"NO, not I," said Silver. "Flint was cap'n; I was quartermaster, alongof my timber leg. The same broadside I lost my leg, old Pew lost hisdeadlights. It was a master surgeon, him that ampytated me--out ofcollege and all--Latin by the bucket, and what not; but he was hangedlike a dog, and sun-dried like the rest, at Corso Castle. Thatwas Roberts' men, that was, and comed of changing names to theirships--ROYAL FORTUNE and so on. Now, what a ship was christened, so lether stay, I says. So it was with the CASSANDRA, as brought us all safehome from Malabar, after England took the viceroy of the Indies; so itwas with the old WALRUS, Flint's old ship, as I've seen amuck with thered blood and fit to sink with gold.""Ah!" cried another voice, that of the youngest hand on board, andevidently full of admiration. "He was the flower of the flock, wasFlint!""Davis was a man too, by all accounts," said Silver. "I never sailedalong of him; first with England, then with Flint, that's my story;and now here on my own account, in a manner of speaking. I laid by ninehundred safe, from England, and two thousand after Flint. That ain't badfor a man before the mast--all safe in bank. 'Tain't earning now, it'ssaving does it, you may lay to that. Where's all England's men now? Idunno. Where's Flint's? Why, most on 'em aboard here, and glad to getthe duff--been begging before that, some on 'em. Old Pew, as had losthis sight, and might have thought shame, spends twelve hundred pound ina year, like a lord in Parliament. Where is he now? Well, he's dead nowand under hatches; but for two year before that, shiver my timbers,the man was starving! He begged, and he stole, and he cut throats, andstarved at that, by the powers!""Well, it ain't much use, after all," said the young seaman."'Tain't much use for fools, you may lay to it--that, nor nothing,"cried Silver. "But now, you look here: you're young, you are, but you'reas smart as paint. I see that when I set my eyes on you, and I'll talkto you like a man."You may imagine how I felt when I heard this abominable old rogueaddressing another in the very same words of flattery as he had usedto myself. I think, if I had been able, that I would have killedhim through the barrel. Meantime, he ran on, little supposing he wasoverheard."Here it is about gentlemen of fortune. They lives rough, and they riskswinging, but they eat and drink like fighting-cocks, and when a cruiseis done, why, it's hundreds of pounds instead of hundreds of farthingsin their pockets. Now, the most goes for rum and a good fling, and tosea again in their shirts. But that's not the course I lay. I puts itall away, some here, some there, and none too much anywheres, by reasonof suspicion. I'm fifty, mark you; once back from this cruise, I set upgentleman in earnest. Time enough too, says you. Ah, but I've lived easyin the meantime, never denied myself o' nothing heart desires, and slep'soft and ate dainty all my days but when at sea. And how did I begin?Before the mast, like you!""Well," said the other, "but all the other money's gone now, ain't it?You daren't show face in Bristol after this.""Why, where might you suppose it was?" asked Silver derisively."At Bristol, in banks and places," answered his companion."It were," said the cook; "it were when we weighed anchor. But my oldmissis has it all by now. And the Spy-glass is sold, lease and goodwilland rigging; and the old girl's off to meet me. I would tell you where,for I trust you, but it'd make jealousy among the mates.""And can you trust your missis?" asked the other."Gentlemen of fortune," returned the cook, "usually trusts little amongthemselves, and right they are, you may lay to it. But I have a way withme, I have. When a mate brings a slip on his cable--one as knows me, Imean--it won't be in the same world with old John. There was some thatwas feared of Pew, and some that was feared of Flint; but Flint his ownself was feared of me. Feared he was, and proud. They was the roughestcrew afloat, was Flint's; the devil himself would have been feared to goto sea with them. Well now, I tell you, I'm not a boasting man, and youseen yourself how easy I keep company, but when I was quartermaster,LAMBS wasn't the word for Flint's old buccaneers. Ah, you may be sure ofyourself in old John's ship.""Well, I tell you now," replied the lad, "I didn't half a quarter likethe job till I had this talk with you, John; but there's my hand on itnow.""And a brave lad you were, and smart too," answered Silver, shakinghands so heartily that all the barrel shook, "and a finer figurehead fora gentleman of fortune I never clapped my eyes on."By this time I had begun to understand the meaning of their terms. By a"gentleman of fortune" they plainly meant neither more nor less than acommon pirate, and the little scene that I had overheard was the lastact in the corruption of one of the honest hands--perhaps of the lastone left aboard. But on this point I was soon to be relieved, for Silvergiving a little whistle, a third man strolled up and sat down by theparty."Dick's square," said Silver."Oh, I know'd Dick was square," returned the voice of the coxswain,Israel Hands. "He's no fool, is Dick." And he turned his quid and spat."But look here," he went on, "here's what I want to know, Barbecue: howlong are we a-going to stand off and on like a blessed bumboat? I've hada'most enough o' Cap'n Smollett; he's hazed me long enough, by thunder!I want to go into that cabin, I do. I want their pickles and wines, andthat.""Israel," said Silver, "your head ain't much account, nor ever was. Butyou're able to hear, I reckon; leastways, your ears is big enough.Now, here's what I say: you'll berth forward, and you'll live hard, andyou'll speak soft, and you'll keep sober till I give the word; and youmay lay to that, my son.""Well, I don't say no, do I?" growled the coxswain. "What I say is,when? That's what I say.""When! By the powers!" cried Silver. "Well now, if you want to know,I'll tell you when. The last moment I can manage, and that's when.Here's a first-rate seaman, Cap'n Smollett, sails the blessed ship forus. Here's this squire and doctor with a map and such--I don't knowwhere it is, do I? No more do you, says you. Well then, I mean thissquire and doctor shall find the stuff, and help us to get it aboard,by the powers. Then we'll see. If I was sure of you all, sons of doubleDutchmen, I'd have Cap'n Smollett navigate us half-way back again beforeI struck.""Why, we're all seamen aboard here, I should think," said the lad Dick."We're all forecastle hands, you mean," snapped Silver. "We can steera course, but who's to set one? That's what all you gentlemen split on,first and last. If I had my way, I'd have Cap'n Smollett work us backinto the trades at least; then we'd have no blessed miscalculations anda spoonful of water a day. But I know the sort you are. I'll finish with'em at the island, as soon's the blunt's on board, and a pity it is. Butyou're never happy till you're drunk. Split my sides, I've a sick heartto sail with the likes of you!""Easy all, Long John," cried Israel. "Who's a-crossin' of you?""Why, how many tall ships, think ye, now, have I seen laid aboard? Andhow many brisk lads drying in the sun at Execution Dock?" cried Silver."And all for this same hurry and hurry and hurry. You hear me? I seena thing or two at sea, I have. If you would on'y lay your course, and ap'int to windward, you would ride in carriages, you would. But not you!I know you. You'll have your mouthful of rum tomorrow, and go hang.""Everybody knowed you was a kind of a chapling, John; but there's othersas could hand and steer as well as you," said Israel. "They liked a bito' fun, they did. They wasn't so high and dry, nohow, but took theirfling, like jolly companions every one.""So?" says Silver. "Well, and where are they now? Pew was that sort,and he died a beggar-man. Flint was, and he died of rum at Savannah. Ah,they was a sweet crew, they was! On'y, where are they?""But," asked Dick, "when we do lay 'em athwart, what are we to do with'em, anyhow?""There's the man for me!" cried the cook admiringly. "That's what I callbusiness. Well, what would you think? Put 'em ashore like maroons? Thatwould have been England's way. Or cut 'em down like that much pork? Thatwould have been Flint's, or Billy Bones's.""Billy was the man for that," said Israel. "'Dead men don't bite,' sayshe. Well, he's dead now hisself; he knows the long and short on it now;and if ever a rough hand come to port, it was Billy.""Right you are," said Silver; "rough and ready. But mark you here,I'm an easy man--I'm quite the gentleman, says you; but this time it'sserious. Dooty is dooty, mates. I give my vote--death. When I'm inParlyment and riding in my coach, I don't want none of these sea-lawyersin the cabin a-coming home, unlooked for, like the devil at prayers.Wait is what I say; but when the time comes, why, let her rip!""John," cries the coxswain, "you're a man!""You'll say so, Israel when you see," said Silver. "Only one thing Iclaim--I claim Trelawney. I'll wring his calf's head off his body withthese hands, Dick!" he added, breaking off. "You just jump up, like asweet lad, and get me an apple, to wet my pipe like."You may fancy the terror I was in! I should have leaped out and run forit if I had found the strength, but my limbs and heart alike misgave me.I heard Dick begin to rise, and then someone seemingly stopped him, andthe voice of Hands exclaimed, "Oh, stow that! Don't you get sucking ofthat bilge, John. Let's have a go of the rum.""Dick," said Silver, "I trust you. I've a gauge on the keg, mind.There's the key; you fill a pannikin and bring it up."Terrified as I was, I could not help thinking to myself that this musthave been how Mr. Arrow got the strong waters that destroyed him.Dick was gone but a little while, and during his absence Israel spokestraight on in the cook's ear. It was but a word or two that I couldcatch, and yet I gathered some important news, for besides other scrapsthat tended to the same purpose, this whole clause was audible: "Notanother man of them'll jine." Hence there were still faithful men onboard.When Dick returned, one after another of the trio took the pannikin anddrank--one "To luck," another with a "Here's to old Flint," and Silverhimself saying, in a kind of song, "Here's to ourselves, and hold yourluff, plenty of prizes and plenty of duff."Just then a sort of brightness fell upon me in the barrel, and lookingup, I found the moon had risen and was silvering the mizzen-top andshining white on the luff of the fore-sail; and almost at the same timethe voice of the lookout shouted, "Land ho!"12Council of WarTHERE was a great rush of feet across the deck. I could hear peopletumbling up from the cabin and the forecastle, and slipping in aninstant outside my barrel, I dived behind the fore-sail, made a doubletowards the stern, and came out upon the open deck in time to joinHunter and Dr. Livesey in the rush for the weather bow.There all hands were already congregated. A belt of fog had liftedalmost simultaneously with the appearance of the moon. Away to thesouth-west of us we saw two low hills, about a couple of miles apart,and rising behind one of them a third and higher hill, whose peak wasstill buried in the fog. All three seemed sharp and conical in figure.So much I saw, almost in a dream, for I had not yet recovered from myhorrid fear of a minute or two before. And then I heard the voice ofCaptain Smollett issuing orders. The HISPANIOLA was laid a couple ofpoints nearer the wind and now sailed a course that would just clear theisland on the east."And now, men," said the captain, when all was sheeted home, "has anyone of you ever seen that land ahead?""I have, sir," said Silver. "I've watered there with a trader I was cookin.""The anchorage is on the south, behind an islet, I fancy?" asked thecaptain."Yes, sir; Skeleton Island they calls it. It were a main place forpirates once, and a hand we had on board knowed all their names for it.That hill to the nor'ard they calls the Fore-mast Hill; there are threehills in a row running south'ard--fore, main, and mizzen, sir. But themain--that's the big un, with the cloud on it--they usually callsthe Spy-glass, by reason of a lookout they kept when they was in theanchorage cleaning, for it's there they cleaned their ships, sir, askingyour pardon.""I have a chart here," says Captain Smollett. "See if that's the place."Long John's eyes burned in his head as he took the chart, but by thefresh look of the paper I knew he was doomed to disappointment. Thiswas not the map we found in Billy Bones's chest, but an accurate copy,complete in all things--names and heights and soundings--with the singleexception of the red crosses and the written notes. Sharp as must havebeen his annoyance, Silver had the strength of mind to hide it."Yes, sir," said he, "this is the spot, to be sure, and very prettilydrawed out. Who might have done that, I wonder? The pirates were tooignorant, I reckon. Aye, here it is: 'Capt. Kidd's Anchorage'--justthe name my shipmate called it. There's a strong current runs along thesouth, and then away nor'ard up the west coast. Right you was, sir,"says he, "to haul your wind and keep the weather of the island.Leastways, if such was your intention as to enter and careen, and thereain't no better place for that in these waters.""Thank you, my man," says Captain Smollett. "I'll ask you later on togive us a help. You may go."I was surprised at the coolness with which John avowed his knowledgeof the island, and I own I was half-frightened when I saw him drawingnearer to myself. He did not know, to be sure, that I had overheard hiscouncil from the apple barrel, and yet I had by this time taken such ahorror of his cruelty, duplicity, and power that I could scarce conceala shudder when he laid his hand upon my arm."Ah," says he, "this here is a sweet spot, this island--a sweet spot fora lad to get ashore on. You'll bathe, and you'll climb trees, and you'llhunt goats, you will; and you'll get aloft on them hills like a goatyourself. Why, it makes me young again. I was going to forget my timberleg, I was. It's a pleasant thing to be young and have ten toes, and youmay lay to that. When you want to go a bit of exploring, you just askold John, and he'll put up a snack for you to take along."And clapping me in the friendliest way upon the shoulder, he hobbled offforward and went below.Captain Smollett, the squire, and Dr. Livesey were talking together onthe quarter-deck, and anxious as I was to tell them my story, I durstnot interrupt them openly. While I was still casting about in mythoughts to find some probable excuse, Dr. Livesey called me to hisside. He had left his pipe below, and being a slave to tobacco, hadmeant that I should fetch it; but as soon as I was near enough to speakand not to be overheard, I broke immediately, "Doctor, let me speak. Getthe captain and squire down to the cabin, and then make some pretence tosend for me. I have terrible news."The doctor changed countenance a little, but next moment he was masterof himself."Thank you, Jim," said he quite loudly, "that was all I wanted to know,"as if he had asked me a question.And with that he turned on his heel and rejoined the other two. Theyspoke together for a little, and though none of them started, or raisedhis voice, or so much as whistled, it was plain enough that Dr. Liveseyhad communicated my request, for the next thing that I heard was thecaptain giving an order to Job Anderson, and all hands were piped ondeck."My lads," said Captain Smollett, "I've a word to say to you. Thisland that we have sighted is the place we have been sailing for. Mr.Trelawney, being a very open-handed gentleman, as we all know, has justasked me a word or two, and as I was able to tell him that every man onboard had done his duty, alow and aloft, as I never ask to see it donebetter, why, he and I and the doctor are going below to the cabin todrink YOUR health and luck, and you'll have grog served out for you todrink OUR health and luck. I'll tell you what I think of this: I thinkit handsome. And if you think as I do, you'll give a good sea-cheer forthe gentleman that does it."The cheer followed--that was a matter of course; but it rang out so fulland hearty that I confess I could hardly believe these same men wereplotting for our blood."One more cheer for Cap'n Smollett," cried Long John when the first hadsubsided.And this also was given with a will.On the top of that the three gentlemen went below, and not long after,word was sent forward that Jim Hawkins was wanted in the cabin.I found them all three seated round the table, a bottle of Spanish wineand some raisins before them, and the doctor smoking away, with his wigon his lap, and that, I knew, was a sign that he was agitated. The sternwindow was open, for it was a warm night, and you could see the moonshining behind on the ship's wake."Now, Hawkins," said the squire, "you have something to say. Speak up."I did as I was bid, and as short as I could make it, told the wholedetails of Silver's conversation. Nobody interrupted me till I was done,nor did any one of the three of them make so much as a movement, butthey kept their eyes upon my face from first to last."Jim," said Dr. Livesey, "take a seat."And they made me sit down at table beside them, poured me out a glass ofwine, filled my hands with raisins, and all three, one after the other,and each with a bow, drank my good health, and their service to me, formy luck and courage."Now, captain," said the squire, "you were right, and I was wrong. I ownmyself an ass, and I await your orders.""No more an ass than I, sir," returned the captain. "I never heard of acrew that meant to mutiny but what showed signs before, for any man thathad an eye in his head to see the mischief and take steps according. Butthis crew," he added, "beats me.""Captain," said the doctor, "with your permission, that's Silver. A veryremarkable man.""He'd look remarkably well from a yard-arm, sir," returned the captain."But this is talk; this don't lead to anything. I see three or fourpoints, and with Mr. Trelawney's permission, I'll name them.""You, sir, are the captain. It is for you to speak," says Mr. Trelawneygrandly."First point," began Mr. Smollett. "We must go on, because we can't turnback. If I gave the word to go about, they would rise at once. Secondpoint, we have time before us--at least until this treasure's found.Third point, there are faithful hands. Now, sir, it's got to cometo blows sooner or later, and what I propose is to take time by theforelock, as the saying is, and come to blows some fine day when theyleast expect it. We can count, I take it, on your own home servants, Mr.Trelawney?""As upon myself," declared the squire."Three," reckoned the captain; "ourselves make seven, counting Hawkinshere. Now, about the honest hands?""Most likely Trelawney's own men," said the doctor; "those he had pickedup for himself before he lit on Silver.""Nay," replied the squire. "Hands was one of mine.""I did think I could have trusted Hands," added the captain."And to think that they're all Englishmen!" broke out the squire. "Sir,I could find it in my heart to blow the ship up.""Well, gentlemen," said the captain, "the best that I can say is notmuch. We must lay to, if you please, and keep a bright lookout. It'strying on a man, I know. It would be pleasanter to come to blows. Butthere's no help for it till we know our men. Lay to, and whistle for awind, that's my view.""Jim here," said the doctor, "can help us more than anyone. The men arenot shy with him, and Jim is a noticing lad.""Hawkins, I put prodigious faith in you," added the squire.I began to feel pretty desperate at this, for I felt altogetherhelpless; and yet, by an odd train of circumstances, it was indeedthrough me that safety came. In the meantime, talk as we pleased, therewere only seven out of the twenty-six on whom we knew we could rely; andout of these seven one was a boy, so that the grown men on our side weresix to their nineteen.PART THREE--My Shore Adventure13How My Shore Adventure BeganTHE appearance of the island when I came on deck next morning wasaltogether changed. Although the breeze had now utterly ceased, we hadmade a great deal of way during the night and were now lying becalmedabout half a mile to the south-east of the low eastern coast.Grey-coloured woods covered a large part of the surface. This even tintwas indeed broken up by streaks of yellow sand-break in the lower lands,and by many tall trees of the pine family, out-topping the others--somesingly, some in clumps; but the general colouring was uniform and sad.The hills ran up clear above the vegetation in spires of naked rock.All were strangely shaped, and the Spy-glass, which was by three or fourhundred feet the tallest on the island, was likewise the strangest inconfiguration, running up sheer from almost every side and then suddenlycut off at the top like a pedestal to put a statue on.The HISPANIOLA was rolling scuppers under in the ocean swell. The boomswere tearing at the blocks, the rudder was banging to and fro, and thewhole ship creaking, groaning, and jumping like a manufactory. I hadto cling tight to the backstay, and the world turned giddily before myeyes, for though I was a good enough sailor when there was way on, thisstanding still and being rolled about like a bottle was a thing I neverlearned to stand without a qualm or so, above all in the morning, on anempty stomach.Perhaps it was this--perhaps it was the look of the island, with itsgrey, melancholy woods, and wild stone spires, and the surf that wecould both see and hear foaming and thundering on the steep beach--atleast, although the sun shone bright and hot, and the shore birds werefishing and crying all around us, and you would have thought anyonewould have been glad to get to land after being so long at sea, my heartsank, as the saying is, into my boots; and from the first look onward, Ihated the very thought of Treasure Island.We had a dreary morning's work before us, for there was no sign of anywind, and the boats had to be got out and manned, and the ship warpedthree or four miles round the corner of the island and up the narrowpassage to the haven behind Skeleton Island. I volunteered for one ofthe boats, where I had, of course, no business. The heat was sweltering,and the men grumbled fiercely over their work. Anderson was in commandof my boat, and instead of keeping the crew in order, he grumbled asloud as the worst."Well," he said with an oath, "it's not forever."I thought this was a very bad sign, for up to that day the men had gonebriskly and willingly about their business; but the very sight of theisland had relaxed the cords of discipline.All the way in, Long John stood by the steersman and conned the ship.He knew the passage like the palm of his hand, and though the man in thechains got everywhere more water than was down in the chart, John neverhesitated once."There's a strong scour with the ebb," he said, "and this here passagehas been dug out, in a manner of speaking, with a spade."We brought up just where the anchor was in the chart, about a third ofa mile from each shore, the mainland on one side and Skeleton Island onthe other. The bottom was clean sand. The plunge of our anchor sent upclouds of birds wheeling and crying over the woods, but in less than aminute they were down again and all was once more silent.