Heavy metal music
Heavy metal (often referred to simply as metal) is a genre of rock music[1] that developed in 
the late 1960s and early 1970s, largely in the Midlands of the United Kingdom and the 
United States.[2] With roots in blues rock and psychedelic rock, the bands that created heavy 
metal developed a thick, massive sound, characterized by highly amplified distortion, 
extended guitar solos, emphatic beats, and overall loudness. Heavy metal lyrics and 
performance styles are generally associated with masculinity and machismo.[3]
The first heavy metal bands such as Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple attracted 
large audiences, though they were often critically reviled, a status common throughout the 
history of the genre. In the mid-1970s Judas Priest helped spur the genre's evolution by 
discarding much of its blues influence; Motorhead introduced a punk rock sensibility and an 
increasing emphasis on speed. Bands in the New Wave of British Heavy Metal such as Iron 
Maiden followed in a similar vein. Before the end of the decade, heavy metal had attracted a 
worldwide following of fans known as "metalheads" or "headbangers".
In the 1980s, glam metal became a major commercial force with groups like Motley Crue and 
Poison. Underground scenes produced an array of more extreme, aggressive styles: thrash 
metal broke into the mainstream with bands such as Metallica, Megadeth, Slayer, and 
Anthrax, while other styles like death metal and black metal remain subcultural phenomena. 
Since the mid-1990s, popular styles such as nu metal, which often incorporates elements of 
grunge and hip hop; and metalcore, which blends extreme metal with hardcore punk, have 
further expanded the definition of the genre.
Characteristics
Heavy metal is traditionally characterized by loud distorted guitars, emphatic rhythms, dense bass-
and-drum sound, and vigorous vocals. Metal subgenres variously emphasize, alter, or omit one or 
more of these attributes. New York Times critic Jon Pareles writes, "In the taxonomy of popular 
music, heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard-rock-the breed with less syncopation, less blues, 
more showmanship and more brute force."[4] The typical band lineup includes a drummer, a bassist, 
a rhythm guitarist, a lead guitarist, and a singer, who may or may not be an instrumentalist. 
Keyboard instruments are sometimes used to enhance the fullness of the sound
The electric guitar and the sonic power that it projects through amplification has historically 
been the key element in heavy metal.[6] The lead role of the guitar in heavy metal often collides 
with the traditional "frontman" or bandleader role of the vocalist, creating a musical tension as 
the two "contend for dominance" in a spirit of "affectionate rivalry".[5] Heavy metal "demands 
the subordination of the voice" to the overall sound of the band. Reflecting metal's roots in 
the 1960s counterculture, an "explicit display of emotion" is required from the vocals as a sign 
of authenticity.[7] Critic Simon Frith claims that the metal singer's "tone of voice" is more 
important than the lyrics.[8] Metal vocals vary widely in style, from the multioctave, theatrical 
approach of Judas Priest's Rob Halford and Iron Maiden's Bruce Dickinson, to the gruff style 
of Motorhead's Lemmy and Metallica's James Hetfield, to the growling of many death metal 
performers, and to the harsh screams of black metal.
The prominent role of the bass is also key to the metal sound, and the interplay of bass and 
guitar is a central element. The bass guitar provides the low-end sound crucial to making the 
music "heavy".[9] Metal basslines vary widely in complexity, from holding down a low pedal 
point as a foundation to doubling complex riffs and licks along with the lead and/or rhythm 
guitars. Some bands feature the bass as a lead instrument, an approach popularized by 
Metallica's Cliff Burton in the early 1980s.[10]
The essence of metal drumming is creating a loud, constant beat for the band using the 
"trifecta of speed, power, and precision".[11] Metal drumming "requires an exceptional amount 
of endurance", and drummers have to develop "considerable speed, coordination, and 
dexterity...to play the intricate patterns" used in metal.[12] A characteristic metal drumming 
technique is the cymbal choke, which consists of striking a cymbal and then immediately 
silencing it by grabbing it with the other hand (or, in some cases, the same striking hand), 
producing a burst of sound. The metal drum setup is generally much larger than those 
employed in other forms of rock music.[9]
In live performance, loudness-an "onslaught of sound," in sociologist Deena Weinstein's 
description-is considered vital.[6] In his book Metalheads, psychologist Jeffrey Arnett refers 
to heavy metal concerts as "the sensory equivalent of war."[13] Following the lead set by Jimi 
Hendrix, Cream and The Who, early heavy metal acts such as Blue Cheer set new benchmarks 
for volume. As Blue Cheer's Dick Peterson put it, "All we knew was we wanted more 
power."[14] A 1977 review of a Motorhead concert noted how "excessive volume in particular 
figured into the band's impact."[15] Weinstein makes the case that in the same way that melody 
is the main element of pop and rhythm is the main focus of house music, powerful sound, 
timbre, and volume are the key elements of metal. She argues that the loudness is designed to 
"sweep the listener into the sound" and to provide a "shot of youthful vitality.
Musical language
Rhythm and tempo

The rhythm in metal songs is emphatic, with deliberate stresses. Weinstein observes that the wide 
array of sonic effects available to metal drummers enables the "rhythmic pattern to take on a 
complexity within its elemental drive and insistency."[9] In many heavy metal songs, the main 
groove is characterized by short, two-note or three-note rhythmic figures-generally made up of 
8th or 16th notes. These rhythmic figures are usually performed with a staccato attack created by 
using a palm-muted technique on the rhythm guitar
Harmony
One of the signatures of the genre is the guitar power chord.[17] In technical terms, the power 
chord is relatively simple: it involves just one main interval, generally the perfect fifth, though 
an octave may be added as a doubling of the root. Although the perfect fifth interval is the 
most common basis for the power chord,[18] power chords are also based on different intervals 
such as the minor third, major third, perfect fourth, diminished fifth, or minor sixth.[19] Most 
power chords are also played with a consistent finger arrangement that can be slid easily up 
and down the fretboard.[20]
Typical harmonic structures
Heavy metal is usually based on riffs created with three main harmonic traits: modal scale 
progressions, tritone and chromatic progressions, and the use of pedal points. Traditional 
heavy metal tends to employ modal scales, in particular the Aeolian and Phrygian modes.[21] 
Harmonically speaking, this means the genre typically incorporates modal chord progressions 
such as the Aeolian progressions I-VI-VII, I-VII-(VI), or I-VI-IV-VII and Phrygian 
progressions implying the relation between I and ?II (I-?II-I, I-?II-III, or I-?II-VII for 
example). Tense-sounding chromatic or tritone relationships are used in a number of metal 
chord progressions.[22][23] The tritone, an interval spanning three whole tones-such as C and 
F#-was a forbidden dissonance in medieval ecclesiastical singing, which led monks to call it 
diabolus in musica-"the devil in music."[24] Because of that original symbolic association, it 
came to be heard in Western cultural convention as "evil". Heavy metal has made extensive 
use of the tritone in guitar solos and riffs, such as in the beginning of "Black Sabbath".
Heavy metal songs often make extensive use of pedal point as a harmonic basis. A pedal point 
is a sustained tone, typically in the bass range, during which at least one foreign (i.e., 
dissonant) harmony is sounded in the other parts
Relationship with classical music
Robert Walser argues that, alongside blues and R&B, the "assemblage of disparate musical 
styles known...as 'classical music'" has been a major influence on heavy metal since the genre's 
earliest days. He claims that metal's "most influential musicians have been guitar players who 
have also studied classical music. Their appropriation and adaptation of classical models 
sparked the development of a new kind of guitar virtuosity [and] changes in the harmonic and 
melodic language of heavy metal."[26] The Grove Music Online states that the "1980s brought 
on ...the widespread adaptation of chord progressions and virtuosic practices from 18th-
century European models, especially Bach, Wilhelm Richard Wagner and Vivaldi, by 
influential guitarists such as Eddie Van Halen, Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen".[27] 
Kurt Bachmann of Believer has stated that "If done correctly, metal and classical fit quite well 
together. Classical and metal are probably the two genres that have the most in common when 
it comes to feel, texture, creativity."[28]
Although a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration, classical and 
metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practices-classical in the art music 
tradition, metal in the popular music tradition. As musicologists Nicolas Cook and Nicola 
Dibben note, "Analyses of popular music also sometimes reveal the influence of 'art traditions.' 
An example is Walser's linkage of heavy metal music with the ideologies and even some of 
the performance practices of nineteenth-century Romanticism. However, it would be clearly 
wrong to claim that traditions such as blues, rock, heavy metal, rap or dance music derive 
primarily from 'art music.'"
Lyrical themes
Black Sabbath and the many metal bands they inspired have concentrated lyrically "on dark 
and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music," 
according to scholars David Hatch and Stephen Millward. They take as an example Sabbath's 
second album Paranoid (1970), which "included songs dealing with personal trauma-
'Paranoid' and 'Fairies Wear Boots' (which described the unsavoury side effects of drug-
taking) -as well as those confronting wider issues, such as the self-explanatory 'War Pigs' 
and 'Hand of Doom.'"[30] Nuclear annihilation was addressed in later metal songs such as Iron 
Maiden's "2 Minutes to Midnight", Ozzy Osbourne's "Killer of Giants", Megadeth's "Rust In 
Peace... Polaris", and Metallica's "Fight Fire With Fire". Death is a predominant theme in 
heavy metal, routinely featuring in the lyrics of bands as otherwise widely different as Slayer 
and W.A.S.P. The more extreme forms of death metal and grindcore tend to have aggressive 
and gory lyrics.
Deriving from the genre's roots in blues music, sex is another important topic-a thread 
running from Led Zeppelin's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam and nu 
metal bands.[31] Romantic tragedy is a standard theme of gothic and doom metal, as well as of 
nu metal, where teenage angst is another central topic. Heavy metal songs often feature 
outlandish, fantasy-inspired lyrics, lending them an escapist quality. Iron Maiden's songs, for 
instance, were frequently inspired by mythology, fiction, and poetry, such as Iron Maiden's 
"Rime of the Ancient Mariner", based on the Samuel Taylor Coleridge poem. Led Zeppelin 
lyrics often reference Lord of the Rings as well as other mythology and folklore, such as in the 
songs "The Battle of Evermore", "Immigrant Song", "Ramble On", "No Quarter", and 
"Achilles Last Stand". Other examples include Black Sabbath's "The Wizard," Megadeth's 
"The Conjuring" and "Five Magics," and Judas Priest's "Dreamer Deceiver". Since the 1980s, 
with the rise of thrash metal and songs such as Metallica's "...And Justice for All" and 
Megadeth's "Peace Sells", more metal lyrics have included sociopolitical commentary. Genres 
such as melodic death metal, progressive metal, and black metal often explore philosophical 
themes.
The thematic content of heavy metal has long been a target of criticism. According to Jon 
Pareles, "Heavy metal's main subject matter is simple and virtually universal. With grunts, 
moans and subliterary lyrics, it celebrates...a party without limits.... [T]he bulk of the music is 
stylized and formulaic."[4] Music critics have often deemed metal lyrics juvenile and banal, and 
others have objected to what they see as advocacy of misogyny and the occult. During the 
1980s, the Parents Music Resource Center petitioned the U.S. Congress to regulate the 
popular music industry due to what the group asserted were objectionable lyrics, particularly 
those in heavy metal songs. In 1990, Judas Priest was sued in American court by the parents 
of two young men who had shot themselves five years earlier, allegedly after hearing the 
subliminal statement "do it" in a Priest song. While the case attracted a great deal of media 
attention, it was ultimately dismissed.[32] In some predominantly Muslim countries, heavy 
metal has been officially denounced as a threat to traditional values. In countries including 
Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon, and Malaysia, there have been incidents of heavy metal musicians 
and fans being arrested and incarcerated
Image and fashion
As with much popular music, visual imagery plays a large role in heavy metal. In addition to 
its sound and lyrics, a heavy metal band's "image" is expressed in album sleeve art, logos, 
stage sets, clothing, and music videos.[34] Some heavy metal acts such as Alice Cooper, Kiss, 
Lordi, Slipknot, and Gwar have become known as much for their outrageous performance 
personas and stage shows as for their music.
Down-the-back long hair, according to Weinstein, is the "most crucial distinguishing feature 
of metal fashion."[35] Originally adopted from the hippie subculture, by the 1980s and 1990s 
heavy metal hair "symbolised the hate, angst and disenchantment of a generation that 
seemingly never felt at home," according to journalist Nader Rahman. Long hair gave 
members of the metal community "the power they needed to rebel against nothing in 
general."[36]
The classic uniform of heavy metal fans consists of "blue jeans, black T-shirts, boots and black 
leather or jeans jackets.... T-shirts are generally emblazoned with the logos or other visual 
representations of favorite metal bands."[37] Metal fans also "appropriated elements from the 
S&M community (chains, metal studs, skulls, leather and crosses)." In the 1980s, a range of 
sources, from punk and goth music to horror films, influenced metal fashion.[38] Many metal 
performers of the 1970s and 1980s used radically shaped and brightly colored instruments to 
enhance their stage appearance. Fashion and personal style was especially important for glam 
metal bands of the era. Performers typically wore long, dyed, hairspray-teased hair (hence the 
nickname, "hair metal"); makeup such as lipstick and eyeliner; gaudy clothing, including 
leopard-skin-printed shirts or vests and tight denim, leather, or spandex pants; and accessories 
such as headbands and jewelry.[39] Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s, 
bands in the Japanese movement known as visual kei-which includes many nonmetal 
groups-emphasize elaborate costumes, hair, and makeup
Physical gestures
Many metal musicians when performing live engage in headbanging, which involves 
rhythmically beating time with the head, often emphasized by long hair. The corna, or devil 
horns, hand gesture, also widespread, was popularized by vocalist Ronnie James Dio while 
with Black Sabbath and Dio.[23] Gene Simmons of Kiss claims to have been the first to make 
the gesture in concert.[41]
Attendees of metal concerts do not dance in the usual sense; Deena Weinstein has argued that 
this is due to the music's largely male audience and "extreme heterosexualist ideology." She 
identifies two primary body movements that substitute for dancing: headbanging and an arm 
thrust that is both a sign of appreciation and a rhythmic gesture.[42] The performance of air 
guitar is popular among metal fans both at concerts and listening to records at home.[43] Other 
concert audience activities include stage diving, crowd surfing, pushing and shoving in a 
chaotic melee called moshing, and displaying the corna hand symbol.
Fan subculture
Deena Weinstein argues that heavy metal has outlasted many other rock genres largely due to 
the emergence of an intense, exclusionary, strongly masculine subculture.[44] While the metal 
fanbase is largely young, white, male, and blue-collar, the group is "tolerant of those outside 
its core demographic base who follow its codes of dress, appearance, and behavior."[45] 
Identification with the subculture is strengthened not only by the shared experience of 
concert-going and shared elements of fashion, but also by contributing to metal magazines 
and, more recently, websites.[46]
The metal scene has been characterized as a "subculture of alienation", with its own code of 
authenticity.[47] This code puts several demands on performers: they must appear both 
completely devoted to their music and loyal to the subculture that supports it; they must 
appear disinterested in mainstream appeal and radio hits; and they must never "sell out".[48] For 
the fans themselves, the code promotes "opposition to established authority, and separateness 
from the rest of society."[49] Musician and filmmaker Rob Zombie observes, "Most of the kids 
who come to my shows seem like really imaginative kids with a lot of creative energy they 
don't know what to do with" and that metal is "outsider music for outsiders. Nobody wants to 
be the weird kid; you just somehow end up being the weird kid. It's kind of like that, but with 
metal you have all the weird kids in one place."[50] Scholars of metal have noted the tendency 
of fans to classify and reject some performers (and some other fans) as "posers" "who 
pretended to be part of the subculture, but who were deemed to lack authenticity and 
sincerity.
Etymology
The origin of the term "heavy metal" in a musical context is uncertain. The phrase has been 
used for centuries in chemistry and metallurgy. An early use of the term in modern popular 
culture was by countercultural writer William S. Burroughs. His 1962 novel The Soft Machine 
includes a character known as "Uranian Willy, the Heavy Metal Kid." Burroughs's next novel, 
Nova Express (1964), develops the theme, using heavy metal as a metaphor for addictive 
drugs: "With their diseases and orgasm drugs and their sexless parasite life forms-Heavy 
Metal People of Uranus wrapped in cool blue mist of vaporized bank notes-And The Insect 
People of Minraud with metal music."[52]
Metal historian Ian Christe describes what the components of the term mean in "hippiespeak": 
"heavy" is roughly synonymous with "potent" or "profound," and "metal" designates a certain 
type of mood, grinding and weighted as with metal.[53] The word "heavy" in this sense was a 
basic element of beatnik and later countercultural slang, and references to "heavy music"-
typically slower, more amplified variations of standard pop fare-were already common by 
the mid-1960s. British psychedelic art experimenters Hapshash and the Coloured Coat 
released a record in 1967 titled Featuring the Human Host and the Heavy Metal Kids. Iron 
Butterfly's debut album, released in early 1968, was titled Heavy. The first recorded use of 
"heavy metal" is a reference to a motorcycle in the Steppenwolf song "Born to Be Wild", also 
released that year:[54] "I like smoke and lightning/Heavy metal thunder/Racin' with the 
wind/And the feelin' that I'm under." A late, and disputed, claim about the source of the term 
was made by "Chas" Chandler, former manager of the Jimi Hendrix Experience. In a 1995 
interview on the PBS program Rock and Roll, he asserted that heavy metal "was a term 
originated in a New York Times article reviewing a Jimi Hendrix performance," in which the 
author likened the event to "listening to heavy metal falling from the sky." A source for 
Chandler's claim has never been found.
The first documented use of the phrase to describe a type of rock music identified to date 
appears in a review by Barry Gifford. In the May 11, 1968, issue of Rolling Stone, he wrote 
about the album A Long Time Comin' by U.S. band Electric Flag: "Nobody who's been 
listening to Mike Bloomfield-either talking or playing-in the last few years could have 
expected this. This is the new soul music, the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal 
rock."[55] In January 1970 Lucian K. Truscott IV reviewing Led Zeppelin II for the Village 
Voice described the sound as "heavy" and made comparisons with Blue Cheer and Vanilla 
Fudge.[56] Other early documented uses of the phrase are from reviews by critic Mike 
Saunders. In the November 12, 1970, issue of Rolling Stone, he commented on an album put 
out the previous year by the British band Humble Pie: "Safe as Yesterday Is, their first 
American release, proved that Humble Pie could be boring in lots of different ways. Here they 
were a noisy, unmelodic, heavy metal-leaden shit-rock band with the loud and noisy parts 
beyond doubt. There were a couple of nice songs...and one monumental pile of refuse." He 
described the band's latest, self-titled release as "more of the same 27th-rate heavy metal 
crap."[57] In a review of Sir Lord Baltimore's Kingdom Come in the May 1971 Creem, 
Saunders wrote, "Sir Lord Baltimore seems to have down pat most all the best heavy metal 
tricks in the book."[58] Creem critic Lester Bangs is credited with popularizing the term via his 
early 1970s essays on bands such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath.[59] Through the decade, 
heavy metal was used by certain critics as a virtually automatic putdown. In 1979, lead New 
York Times popular music critic John Rockwell described what he called "heavy-metal rock" 
as "brutally aggressive music played mostly for minds clouded by drugs,"[60] and, in a different 
article, as "a crude exaggeration of rock basics that appeals to white teenagers."[61]
Coined by Black Sabbath drummer, Bill Ward, "downer rock" was one of the earliest terms 
used to describe this style of music and was applied to acts such as Sabbath and Bloodrock. 
Classic Rock magazine described the downer rock culture revolving around the use of 
Quaaludes and the drinking of wine.[62] Later the term would be replaced by "heavy metal."[63]
The terms "heavy metal" and "hard rock" have often been used interchangeably, particularly in 
discussing bands of the 1970s, a period when the terms were largely synonymous.[64] For 
example, the 1983 Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll includes this passage: "known 
for its aggressive blues-based hard-rock style, Aerosmith was the top American heavy-metal 
band of the mid-Seventies."
History
Antecedents: mid-1960s
While heavy metal's quintessential guitar style, built around distortion-heavy riffs and power 
chords, traces its roots to the late 1950s instrumentals of American Link Wray,[66] and the 
Kingsmen's version of "Louie, Louie" (1963), which made it a garage rock standard,[67] the 
genre's direct lineage begins in the mid-1960s. American blues music was a major influence on 
the early British rockers of the era. Bands like The Rolling Stones and The Yardbirds 
developed blues-rock by recording covers of many classic blues songs, often speeding up the 
tempos. As they experimented with the music, the UK blues-based bands-and the U.S. acts 
they influenced in turn-developed what would become the hallmarks of heavy metal, in 
particular, the loud, distorted guitar sound.[14] The Kinks played a major role in popularizing 
this sound with their 1964 hit "You Really Got Me".[68] "Ticket to Ride" (1965) written by 
John Lennon (credited to Lennon/McCartney) of The Beatles has been suggested as the first 
ever heavy metal song, given the droning bassline, repeating drums, and loaded guitar lines.[69]
In addition to The Kinks' Dave Davies, other guitarists such as The Who's Pete Townshend 
and The Yardbirds' Jeff Beck were experimenting with feedback.[70][71] Where the blues-rock 
drumming style started out largely as simple shuffle beats on small kits, drummers began using 
a more muscular, complex, and amplified approach to match and be heard against the 
increasingly loud guitar.[72] Vocalists similarly modified their technique and increased their 
reliance on amplification, often becoming more stylized and dramatic. In terms of sheer 
volume, especially in live performance, The Who's "bigger-louder-wall-of-Marshalls" approach 
was seminal.[73]
The combination of blues-rock with psychedelic rock formed much of the original basis for 
heavy metal.[74] One of the most influential bands in forging the merger of genres was the 
British power trio Cream, who derived a massive, heavy sound from unison riffing between 
guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce, as well as Ginger Baker's double bass 
drumming.[75] Their first two LPs, Fresh Cream (1966) and Disraeli Gears (1967), are 
regarded as essential prototypes for the future style. The Jimi Hendrix Experience's debut 
album, Are You Experienced (1967), was also highly influential. Hendrix's virtuosic technique 
would be emulated by many metal guitarists and the album's most successful single, "Purple 
Haze", is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit.[14]During the late sixties, many 
psychedelic singers such as Arthur Brown, began to create outlandish, theatrical and often 
macabre performances; which in itself became incredibly influential to many metal 
acts.[76][77][78] Vanilla Fudge, whose first album also came out in 1967, have been called "one of 
the few American links between psychedelia and what soon became heavy metal."[79]
Origins: late 1960s and early 1970s
In 1968, the sound that would become known as heavy metal began to coalesce. That January, 
the San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran's classic "Summertime 
Blues", from their debut album Vincebus Eruptum, that many consider the first true heavy 
metal recording.[80] The same month, Steppenwolf released its self-titled debut album, 
including "Born to Be Wild", which refers to "heavy metal thunder" in the lyrics. In July, 
another two epochal records came out: The Yardbirds' "Think About It"-B-side of the band's 
last single-with a performance by guitarist Jimmy Page anticipating the metal sound he 
would soon make famous; and Iron Butterfly's In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida, with its 17-minute-long 
title track, a prime candidate for first-ever heavy metal album. In August, The Beatles' single 
version of "Revolution", with its redlined guitar and drum sound, set new standards for 
distortion in a top-selling context.
The Jeff Beck Group, whose leader had preceded Page as The Yardbirds' guitarist, released its 
debut record that same month: Truth featured some of the "most molten, barbed, downright 
funny noises of all time," breaking ground for generations of metal ax-slingers.[81] In October, 
Page's new band, Led Zeppelin, made its live debut. The Beatles' so-called White Album, 
which also came out that month, included "Birthday" and "Helter Skelter", then one of the 
heaviest-sounding songs ever released by a major band,[82] and has been noted for its "proto-
metal roar".[83] The Pretty Things' rock opera S.F. Sorrow, released in December, featured 
"proto heavy metal" songs such as "Old Man Going".[84] In this period MC5, who began as 
part of the Detroit garage rock scene, developed a raw distorted style that has been seen as a 
major influence on the future sound of both heavy metal and later punk music.[85][86] Pink 
Floyd released two of their heaviest and loudest songs to date; "Ibiza Bar" and "The Nile 
Song", which was regarded as "one of the heaviest songs the band recorded"
In January 1969, Led Zeppelin's self-titled debut album was released and reached number 10 on the 
Billboard album chart. In July, Zeppelin and a power trio with a Cream-inspired, but cruder sound, 
Grand Funk Railroad, played the Atlanta Pop Festival. That same month, another Cream-rooted trio 
led by Leslie West released Mountain, an album filled with heavy blues-rock guitar and roaring 
vocals. In August, the group-now itself dubbed Mountain-played an hour-long set at the 
Woodstock Festival.[89] Grand Funk's debut album, On Time, also came out that month. In the fall, 
Led Zeppelin II went to number 1 and the album's single "Whole Lotta Love" hit number 4 on the 
Billboard pop chart. The metal revolution was under way.
Led Zeppelin defined central aspects of the emerging genre, with Page's highly distorted guitar 
style and singer Robert Plant's dramatic, wailing vocals.[91] Other bands, with a more consistently 
heavy, "purely" metal sound, would prove equally important in codifying the genre. The 1970 
releases by Black Sabbath (Black Sabbath and Paranoid) and Deep Purple (In Rock) were crucial in 
this regard.[72] Black Sabbath had developed a particularly heavy sound in part due to an industrial 
accident guitarist Tony Iommi suffered before cofounding the band. Unable to play normally, 
Iommi had to tune his guitar down for easier fretting and rely on power chords with their relatively 
simple fingering.[92] Deep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years, but by 1969 
vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy 
metal style.[93] In 1970, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple scored major UK chart hits with "Paranoid" 
and "Black Night", respectively.[94][95] That same year, two other British bands released debut 
albums in a heavy metal mode: Uriah Heep with Very 'eavy... Very 'umble and UFO with UFO 1. 
Budgie brought the new metal sound into a power trio context.[96] The occult lyrics and imagery 
employed by Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep would prove particularly influential; Led Zeppelin also 
began foregrounding such elements with its fourth album, released in 1971.
On the other side of the Atlantic, the trend-setting group was Grand Funk Railroad, "the most 
commercially successful American heavy-metal band from 1970 until they disbanded in 1976, [they] 
established the Seventies success formula: continuous touring."[98] Other bands identified with 
metal emerged in the U.S., such as Sir Lord Baltimore (whose Kingdom Coe album emerged in 
1970), Dust (first LP in 1971), Blue Oyster Cult (1972), and Kiss (1974). In Germany, Scorpions 
debuted with Lonesome Crow in 1972. Blackmore, who had emerged as a virtuoso soloist with Deep 
Purple's Machine Head (1972), quit the group in 1975 to form Rainbow. These bands also built 
audiences via constant touring and increasingly elaborate stage shows.[72] As described above, 
there are arguments about whether these and other early bands truly qualify as "heavy metal" or 
simply as "hard rock". Those closer to the music's blues roots or placing greater emphasis on 
melody are now commonly ascribed the latter label. AC/DC, which debuted with High Voltage in 
1975, is a prime example. The 1983 Rolling Stone encyclopedia entry begins, "Australian heavy-
metal band AC/DC..."[99] Rock historian Clinton Walker writes, "Calling AC/DC a heavy metal band in 
the seventies was as inaccurate as it is today.... [They] were a rock 'n' roll band that just happened 
to be heavy enough for metal."[100] The issue is not only one of shifting definitions, but also a 
persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification: Ian Christe describes how 
the band "became the stepping-stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal 
perdition."
In certain cases, there is little debate. After Black Sabbath, the next major example is Britain's Judas 
Priest, which debuted with Rocka Rolla in 1974. In Christe's description
"Black Sabbath's audience was...left to scavenge for sounds with similar impact. By the mid-
1970s, heavy metal aesthetic could be spotted, like a mythical beast, in the moody bass and 
complex dual guitars of Thin Lizzy, in the stagecraft of Alice Cooper, in the sizzling guitar 
and showy vocals of Queen, and in the thundering medieval questions of Rainbow.... Judas 
Priest arrived to unify and amplify these diverse highlights from hard rock's sonic palette. For 
the first time, heavy metal became a true genre unto itself."[102]
Though Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the U.S. until 1980, for many it was the 
definitive post-Sabbath heavy metal band; its twin-guitar attack, featuring rapid tempos and a 
nonbluesy, more cleanly metallic sound, was a major influence on later acts.[103] While heavy 
metal was growing in popularity, most critics were not enamored of the music. Objections 
were raised to metal's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial 
artifice,[104] but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity: reviewing a 
Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s, leading critic Robert Christgau described it as "dull 
and decadent...dim-witted, amoral exploitation."[105]
Mainstream: late 1970s and 1980s
Punk rock emerged in the mid-1970s as a reaction against contemporary social conditions as well as 
what was perceived as the overindulgent, overproduced rock music of the time, including heavy 
metal. Sales of heavy metal records declined sharply in the late 1970s in the face of punk, disco, and 
more mainstream rock.[104] With the major labels fixated on punk, many newer British heavy metal 
bands were inspired by the movement's aggressive, high-energy sound and "lo-fi", do it yourself 
ethos. Underground metal bands began putting out cheaply recorded releases independently to 
small, devoted audiences.[106] Motorhead, founded in 1975, was the first important band to 
straddle the punk/metal divide. With the explosion of punk in 1977, others followed. British music 
papers such as the NME and Sounds took notice, with Sounds writer Geoff Barton christening the 
movement the "New Wave of British Heavy Metal".[107] NWOBHM bands including Iron Maiden, 
Saxon, and Def Leppard reenergized the heavy metal genre. Following the lead set by Judas Priest 
and Motorhead, they toughened up the sound, reduced its blues elements, and emphasized 
increasingly fast tempos.[108] In 1980, the NWOBHM broke into the mainstream, as albums by Iron 
Maiden and Saxon, as well as Motorhead, reached the British top 10. Though less commercially 
successful, other NWOBHM bands such as Venom and Diamond Head would have a significant 
influence on metal's development.[109] In 1981, Motorhead became the first of this new breed of 
metal bands to top the UK charts with No Sleep 'til Hammersmith.
The first generation of metal bands was ceding the limelight. Deep Purple had broken up soon after 
Blackmore's departure in 1975, and Led Zeppelin broke up following drummer John Bonham's 
death in 1980. Black Sabbath was routinely upstaged in concert by its opening act, the Los Angeles 
band Van Halen.[110] Eddie Van Halen established himself as one of the leading metal guitar 
virtuosos of the era-his solo on "Eruption", from the band's self-titled 1978 album, is considered a 
milestone.[111] Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen also became famed virtuosos, associated with 
what would be known as the neoclassical metal style. The adoption of classical elements had been 
spearheaded by Blackmore and the Scorpions' Uli Jon Roth; this next generation progressed to 
occasionally using classical nylon-stringed guitars, as Rhoads does on "Dee" from former Sabbath 
lead singer Ozzy Osbourne's first solo album, Blizzard of Ozz (1980).
Inspired by Van Halen's success, a metal scene began to develop in Southern California during 
the late 1970s. Based on the clubs of L.A.'s Sunset Strip, bands such as Quiet Riot, Ratt, 
Motley Crue, and W.A.S.P. were influenced by traditional heavy metal of the earlier 1970s[112] 
and incorporated the theatrics (and sometimes makeup) of glam rock acts such as Alice 
Cooper and Kiss.[113] The lyrics of these glam metal bands characteristically emphasized 
hedonism and wild behavior. Musically, the style was distinguished by rapid-fire shred guitar 
solos, anthemic choruses, and a relatively pop-oriented melodic approach. The glam metal 
movement-along with similarly styled acts such as New York's Twisted Sister-became a 
major force in metal and the wider spectrum of rock music.
In the wake of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal and Judas Priest's breakthrough British 
Steel (1980), heavy metal became increasingly popular in the early 1980s. Many metal artists 
benefited from the exposure they received on MTV, which began airing in 1981-sales often 
soared if a band's videos screened on the channel.[114] Def Leppard's videos for Pyromania 
(1983) made them superstars in America and Quiet Riot became the first domestic heavy 
metal band to top the Billboard chart with Metal Health (1983). One of the seminal events in 
metal's growing popularity was the 1983 US Festival in California, where the "heavy metal 
day" featuring Ozzy Osbourne, Van Halen, Scorpions, Motley Crue, Judas Priest, and others 
drew the largest audiences of the three-day event.[115] Between 1983 and 1984, heavy metal 
went from an 8 percent to a 20 percent share of all recordings sold in the U.S.[116] Several 
major professional magazines devoted to the genre were launched, including Kerrang! (in 
1981) and Metal Hammer (in 1984), as well as a host of fan journals. In 1985, Billboard 
declared, "Metal has broadened its audience base. Metal music is no longer the exclusive 
domain of male teenagers. The metal audience has become older (college-aged), younger (pre-
teen), and more female."[117]
By the mid-1980s, glam metal was a dominant presence on the U.S. charts, music television, 
and the arena concert circuit. New bands such as L.A.'s Warrant and acts from the East Coast 
like Poison and Cinderella became major draws, while Motley Crue and Ratt remained very 
popular. Bridging the stylistic gap between hard rock and glam metal, New Jersey's Bon Jovi 
became enormously successful with its third album, Slippery When Wet (1986). The similarly 
styled Swedish band Europe became international stars with The Final Countdown (1986). Its 
title track hit number 1 in 25 countries.[118] In 1987, MTV launched a show, Headbanger's 
Ball, devoted exclusively to heavy metal videos. However, the metal audience had begun to 
factionalize, with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and 
disparaging the popular style as "light metal" or "hair metal."[119]
One band that reached diverse audiences was Guns N' Roses. In contrast to their glam metal 
contemporaries in L.A., they were seen as much more raw and dangerous. With the release of 
their chart-topping Appetite for Destruction (1987), they "recharged and almost single-
handedly sustained the Sunset Strip sleaze system for several years."[120] The following year, 
Jane's Addiction emerged from the same L.A. hard-rock club scene with its major label debut, 
Nothing's Shocking. Reviewing the album, Rolling Stone declared, "as much as any band in 
existence, Jane's Addiction is the true heir to Led Zeppelin."[121] The group was one of the first 
to be identified with the "alternative metal" trend that would come to the fore in the next 
decade. Meanwhile, new bands such as New York's Winger and New Jersey's Skid Row 
sustained the popularity of the glam metal style.[122]
Other metal genres: 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s
Many subgenres of heavy metal developed outside of the commercial mainstream during the 
1980s.[123] Several attempts have been made to map the complex world of underground metal, 
most notably by the editors of Allmusic, as well as critic Garry Sharpe-Young. Sharpe-
Young's multivolume metal encyclopedia separates the underground into five major 
categories: thrash metal, death metal, black metal, power metal, and the related subgenres of 
doom and gothic metal.
Thrash metal
Thrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the New Wave 
of British Heavy Metal,[124] particularly songs in the revved-up style known as speed metal. The 
movement began in the United States, with Bay Area thrash metal being the leading scene. The 
sound developed by thrash groups was faster and more aggressive than that of the original metal 
bands and their glam metal successors.[124] Low-register guitar riffs are typically overlaid with 
shredding leads. Lyrics often express nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral, gory 
language. Thrash has been described as a form of "urban blight music" and "a palefaced cousin of 
rap."[125]
The subgenre was popularized by the "Big Four of Thrash": Metallica, Anthrax, Megadeth, and 
Slayer.[126] Three German bands, Kreator, Sodom, and Destruction, played a central role in bringing 
the style to Europe. Others, including San Francisco Bay Area's Testament and Exodus, New Jersey's 
Overkill, and Brazil's Sepultura, also had a significant impact. While thrash began as an underground 
scene, and remained largely that for almost a decade, the leading bands in the movement began to 
reach a wider audience. Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the Billboard album chart in 
1986 with Master of Puppets; two years later, the band's ...And Justice for All hit number 6, while 
Megadeth and Anthrax had top 40 records.[127]
Though less commercially successful than the rest of the Big Four, Slayer released one of the 
genre's definitive records: Reign in Blood (1986) was described by Kerrang! as the "heaviest album 
of all time."[128] Two decades later, Metal Hammer named it the best album of the preceding 
twenty years.[129] Slayer attracted a following among far-right skinheads, and accusations of 
promoting violence and Nazi themes have dogged the band.[130] In the early 1990s, thrash achieved 
breakout success, challenging and redefining the metal mainstream.[131] Metallica's self-titled 1991 
album topped the Billboard chart,[132] Megadeth's Countdown to Extinction (1992) hit number 2,[133] 
Anthrax and Slayer cracked the top 10,[134] and albums by regional bands such as Testament and 
Sepultura entered the top 100.[135]
Death metal
Thrash soon began to evolve and split into more extreme metal genres. "Slayer's music was 
directly responsible for the rise of death metal," according to MTV News.[137] The NWOBHM 
band Venom was also an important progenitor. The death metal movement in both North 
America and Europe adopted and emphasized the elements of blasphemy and diabolism 
employed by such acts. Florida's Death and the Bay Area's Possessed are recognized as 
seminal bands in the style. Both groups have been credited with inspiring the subgenre's name, 
the latter via its 1984 demo Death Metal and the song "Death Metal," from its 1985 debut 
album Seven Churches (1985).
Death metal utilizes the speed and aggression of both thrash and hardcore, fused with lyrics 
preoccupied with Z-grade slasher movie violence and Satanism.[138] Death metal vocals are 
typically bleak, involving guttural "death growls," high-pitched screaming, the "death 
rasp,"[139] and other uncommon techniques.[140] Complementing the deep, aggressive vocal style 
are downtuned, highly distorted guitars[138][139] and extremely fast percussion, often with rapid 
double bass drumming and "wall of sound"-style blast beats. Frequent tempo and time 
signature changes and syncopation are also typical.
Death metal, like thrash metal, generally rejects the theatrics of earlier metal styles, opting instead 
for an everyday look of ripped jeans and plain leather jackets.[141] One major exception to this rule 
was Deicide's Glen Benton, who branded an inverted cross on his forehead and wore armor on 
stage. Morbid Angel adopted neo-fascist imagery.[141] These two bands, along with Death and 
Obituary, were leaders of the major death metal scene that emerged in Florida in the mid-1980s. In 
the UK, the related style of grindcore, led by bands such as Napalm Death and Extreme Noise 
Terror, emerged out of the anarcho-punk movement.[138]
Black metal
The first wave of black metal emerged in Europe in the early and mid-1980s, led by Britain's Venom, 
Denmark's Mercyful Fate, Switzerland's Hellhammer and Celtic Frost, and Sweden's Bathory. By the 
late 1980s, Norwegian bands such as Mayhem and Burzum were heading a second wave.[142] Black 
metal varies considerably in style and production quality, although most bands emphasize shrieked 
and growled vocals, highly distorted guitars frequently played with rapid tremolo picking, a "dark" 
atmosphere[140] and intentionally lo-fi production, with ambient noise and background hiss.[143] 
Satanic themes are common in black metal, though many bands take inspiration from ancient 
paganism, promoting a return to pre-Christian values.[144] Numerous black metal bands also 
"experiment with sounds from all possible forms of metal, folk, classical music, electronica and 
avant-garde."[139] Darkthrone drummer Fenriz explains, "It had something to do with production, 
lyrics, the way they dressed and a commitment to making ugly, raw, grim stuff. There wasn't a 
generic sound."
By 1990, Mayhem was regularly wearing corpsepaint; many other black metal acts also adopted the 
look. Bathory inspired the Viking metal and folk metal movements and Immortal brought blast 
beats to the fore. Some bands in the Scandinavian black metal scene became associated with 
considerable violence in the early 1990s,[146] with Mayhem and Burzum linked to church burnings. 
Growing commercial hype around death metal generated a backlash; beginning in Norway, much of 
the Scandinavian metal underground shifted to support a black metal scene that resisted being co-
opted by the commercial metal industry.[147] According to former Gorgoroth vocalist Gaahl, "Black 
Metal was never meant to reach an audience.... [We] had a common enemy which was, of course, 
Christianity, socialism and everything that democracy stands for."
By 1992, black metal scenes had begun to emerge in areas outside Scandinavia, including Germany, 
France, and Poland.[148] The 1993 murder of Mayhem's Euronymous by Burzum's Varg Vikernes 
provoked intensive media coverage.[145] Around 1996, when many in the scene felt the genre was 
stagnating,[149] several key bands, including Burzum and Finland's Beherit, moved toward an 
ambient style, while symphonic black metal was explored by Sweden's Tiamat and Switzerland's 
Samael.[150] In the late 1990s and early 2000s decade, Norway's Dimmu Borgir brought black metal 
closer to the mainstream,[151] as did Cradle of Filth, which Metal Hammer calls England's most 
successful metal band since Iron Maiden.[152]
Power metal
During the late 1980s, the power metal scene came together largely in reaction to the 
harshness of death and black metal.[153] Though a relatively underground style in North 
America, it enjoys wide popularity in Europe, Japan, and South America. Power metal focuses 
on upbeat, epic melodies and themes that "appeal to the listener's sense of valor and 
loveliness."[154] The prototype for the sound was established in the mid-to-late 1980s by 
Germany's Helloween, which combined the power riffs, melodic approach, and high-pitched, 
"clean" singing style of bands like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden with thrash's speed and 
energy, "crystalliz[ing] the sonic ingredients of what is now known as power metal."[155]
Traditional power metal bands like Sweden's HammerFall, England's DragonForce, and 
Florida's Iced Earth have a sound clearly indebted to the classic NWOBHM style.[156] Many 
power metal bands such as Florida's Kamelot, Finland's Nightwish, Italy's Rhapsody of Fire, 
and Russia's Catharsis feature a keyboard-based "symphonic" sound, sometimes employing 
orchestras and opera singers. Power metal has built a strong fanbase in Japan and South 
America, where bands like Brazil's Angra and Argentina's Rata Blanca are popular.
Closely related to power metal is progressive metal, which adopts the complex compositional 
approach of bands like Rush and King Crimson. This style emerged in the United States in the 
early and mid-1980s, with innovators such as Queensryche, Fates Warning, and Dream 
Theater. The mix of the progressive and power metal sounds is typified by New Jersey's 
Symphony X, whose guitarist Michael Romeo is among the most recognized of latter-day 
shredders.[157]
Doom and gothic metal
Emerging in the mid-1980s with such bands as California's Saint Vitus, Maryland's The Obsessed, 
Chicago's Trouble, and Sweden's Candlemass, the doom metal movement rejected other metal 
styles' emphasis on speed, slowing its music to a crawl. Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical 
themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath.[158] The Melvins have also been a significant 
influence on doom metal and a number of its subgenres.[159] Doom emphasizes melody, 
melancholy tempos, and a sepulchral mood relative to many other varieties of metal.
The 1991 release of Forest of Equilibrium, the debut album by UK band Cathedral, helped spark a 
new wave of doom metal. During the same period, the doom-death fusion style of British bands 
Paradise Lost, My Dying Bride, and Anathema gave rise to European gothic metal,[161] with its 
signature dual-vocalist arrangements, exemplified by Norway's Theatre of Tragedy and Tristania. 
New York's Type O Negative introduced an American take on the style
In the United States, sludge metal, mixing doom and hardcore, emerged in the late 1980s-
Eyehategod and Crowbar were leaders in a major Louisiana sludge scene. Early in the next decade, 
California's Kyuss and Sleep, inspired by the earlier doom metal bands, spearheaded the rise of 
stoner metal,[163] while Seattle's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre.[164] The late 1990s 
saw new bands form such as the Los Angeles-based Goatsnake, with a classic stoner/doom sound, 
and Sunn O))), which crosses lines between doom, drone, and dark ambient metal-the New York 
Times has compared their sound to an "Indian raga in the middle of an earthquake
New fusions: 1990s and early 2000s
The era of metal's mainstream dominance in North America came to an end in the early 1990s 
with the emergence of Nirvana and other grunge bands, signaling the popular breakthrough of 
alternative rock.[165] Grunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound, but rejected the 
excesses of the more popular metal bands, such as their "flashy and virtuosic solos" and 
"appearance-driven" MTV orientation.[122]
Glam metal fell out of favor due not only to the success of grunge,[166] but also because of the 
growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post-thrash 
groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie.[167] A few new, unambiguously metal bands had 
commercial success during the first half of the decade-Pantera's Far Beyond Driven topped 
the Billboard chart in 1994-but, "In the dull eyes of the mainstream, metal was dead."[168] 
Some bands tried to adapt to the new musical landscape. Metallica revamped its image: the 
band members cut their hair and, in 1996, headlined the alternative musical festival 
Lollapalooza founded by Jane's Addiction singer Perry Farrell. While this prompted a 
backlash among some long-time fans,[169] Metallica remained one of the most successful bands 
in the world into the new century.[170]
Like Jane's Addiction, many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal 
fall under the umbrella term "alternative metal."[171] Bands in Seattle's grunge scene such as 
Soundgarden, credited as making a "place for heavy metal in alternative rock",[172] and Alice in 
Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement. The label was applied to a wide 
spectrum of other acts that fused metal with different styles: Faith No More combined their 
alternative rock sound with punk, funk, metal, and hip hop; Primus joined elements of funk, 
punk, thrash metal, and experimental music; Tool mixed metal and progressive rock; bands 
such as Fear Factory and Ministry and Nine Inch Nails began incorporating metal into their 
industrial sound, and vice versa, respectively; and Marilyn Manson went down a similar route, 
while also employing shock effects of the sort popularized by Alice Cooper. Alternative metal 
artists, though they did not represent a cohesive scene, were united by their willingness to 
experiment with the metal genre and their rejection of glam metal aesthetics (with the 
stagecraft of Marilyn Manson and White Zombie-also identified with alt-metal-significant, 
if partial, exceptions).[171] Alternative metal's mix of styles and sounds represented "the 
colorful results of metal opening up to face the outside world."[173]
In the mid- and late 1990s came a new wave of U.S. metal groups inspired by the alternative 
metal bands and their mix of genres.[174] Dubbed "nu metal", bands such as Slipknot, Linkin 
Park, Limp Bizkit, Papa Roach, P.O.D., Korn, Disturbed and Rammstein incorporated 
elements ranging from death metal to hip hop, often including DJs and rap-style vocals. The 
mix demonstrated that "pancultural metal could pay off."[175] Nu metal gained mainstream 
success through heavy MTV rotation and Ozzy Osbourne's 1996 introduction of Ozzfest, 
which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal.[176] In 1999, Billboard noted that 
there were more than 500 specialty metal radio shows in the U.S., nearly three times as many 
as ten years before.[177] While nu metal was widely popular, traditional metal fans did not fully 
embrace the style.[178] By early 2003, the movement's popularity was on the wane, though 
several nu metal acts such as System Of A Down retained substantial followings
Recent trends: mid-late 2000s
Metal remained popular in the 2000s, particularly in continental Europe. By the new millennium 
Scandinavia had emerged as one of the areas producing innovative and successful bands, while 
Belgium, Holland and especially Germany were the most significant markets.[180] Established 
continental metal bands that placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the German charts between 
2003 and 2008, including Finnish band Children of Bodom,[181] Norwegian act Dimmu Borgir,[182] 
Germany's Blind Guardian[183] and Sweden's HammerFall
Metalcore, an originally American hybrid of thrash metal and hardcore punk,[185] emerged as a 
commercial force in the mid-2000s decade. It is rooted in the crossover thrash style developed 
two decades earlier by bands such as Suicidal Tendencies, Dirty Rotten Imbeciles, and 
Stormtroopers of Death.[186] Through the 1990s, metalcore was mostly an underground 
phenomenon. By 2004, melodic metalcore-influenced as well by melodic death metal-was 
popular enough that Killswitch Engage's The End of Heartache and Shadows Fall's The War 
Within debuted at numbers 21 and 20, respectively, on the Billboard album chartBullet for My 
Valentine of Wales' 3rd studio album Fever debuted at position number 3 on The Billboard 
200 and number 1 on Billboard's Rock and Alternative charts, making it the band's most 
successful record to date.[188] In recent years, metalcore bands have received prominent slots at 
Ozzfest and the Download Festival. Lamb of God, with a related blend of metal styles, hit 
the Billboard top 10 in 2006 with Sacrament. The success of these bands and others such as 
Trivium, which has released both metalcore and straight-ahead thrash albums, and Mastodon, 
which plays in a progressive/sludge style, has inspired claims of a metal revival in the United 
States, dubbed by some critics the "New Wave of American Heavy Metal".[189]
The term "retro-metal" has been applied to such bands as Australia's Wolfmother and 
Airbourne.[190] Wolfmother's self-titled 2005 debut album had "Deep Purple-ish organs," 
"Jimmy Page-worthy chordal riffing," and lead singer Andrew Stockdale howling "notes that 
Robert Plant can't reach anymore."[190] "Woman", a track from the album, won for Best Hard 
Rock Performance at the 2007 Grammy Awards. Slayer's "Eyes of the Insane" won for Best 
Metal Performance in 2007; their "Final Six" won the same award in 2008. Metallica took the 
honor in 2009 for "My Apocalypse".[

