       CHAPTER I - START IN LIFE


   I was born in the year 1632, in the city of York, of a
good family, though not of that country, my father being a
foreigner of Bremen, who settled first at Hull. He got a
good estate by merchandise, and leaving off his trade, lived
afterwards at York, from whence he had married my
mother, whose relations were named Robinson, a very
good family in that country, and from whom I was called
Robinson Kreutznaer; but, by the usual corruption of
words in England, we are now called - nay we call
ourselves and write our name - Crusoe; and so my
companions always called me.
    I had two elder brothers, one of whom was lieutenantcolonel
to an English regiment of foot in Flanders,
formerly commanded by the famous Colonel Lockhart,
and was killed at the battle near Dunkirk against the
Spaniards. What became of my second brother I never
knew, any more than my father or mother knew what
became of me.
   Being the third son of the family and not bred to any
trade, my head began to be filled very early with rambling
thoughts. My father, who was very ancient, had given me
a competent share of learning, as far as house-education
and a country free school generally go, and designed me
for the law; but I would be satisfied with nothing but
going to sea; and my inclination to this led me so strongly
against the will, nay, the commands of my father, and
against all the entreaties and persuasions of my mother and
other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in
that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of
misery which was to befall me.
    My father, a wise and grave man, gave me serious and
excellent counsel against what he foresaw was my design.
He called me one morning into his chamber, where he
was confined by the gout, and expostulated very warmly
with me upon this subject. He asked me what reasons,
more than a mere wandering inclination, I had for leaving
father’s house and my native country, where I might be
well introduced, and had a prospect of raising my fortune
by application and industry, with a life of ease and
pleasure. He told me it was men of desperate fortunes on
one hand, or of aspiring, superior fortunes on the other,
who went abroad upon adventures, to rise by enterprise,
and make themselves famous in undertakings of a nature
out of the common road; that these things were all either
too far above me or too far below me; that mine was the
middle state, or what might be called the upper station of
low life, which he had found, by long experience, was the
best state in the world, the most suited to human
happiness, not exposed to the miseries and hardships, the
labour and sufferings of the mechanic part of mankind,
and not embarrassed with the pride, luxury, ambition, and
envy of the upper part of mankind. He told me I might
judge of the happiness of this state by this one thing - viz.
that this was the state of life which all other people envied;
that kings have frequently lamented the miserable
consequence of being born to great things, and wished
they had been placed in the middle of the two extremes,
between the mean and the great; that the wise man gave
his testimony to this, as the standard of felicity, when he
prayed to have neither poverty nor riches.
    He bade me observe it, and I should always find that
the calamities of life were shared among the upper and
lower part of mankind, but that the middle station had the
fewest disasters, and was not exposed to so many
vicissitudes as the higher or lower part of mankind; nay,
they were not subjected to so many distempers and
uneasinesses, either of body or mind, as those were who,
by vicious living, luxury, and extravagances on the one
hand, or by hard labour, want of necessaries, and mean or
insufficient diet on the other hand, bring distemper upon
themselves by the natural consequences of their way of
living; that the middle station of life was calculated for all
kind of virtue and all kind of enjoyments; that peace and
plenty were the handmaids of a middle fortune; that
temperance, moderation, quietness, health, society, all
agreeable diversions, and all desirable pleasures, were the
blessings attending the middle station of life; that this way
men went silently and smoothly through the world, and
comfortably out of it, not embarrassed with the labours of
the hands or of the head, not sold to a life of slavery for
daily bread, nor harassed with perplexed circumstances,
which rob the soul of peace and the body of rest, nor
enraged with the passion of envy, or the secret burning
lust of ambition for great things; but, in easy
circumstances, sliding gently through the world, and
sensibly tasting the sweets of living, without the bitter;
feeling that they are happy, and learning by every day’s
experience to know it more sensibly,
     After this he pressed me earnestly, and in the most
affectionate manner, not to play the young man, nor to
precipitate myself into miseries which nature, and the
station of life I was born in, seemed to have provided
against; that I was under no necessity of seeking my bread;
that he would do well for me, and endeavour to enter me
fairly into the station of life which he had just been
recommending to me; and that if I was not very easy and
happy in the world, it must be my mere fate or fault that
must hinder it; and that he should have nothing to answer
for, having thus discharged his duty in warning me against
measures which he knew would be to my hurt; in a word,
that as he would do very kind things for me if I would stay
and settle at home as he directed, so he would not have so
much hand in my misfortunes as to give me any
encouragement to go away; and to close all, he told me I
had my elder brother for an example, to whom he had
used the same earnest persuasions to keep him from going
into the Low Country wars, but could not prevail, his
young desires prompting him to run into the army, where
he was killed; and though he said he would not cease to
pray for me, yet he would venture to say to me, that if I
did take this foolish step, God would not bless me, and I
should have leisure hereafter to reflect upon having
neglected his counsel when there might be none to assist
in my recovery.
    I observed in this last part of his discourse, which was
truly prophetic, though I suppose my father did not know
it to be so himself - I say, I observed the tears run down
his face very plentifully, especially when he spoke of my
brother who was killed: and that when he spoke of my
having leisure to repent, and none to assist me, he was so
moved that he broke off the discourse, and told me his
heart was so full he could say no more to me.
    I was sincerely affected with this discourse, and, indeed,
who could be otherwise? and I resolved not to think of
going abroad any more, but to settle at home according to
my father’s desire. But alas! a few days wore it all off; and,
in short, to prevent any of my father’s further
importunities, in a few weeks after I resolved to run quite
away from him. However, I did not act quite so hastily as
the first heat of my resolution prompted; but I took my
mother at a time when I thought her a little more pleasant
than ordinary, and told her that my thoughts were so
entirely bent upon seeing the world that I should never
settle to anything with resolution enough to go through
with it, and my father had better give me his consent than
force me to go without it; that I was now eighteen years
old, which was too late to go apprentice to a trade or clerk
to an attorney; that I was sure if I did I should never serve
out my time, but I should certainly run away from my
master before my time was out, and go to sea; and if she
would speak to my father to let me go one voyage abroad,
if I came home again, and did not like it, I would go no
more; and I would promise, by a double diligence, to
recover the time that I had lost.
   This put my mother into a great passion; she told me
she knew it would be to no purpose to speak to my father
upon any such subject; that he knew too well what was
my interest to give his consent to anything so much for
my hurt; and that she wondered how I could think of any
such thing after the discourse I had had with my father,
and such kind and tender expressions as she knew my
father had used to me; and that, in short, if I would ruin
myself, there was no help for me; but I might depend I
should never have their consent to it; that for her part she
would not have so much hand in my destruction; and I
should never have it to say that my mother was willing
when my father was not.
     Though my mother refused to move it to my father,
yet I heard afterwards that she reported all the discourse to
him, and that my father, after showing a great concern at
it, said to her, with a sigh, ‘That boy might be happy if he
would stay at home; but if he goes abroad, he will be the
most miserable wretch that ever was born: I can give no
consent to it.’
   It was not till almost a year after this that I broke loose,
though, in the meantime, I continued obstinately deaf to
all proposals of settling to business, and frequently
expostulated with my father and mother about their being
so positively determined against what they knew my
inclinations prompted me to. But being one day at Hull,
where I went casually, and without any purpose of making
an elopement at that time; but, I say, being there, and one
of my companions being about to sail to London in his
father’s ship, and prompting me to go with them with the
common allurement of seafaring men, that it should cost
me nothing for my passage, I consulted neither father nor
mother any more, nor so much as sent them word of it;
but leaving them to hear of it as they might, without
asking God’s blessing or my father’s, without any
consideration of circumstances or consequences, and in an
ill hour, God knows, on the 1st of September 1651, I
went on board a ship bound for London. Never any
young adventurer’s misfortunes, I believe, began sooner,
or continued longer than mine. The ship was no sooner
out of the Humber than the wind began to blow and the
sea to rise in a most frightful manner; and, as I had never
been at sea before, I was most inexpressibly sick in body
and terrified in mind. I began now seriously to reflect
upon what I had done, and how justly I was overtaken by
the judgment of Heaven for my wicked leaving my
father’s house, and abandoning my duty. All the good
counsels of my parents, my father’s tears and my mother’s
entreaties, came now fresh into my mind; and my
conscience, which was not yet come to the pitch of
hardness to which it has since, reproached me with the
contempt of advice, and the breach of my duty to God
and my father.
    All this while the storm increased, and the sea went
very high, though nothing like what I have seen many
times since; no, nor what I saw a few days after; but it was
enough to affect me then, who was but a young sailor, and
had never known anything of the matter. I expected every
wave would have swallowed us up, and that every time
the ship fell down, as I thought it did, in the trough or
hollow of the sea, we should never rise more; in this
agony of mind, I made many vows and resolutions that if
it would please God to spare my life in this one voyage, if
ever I got once my foot upon dry land again, I would go
directly home to my father, and never set it into a ship
again while I lived; that I would take his advice, and never
run myself into such miseries as these any more. Now I
saw plainly the goodness of his observations about the
middle station of life, how easy, how comfortably he had
lived all his days, and never had been exposed to tempests
at sea or troubles on shore; and I resolved that I would,
like a true repenting prodigal, go home to my father.
These wise and sober thoughts continued all the while
the storm lasted, and indeed some time after; but the next
day the wind was abated, and the sea calmer, and I began
to be a little inured to it; however, I was very grave for all
that day, being also a little sea-sick still; but towards night
the weather cleared up, the wind was quite over, and a
charming fine evening followed; the sun went down
perfectly clear, and rose so the next morning; and having
little or no wind, and a smooth sea, the sun shining upon
it, the sight was, as I thought, the most delightful that ever
I saw.
    I had slept well in the night, and was now no more seasick,
but very cheerful, looking with wonder upon the sea
that was so rough and terrible the day before, and could be
so calm and so pleasant in so little a time after. And now,
lest my good resolutions should continue, my companion,
who had enticed me away, comes to me; ‘Well, Bob,’ says
he, clapping me upon the shoulder, ‘how do you do after
it? I warrant you were frighted, wer’n’t you, last night,
when it blew but a capful of wind?’ ‘A capful d’you call
it?’ said I; ‘‘twas a terrible storm.’ ‘A storm, you fool you,’
replies he; ‘do you call that a storm? why, it was nothing
at all; give us but a good ship and sea-room, and we think
nothing of such a squall of wind as that; but you’re but a
fresh-water sailor, Bob. Come, let us make a bowl of
punch, and we’ll forget all that; d’ye see what charming
weather ‘tis now?’ To make short this sad part of my story,
we went the way of all sailors; the punch was made and I
was made half drunk with it: and in that one night’s
wickedness I drowned all my repentance, all my
reflections upon my past conduct, all my resolutions for
the future. In a word, as the sea was returned to its
smoothness of surface and settled calmness by the
abatement of that storm, so the hurry of my thoughts
being over, my fears and apprehensions of being
swallowed up by the sea being forgotten, and the current
of my former desires returned, I entirely forgot the vows
and promises that I made in my distress. I found, indeed,
some intervals of reflection; and the serious thoughts did,
as it were, endeavour to return again sometimes; but I
shook them off, and roused myself from them as it were
from a distemper, and applying myself to drinking and
company, soon mastered the return of those fits - for so I
called them; and I had in five or six days got as complete a
victory over conscience as any young fellow that resolved
not to be troubled with it could desire. But I was to have
another trial for it still; and Providence, as in such cases
generally it does, resolved to leave me entirely without
excuse; for if I would not take this for a deliverance, the
next was to be such a one as the worst and most hardened
wretch among us would confess both the danger and the
mercy of.
    The sixth day of our being at sea we came into
Yarmouth Roads; the wind having been contrary and the
weather calm, we had made but little way since the storm.
Here we were obliged to come to an anchor, and here we
lay, the wind continuing contrary - viz. at south-west - for
seven or eight days, during which time a great many ships
from Newcastle came into the same Roads, as the
common harbour where the ships might wait for a wind
for the river.
    We had not, however, rid here so long but we should
have tided it up the river, but that the wind blew too
fresh, and after we had lain four or five days, blew very
hard. However, the Roads being reckoned as good as a
harbour, the anchorage good, and our ground- tackle very
strong, our men were unconcerned, and not in the least
apprehensive of danger, but spent the time in rest and
mirth, after the manner of the sea; but the eighth day, in
the morning, the wind increased, and we had all hands at
work to strike our topmasts, and make everything snug
and close, that the ship might ride as easy as possible. By
noon the sea went very high indeed, and our ship rode
forecastle in, shipped several seas, and we thought once or
twice our anchor had come home; upon which our master
ordered out the sheet-anchor, so that we rode with two
anchors ahead, and the cables veered out to the bitter end.
   By this time it blew a terrible storm indeed; and now I
began to see terror and amazement in the faces even of the
seamen themselves. The master, though vigilant in the
business of preserving the ship, yet as he went in and out
of his cabin by me, I could hear him softly to himself say,
several times, ‘Lord be merciful to us! we shall be all lost!
we shall be all undone!’ and the like. During these first
hurries I was stupid, lying still in my cabin, which was in
the steerage, and cannot describe my temper: I could ill
resume the first penitence which I had so apparently
trampled upon and hardened myself against: I thought the
bitterness of death had been past, and that this would be
nothing like the first; but when the master himself came
by me, as I said just now, and said we should be all lost, I
was dreadfully frighted. I got up out of my cabin and
looked out; but such a dismal sight I never saw: the sea ran
mountains high, and broke upon us every three or four
minutes; when I could look about, I could see nothing but
distress round us; two ships that rode near us, we found,
had cut their masts by the board, being deep laden; and
our men cried out that a ship which rode about a mile
ahead of us was foundered. Two more ships, being driven
from their anchors, were run out of the Roads to sea, at all
adventures, and that with not a mast standing. The light
ships fared the best, as not so much labouring in the sea;
but two or three of them drove, and came close by us,
running away with only their spritsail out before the wind.
     Towards evening the mate and boatswain begged the
master of our ship to let them cut away the fore-mast,
which he was very unwilling to do; but the boatswain
protesting to him that if he did not the ship would
founder, he consented; and when they had cut away the
fore-mast, the main-mast stood so loose, and shook the
ship so much, they were obliged to cut that away also, and
make a clear deck.
    Any one may judge what a condition I must be in at all
this, who was but a young sailor, and who had been in
such a fright before at but a little. But if I can express at
this distance the thoughts I had about me at that time, I
was in tenfold more horror of mind upon account of my
former convictions, and the having returned from them to
the resolutions I had wickedly taken at first, than I was at
death itself; and these, added to the terror of the storm,
put me into such a condition that I can by no words
describe it. But the worst was not come yet; the storm
continued with such fury that the seamen themselves
acknowledged they had never seen a worse. We had a
good ship, but she was deep laden, and wallowed in the
sea, so that the seamen every now and then cried out she
would founder. It was my advantage in one respect, that I
did not know what they meant by FOUNDER till I
inquired. However, the storm was so violent that I saw,
what is not often seen, the master, the boatswain, and
some others more sensible than the rest, at their prayers,
and expecting every moment when the ship would go to
the bottom. In the middle of the night, and under all the
rest of our distresses, one of the men that had been down
to see cried out we had sprung a leak; another said there
was four feet water in the hold. Then all hands were called
to the pump. At that word, my heart, as I thought, died
within me: and I fell backwards upon the side of my bed
where I sat, into the cabin. However, the men roused me,
and told me that I, that was able to do nothing before, was
as well able to pump as another; at which I stirred up and
went to the pump, and worked very heartily. While this
was doing the master, seeing some light colliers, who, not
able to ride out the storm were obliged to slip and run
away to sea, and would come near us, ordered to fire a
gun as a signal of distress. I, who knew nothing what they
meant, thought the ship had broken, or some dreadful
thing happened. In a word, I was so surprised that I fell
down in a swoon. As this was a time when everybody had
his own life to think of, nobody minded me, or what was
become of me; but another man stepped up to the pump,
and thrusting me aside with his foot, let me lie, thinking I
had been dead; and it was a great while before I came to
myself.
   We worked on; but the water increasing in the hold, it
was apparent that the ship would founder; and though the
storm began to abate a little, yet it was not possible she
could swim till we might run into any port; so the master
continued firing guns for help; and a light ship, who had
rid it out just ahead of us, ventured a boat out to help us.
It was with the utmost hazard the boat came near us; but it
was impossible for us to get on board, or for the boat to lie
near the ship’s side, till at last the men rowing very
heartily, and venturing their lives to save ours, our men
cast them a rope over the stern with a buoy to it, and then
veered it out a great length, which they, after much labour
and hazard, took hold of, and we hauled them close under
our stern, and got all into their boat. It was to no purpose
for them or us, after we were in the boat, to think of
reaching their own ship; so all agreed to let her drive, and
only to pull her in towards shore as much as we could; and
our master promised them, that if the boat was staved
upon shore, he would make it good to their master: so
partly rowing and partly driving, our boat went away to
the northward, sloping towards the shore almost as far as
Winterton Ness.
     We were not much more than a quarter of an hour out
of our ship till we saw her sink, and then I understood for
the first time what was meant by a ship foundering in the
sea. I must acknowledge I had hardly eyes to look up
when the seamen told me she was sinking; for from the
moment that they rather put me into the boat than that I
might be said to go in, my heart was, as it were, dead
within me, partly with fright, partly with horror of mind,
and the thoughts of what was yet before me.
    While we were in this condition - the men yet
labouring at the oar to bring the boat near the shore - we
could see (when, our boat mounting the waves, we were
able to see the shore) a great many people running along
the strand to assist us when we should come near; but we
made but slow way towards the shore; nor were we able
to reach the shore till, being past the lighthouse at
Winterton, the shore falls off to the westward towards
Cromer, and so the land broke off a little the violence of
the wind. Here we got in, and though not without much
difficulty, got all safe on shore, and walked afterwards on
foot to Yarmouth, where, as unfortunate men, we were
used with great humanity, as well by the magistrates of the
town, who assigned us good quarters, as by particular
merchants and owners of ships, and had money given us
sufficient to carry us either to London or back to Hull as
we thought fit.
   Had I now had the sense to have gone back to Hull,
and have gone home, I had been happy, and my father, as
in our blessed Saviour’s parable, had even killed the fatted
calf for me; for hearing the ship I went away in was cast
away in Yarmouth Roads, it was a great while before he
had any assurances that I was not drowned.
But my ill fate pushed me on now with an obstinacy
that nothing could resist; and though I had several times
loud calls from my reason and my more composed
judgment to go home, yet I had no power to do it. I
know not what to call this, nor will I urge that it is a secret
overruling decree, that hurries us on to be the instruments
of our own destruction, even though it be before us, and
that we rush upon it with our eyes open. Certainly,
nothing but some such decreed unavoidable misery, which
it was impossible for me to escape, could have pushed me
forward against the calm reasonings and persuasions of my
most retired thoughts, and against two such visible
instructions as I had met with in my first attempt.
     My comrade, who had helped to harden me before,
and who was the master’s son, was now less forward than
I. The first time he spoke to me after we were at
Yarmouth, which was not till two or three days, for we
were separated in the town to several quarters; I say, the
first time he saw me, it appeared his tone was altered; and,
looking very melancholy, and shaking his head, he asked
me how I did, and telling his father who I was, and how I
had come this voyage only for a trial, in order to go
further abroad, his father, turning to me with a very grave
and concerned tone ‘Young man,’ says he, ‘you ought
never to go to sea any more; you ought to take this for a
plain and visible token that you are not to be a seafaring
man.’ ‘Why, sir,’ said I, ‘will you go to sea no more?’
‘That is another case,’ said he; ‘it is my calling, and
therefore my duty; but as you made this voyage on trial,
you see what a taste Heaven has given you of what you
are to expect if you persist. Perhaps this has all befallen us
on your account, like Jonah in the ship of Tarshish. Pray,’
continues he, ‘what are you; and on what account did you
go to sea?’ Upon that I told him some of my story; at the
end of which he burst out into a strange kind of passion:
‘What had I done,’ says he, ‘that such an unhappy wretch
should come into my ship? I would not set my foot in the
same ship with thee again for a thousand pounds.’ This
indeed was, as I said, an excursion of his spirits, which
were yet agitated by the sense of his loss, and was farther
than he could have authority to go. However, he
afterwards talked very gravely to me, exhorting me to go
back to my father, and not tempt Providence to my ruin,
telling me I might see a visible hand of Heaven against me.
‘And, young man,’ said he, ‘depend upon it, if you do not
go back, wherever you go, you will meet with nothing
but disasters and disappointments, till your father’s words
are fulfilled upon you.’
    We parted soon after; for I made him little answer, and
I saw him no more; which way he went I knew not. As
for me, having some money in my pocket, I travelled to
London by land; and there, as well as on the road, had
many struggles with myself what course of life I should
take, and whether I should go home or to sea.
As to going home, shame opposed the best motions
that offered to my thoughts, and it immediately occurred
to me how I should be laughed at among the neighbours,
and should be ashamed to see, not my father and mother
only, but even everybody else; from whence I have since
often observed, how incongruous and irrational the
common temper of mankind is, especially of youth, to that
reason which ought to guide them in such cases - viz. that
they are not ashamed to sin, and yet are ashamed to
repent; not ashamed of the action for which they ought
justly to be esteemed fools, but are ashamed of the
returning, which only can make them be esteemed wise
men.
   In this state of life, however, I remained some time,
uncertain what measures to take, and what course of life to
lead. An irresistible reluctance continued to going home;
and as I stayed away a while, the remembrance of the
distress I had been in wore off, and as that abated, the little
motion I had in my desires to return wore off with it, till
at last I quite laid aside the thoughts of it, and looked out
for a voyage.


       CHAPTER II - SLAVERY AND   ESCAPE


    THAT evil influence which carried me first away from
my father’s house - which hurried me into the wild and
indigested notion of raising my fortune, and that impressed
those conceits so forcibly upon me as to make me deaf to
all good advice, and to the entreaties and even the
commands of my father - I say, the same influence,
whatever it was, presented the most unfortunate of all
enterprises to my view; and I went on board a vessel
bound to the coast of Africa; or, as our sailors vulgarly
called it, a voyage to Guinea.
    It was my great misfortune that in all these adventures I
did not ship myself as a sailor; when, though I might
indeed have worked a little harder than ordinary, yet at
the same time I should have learnt the duty and office of a
fore-mast man, and in time might have qualified myself for
a mate or lieutenant, if not for a master. But as it was
always my fate to choose for the worse, so I did here; for
having money in my pocket and good clothes upon my
back, I would always go on board in the habit of a
gentleman; and so I neither had any business in the ship,
nor learned to do any.
    It was my lot first of all to fall into pretty good
company in London, which does not always happen to
such loose and misguided young fellows as I then was; the
devil generally not omitting to lay some snare for them
very early; but it was not so with me. I first got acquainted
with the master of a ship who had been on the coast of
Guinea; and who, having had very good success there, was
resolved to go again. This captain taking a fancy to my
conversation, which was not at all disagreeable at that
time, hearing me say I had a mind to see the world, told
me if I would go the voyage with him I should be at no
expense; I should be his messmate and his companion; and
if I could carry anything with me, I should have all the
advantage of it that the trade would admit; and perhaps I
might meet with some encouragement.
     I embraced the offer; and entering into a strict
friendship with this captain, who was an honest, plaindealing
man, I went the voyage with him, and carried a
small adventure with me, which, by the disinterested
honesty of my friend the captain, I increased very
considerably; for I carried about 40 pounds in such toys
and trifles as the captain directed me to buy. These 40
pounds I had mustered together by the assistance of some
of my relations whom I corresponded with; and who, I
believe, got my father, or at least my mother, to
contribute so much as that to my first adventure.
    This was the only voyage which I may say was
successful in all my adventures, which I owe to the
integrity and honesty of my friend the captain; under
whom also I got a competent knowledge of the
mathematics and the rules of navigation, learned how to
keep an account of the ship’s course, take an observation,
and, in short, to understand some things that were needful
to be understood by a sailor; for, as he took delight to
instruct me, I took delight to learn; and, in a word, this
voyage made me both a sailor and a merchant; for I
brought home five pounds nine ounces of gold-dust for
my adventure, which yielded me in London, at my return,
almost 300 pounds; and this filled me with those aspiring
thoughts which have since so completed my ruin.
     Yet even in this voyage I had my misfortunes too;
particularly, that I was continually sick, being thrown into
a violent calenture by the excessive heat of the climate;
our principal trading being upon the coast, from latitude
of 15 degrees north even to the line itself.
    I was now set up for a Guinea trader; and my friend, to
my great misfortune, dying soon after his arrival, I resolved
to go the same voyage again, and I embarked in the same
vessel with one who was his mate in the former voyage,
and had now got the command of the ship. This was the
unhappiest voyage that ever man made; for though I did
not carry quite 100 pounds of my new-gained wealth, so
that I had 200 pounds left, which I had lodged with my
friend’s widow, who was very just to me, yet I fell into
terrible misfortunes. The first was this: our ship making
her course towards the Canary Islands, or rather between
those islands and the African shore, was surprised in the
grey of the morning by a Turkish rover of Sallee, who
gave chase to us with all the sail she could make. We
crowded also as much canvas as our yards would spread, or
our masts carry, to get clear; but finding the pirate gained
upon us, and would certainly come up with us in a few
hours, we prepared to fight; our ship having twelve guns,
and the rogue eighteen. About three in the afternoon he
came up with us, and bringing to, by mistake, just athwart
our quarter, instead of athwart our stern, as he intended,
we brought eight of our guns to bear on that side, and
poured in a broadside upon him, which made him sheer
off again, after returning our fire, and pouring in also his
small shot from near two hundred men which he had on
board. However, we had not a man touched, all our men
keeping close. He prepared to attack us again, and we to
defend ourselves. But laying us on board the next time
upon our other quarter, he entered sixty men upon our
decks, who immediately fell to cutting and hacking the
sails and rigging. We plied them with small shot, halfpikes,
powder-chests, and such like, and cleared our deck
of them twice. However, to cut short this melancholy part
of our story, our ship being disabled, and three of our men
killed, and eight wounded, we were obliged to yield, and
were carried all prisoners into Sallee, a port belonging to
the Moors.
    The usage I had there was not so dreadful as at first I
apprehended; nor was I carried up the country to the
emperor’s court, as the rest of our men were, but was kept
by the captain of the rover as his proper prize, and made
his slave, being young and nimble, and fit for his business.
At this surprising change of my circumstances, from a
merchant to a miserable slave, I was perfectly
overwhelmed; and now I looked back upon my father’s
prophetic discourse to me, that I should be miserable and
have none to relieve me, which I thought was now so
effectually brought to pass that I could not be worse; for
now the hand of Heaven had overtaken me, and I was
undone without redemption; but, alas! this was but a taste
of the misery I was to go through, as will appear in the
sequel of this story.
   As my new patron, or master, had taken me home to
his house, so I was in hopes that he would take me with
him when he went to sea again, believing that it would
some time or other be his fate to be taken by a Spanish or
Portugal man-of-war; and that then I should be set at
liberty. But this hope of mine was soon taken away; for
when he went to sea, he left me on shore to look after his
little garden, and do the common drudgery of slaves about
his house; and when he came home again from his cruise,
he ordered me to lie in the cabin to look after the ship.
Here I meditated nothing but my escape, and what
method I might take to effect it, but found no way that
had the least probability in it; nothing presented to make
the supposition of it rational; for I had nobody to
communicate it to that would embark with me - no
fellow-slave, no Englishman, Irishman, or Scotchman
there but myself; so that for two years, though I often
pleased myself with the imagination, yet I never had the
least encouraging prospect of putting it in practice.
    After about two years, an odd circumstance presented
itself, which put the old thought of making some attempt
for my liberty again in my head. My patron lying at home
longer than usual without fitting out his ship, which, as I
heard, was for want of money, he used constantly, once or
twice a week, sometimes oftener if the weather was fair, to
take the ship’s pinnace and go out into the road a- fishing;
and as he always took me and young Maresco with him to
row the boat, we made him very merry, and I proved very
dexterous in catching fish; insomuch that sometimes he
would send me with a Moor, one of his kinsmen, and the
youth - the Maresco, as they called him - to catch a dish
of fish for him.
    It happened one time, that going a-fishing in a calm
morning, a fog rose so thick that, though we were not half
a league from the shore, we lost sight of it; and rowing we
knew not whither or which way, we laboured all day, and
all the next night; and when the morning came we found
we had pulled off to sea instead of pulling in for the shore;
and that we were at least two leagues from the shore.
However, we got well in again, though with a great deal
of labour and some danger; for the wind began to blow
pretty fresh in the morning; but we were all very hungry.
But our patron, warned by this disaster, resolved to take
more care of himself for the future; and having lying by
him the longboat of our English ship that he had taken, he
resolved he would not go a- fishing any more without a
compass and some provision; so he ordered the carpenter
of his ship, who also was an English slave, to build a little
state-room, or cabin, in the middle of the long- boat, like
that of a barge, with a place to stand behind it to steer, and
haul home the main-sheet; the room before for a hand or
two to stand and work the sails. She sailed with what we
call a shoulder-of-mutton sail; and the boom jibed over
the top of the cabin, which lay very snug and low, and
had in it room for him to lie, with a slave or two, and a
table to eat on, with some small lockers to put in some
bottles of such liquor as he thought fit to drink; and his
bread, rice, and coffee.
    We went frequently out with this boat a-fishing; and as
I was most dexterous to catch fish for him, he never went
without me. It happened that he had appointed to go out
in this boat, either for pleasure or for fish, with two or
three Moors of some distinction in that place, and for
whom he had provided extraordinarily, and had,
therefore, sent on board the boat overnight a larger store
of provisions than ordinary; and had ordered me to get
ready three fusees with powder and shot, which were on
board his ship, for that they designed some sport of
fowling as well as fishing.
   I got all things ready as he had directed, and waited the
next morning with the boat washed clean, her ancient and
pendants out, and everything to accommodate his guests;
when by-and-by my patron came on board alone, and told
me his guests had put off going from some business that
fell out, and ordered me, with the man and boy, as usual,
to go out with the boat and catch them some fish, for that
his friends were to sup at his house, and commanded that
as soon as I got some fish I should bring it home to his
house; all which I prepared to do.
    This moment my former notions of deliverance darted
into my thoughts, for now I found I was likely to have a
little ship at my command; and my master being gone, I
prepared to furnish myself, not for fishing business, but for
a voyage; though I knew not, neither did I so much as
consider, whither I should steer - anywhere to get out of
that place was my desire.
    My first contrivance was to make a pretence to speak to
this Moor, to get something for our subsistence on board;
for I told him we must not presume to eat of our patron’s
bread. He said that was true; so he brought a large basket
of
 rusk or biscuit, and three jars of fresh water, into the
boat. I knew where my patron’s case of bottles stood,
which it was evident, by the make, were taken out of
some English prize, and I conveyed them into the boat
while the Moor was on shore, as if they had been there
before for our master. I conveyed also a great lump of
beeswax into the boat, which weighed about half a
hundred-weight, with a parcel of twine or thread, a
hatchet, a saw, and a hammer, all of which were of great
use to us afterwards, especially the wax, to make candles.
Another trick I tried upon him, which he innocently came
into also: his name was Ismael, which they call Muley, or
Moely; so I called to him - ‘Moely,’ said I, ‘our patron’s
guns are on board the boat; can you not get a little
powder and shot? It may be we may kill some alcamies (a
fowl like our curlews) for ourselves, for I know he keeps
the gunner’s stores in the ship.’ ‘Yes,’ says he, ‘I’ll bring
some;’ and accordingly he brought a great leather pouch,
which held a pound and a half of powder, or rather more;
and another with shot, that had five or six pounds, with
some bullets, and put all into the boat. At the same time I
had found some powder of my master’s in the great cabin,
with which I filled one of the large bottles in the case,
which was almost empty, pouring what was in it into
another; and thus furnished with everything needful, we
sailed out of the port to fish. The castle, which is at the
entrance of the port, knew who we were, and took no
notice of us; and we were not above a mile out of the port
before we hauled in our sail and set us down to fish. The
wind blew from the N.N.E., which was contrary to my
desire, for had it blown southerly I had been sure to have
made the coast of Spain, and at least reached to the bay of
Cadiz; but my resolutions were, blow which way it
would, I would be gone from that horrid place where I
was, and leave the rest to fate.
    After we had fished some time and caught nothing - for
when I had fish on my hook I would not pull them up,
that he might not see them - I said to the Moor, ‘This will
not do; our master will not be thus served; we must stand
farther off.’ He, thinking no harm, agreed, and being in
the head of the boat, set the sails; and, as I had the helm, I
ran the boat out near a league farther, and then brought
her to, as if I would fish; when, giving the boy the helm, I
stepped forward to where the Moor was, and making as if
I stooped for something behind him, I took him by
surprise with my arm under his waist, and tossed him clear
overboard into the sea. He rose immediately, for he swam
like a cork, and called to me, begged to be taken in, told
me he would go all over the world with me. He swam so
strong after the boat that he would have reached me very
quickly, there being but little wind; upon which I stepped
into the cabin, and fetching one of the fowling-pieces, I
presented it at him, and told him I had done him no hurt,
and if he would be quiet I would do him none. ‘But,’ said
I, ‘you swim well enough to reach to the shore, and the
sea is calm; make the best of your way to shore, and I will
do you no harm; but if you come near the boat I’ll shoot
you through the head, for I am resolved to have my
liberty;’ so he turned himself about, and swam for the
shore, and I make no doubt but he reached it with ease,
for he was an excellent swimmer.
     I could have been content to have taken this Moor
with me, and have drowned the boy, but there was no
venturing to trust him. When he was gone, I turned to the
boy, whom they called Xury, and said to him, ‘Xury, if
you will be faithful to me, I’ll make you a great man; but
if you will not stroke your face to be true to me’ - that is,
swear by Mahomet and his father’s beard - ‘I must throw
you into the sea too.’ The boy smiled in my face, and
spoke so innocently that I could not distrust him, and
swore to be faithful to me, and go all over the world with
me.
    While I was in view of the Moor that was swimming, I
stood out directly to sea with the boat, rather stretching to
windward, that they might think me gone towards the
Straits’ mouth (as indeed any one that had been in their
wits must have been supposed to do): for who would have
supposed we were sailed on to the southward, to the truly
Barbarian coast, where whole nations of negroes were sure
to surround us with their canoes and destroy us; where we
could not go on shore but we should be devoured by
savage beasts, or more merciless savages of human kind.
   But as soon as it grew dusk in the evening, I changed
my course, and steered directly south and by east, bending
my course a little towards the east, that I might keep in
with the shore; and having a fair, fresh gale of wind, and a
smooth, quiet sea, I made such sail that I believe by the
next day, at three o’clock in the afternoon, when I first
made the land, I could not be less than one hundred and
fifty miles south of Sallee; quite beyond the Emperor of
Morocco’s dominions, or indeed of any other king
thereabouts, for we saw no people.
    Yet such was the fright I had taken of the Moors, and
the dreadful apprehensions I had of falling into their hands,
that I would not stop, or go on shore, or come to an
anchor; the wind continuing fair till I had sailed in that
manner five days; and then the wind shifting to the
southward, I concluded also that if any of our vessels were
in chase of me, they also would now give over; so I
ventured to make to the coast, and came to an anchor in
the mouth of a little river, I knew not what, nor where,
neither what latitude, what country, what nation, or what
river. I neither saw, nor desired to see any people; the
principal thing I wanted was fresh water. We came into
this creek in the evening, resolving to swim on shore as
soon as it was dark, and discover the country; but as soon
as it was quite dark, we heard such dreadful noises of the
barking, roaring, and howling of wild creatures, of we
knew not what kinds, that the poor boy was ready to die
with fear, and begged of me not to go on shore till day.
‘Well, Xury,’ said I, ‘then I won’t; but it may be that we
may see men by day, who will be as bad to us as those
lions.’ ‘Then we give them the shoot gun,’ says Xury,
laughing, ‘make them run wey.’ Such English Xury spoke
by conversing among us slaves. However, I was glad to see
the boy so cheerful, and I gave him a dram (out of our
patron’s case of bottles) to cheer him up. After all, Xury’s
advice was good, and I took it; we dropped our little
anchor, and lay still all night; I say still, for we slept none;
for in two or three hours we saw vast great creatures (we
knew not what to call them) of many sorts, come down to
the sea-shore and run into the water, wallowing and
washing themselves for the pleasure of cooling themselves;
and they made such hideous howlings and yellings, that I
never indeed heard the like.
     Xury was dreadfully frighted, and indeed so was I too;
but we were both more frighted when we heard one of
these mighty creatures come swimming towards our boat;
we could not see him, but we might hear him by his
blowing to be a monstrous huge and furious beast. Xury
said it was a lion, and it might be so for aught I know; but
poor Xury cried to me to weigh the anchor and row
away; ‘No,’ says I, ‘Xury; we can slip our cable, with the
buoy to it, and go off to sea; they cannot follow us far.’ I
had no sooner said so, but I perceived the creature
(whatever it was) within two oars’ length, which
something surprised me; however, I immediately stepped
to the cabin door, and taking up my gun, fired at him;
upon which he immediately turned about and swam
towards the shore again.
   But it is impossible to describe the horrid noises, and
hideous cries and howlings that were raised, as well upon
the edge of the shore as higher within the country, upon
the noise or report of the gun, a thing I have some reason
to believe those creatures had never heard before: this
convinced me that there was no going on shore for us in
the night on that coast, and how to venture on shore in
the day was another question too; for to have fallen into
the hands of any of the savages had been as bad as to have
fallen into the hands of the lions and tigers; at least we
were equally apprehensive of the danger of it.
    Be that as it would, we were obliged to go on shore
somewhere or other for water, for we had not a pint left
in the boat; when and where to get to it was the point.
Xury said, if I would let him go on shore with one of the
jars, he would find if there was any water, and bring some
to me. I asked him why he would go? why I should not
go, and he stay in the boat? The boy answered with so
much affection as made me love him ever after. Says he,
‘If wild mans come, they eat me, you go wey.’ ‘Well,
Xury,’ said I, ‘we will both go and if the wild mans come,
we will kill them, they shall eat neither of us.’ So I gave
Xury a piece of rusk bread to eat, and a dram out of our
patron’s case of bottles which I mentioned before; and we
hauled the boat in as near the shore as we thought was
proper, and so waded on shore, carrying nothing but our
arms and two jars for water.
    I did not care to go out of sight of the boat, fearing the
coming of canoes with savages down the river; but the
boy seeing a low place about a mile up the country,
rambled to it, and by-and-by I saw him come running
towards me. I thought he was pursued by some savage, or
frighted with some wild beast, and I ran forward towards
him to help him; but when I came nearer to him I saw
something hanging over his shoulders, which was a
creature that he had shot, like a hare, but different in
colour, and longer legs; however, we were very glad of it,
and it was very good meat; but the great joy that poor
Xury came with, was to tell me he had found good water
and seen no wild mans.
    But we found afterwards that we need not take such
pains for water, for a little higher up the creek where we
were we found the water fresh when the tide was out,
which flowed but a little way up; so we filled our jars, and
feasted on the hare he had killed, and prepared to go on
our way, having seen no footsteps of any human creature
in that part of the country.
    As I had been one voyage to this coast before, I knew
very well that the islands of the Canaries, and the Cape de
Verde Islands also, lay not far off from the coast. But as I
had no instruments to take an observation to know what
latitude we were in, and not exactly knowing, or at least
remembering, what latitude they were in, I knew not
where to look for them, or when to stand off to sea
towards them; otherwise I might now easily have found
some of these islands. But my hope was, that if I stood
along this coast till I came to that part where the English
traded, I should find some of their vessels upon their usual
design of trade, that would relieve and take us in.
    By the best of my calculation, that place where I now
was must be that country which, lying between the
Emperor of Morocco’s dominions and the negroes, lies
waste and uninhabited, except by wild beasts; the negroes
having abandoned it and gone farther south for fear of the
Moors, and the Moors not thinking it worth inhabiting by
reason of its barrenness; and indeed, both forsaking it
because of the prodigious number of tigers, lions, leopards,
and other furious creatures which harbour there; so that
the Moors use it for their hunting only, where they go
like an army, two or three thousand men at a time; and
indeed for near a hundred miles together upon this coast
we saw nothing but a waste, uninhabited country by day,
and heard nothing but howlings and roaring of wild beasts
by night.
    Once or twice in the daytime I thought I saw the Pico
of Teneriffe, being the high top of the Mountain Teneriffe
in the Canaries, and had a great mind to venture out, in
hopes of reaching thither; but having tried twice, I was
forced in again by contrary winds, the sea also going too
high for my little vessel; so, I resolved to pursue my first
design, and keep along the shore.
   Several times I was obliged to land for fresh water, after
we had left this place; and once in particular, being early
in morning, we came to an anchor under a little point of
land, which was pretty high; and the tide beginning to
flow, we lay still to go farther in. Xury, whose eyes were
more about him than it seems mine were, calls softly to
me, and tells me that we had best go farther off the shore;
‘For,’ says he, ‘look, yonder lies a dreadful monster on the
side of that hillock, fast asleep.’ I looked where he
pointed, and saw a dreadful monster indeed, for it was a
terrible, great lion that lay on the side of the shore, under
the shade of a piece of the hill that hung as it were a little
over him. ‘Xury,’ says I, ‘you shall on shore and kill him.’
Xury, looked frighted, and said, ‘Me kill! he eat me at one
mouth!’ - one mouthful he meant. However, I said no
more to the boy, but bade him lie still, and I took our
biggest gun, which was almost musket-bore, and loaded it
with a good charge of powder, and with two slugs, and
laid it down; then I loaded another gun with two bullets;
and the third (for we had three pieces) I loaded with five
smaller bullets. I took the best aim I could with the first
piece to have shot him in the head, but he lay so with his
leg raised a little above his nose, that the slugs hit his leg
about the knee and broke the bone. He started up,
growling at first, but finding his leg broken, fell down
again; and then got upon three legs, and gave the most
hideous roar that ever I heard. I was a little surprised that I
had not hit him on the head; however, I took up the
second piece immediately, and though he began to move
off, fired again, and shot him in the head, and had the
pleasure to see him drop and make but little noise, but lie
struggling for life. Then Xury took heart, and would have
me let him go on shore. ‘Well, go,’ said I: so the boy
jumped into the water and taking a little gun in one hand,
swam to shore with the other hand, and coming close to
the creature, put the muzzle of the piece to his ear, and
shot him in the head again, which despatched him quite.
   This was game indeed to us, but this was no food; and I
was very sorry to lose three charges of powder and shot
upon a creature that was good for nothing to us.
However, Xury said he would have some of him; so he
comes on board, and asked me to give him the hatchet.
‘For what, Xury?’ said I. ‘Me cut off his head,’ said he.
However, Xury could not cut off his head, but he cut off
a foot, and brought it with him, and it was a monstrous
great one.
   I bethought myself, however, that, perhaps the skin of
him might, one way or other, be of some value to us; and
   I resolved to take off his skin if I could. So Xury and I
went to work with him; but Xury was much the better
workman at it, for I knew very ill how to do it. Indeed, it
took us both up the whole day, but at last we got off the
hide of him, and spreading it on the top of our cabin, the
sun effectually dried it in two days’ time, and it afterwards
served me to lie upon.