
Jillian sank into a chair at the lunchroom table and laid her
head on her arms. She should find Connor immediately and
explain—no, not explain, there was no explanation, no excuse
for her behavior. Apologize, that was what she should do first.
Then resign. Maybe—
“Do you always beat yourself up like this?”
Jillian sat up quickly and scowled. Of all the people she’d
rather not deal with right now, James was right at the top of her
list. “What do you want?”
He pulled out the chair next to hers, flipped it around and
straddled it with his arms resting on the back. “I want to know
what’s got you so upset.”
She goggled at him. “You must be the only person in a twomile
radius who didn’t hear me yelling at Charmaine Forrester. I
could lose my job over this. I should lose my job.”
“Your job’s safe enough. If Connor fired his staff for getting
exasperated with clients like that one, he’d have no one left to
work for him. Including himself. By the way, Birkie says to thank
you for saying a few things that she’s been dying to say for
years. She may start a fan club for you.”
“I . . . oh, jeez, it was so damn unprofessional.” Jillian blew out
a breath and ran a nervous hand through her hair, not realizing
that it made it stick straight up in several places.
“No argument there. So tell me why you became a vet.”
“What?”
“Tell me why you decided to become a vet. I want to know.”
She eyed him suspiciously but his face seemed sincere
enough. “I care about animals,” she said, hesitating. Oh, what the
hell. “Okay, so I love animals. I’ve been crazy about animals
since I was a kid. But I respect them too. I like being around
them and learning all that I can about them and from them.” Her
voice was clear and steady now. “I want to make things better
for them whenever I can.”
James nodded. “So wasn’t that at the root of your argument
with Charmaine? You didn’t argue with her over her choice of
hair color or her political persuasion. You wanted to make
things better for that worn-out little dog.”
“Yeah. Yeah, I guess that’s what it boiled down to, but I
probably just pissed off Charmaine.”
“You sure did. Birkie says the woman’ll have a terrific time
telling the story to everyone she knows.”
Jillian winced and put a hand to her forehead. “Great. Just
great. She’ll never come back, never take that poor dog to a vet
again.”
“It’s not all bad. She’s going to rehearse everything you said
over and over to herself and everyone who’ll listen. So some of
it might sink in eventually. And out of everyone she tells, there’s
probably plenty of people who will agree with you, enough to
sprinkle a little doubt in her mind.”
“Plus she’s one hell of a drama queen.” Zoey Macleod was
standing in the doorway. “If you knew Charmaine, you’d know
she’s addicted to drama, especially if it involves her. So she’ll
definitely continue to take Pinky to an animal clinic. Wanna
guess which one?”
She hesitated, trying to read the answer in Zoey’s freckled
face. “Here?” she ventured.
“Without a single doubt. She couldn’t resist the possibility of
another scene. Know how I know that?”
Jillian studied her until the truth dawned on her. “Connor!
Connor told her off?”
“Oh, you bet he did. Raised his voice on more than one
occasion too. Ask Birkie about it sometime. And there’ve been a
few other clients who have managed to push his buttons too.
The point is that you can’t care about animals and always keep
your professional detachment in place. I’m not saying you
shouldn’t try—you don’t want to start abusing clients—but
there’s always going to be a few who drive you absolutely
crazy.” She rolled her eyes. “Trust me on that. I had old Mick
Kuchabsky in my office for an hour today, complaining and
cussing about everything from the last week’s editorial to the
size of the print.”
“Did you yell at him?”
“Eventually, but he’s ninety-six and deaf as a post so it didn’t
faze him. I felt a little better though.” Zoey winked and checked
her watch. “Just stopped by to collect Connor—he should be
cleaned up by now. We’ve got dinner at the Watsons’ tonight,
so I’ll see you folks later.”
“Thanks. Thanks a lot.” The relief was like cool rain on a hot
summer day. Jillian closed her eyes and just breathed it in for a
long moment. Opened her eyes to see James looking at her with
decided amusement in those impossibly blue eyes. It rankled
for a moment, but then she reminded herself that he had been
kind. Which was more than she had been the last time she’d
seen him. “Guess I should say thanks to you too. I know you
were trying to make me feel better.”
“Don’t know if I succeeded. You look pretty tired.”
“It’s been a long day. I just need a nap and I’ll be fine.” And
sex, she needed sex too. Lots of sex. At this time of day she’d
usually think only food, shower, sleep, but having James nearby
was making her hormones hum. It was a shame his shirt was
buttoned today. “I gave those papers to Birkie.”
“I know, thanks for signing them. I just picked up the order
from her.”
He seemed to be looking at her very intently. Her own gaze
traveled over his strong features and rested on his lips. She
knew just what they tasted like, and a shiver raced down her
spine. She wanted to taste them again. I’ve got to get out of here.
“Good. Um, that’s good. Glad I could help. See you.” She had
no choice but to be abrupt, not when she had to order her
eyeballs to quit staring at the man, force her body to get up, and
command her legs to carry her out of the room.
Her hormones protested loudly all the way to the livestock
wing. She hung her stethoscope on the cattle stanchion,
stripped off the lab coat and ran through several hyungs in her
scrubs. Right, left, hook, turn. Rhythm, power, control, balance.
Finally, drenched in sweat, she had to admit defeat. She had not
achieved the calm she sought, hadn’t even managed to vent
much of her frustration. Sighing heavily, she trudged to her
apartment and stood under the shower. Continued to stand
there long after the hot water ran out.
Chapter Eighteen
Evenings were going to be the hardest, he knew that now.
James could see the thumbnail shell of the moon sailing high
and bright in the star-studded sky. The breeze whispered and
called to him as he sat on the front steps of the cabin. The
tendrils of air, ripe with forest scents, enticed him to give in, to
leap away from his two-legged self and be one with the night. It
was like entreating a parched man in a desert to leap into a cool
oasis pool.
He gritted his teeth and turned away, determined to stay his
set course and remain completely human. His wolf side was just
too unpredictable. But God, it was hard to resist Changing and
running free. Almost physically painful. I wonder if addicts feel like
this? Needing that one thing that gets them through another day,
another hour. James shoved those thoughts aside and tried to
focus on something else.
Like his family. His brothers and sister had entered the yard
as wolves, but they’d acted more like big dogs, leaping on him
joyfully and knocking him flat. When they’d finally Changed,
they’d hugged the breath out of him, couldn’t stop touching and
patting him all night as if to reassure themselves he was real.
They talked all night too—or rather, his brothers and sister had
talked. James found himself with very little to say. After all, what
had he done over the past three decades that was worth talking
about? His baby sister, Kenzie, had two doctorates. Two, for
God’s sake. Devlin was a published author. Culley ran a
successful business.
And then Connor’s wife had come in. Zoey. She was beautiful,
he’d known that, he’d noticed her from a distance in her human
form as she came and went from the farm, watched her with the
Pack in her wolfen form too. But as a wolf himself, he’d never
approached her, never talked to her, never known how smart or
funny or kind she was, or how devoted to his brother. Connor
had found his true mate, and they were as happy now as they
appeared in the wedding photos on the living room wall.
Photos that included every member of the family but James
Macleod. Not only had he not known about the wedding, he
couldn’t even remember what part of the country he’d been
wandering at the time.
Rip Van Winkle. That was what Culley had called James. After
the man in the old folk tale who went to sleep for many years,
and awakened to find that life had gone on without him. Culley
had meant it as a joke, and James had smiled at the time but
inside, he was horrified by all that he’d missed.
Not only his family but the world itself had advanced in ways
he hadn’t expected. Culley’s business was a prime example. It
was online and he had tried to show it to James in Connor’s
home office. The computer hadn’t remotely resembled the last
one James had seen. And it was mind-boggling to learn that
most people had one—or two or more—in their home as a
matter of course. Devlin had one in his pocket for God’s sake.
There was no doubt that James had some real catching up to
do in order to fit into the human world. He’d felt seriously
overwhelmed, emotionally and mentally, by the time everyone
went to bed near dawn.
Small wonder he’d chosen to sleep outside for a few hours,
claiming he was too hot to remain in the house. Whether his
siblings bought that excuse or not, James didn’t know, but it
was an immense relief to be out in the night air, away from all
the little technological marvels that marked this new century.
He’d rather have Changed, curled up in the nearby woods, but if
he was going to be human, he had to learn to make do. The
porch swings didn’t look overly comfortable, but he found an
old hammock between a couple of trees behind the house. And
so he let himself be lulled into exhausted sleep by the soft
susurrus of the breeze in the aspen leaves.
At least Connor had waited a couple days before springing
his big idea on James. “I know you’re still trying to adjust, bro,
but you’ve got to have a reason to get up in the morning. You
used to have your own ranch, used to enjoy it. Hell, you were
damn good at it. I’ve never seen anyone with a gift like yours,
and heaven knows my land could use that gift. The ground’s
just lying there fallow and wasted when it could be producing,
but we both know that I’m never going to have time for it. Zoey
loves the place but she’s a city gal and running the newspaper
keeps her busy enough.” Connor waved his arm at the
buildings, the fences. “Look at it, it’s a mess. But it doesn’t have
to be. There’s no reason the farm can’t belong to both of us.
Zoey and I talked about it and we’re proposing a partnership.
We’ll put up the money and give you signing authority on all the
farm accounts, if you’ll just get this place whipped into shape.”
In the end James had agreed to it, even though his gut was
tight with fear, as if the whole thing was a monstrous trap, a
ploy to keep him human, keep him here. It was an emotional
reaction, he knew. He’d already made his decision to walk on
two legs. But in truth, he hadn’t given a thought to what he was
going to do with his time. Protecting Jillian wasn’t working out
to a full-time job, especially since she didn’t want him to defend
her. Connor was right—again, which was getting just a little
irritating—and so James found himself suddenly in charge of a
very large, very rundown farm.
At his brother’s invitation, James had taken up residence in
an empty farmhouse. It had begun its life as a cabin for the hired
man but had been added to over the years until now it was more
like a sprawling lodge. The last person to live there had been his
brother’s late friend, Jim Neely. Old Jim had loved Connor’s
animals as if they were his own children, and there was nothing
but good energy in and around the house. Good location too.
Tucked back away into the trees on the opposite side of the
farmyard from Connor’s place, the house was invisible from
every direction until you were almost standing in front of it.
But God, that first night indoors, in a bed . . . James had been
disoriented, frightened in some primal way, like a child afraid of
the dark. He didn’t tell Connor, but that first night he had ended
up sleeping outside on the porch. And the next night as well. No
blankets, no pillow, just curled on the weathered boards like—
Like an animal. James made a disgusted sound. Jesus, it’s just
a bed. I’ll sleep in the damn thing.
In less than an hour, James was back on the porch, sweating.
He swore viciously, half at himself and half at the bed that
terrified him, and waited for his head to clear and his heart rate
to slow to normal. He tried to think rationally when what he
really wanted to do was tear the offending piece of furniture into
tiny shreds with his teeth. And wasn’t that just another sign of
his animal nature? Would his first impulses always be those of a
wolf? “Okay, okay. Small steps then. Maybe I can’t sleep in the
goddamn bed just yet, but I don’t have to sleep on the porch
either.”
He got up and went inside, just stood in the living room. So
far, so good. Maybe he could sleep on the couch. Even a wolf
would probably like sleeping on a couch. He remembered
sprawling on Jillian’s couch, wondered if it had been a good
idea to startle her like that. Hell, that whole night hadn’t been a
good idea. Look what it had brought him to. Warring with his
wolf side, trying to sleep indoors like a human being . . .
To be human or not to be human, that is the question. Culley had
once paraphrased Hamlet when a wild game of four-legged
rough-and-tumble gave the young Macleod boys a tough
decision to make. Should they tell their mother about
accidentally collapsing her line of clean laundry or stay in wolf
form and run for the hills? It was over a century and a half ago,
and they had laughed over that line many times since.
It didn’t strike James as funny now. He no longer had the
luxury of contemplating that question because Connor had
been right. James couldn’t just pop back into his family’s lives,
decide it wasn’t working out, and vanish again. It would be
cruel, and he was not a cruel man. He was only beginning to
understand how much he had hurt his loved ones by
disappearing the first time. He could never bring himself to do
that to them again. Add to that the instinctive imperative to
protect Jillian—if only from himself and his wolf nature—and
James felt there was no other choice for him. He had to resume
a human life.
Doesn’t mean I have to like it. James stalked into the bedroom,
kicked the offending bed, and grabbed a pillow and blanket. It
had been simple to be human once, even enjoyable. He didn’t
remember having to struggle so damn much, didn’t recall
experiencing this level of frustration. And if it was simple once, it
could be again.
He stretched out on the couch in the front room but couldn’t
relax. His eyes simply refused to close. His body wanted to curl
up in a ball. He’d opened all the windows, but the room still felt
stifling, even claustrophobic. At the clinic he’d managed to
sleep in the loft, but it was wide open to the elements at one
end, and the ceiling rafters were high above him. Burrowing into
a pile of straw had been a whole lot more organic, more natural,
than trying to get comfortable with a blanket and pillow. He
thought wistfully of the hammock behind Connor’s house.
Maybe he should put up one of those in the yard. Yeah, that’ll
work real well in the winter. And the thought that he would still be
human months from now was somehow depressing.
Jillian’s probably sound asleep. An image popped into his head,
and he let it linger: the small blond woman curled in her bed, her
short hair sticking up in every direction, her delicate faery
features, the pajamas with the silly frogs on them . . . He hoped
she was sleeping better than he was. The last time he’d spoken
to her at the clinic, she’d looked ready to drop, but then, she’d
fought more than one battle that day.
That whole scene with Mountney, for instance. Jillian’s body
language had shown no fear as she faced down the arrogant
bastard and traded verbal blows. There was passion in her
voice, in her face, as she stood up for a neglected animal, a
passion her body didn’t seem big enough to hold. It lit her up
like a prairie wildfire, leapt out and scorched her adversary. And
the glorious blaze of her pulled at something in James as he
watched. Pulled him now just remembering.
He had successfully resisted the powerful urge to charge in
and protect her. He’d learned enough about her to know that
Jillian didn’t want to be defended, even though Mountney was
doing his best to bully her with threats. In fact, she seemed to
think an offer of help was some sort of statement on her
abilities. So James accorded her the respect he would give
another Changeling and allowed her to fight her own battle. But
his wolf nature hadn’t made it easy. A low growl had crept into
his throat, and his control seemed balanced on a high, thin wire
in a strong wind. James knew then, knew, that if anything in the
highly charged scene shifted even slightly—if Jillian showed a
moment’s uncertainty, if Mountney lifted a hand to strike her—
the wolf would have been at the man’s throat in a heartbeat.
None of that had happened, thank God. James had partially
appeased the wolf by standing, simply standing behind Jillian
and glaring over the top of her head at her assailant as only a
Changeling could glare. The guy had backed down and left in a
hurry, but Jillian definitely hadn’t appreciated what James had
done. And she had no way of appreciating what he hadn’t done.
Later when she went head to head with that Forrester woman,
James was again fascinated by Jillian’s passion. She cared.
She cared about the animals, she cared about her ideals, and
she even cared about him to a degree. The incident in the loft
had shown him that. Not every woman would risk asking a halfnaked
man if he needed anything, especially after he’d just
grabbed her and scared her almost to death. A warrior spirit and a
compassionate heart. Small wonder he was mesmerized by her.
Which meant he’d have to be a hell of a lot more careful.
In the past, Jillian Descharme had left an impression on him,
even as a wolf, that he couldn’t shake. A connection he didn’t
understand but couldn’t deny. But he had to stay in control, had
to find a way to watch over her and keep his distance at the
same time. It would be too easy, much too easy, to become
involved with her, to encourage a relationship that would only
place her in further jeopardy. His job was to protect her, even
from himself.
Some protector I am. He couldn’t even win a battle with a
stupid bed, of all things. And he didn’t seem to be gaining any
ground with the damn couch either. In the end, James slept on
the bare floor just inside the open door. It was a start.
Connor didn’t see his older brother for days. The work
around the farm was done as if by ghosts. The animals were fed
and cared for, the tool shed tidied up, bales stacked and grain
moved. Connor caught a rare glimpse of James as he was
walking the far fields at sunup, kneeling now and again to run
his hands through the soil. Maybe I pushed him too hard about
taking on the farm. Maybe it’s too much too soon and he needs more
time.
Then one night he came home to a very different farm than he
had left that morning. There were construction crews on the
roofs of the buildings. Flatbed trucks of materials filled the lane.
Heavy equipment vied for position in the corrals and smoke
rose from burning piles of discarded fencing. The peace and
quiet of the country had been replaced with a cacophony of
power tools. He found a place to park his truck and walked into
the heart of the chaos until he found James giving detailed
instructions to a crew of electricians. Connor was intrigued. He
waited until his brother finished, then tapped him on the
shoulder. “Who are you and what have you done with my
farm?”
“I’m your partner, and this farm needs to be brought back
from the dead.”
“Can’t argue with that. It’s needed serious work for a long
time. How the hell did you find so much help? Looks like
somebody kicked over an anthill.”
“I discovered one thing that hasn’t changed in thirty years—
money still talks. I figured there’s no point dragging all these
projects out, so I offered hefty incentives to finish by the end of
the month. Just in time, too. There isn’t a roof that doesn’t leak,
and two of the equipment sheds are on the verge of collapse.
There’s no watering system for the stock, and the fuse box in
the stable catches fire when you turn on a light.”
Connor put his hands up as if surrendering. “I admit it, it was
grim. I thought this place had a lot of potential, but if it was left in
my hands, it would just revert back to the forest, like those
ancient ruins you see in South America.”
“You didn’t do so bad. You got a contractor to come in and
renovate the house at least. I hate to think what kind of shape it
was in.”
“Well, it had an air-conditioned roof that matched the barn, for
one thing. Once we got that fixed, the contractor pointed out
other things that should be done too. Remove the weasel family
from the kitchen, the bee colony from the attic, and so forth. One
thing led to another. I figure it’s pretty much a new house now,
but I like it. I imagine I’ll like what you’re doing when it’s done
too.”
“I hope so. Look, if you and Zoey want anything done a
certain way—”
Connor shook his head. “Nope. You go right ahead and do it,
do anything, any way you see fit. Believe me, we’ll be perfectly
happy as silent partners.” As he scanned the farmyard, his gaze
rested on three big shaggy beasts with long sweeping horns
that hadn’t been there the day before. “Christ, are those
Highlands?” He knew full well they were, but it was so damn
good to see them. He quickly blinked away the unexpected
moisture from his eyes.
“Zoey told me about what happened to your livestock a
couple years back, how they were all wiped out. I, uh . . . I
figured it would be a good move to infuse some Highland Cattle
genes into our Angus herd. You know, they have a good feed
conversion ratio and they—”
Connor put a hand on his brother’s shoulder. “You don’t have
to make excuses, bro. You did that for me, and I appreciate it,
big time. I’ve really missed seeing those hairy critters around
here.” He was about to walk away, then turned back. “Almost
forgot. Our multitalented Culley sent these over for you. It’s your
new ID.”
James surveyed the little plastic cards his brother dumped in
his hand. “Which one is the ID?”
“All of them. It’s a collective term for the basics. Driver’s
license is probably your main one. Birth certificate—that’s
important. You’ll have to memorize the new year, but the date
and place are the same. Figured it would be less confusing for
you.”
“Seems to be a lot tougher to be a Changeling in the twentyfirst
century. Tougher to hide your age.”
“You got that right.” Connor rolled his eyes. It was a perennial
problem for all of them. The lifespan of a Changeling was much
longer than that of a human, and they aged very slowly. And
that meant James couldn’t use a single document from his
previous life. Because according to them, he was seventy-five
years old. Or dead. Either way, he had to start fresh. As Connor
had. “Zoey says she can put a few gray streaks in my hair
eventually, and Birkie has a little magic that will make me look
older. I figure I’ve got maybe twenty to thirty years left here
before I need to move on. I’m thinking I’ll try Alaska next time.
Mom and Dad want to go there too. Or Wyoming. Carlene says
it’s incredible.”
“Mom and Dad still coming here to visit?”
“In the fall. They’re leading a historical tour of the Highlands
until late September. Then they have the rest of the year off, said
they’d like to spend it here with us. You know, their first impulse
was to drop everything and rush over here to see you. But they
thought maybe that might be overwhelming, that they should
give you a little more time to get your human feet under you.”
Connor watched his brother’s face. Decided not to mention that
holding off had been his idea, but he wasn’t sure at that moment
whom he had been protecting, his parents or his brother. “It
cost them, James, let me tell you. They love you. We all do.”
James nodded, then abruptly walked away. Connor let him
go. I know it costs you too, bro, just to be here in human skin. Please
don’t give up.
He walked out of the bank with two new accounts, two more
plastic cards, and a sheaf of papers and brochures. James’s
first impulse was to dump the paper into the nearest trash can,
but Culley had cautioned him against doing exactly that. Thank
God Culley was doing his bookkeeping, if it meant keeping
track of this much crap.
James had to admit that Culley was doing a very good job of
it, though. His youngest brother had showed him a lengthy list
of assets and investments waiting to be transferred into
James’s new accounts. Wealth accumulation was relatively
easy with a long lifespan, but still, James had been shocked at
the amounts.
He’d also been humbled. He’d never thought about all the
things his family had had to deal with, all the details that had to
be taken care of. They’d even had to bury Evelyn, sort her
belongings, sort his belongings, sell off the ranch, all without
any help from him. As if he had died. What had he put them
through? Automatically he thought about his parents again, and
his throat tightened up. He wanted to see them, badly, and
dreaded the powerful emotions that were sure to come with it at
the same time. Maybe he’d be more comfortable, better able to
handle those emotions in a few months, when he’d had more
practice at being human. Maybe pigs will fly. That’s the whole damn
problem with being human. You always end up feeling things you
don’t want to feel. Nevertheless he wanted to see his folks. He
had no idea how he was going to apologize for his thirty-year
absence, but he was damn well going to try.
The scary part was that he couldn’t promise his family
anything, not a thing. He had no idea how long he could stand
to be human. All that held him to a two-legged existence was the
overriding need to protect Jillian from his own wolf. As long as it
takes. I’ll do it as long as it takes.
He’d hoped that just being human would be enough to keep
the wolf away from Jillian. God knew it wasn’t enough to keep
her out of his mind. He caught himself thinking about her
countless times through the day, and at night he dreamed about
her frequently, often reliving that kiss at the clinic. Sometimes
dreaming beyond the kiss. . . .
When he awakened one night on the very verge of Changing,
he realized he’d have to find some other way to appease his
alter ego. There was no doubt in his mind that if he’d finished
the Change, the damn wolf would have headed straight to the
clinic. To Jillian. Maybe I need to give it what it wants. Some of
what it wants, he amended. If he dropped by the clinic in the
morning, saw Jillian, would the wolf be satisfied?
He didn’t know that once would be far from enough. And it
didn’t take long for Connor to notice either. His brother was
waiting for him at the edge of the field when he finished seeding
one night.
“Noticed you were at the clinic again today.”
“Yeah, so?”
“So, seems like you’re there a lot. Any special reason?”
“No big deal. Just checking on Jillian, that’s all. Making sure
she’s okay.”
“Every single day?”
“Look, I figure it keeps the damn wolf from looking in on her
while I’m asleep. Just being proactive.” It was true that James
didn’t trust his alter ego, but he wasn’t about to mention how
much he had come to look forward to going to the clinic. It
wasn’t something he admitted to himself. He never stayed long,
a few minutes only. Enough to catch a glimpse of her.
Sometimes to exchange a couple of words with her, hear her
voice.
“Good Christ, James, it’s pretty obvious to everyone that you
like her a lot. Why the hell don’t you ask her out? Come to think
of it, if you’re so damn concerned about her safety, it would be a
lot easier to keep an eye on her—and the wolf—if you were in a
relationship. Maybe you should think about that.”
What? “Maybe you should mind your business. I’m not
interested.”
Connor’s expression was smug. “Not interested. Sure. You
must have mentioned her a half dozen times over supper last
night. And at the clinic this morning I thought you were going to
flatten Martin Bell when he asked where the little blond girl with
the great ass was.”
James flicked a murderous glance at the smirk on his older
brother’s face. Surely he hadn’t mentioned Jillian that much.
Connor was exaggerating, right? “Maybe I get tired of hearing
jerks like Bell shoot off their mouths. So what?” And dammit,
she did have a great little behind.
“So you’re asking me to believe you’re not the least little bit
interested in Jillian Descharme? She’s just a responsibility,
someone you feel obligated to look out for, but nothing more?”
“I’m not asking you anything. Just leave it alone, Connor.” It
was all he could do to keep from shouting at his brother. Deep
inside James was uncomfortably aware his anger was little
more than a flimsy shield, and that pissed him off even more.
He’d made a decision, goddammit! Decided it was best to stay
away from Jillian, to resist the attraction he felt for her. Because
in order to keep her safe, he could not have a future with Jillian
Descharme.
He hadn’t expected it to be so damn hard.
Jillian paused long enough from eating her triple-fudge
mocha almond ice cream to down more aspirin. It wasn’t her
best choice, she supposed, but neither was letting her
wrenched shoulder throb constantly. She’d delivered a 90-
pound foal, and both her arms were now strained and bruised,
while the shoulder hurt like hell. At least the mare came through
the event just fine, and the foal was healthy and sound. Jillian
might be sore, but she also had a sense of satisfaction that she
wouldn’t trade.
Birkie offered her a brown plastic bottle. “Chocolate syrup?”
“Does it come with a straw?”
They both giggled. The two were sitting on Jillian’s couch
with their feet propped comfortably on the sagging coffee table.
The clinic usually closed at five, but thanks to a number of
emergencies, they hadn’t had a chance to shut the doors until
nearly seven. Connor had headed home to Zoey, while Birkie
and Jillian ate dinner in the staff room. They’d elected to have
dessert—or “a sanity refill” as Birkie called it—in front of
Jillian’s tiny TV. There wasn’t much to watch, but they were
both too tired to care. Birkie picked a rerun of a gardening show
and left the volume on low just for background chatter.
“I see James dropped by again,” she said. “What did he have
to talk about today?”
“Nothing really. We never seem to have much of a
conversation. Besides I was, well—” Frankly, Jillian had been
thinking about how much she’d like to jump James, but she
wasn’t about to say that. “I was really tired, and I left.”
“Left?” Birkie snorted, leaned forward and pointed her spoon
at the younger woman. “Honey, the moment you get too tired to
spend time with a handsome man who’s smitten with you, you
are definitely working too hard. Sounds like we got you some
days off just in the nick of time.”
“I . . . you . . . he is not smitten with me. He doesn’t even know
me. And I don’t even know him. And what kind of an archaic
word is smitten anyway?”
“Ha. Smitten’s a perfect word for someone who shows up
here every single day.”
“Oh, come on. Davis Jenkins is in here daily, and he’s
definitely not fond of any of us.”
“Davis just likes to complain and drink up the free coffee in
the waiting room while he does it. James Macleod, on the other
hand, likes you quite a bit.”
“Since when?”
“Oh, I’d say since all the way back to when Ruby brought
Cujo in. You didn’t see the way James was looking at you. I did,
though. I stood in the doorway and watched him hold that dog.
Ruby was talking a mile a minute about the price of lamb, but he
wasn’t listening to a word. His eyes were on you the whole
time.”
“He was probably just interested in what I was doing. More
people than you might think like to watch stitching and surgery
and all kinds of things like that. That’s why reality TV is so
popular.”
“And that’s why he was staring at your face?”
“He was not.”
“Was too. Was today as well, when you were treating that
pony that ran into a hornet’s nest.”
“Well, if he was, I didn’t notice.” She wasn’t about to admit
that it gave her a pleasant little flutter to know that he might
have been looking at her. “The pony sure calmed down a lot
when James came along, though. The owner wasn’t any help at
all.”
“Don’t forget how James hot-footed it out to the corral that
time he saw Gerald Mountney Jr. giving you a bad time.”
“I didn’t need any help.”
“Course not. But that’s not the point. The point is that James
was prepared to dive in and do whatever was necessary. He
would have defended you if you’d wanted him to, you know.”
“Yeah, I get that. It’s a guy thing. So?”
“So he didn’t. Because he also knew you didn’t want him to.
That tells me he’s thought about you and how you think, how
you feel. Therefore he likes you. A lot.”
Jillian narrowed her eyes at her friend. “Are you sure you’re
not a detective or something? Do you keep notes on all this
stuff?”
“Just observant, hon. And even an old duck like me isn’t
going to turn down an opportunity to observe someone like
James Macleod. Especially that mighty fine butt of his.”
“Birkie!”
“Just stating a fact, hon.” Birkie’s grin was unrepentant.
“Privilege just to see a butt like that. . . .”
Jillian poked fiercely at her ice cream with a tightly held spoon
as she told herself she didn’t give a damn about James’s butt,
the fact that she’d once wanted to compare it to the rest of his
appealing physique notwithstanding. And for the five hundredth
time she ruthlessly yanked her mind back from the sexy dream
she’d had in the night about him. Much more of this and she
was so going to order a shiny new vibrator off the Internet.
Maybe that blue one . . .
“Come to think of it, seeing Mountney peel out of here with
his forked tail between his legs was a close second,” Birkie
added. “But James’s butt is still at the top of the list, don’t you
think?”
Jillian rolled her eyes. “Okay, okay, I admit it. James is hot,
and I’m attracted. I don’t know what difference it makes. Maybe
he looks at me, maybe he even kind of likes me—maybe. But it’s
not like he’s ever asked me out. We never really talk. We
probably have nothing in common.”
“Bah. I’ll bet you have plenty in common. For one thing, both
of you are very talented with animals. James has taken over
Connor’s farm for him, and you’d better believe that place is
going to flourish from now on. He’s already made a lot of
changes.”
“I heard something about that. I guess it’s a good thing for
Connor. He’s so busy, I don’t know how he ever had time for a
farm.”
Birkie carefully spooned a chocolate-covered almond out of
her ice cream, savored it for a long moment. “Connor bought
the place about ten or eleven years ago at an auction. He
wanted to live out of town, and he liked the land. Big place and
pretty too, backing right onto the Peace River. But you’re right,
he just hasn’t had the time to make the farm produce. Really, the
place is just a catchall for some of the unwanted animals he
comes across in his practice.”
“God knows there’s too many of those.”
“Amen. And we try to find homes for as many as we can, but
when we can’t, the creature generally finds its way to Connor’s
farm. He must have quite a menagerie by now.”
“So James is managing the place for him?”
“Yup. More than a manager, though, he’s a full partner in the
operation. Moved into a house of his own out there too.”
“Huh. Guess he’s not homeless and jobless anymore.” Jillian
found herself unexpectedly relieved.
“Exactly. So when are you going out to visit the Macleod
farm?”
“What? When Connor invites me, I guess. I’d say when James
invites me, but I’ll be old and gray before that happens.”
Birkie made little tsk-tsking noises. “My dear, you have to be a
lot more proactive if you ever expect to get to know James any
better.”
“I know that look. What you really mean is devious. I don’t
know if I’m that interested.”
Her friend just looked at her.
“Okay, okay, I am. Just out of curiosity, mind you.”
“Of course. So when do you want to visit James on his home
turf?”
Jillian put up her hands. “I give up. You’re the mastermind,
you tell me.”
“Well, it just so happens I have some plants and things for
Connor. Maybe you could find time to do me a favor on your
day off, make a little delivery?”
Chapter Nineteen
As a veterinarian, Jillian had been to countless farms. But she’d
never assign the word beautiful to any of them. The Macleod
farm was an exception. A long wooded lane led to a sprawling
two-story house nestled in the trees. The old building had been
made over into something that spoke of both history and
comfort. The roofed porch that wrapped around two sides of
the house had a charming assortment of mismatched chairs
and rockers scattered about, and a couple of hanging swings.
Pots of newly planted flowers sat in groups everywhere.
Carefully tended beds of yellow daylilies and purple irises
flanked the steps. The effect was one of invitation, of welcome.
She parked the truck in front of the steps, took Birkie’s trays
of plants to the porch and set them carefully in front of the door.
She knew there was no one at the house. Connor was in
surgery this afternoon. There was no sign of anyone else either.
No sign of James, and that was a bit of a letdown, even if she
knew he was likely busy. It was a sunny and pleasant day,
however, and who could blame her if she decided to walk
around a little?
Most farmyards were as clear-cut and visually barren as the
fields beyond them but not here. Jillian counted five species of
trees she knew and two she didn’t in tall dense stands between
every building. And every barn and shed was freshly painted in
clean bright white with simple black trim to match the house. A
refreshing change from the usual garish red barn paint most
farmers favored, when they bothered to paint anything at all.
The buildings, although in good repair, looked to be of the
same era as the house. The fencing, however, was a sharp
contrast. No battered wood here, no patched and spliced wire.
Instead, steel rails gleamed between steel posts, all in basic
black. Jillian recognized the brand label as top of the line. No
haphazard enclosures here either, but tidy, organized corrals
and paddocks, linked in places by modern chutes. A clean and
efficient operation yet far from sterile, Jillian thought. Animals
probably enjoy living here. God knows there’re enough of them.
Dogs, cats, goats, chickens, and even a couple of outsized pigs
seemed to have the run of the place. She couldn’t help smiling
as she recognized a few of the dogs, knew Connor had adopted
them when their owners had requested euthanasia for reasons
of convenience rather than mercy. They bounced over to her,
swarmed her with affection. She laughed and tried to distribute
petting and head rubs to all.
A sudden voice made her jump. “Looking for something?”
The dogs left her at once in favor of James. Jillian saw with
interest that they didn’t jump and leap but sat grinning at his
feet. He gave them each a quick pat and turned his attention
back to her. “What brings you out here?”
“Birkie sent some bedding plants over for Connor. I didn’t
know what to do with them.”
“Where are they?”
“On the porch.” She stood open-mouthed as he immediately
strode across the yard in the direction of his brother’s house.
She walked quickly but was forced to break into a jog just to try
to catch up. Jillian made it to the bottom of the steps just as
James scooped up the trays from in front of the door.
“I’m sorry, should I have put them somewhere else?”
“Anywhere but with Connor. I don’t know how anyone so
gifted with animals can have such a black thumb when it comes
to plants.”
Jillian looked around at the abundance of flowers spilling out
of pots and overflowing the garden on either side of the steps.
“He seems to do all right with these.”
James shook his head as he swept by her with the trays.
“Zoey filled the pots while I cleaned up the garden. Connor had
thistles the size of trees growing here.”
“What kind of plants did Birkie give you?” She was trying to
be pleasant but it was irritating to have to hurry to keep up
again. She nearly ran into him when he stopped abruptly.
“You don’t know them?”
“No. I studied zoology not botany. I can recognize a few
things like the geraniums on the porch, but these have no
flowers.” She was surprised to see him—what? It wasn’t a smile
or a grin, but the ghost of each, a faint crook of one corner of
his mouth. Still it had the effect of lightening his face, easing the
fierce brow, although those blue Viking eyes were just as
piercing. Jillian scanned the trays he was holding and pointed
to a dark-leafed plant. “So what’s this one here?”
In answer he pulled off a leaf and crushed it under her nose.
“Recognize it now?”
“It’s familiar but I can’t place it.”
“Basil. Haven’t you ever cooked with fresh basil?”
“I’ve never even cooked with the dried up stuff in the little jars.
But I’ve eaten Birkie’s homemade pizza so at least I know that I
like basil.” She pointed to another one. “What’s this one that
looks like tubular grass?”
“Chives.”
“Are they all herbs?”
“Most of them. Connor is actually a decent cook when he has
the time.”
“Connor? Our Connor? The same man who gets so busy he
forgets to eat? He must only cook about once a year then.”
James chuckled at that and set off across the yard again. At a
more leisurely pace.
“I have to say that this place looks terrific.” Jillian was able to
fall in step—almost. His legs were still a lot longer than hers. “I
see a lot of farms, but this one really stands out. What do you
produce here?”
“Nothing much yet. There’s lots of preparation to be done
before we raise anything.”
“I’d love to hear about it.” Then she had a brainwave that
Birkie would be proud of. “Or I’ve got time for a tour if it’s easier
to show me.”
He glanced at her as if to see if she was sincere, then stopped
at a shed and tucked the plants inside. “These will be out of the
sun here. I’ll get them later.”
The tour began with the closest corral, which contained three
enormous Highland bulls. Their sweeping horns reminded
Jillian of the Texas Longhorn of cowboy movie fame, but that’s
where the resemblance ended. Their shaggy fur and stocky
build was more reminiscent of Ice Age oxen. It was a breed that
Jillian hadn’t encountered close up yet, and she got closer than
expected as James led her right inside the corral with the
creatures. They nosed their way over to him with an amiability
she’d seldom seen in cattle, stood patiently as James scratched
their foreheads under the fringe of long hair that hid their eyes.
“Hardy beasts,” he was saying. “Well suited to the kind of
winter we get up here in northern Canada.” He talked about
their history, the pros and cons of using them as a beefproducing
breed.
She thought at first that the bulls were unusually gentle, but
the experience was repeated with each enclosure. Jillian began
to understand that there was something unusual about James,
not the animals. Did he have some sort of calming influence or
aura, something that animals were able to sense? Was that why
he had been able to restrain Cujo? And that poor pony that had
been badly stung by a nest of hornets. It had been a frightened
wreck. Until James came by. The animal had settled down
immediately and allowed Jillian to treat it. Too bad James couldn’t
calm the owner as well, but you can’t have everything.
Jillian glanced up at James as they walked among the corrals.
He was relaxed, at home here. The warrior visage was softened,
nearly nonexistent, as he spoke of his visions for the farm. He
had a deep passion for what he was doing, she realized. Just as
she felt a soul-deep fervor for veterinary medicine, James
Macleod had an affinity for the earth. It was easy to listen to him.
She’d never paid much attention to agriculture, outside of the
health of livestock. Now she was getting a glimpse of how much
farming was both an art and a science.
The horses in the far paddock spotted James and trotted over
at once, just as every other creature here had done. With a start,
Jillian realized she was more than a little envious of that. With
the exception of dogs, most animals didn’t run up to greet a
person unless they were hoping for food.
Certainly livestock seldom showed interest when most
farmers approached unless grain was involved. And animals
definitely didn’t run up to veterinarians. Well, except for Poodle.
He always seemed pleased to be at the clinic, but the old
Siamese cat was decidedly eccentric.
“You’re like the Pied Piper,” she blurted as a pig that must
weigh close to 600 pounds ambled over to receive a scratch on
the head from James.
“Why is that?”
“They all adore you. Look at the parade behind us, for
heaven’s sake.” Jillian waved her free hand at the entourage
that followed them. Dogs certainly, but also cats, goats, two
pigs and an assortment of chickens and geese. “Why do they
do that?”
James grinned. “Animals are excellent judges of character.”
And that was all the explanation he would give her.
Eventually they came to the edge of the farmyard, where the
trees gave way to rolling green fields. “What have you planted
here?” she asked. The plants were nothing like the orderly grain
fields she’d expected. These were bushy with twisted,
sprawling stems and an abundance of leaves.
“Green manure.”
She wrinkled her nose. “What?”
“Seriously. Part of organic farming is to use natural methods
to enrich the soil instead of chemical fertilizer. This is a field of
alfalfa. It has very long roots that bring minerals up to the
topsoil from deep in the earth. And it has the ability to take
nitrogen from the air and put that into the soil too.”
“Don’t they make hay out of this stuff?”
“Most of the time, but alfalfa’s a perennial and this field is
several years old. Too old to make good hay. See how it’s got a
lot of stems? So instead of harvesting it, I’m going to wait
another week and then plow it under while it’s still green to
enrich the soil even further. Voila, green manure.”
“So there’s no real manure involved?”
“No, it’s just a slang term for growing a crop strictly as
fertilizer. Although we do compost real manure to put back into
the soil, but it’ll be a year, maybe two before it’s ready to use.”
“It really means a lot to you to convert this farm to organic
production.”
Her hand was resting on his arm. He stared at it a moment
then covered it with his own hand as if to keep it there. “It does.
We don’t have to destroy the land in order to persuade it to feed
us. And I feel better eating food that was produced this way.
Other people have other opinions of course.”
Jillian looked up at him, studied his face. “You really believe in
what you’re doing, and I like that. I like the way you care about
the land, and I like the way you care about the animals. I guess
that means I like you.”
She’d succeeded in surprising him, yet shouldn’t he look
pleased or happy or something? Maybe he wasn’t as interested
as Birkie thought he was. Oh great, now he’s frowning. Maybe
coming here was a huge mistake.
Or maybe not. James was still frowning, but his powerful
hands had slid around her, gently gathering her in. He lowered
his face to hers, eyes open as if to gauge her reaction. Jillian
reached up to tangle her fingers in his white-blond hair and met
his lips with her own. She poured herself into the kiss, felt the
thrill of it vibrate through both of them. She felt reckless,
exhilarated, as if she were leaping from a great height into a
deep pool.
But the water wasn’t still. Powerful currents rocked her, an
ocean of sensation carried her along at dizzying speed. Each
time she tried to surface, James changed the angle of the kiss
and pulled her under. His lips were hot over hers, soft but
relentless. Jillian had one hand still fisted in James’s hair, the
other gripping his shoulder as he simply flowed into her system
like the tide. She had tried to meet the kiss as she met
everything else in her life, head on, trusting her own strength
and mind and skill to prevail. But they were useless tools here.
The tide was too powerful, the water too deep and fast, the
inescapable pull of an undertow drawing her steadily towards
the silky bottom. With James. She sighed and sank willingly into
the nameless, sweet sea.
James felt her sigh shiver right through him, felt the subtle
shift in her, a yielding. He wanted her, wanted to feel her skin
against his, wanted to touch and to taste. The blood was
pounding in his head and throbbing in his groin, as he ran his
hands over her, held her tightly to him and ached to be closer
still. His hand found its way under her blouse and cupped a
teacup breast, felt the delicate nipple pressing into his palm
through the silky bra. James shifted, trailed kisses along the
angles of her face and down her throat.
Yes, yes, yes. With a start he realized he wasn’t alone. The
wolf was present and it was eager. Eager to have him claim
Jillian fully.
No. With difficulty, James pulled back. God, he wanted
nothing more than to continue what he was doing. But he
wasn’t about to give in to the wolf’s plans for his life, or do
something that might eventually endanger Jillian. And so he
pulled back while he still could. He smoothed her blouse back
into place and rubbed his hands up and down her upper arms.
He was about to say he had work to do and she probably did
too and maybe she should go—but those sea green eyes, still
dreamy with arousal, were looking up at him. “Maybe we should
continue our tour,” he heard himself say.
“Maybe we should.”
Her lips curved. They were still soft and full from kissing, and
he very nearly bent his head to capture them again. But he
could feel the wolf within and would not let it have its way.
Dared not. If he kissed her again right now, he couldn’t stop
himself a second time. A horse nickered nearby, penetrating
James’s awareness, and James seized upon it like a life
preserver. He tore his gaze away from those green eyes and
looked out over the fields. If he didn’t look at her, didn’t fall into
her eyes again, maybe he’d be okay. Still, he had to clear his
throat twice to get his voice to work properly. “If you’d like to
see some of the rest of the farm, we could go back and get the
truck.” His hands were still on her shoulders but he held her
away from him. Not much—maybe an inch or two—but it gave
him a chance to breathe. “Or we could ride. It’s a good day for it.
You like horses, right?”
“I love working with horses—but I don’t know how to ride.”
“What? You’re kidding, right?” Genuinely shocked, he forgot
his intentions and looked down at her.
Jillian shrugged. “I grew up in the city, so I was never really
exposed to them. And then when I went to veterinary college,
believe me, I was too busy learning about their inner workings
to learn how to ride them. I always wanted to learn, though.”
“No time like the present.” He was relieved to find he could let
go of her now. His brain was even starting to work—probably
getting some blood flow again. James took a couple steps away
and whistled shrilly, a four-note sound guaranteed to carry.
“What are you doing?”
“Calling Charlie.”
“One of the horses? But aren’t they in the corral?”
“Not for long.”
Jillian started to say something, but James had a finger to his
lips. Moments passed. With his Changeling hearing, the sounds
of hoofbeats were immediately audible. But it didn’t take long
for Jillian to hear them, too. A pale horse with a riot of spots and
speckles in his coat rounded the last shed and trotted toward
them. An enormous gray draft horse and a trio of chubby
ponies followed him. They milled around James like big dogs
eager for play.
“Somebody knows how to open gates.” Jillian chuckled.
But James didn’t reply right away. He watched in fascination
as she patted and stroked the glossy coats with both hands,
grinning as velvet noses nuzzled her. The serious veterinarian
was gone, and in her place was someone nearly bursting with
childlike delight. She laughed out loud as the draft horse
nudged her a little too hard with his massive nose and sent her
skidding on her butt in the dirt.
James laughed then too and reached a hand for her. She
expected him to pull her to her feet. Instead he picked her up
and tossed her, wide-eyed, onto the back of the culprit.
“Omigod, he’s huge. I’m going to get a nosebleed up here.”
But she didn’t ask to get down. Her hands were already running
over the dappled gray neck, winding through the silky white
mane. “What’s his name?”
“Toby. And he is huge. He’s over eighteen hands high. I think
his head alone weighs as much as you do.” James eyed her
speculatively. “Maybe a bit more.”
She sniffed at that and leaned further over Toby’s neck to pet
him. “So does Charlie break out regularly?”
“Whenever we ask him to. Sometimes when we don’t. Charlie
can open every gate and door in the place, lets his friends out
too sometimes as you can see.”
“You must spend a lot of time rounding up animals.”
“Nope. Charlie does that. He’s an incredible cow-horse, best
I’ve ever seen. More like a big sheep dog really.” James
scratched the Appaloosa behind the ears. “He can’t carry much
weight with those legs of his—see how the front ones bow out?
—but he doesn’t need to be ridden. He brings the cows in when
we tell him to, or singles out the ones we need to work on, all on
his own.”
“But the other horses—”
“Will stay with him. He’s not the biggest, but he’s the herd
leader and they don’t stray. We’re going to take our tour of the
rest of the farm, and they’ll all just follow us.”
“They will?” That was as far as Jillian got before James
suddenly vaulted up in one smooth cat-like motion and settled
in close behind her, chuckling at her openmouthed surprise.
“Practice,” he answered before she could ask. Although he
knew there were few if any humans who could mount a horse of
Toby’s size without stirrups and from a standing start, no matter
how much they practiced. Being a Changeling had some pretty
good perks.
He waited for the next question as he nudged Toby forward.
She didn’t disappoint him. “Hold it, we don’t have a bridle or
reins or—”
“Don’t need them, doc. Toby is used to being guided by legs
alone.”
“You’re kidding.”
“Nope. Ask Connor. He rides just like this all the time. So does
Kenzie when she comes out to visit.”
“Your sister does this?”
“Uh-huh. She’s pretty good at it, been teaching Zoey too. I can
teach you if you like. So you don’t ride at all?” He was still
surprised by that.
“Not a bit.” She was accustomed to treating horses, not riding
them, with both of her feet firmly on the ground. “I’ve sat on a
horse inside a corral once or twice, but that’s all.”
“Well, then there’ll be a whole bunch of things you won’t have
to unlearn.”
Jillian surveyed her mount and ventured to lean over the side.
“Toby is tall and broad and gray all over. Are you sure he isn’t
an elephant? I think I should take lessons on something a lot
closer to the ground.”
James laughed and brushed a kiss on top of her head, dared
to nuzzle her wayward blond hair and enjoyed the scent of it.
“You can try riding one of the ponies later if you want. For now,
just pretend Toby is a tour bus and enjoy the ride.” He wrapped
an arm around her waist and nudged Toby into a brisk trot,
chuckled as Jillian scrabbled to wind her hands into the horse’s
mane. “I won’t let you fall, doc, I promise. Relax.”
She glared back at him. “I’m perched on top of a tour bus with
no visible means of control. It’s a little tough to feel safe.”
“Trust me.”
“I’ll try.”
He smiled at the hesitation in her voice, then moved Toby into
an easy gallop. “Wait, wait, wait,” she squealed.
“I told you to trust me,” he said with his lips near her ear.
“You didn’t tell me you were going to go fast.” She had a
death grip on Toby’s mane.
“Believe me, this is easier on you than a trot. See how you’re
not bouncing now?” He put his hands over hers. “Look, give
me your hands. Let me hold them while you relax and feel how
to move with the horse.”
“You mean let go? Are you nuts?”
“I’m not hanging on to anything and I’m okay,” he pointed
out. “It’s balance, Jillian. You know all about balance from
whatever martial art it is that you practice.”
“How did you know about that?”
“Your reflexes. And that power punch to the gut at the clinic.
Not to mention that little battle in the loft we had—those little
fists of yours really drill between the ribs. So what is it exactly
that you practice?”
“Tae Kwon Do.”
“Belt?”
“Blue with a red stripe. It’s a little past intermediate. I’m hoping
to test for red belt in the fall.”
He nodded appreciatively. “Okay then, you know plenty about
balance. So you can do this. Trust me and let go. Trust
yourself.” They were doing a large loping circle around the field
now, with Charlie and the ponies following close behind. When
Jillian still hesitated, James pressed his very best button.
“You’re not afraid, are you?”
Her fingers released the mane at once, and he had to stifle a
laugh. Instead he held her hands, marveling anew at how small
they were, seemingly too small to have knocked the wind from
him after that first kiss in the clinic. He brushed his thumbs over
the palms, then held her hands out from her sides. “Close your
eyes, doc. Pretend Toby’s a circus horse.”
“I thought he was a tour bus.”
“That’s just his day job. Now he’s a circus horse and we’re
the performers.” James was surprised and pleased when she
closed her eyes at once, when she lifted her hands free from his
and held her arms straight out. He rested his hands lightly on
her waist then and used his legs to direct Toby into intricate
patterns and paces. Jillian never faltered. She had a natural
grace, would make an excellent rider.
“It’s kind of like flying,” she said at last. “You were right about
closing my eyes. It’s amazing how not being able to see where
I’m going actually helps me find my balance. Must be a Zen
thing.”
“Must be.” He knew it was Jillian and not Zen that was
affecting his own inner stability, however. She both knocked
him off-balance and grounded him, simply by being near him. It
was a volatile mix, and if he wasn’t a lot more careful, he would
fall.
Chapter Twenty
Jillian was catching on quickly. He could see her begin to
anticipate the horse’s movements. She could sense when Toby
was turning and the direction, even feel when the pace was
about to change. But through it all James was very aware of her.
Her hips were wedged firmly into the vee of his legs, his thighs
dwarfing hers. There was little space between her shapely little
bottom and his groin. His hands tightened on her waist in spite
of himself, although whether it was to hold her away or pull her
closer, he couldn’t say. The only thing he was certain of was
that his jeans had become very uncomfortable.
“Why are you always so hot?” she asked suddenly.
“What?” He really should stop glancing down at her
backside.
“Your body heat. You’re always so warm.”
“High metabolism.” His voice came out thick. He needed a
distraction, but his brain wasn’t working again. “Family trait.
Does it bother you?”
“No. No, it’s kind of nice, actually. I like it.”
She nestled back into him, making him fight to stifle a groan
as his body reacted. God, she felt good. “You’re doing really
well, doc. Ready to try it on your own?”
“What? Wait!” She grabbed at his hands.
“I’m not leaving. I’m just going to move back a little and let go
of you, okay? I’ll still be right here. Put your hands up like
before.”
“All right.” Jillian let her arms rise out from her body like
wings. “I’m ready. I think.”
James let go of her waist and eased back from her body,
putting some welcome inches between his throbbing groin and
her enticing little butt. The relief was enormous, but it slowly
dawned on him that the distance between them was an illusion.
The sun was low in the sky and cast golden lights into Jillian’s
hair. She was beautiful as she sat poised in front of him, moving
as the horse moved. He could feel that she was in perfect synch
with the horse now, beginning to instinctively shift her legs as
well. And he could feel her enjoyment blossom into joy. For a
few perfect moments she was in harmony with everything
around her, and that harmony seemed to radiate from her and
into him. He could hardly breathe, feeling her presence as if it
was part of him. The curious connection seemed tangible—and
transcendent.
James let the moment draw out as long as he dared, then
reluctantly slowed Toby to a walk. Jillian opened her eyes and
looked back at him, but he managed to dodge her gaze. He
knew he couldn’t muster a defense against those green eyes,
not at the moment. Maybe not at all.
“Is he tired? Do we need to stop?” She lowered her hands,
and James noted she now rested them on her legs instead of
seeking Toby’s mane again.
“It’s a bit more exercise than he’s used to, and he’s carrying
two of us. We’re going to head down the coulee to the river. The
horses can drink and the grass is good there.”
“What the hell’s a coulee?” She sounded if he had made up
the word.
“City girl,” he teased. “The coulees are the steep sandstone
ravines that drop down to the river. They’re eroded by rain and
melt water, full of caves and fossils. Bears and cougars too.”
“Really? Do you think we’ll see any wildlife?”
“Well, it’ll be twilight by the time we’re done.” And just what
was he doing, he wondered, heading further away from the
farm? The horses could be watered in their corrals just as
easily, yet he couldn’t bring himself to head back there yet.
“Animals tend to move around more then, at dusk and at dawn.
Maybe we’ll get lucky and see some.”
I hope so.
What? He lifted his head and regarded her. For a split second
he was certain she hadn’t spoken aloud. Then he shrugged it
off. Imagination. Had to be. He couldn’t even hear his own
brothers’ thoughts unless he was in wolf form.
Twilight had already come to the deep valley at the bottom of
the coulees. The sky far above was gold fading to mauve, and
the evening star was bright in the south. A faint breeze stirred
the leaves of enormous trees, grown tall with ample water and
rich soil. The river itself was smooth and glassy, reflecting the
golden sky.
Jillian inhaled deeply, taking in the cool air, rich with scents.
Water, earth, green and growing things. Abundant life. Forest
primeval. She watched as ripples appeared here and there on
the river, fish seeking insects. Swallows darted low along the
water and ducks could be heard somewhere nearby. There was
a timelessness here, she realized. It could be 2011 or 1811 or
1411, and look just the same.
“I guess that’s why they call it the Peace River,” she said
aloud. “Despite being so big, it hardly looks like it’s moving.”
“Looks are deceiving. The locals call the river the Mighty
Peace. It’s calm on the surface but the water beneath is deep
and moving very fast. A lot of swimmers misjudge it and end up
caught in the powerful current. Some of them don’t escape.”
She was quiet for a long time after that. James was very much
like the river. Calm and steady on the surface, but somehow
she’d been drawn in and captured by the deep current beneath.
Would she escape? And did she really want to?
All she’d known when she arrived at the farm was that she
was tremendously attracted to this man. But when she’d
decided to act on it, the results had been shocking. How could
she have known a kiss could have such power? How could
something as simple as the joining of lips flare all at once into a
fusion of souls? And God, that sounded so corny. But it wasn’t
just any kiss. If James hadn’t stepped back when he did . . . well,
she wasn’t sure she would have stopped him, and that was a
little scary. He was still a stranger, wasn’t he?
No. He might be a little strange at times maybe, but he was
definitely not a stranger. She couldn’t explain how she knew
that, but she knew. That kiss had been less like the ‘gee-I’mphysically-
attracted-to-you’ sort and more like the ‘there-youare-
at-last’ kind. Recognition, she decided. Almost reunion. The
physical desire was strong, but she realized that wasn’t the only
force driving them. At least, it hadn’t been the only force driving
her.
If James wasn’t a stranger, then what was he, exactly? She
knew that she felt good around him, solid and grounded. Not
less herself but somehow more. No one had ever made her feel
quite like that.
“A dollar twenty-seven for your thoughts.”
“What?” She blinked up at James.
“Your thoughts are worth a lot more than a penny, doc, but a
dollar twenty-seven is all I have on me.”
She stood perfectly still then, just looking at him. He could so
easily pass for a Viking from another age. The pale blond hair,
the close blond beard that accentuated the angles of his face
rather than obscured them. The broad shoulders and tall,
powerful build. The piercing blue eyes. The longer she looked at
him, the more she realized that it was what was in the eyes that
called out to her, pulled at her. His brow was often fierce and
forbidding, and his eyes could be too. But in their bottomless
blue depths there was more. Much more. Knowledge, pain,
passion. And tenderness. This was a man who felt intensely,
who would love deeply. She still didn’t know everything about
James Macleod, but Jillian knew she wanted to learn.
She simply stepped into him then, slid her arms up and
around his neck, and tipped her face up to be kissed. She
wasn’t disappointed. His lips were hungry and so were hers. He
demanded and she yielded. She demanded and he gave. Heat
flared, raced over both of them like a brushfire over dry prairie
grass, until skin and blood were alight.
James hiked her up until her legs circled his waist, supported
her with a powerful arm while one hand slid under her shirt and
palmed a breast, kneaded it as he traced her lips with his
tongue. Jillian captured his tongue for a moment, drew it into
her mouth with exquisite slowness, released it as he groaned
deep in his throat. His hand on her breast became more
demanding, his fingers teasing the nipple unbearably. His other
hand cupped her bottom and squeezed it again and again until
she began to move against him. Even through her clothes, it
was electrifying to rub herself against his hard abdomen. A
throbbing tension was growing low in her belly, a pleasurable
restlessness building. She wanted more. She wanted the flame,
the heat, she wanted to burn down in James’s embrace. A hum
vibrated in the back of her throat as she arched against his
powerful body, as he shoved her shirt, her bra, up and out of
the way. A moan broke free as he left her lips and bent his head
to Jillian’s naked breast.
He lapped and teased at it with his tongue, breathed hot on
the nipple until she shivered with pleasure. Then without
warning James set her feet on the ground, sank down himself
until he was kneeling before her. He undid her jeans and kissed
her belly, undid the bottom button of her shirt and lapped at her
navel. He worked his way up until no buttons were left—and
Jillian couldn’t stand it anymore. She pulled off the shirt, then
unhooked her bra. Tossed it. Wriggled off her jeans and kicked
them away. Saw the punch of surprise and the flash of arousal
in James’s eyes. And reveled in the sensation of this man’s
strong hands on her bare skin. His mouth sealed again over a
breast, hot and moist, drawing in the nipple, tugging at it. Began
to suckle hard and strong. Yes, oh yes. Jillian held his head to
her, fingers locked in his hair, her whole body shaking with
waves of sensation. God, yes. James’s calloused palm circled
her belly where strange pulls and tugs deep within her core
echoed the insistent tugging at her breast.
All that was left of the sun was a fading glimmer of color on
the far horizon. The first stars were already making their
appearance and the moon was on the rise. Here, among the
trees, the shadows were blue and purple. Her skin was snow in
the strange half light. But within, she was pure flame.
James pulled back a moment, shrugged out of his shirt.
Stood and skimmed off his jeans. Jillian nearly moaned at the
sight of his naked body. He was even more gorgeous than she
had dreamed. Every muscle was powerful, defined. He was
broad in the chest, in the shoulders, but there was an animal
grace to his movements. Her gaze traveled appreciatively over
his body and came to rest on his long, hard erection.
Tentatively, she reached out a hand and ran her fingers over it.
Her mouth curved as he hissed in his breath between his teeth,
as she saw those powerful muscles quiver.
Smooth, so smooth. Kid leather over polished stone. She slid
her hand over the rigid length of him and closed her fingers
tightly, savoring the strength and hardness of it. And hot.
James’s body radiated heat but this was fire itself. Jillian’s body
clenched at the thought of just how that fiery shaft might feel
deep inside her . . . and for a moment she had to fight to breathe.
She didn’t see James move. She blinked and she was
surrounded with his strength, with his heat, wrapped in those
muscled arms and held close. Skin to skin, head to toe, as his
shaft pressed and pulsed against her belly, as his big hands
roved over her backside. Then just as suddenly he scooped her
up and walked away with her through the trees and into a small
clearing.
“It’s a little softer here,” he murmured and kissed her brow,
her cheek, before easing her down. Jillian had expected grass
but found herself lying on something surprisingly soft and
spongy. She felt around her in surprise.
“It’s just moss.” James answered her unspoken question,
then rested on his elbow beside her. He leaned over and took
her lips before she could think of any more questions, ran a
hand over the contours of her body, followed it with kisses over
her breasts and belly, then palmed the moist curls between her
legs.
She was restless and edgy now, needing, needing. And he
knew. He ran his hand between her legs, long lazy strokes that
reached all the way to her tailbone and back. He gradually
kissed his way down until he was nestled between her legs,
then lifted her hips in his large hands until he could rest her
knees over his broad shoulders. He bent his head and ran his
tongue along the delicate crease of her thigh, slowly, much too
slowly. Jillian shuddered hard with the anticipation, every nerve
shouting for James to hurry, please hurry, gasping for air as her
heart pounded in her ears. She could just make out his face in
the shadows, see him smile as he bent his mouth to her,
sampled her, savored her, then drank her greedily.
A guttural cry burst from Jillian’s throat. The sudden storm of
pleasure had her gasping, made her body pitch and buck like a
small boat caught in a rough sea. Sensation flooded her,
swamped her with monstrous waves so racking and intense
that she shook with the power of them. She exploded into the
sky, into the sun, pulsing with a wave of heat that rippled
outward until the very clouds were set afire.
When awareness returned, Jillian found herself lying beside
James, looking into his Viking blue eyes. She blinked a few
times to focus, feeling stunned but managing a shaky smile. He
kissed her soundly, wrapping her up in his strong arms,
anchoring her, keeping her from floating away. Safe.
“Wow.” She didn’t know what else to say, didn’t trust her
voice anyway. She wasn’t too sure about the rest of her body
either. Languor. That was the only word that seemed to fit the
state her body was in, a deep luxuriant languor. Jillian was
certain she was no longer lying on the bed of moss, but rather,
was draped over it like an empty coat. Perhaps she had burned
up after all, from the inside out. No bones left, just the hide.
“I feel like limp spaghetti,” she blurted out.
James chuckled. “I think I liked ‘wow’ better.”
She grinned and brushed his hair out of his eyes. Saw that
those eyes had softened, filled with warmth and humor. She
saw something else in them too. The fire was still raging.
James nuzzled her ear and took the lobe into his mouth,
suckling it as he had her breast. A heated hand circled her
breasts, her belly, nudged her legs apart and began to stroke
her folds. The orgasm had left her intensely sensitive, and Jillian
trembled beneath his touch, could hardly bear it. He murmured
into her ear, tickling it with heated breath, and her entire body
clenched and quivered. He pulled her closer, and Jillian felt his
fiery hot erection pressed against her thigh. A finger slid inside
her, explored as she moaned. Two fingers pressed deep,
deeper. Her hips rose of their own accord, thrust hard against
his strong hand but it wasn’t enough. She was aching all over,
edgy and wanting. Needing . . .
Jillian whimpered aloud when James took his hand away, but
his muscled body was welcome as it moved over her. She
welcomed the heat and the weight of him, welcomed his face
over hers, framed by the starry sky. Welcomed his powerful legs
nudging hers wider apart. And moaned with a kind of delicious
exultation as he entered her. She felt herself slowly parting
before the fiery heat, giving way, stretching to take the fire into
herself until she had it all. It was bliss, luscious bliss, to be filled
so completely. James paused there, eyes closed as if also
savoring the sensation. He was still for a heartbeat, then two.
Then he began to move. The exquisite friction begot a deeply
primal pleasure and Jillian became a wild thing, digging her
fingers into the muscles of his buttocks, pulling him into her,
thrusting her hips to meet his rhythm. She panted out a plea for
more, more. A soundless vibration began to resonate within her,
within him, as if a tidal wave of unimaginable proportions was
bearing down on them.
Harder, faster, deeper. “Come with me, Jillian,” he panted.
“Come with me now.”
Battered, wave-tossed, lost at sea, she heard his words above
the thunder of her blood, the roaring in her ears, and
instinctively linked her fingers with his. She arched to meet the
strength of his body, the power of him as he filled her. As he
both moved her and anchored her. As he was both storm and
haven. They rode the cresting wave together, a pair of dolphins
skimming above the powerful surf until the ocean suddenly fell
away and they flew free.
Chapter Twenty-one
Birkie appeared at her elbow, arms folded. “Okay, something’s
seriously wrong here. Carlton Fuller’s herd is sick because he
was too cheap to vaccinate again, and you spent fifteen
minutes explaining to him how that ‘doesn’t make good
economic sense’ instead of kicking his sorry ass from here to
Winnipeg. Why?”
“Because it doesn’t make sense from a business standpoint.
If he—”
“I know that. What I want to know is—why isn’t he dead?
Jillian looked baffled. “Well, I thought I’d try an educational
approach . . .” She trailed off at her friend’s expression.
“You, my dear, have either had a complete breakdown from
overwork or you’ve finally gotten some serious nookie. Which is
it?”
“Do we have to call it nookie?”
“We can call it whatever you like as long as you tell me about
it.”
“I’m not going to give you a play-by-play.”
“I’ll settle for details on events leading up to and immediately
following. Your apartment after closing, I’ll bring the chocolate.”
“Deal.”
He was the world’s biggest idiot. What on earth had made him
think that he was in control, even for a moment? The plan had
been just to keep an eye on Jillian, satisfy himself with checking
in on her at the clinic. Briefly, always briefly. Just long enough
to assure himself—and the wolf within—that she was fine, that
she was safe. And yeah, he could admit he looked forward to
catching a glimpse of her or hearing her voice, sometimes
watching her work or maybe saying hello. But that was all the
contact he had permitted himself, all he had planned for. Not for
one moment had James anticipated that she would show up at
the farm.
Still, he could have avoided trouble if only he hadn’t taken her
riding, definitely if he had turned them back to the farm instead
of heading down to the damn river, and most of all, if he’d just
avoided looking in those big green eyes of hers. Sensible
precautions that if taken, would have prevented what happened
last night. Wouldn’t they?
No. No, it would have only delayed the inevitable. The truth of
that resonated uncomfortably within him. If he was honest with
himself, he had never been in control, not since the first time
he’d met her as a man, and certainly not since the first
encounter he’d had with her as a wolf. Which meant he should
have known, should have seen it coming. After all, he had
admitted to himself long ago that he was attracted to Jillian. It
was natural, it was normal, to be attracted. Even natural and
normal to act on that attraction.
Like last night? Well, hell, he wasn’t dead and it had been a
long time since he’d been with a woman. He’d spent most of the
morning trying to tell himself that was all it was. Except it wasn’t
all, not by a long shot, and he knew it. James couldn’t even
pretend that the wolf had anything to do with it, because his
alter ego had all but disappeared after that first kiss. His mind
had disappeared then too. Perhaps he could plead insanity.
After all, he was still reeling from that kiss, even after everything
that had followed. Jillian had looked up at him with those big
sea green eyes and that faery face and it had been like a hard
kick to the stomach. All the air had left his lungs, and James felt
himself swimming in those eyes. Swimming and the water was
oh, so deep. He had had to kiss her, had to more than he had to
breathe. But she’d beaten him to it. She had fisted her hands in
his hair and pulled his face to hers. There and then he drowned.
Small wonder his heart had galloped on ahead of his brain
and developed feelings, strong ones. As much as he was
struggling to rationalize the whole situation, his own words
mocked him: That’s the whole damn problem with being human.
You always end up feeling things you don’t want to feel. Only that
was a lie too. He’d said things, thought things, felt things—and
as much as he had told himself he didn’t want to, he did. Very
much.
He threw the spade he was carrying across the yard,
launching it like a javelin with such force that the blade stuck
into the barn wall about fifteen feet off the ground. He left it there
and stalked away, wishing he could Change and race away into
the forest.
Jesus Murphy! He had to get a grip. So what if he had feelings
for her? He couldn’t let that matter. All that mattered was what
would be best for Jillian, how best to keep her safe. A
relationship was completely out of the question. She was
human and he had to remember that. Associating with a
Changeling would only endanger her. What little contact she
had now was probably too much. Sooner or later someone
would notice. And Jillian would pay.
Bad enough that she was already going to be hurt—he’d be
stupid to think that last night hadn’t meant something to her too
—but at least she’d be alive. She was sure to hate him too, and
rightfully so. Because not only could he never see her again, he
couldn’t even explain why.
She’d missed lunch again. Jillian finished with the goat in the
corral and headed back into the clinic. She had just cut through
the waiting room on her way to the kitchen when she spotted
the large bouquet on Birkie’s desk.
“These just came for you, hon.” Her friend waggled her
brows. “Pretty impressive choice of flowers too.”
Jillian stared at them. She recognized the roses—but what
roses. The large blooms were exquisite, creamy white and longstemmed.
But they were interspersed with tall plumes of tiny
bell-like flowers, also white. And those shiny green leaves—“Is
that holly?”
“It certainly is. Holly and white heather. Both of them
symbolize a pledge of protection and defense.”
“What?”
“It’s the language of flowers, hon. Different flowers mean
different things. This is a very strong message, a double
message of protection.”
“Protection of what?”
“Well, you of course. And the white roses, now those are just
plain classy.”
“Are they protecting me too?”
“No, silly. I’m going to have to loan you one of my books.
White roses are always more powerful than red ones, you know.
The white ones mean ‘love always’ or ‘pure love.’ Like I said, very
classy, very unique. Aren’t you going to read the card? Let me
tell you, it took a pile of restraint to keep from running it out to
you in the corral.”
Jillian fingered the small envelope, noted it was sealed, and
tucked it in her pocket. “I think I’ll read this privately first,” she
said and laughed when Birkie looked disappointed. “If it’s Grated,
maybe I’ll share.”
“Oh, all right. Can I at least keep the flowers on my desk a
while?”
“Of course. They’d be wasted sitting in my apartment all
afternoon. I’ll come and get them at closing time.”
A pledge of protection. That seemed a little medieval, but maybe
James was just trying to be romantic. Or maybe he didn’t know
any more about the so-called language of flowers than she did.
But the white roses. . . . Those were romantic in any language.
Jillian hurried to the lunchroom, hoping for a few more
moments between patients. She tried to open the envelope in a
civilized fashion but in the end, she ripped it. The picture on the
face of the card was simple, trees in a forest. She smiled,
thinking of when she’d last been in a forest . . . then she opened
it and her smile disappeared. She was still standing there
staring at what James had written when Birkie came in to
announce the next patient. Jillian handed her the card without a
word and headed to the examining room.
Jillian. You’re a beautiful woman but it would be best if we didn’t
see each other anymore. I’m sorry.
“Well, Jesus, Mary, and Joseph. Best, he says. Best for who?”
Birkie shook her head, blinked hard until her eyes cleared. “Isn’t
that just like a man? Trying so hard to protect the one you love
that it ends up hurting both of you.” She sighed and stashed
the flowers in the supply room until closing. Then she quietly
took them to the dumpster and dropped them in.
James was drill-seeding the back quarter section of land.
Most farmers used herbicides to kill off all existing plants before
putting in a crop, but there would be no chemicals used on
Macleod land. He’d studied the latest techniques and decided to
go with a no-tillage policy as well. That meant seeding the fields
without plowing them, leaving the existing plant cover to hoard
moisture and shelter topsoil from the powerful west winds. It
would take time, plenty of it, but James was determined to steer
the farm to organic production.
It would take a lot of work too, but that was fine with him. In
fact, the more work, the better. Right now, work was the only
thing keeping him sane. Usually the land was soothing to his
spirit, the soil enlivening. But not now and not for the last three
weeks. Even from the cab of the tall tractor, he should have
been able to feel a unique closeness to the earth but lately he’d
just felt empty, hollowed out and aching. The deep peace and
satisfaction he usually found in green and growing things was
missing, and in its place was desolation.
James told himself repeatedly that he’d done the right thing
by walking out of Jillian’s life. He should never have let things
go so far in the first place. Should never have kissed her,
should never have held her—but he couldn’t seem to bring
himself to regret it. God, that night together, tangled on the
forest floor. Whenever he closed his eyes he still heard her
heart hammering behind her teacup breasts, still saw downy
curls glinting gold between her slim legs.
Everything had changed. She had changed. He had looked at
her with human eyes for the first time while she slept in her
apartment. That little frown on her fine features had immediately
evoked a storybook picture of a cranky faery. But that night in
the forest, the cuteness disappeared. The silvered light had
revealed something downright ethereal, profound. Even regal.
Not Tinkerbell but Titania herself. It was in the angles of Jillian’s
face, in her sea green eyes, in her wild cap of hair. In her narrow
frame that seemed far too small to hold the blazing passions
that drove her. In her skin that was so much fairer than even his
own, so amazingly soft over compact muscle. Every night in his
dreams he ran his hands over her body, delighting in the lines
of it, the colors and textures, even as he breathed in the enticing
scent of her, as his heart thrilled to the sound of her voice, her
laughter. And every morning he had to remind himself that for
Jillian’s sake the dream had to remain a dream.
The sun was down, but the darkness didn’t matter to James.
The tractor had powerful headlights and his night vision was
acute. He could easily finish this field tonight. Maybe the one on
the south side as well. Whatever would keep him busy enough
to stay awake was fine with him. James just didn’t feel up to
having another dream of any kind. Besides, when he was
awake, it was easier to control the wolf within. Relatively easier.
Since James had ended things with Jillian, the wolf had been
increasingly surly, miserable, short-tempered and likely to snap
at anyone. Just like my human self. He didn’t know how long he
could keep a leash on the wolf, knew that it would find its way
back to Jillian sooner or later. Maybe he should leave town. The
wolf would have a tough time interfering with Jillian’s life if
James was in, say, outer Mongolia.
When the fuel gauge beeped a warning, he geared down and
brought the tractor to a standstill, switched off the seeder. There
was a fuel tank and a pump on the back of his truck, but he’d
left it parked under the trees on the far side of the field. That was
okay, he could use the walk. Maybe it would clear his head.
Stars were appearing and he could just see the full moon
above the trees. It was glowing yellow like a Japanese lantern,
but it would lose color as it climbed. James rubbed his hands
over his face and opened the cab door of the tractor, let the
breeze pour through, scented the air, let himself breathe deeply
and rest, relax, just for a moment—
—suddenly he was the wolf, racing through a shadowy forest under
a velvet sky bright with stars. He had to go faster, had to reach her,
had to help her. Followed the river until it flowed through a city, until
game trails gave way to manmade trails. Followed them until he
caught the scent of violence and fear, hate and hopelessness.
Followed until he caught sight of the upraised pipe. Of the brutal
hands that held it. Of the man intent on destroying the life that
fluttered in the slight figure crumpled on the ground beneath him.
The Change overtook him without warning. James cried out
in shock and surprise, then his human voice was strangled off
abruptly by the shift in form. His human mind had time for a only
single thought as he leapt down from the tractor. Jillian. He had
to get to Jillian.
The great wolf ran full out across the field, belly close to the
ground, claws digging into the clay soil, tail a white plume
touched with the moon’s golden light.
Chapter Twenty-two
The calf was a big one, even for its large-boned breed,
weighing almost as much as she did. Bloody to the armpits, her
coveralls soaked with amniotic fluid, Jillian dragged the
creature out of the three-foot long incision in its mother’s side.
The cow, blissfully unaware of that incision due to the contents
of a large syringe carefully inserted between two of its
vertebrae, was looking around in mild interest. She blinked in
surprise as the vet slipped in the wet straw and went down
under 110 pounds of wriggling Charolais calf.
“It’s okay, baby, it’s okay, we’ll get you out.” Jillian fought her
way to her knees, deftly stripped the sac from around the calf’s
golden face, reached into its mouth to pull its tongue forward
and clear the throat. And laughed when her fingers were seized
and sucked with gusto.
Grabbing a towel, she rubbed vigorously to dry the calf,
grunted as she hauled the newborn over to where the cow
could nose it. For a moment the veterinarian looked on in
satisfaction as the mother licked her newborn, memorizing the
scent, cementing the bond between them. Animal bonds, Jillian
knew, tended to be unshakeable. Not like humans. Sighing, she
unwrapped a fresh surgical pack—the contents of the first had
fallen into the wet straw—and began the long process of
closing up.
The full moon was more than halfway across the sky when
Jillian drove away from the Murdock’s farm. She had the heat on
full blast and she’d taken off her coveralls, but her clothes were
wet through. Her teeth chattered as she fumbled with a radio
station. Most farmers would at least have offered her some
coffee or something. But then, every farmer she knew would
have come out to the barn and pitched in. She had hoped for
that kind of help when she couldn’t reach Caroline. Jillian had
thought about asking Connor for help. After all, it wasn’t his fault
his brother was a jerk. But she just didn’t feel up to seeing any
of the Macleod clan tonight. And so she had taken the calving
call alone, even though the farm was in a remote location, nearly
two hours away.
At least both cow and calf were fine. Jed Murdock hadn’t been
pleased that Jillian had shown up instead of Connor, but he
wouldn’t be able to complain about her work. And maybe a
hefty bill for the extra hours she’d spent would encourage the
Murdocks to be a little more helpful next time.
Not that she minded being busy. It was harder for unwelcome
thoughts to creep into her awareness when she was focused
on work. That was why she had thrown herself into every task
she could find at the clinic, why she was even making up tasks.
Birkie had eyed Jillian with concern when she’d restacked the
hay bales in the livestock area, but she didn’t care. It was better
than thinking about how much she ached inside, how much
James Macleod had hurt her. Except for the card that came with
the flowers, she hadn’t heard from him. No letters, no phone
calls. And certainly no face-to-face communication. After being
at the clinic every single day, he hadn’t come by even once for
three solid weeks. Pretty hard not to read that message. She
would never have picked him for the one-night stand type, but
then, how much did she really know about him? It was her own
fault for getting too involved too soon, for letting her hormones
off the leash way too early. The fact that her heart had led the
way didn’t bear thinking about.
And so Jillian was determined not to think about anything.
Her plan was to keep busy, so busy that the thoughts wouldn’t
stand a chance of getting through, so busy that she simply fell
into bed late each night and was asleep before she hit the
pillow. The system had worked just fine for the past three
weeks. But now she was worn right out, and for the first time
she wondered how long she could keep this up.
There was certainly no shortage of tasks to keep her busy
tonight, even though it was well after midnight. The instruments
still needed to be unpacked, washed, and sterilized. The
surgical drapings and her wet coveralls had to be put in the
washing machine and soaked. And she was already so damn
tired. Her eyelids fluttered down, once, twice. . . .
Jillian jerked her head up just as the cab of the truck was
flooded with light. There was another vehicle behind her with its
brights on. She squinted as it rapidly closed the distance
between them. From the height of those blinding headlights,
she judged it to be a truck. A car’s beams wouldn’t have filled
her pickup cab so thoroughly. Sound flooded in as well.
Though her windows were closed, she could hear the highpitched
thrum of a powerful engine and the brain-beating bass
of a massive stereo system. It had to be kids. How did they
stand to be inside that? She could feel the vibration of whatever
music they were playing in her teeth, for God’s sake.
Jillian prayed the driver would switch to low beams soon. She
peered through half-closed eyes at her side mirror. It was
indeed a tall pickup truck, but it was weaving back and forth,
fishtailing on the gravel road. “Great, they’re fooling around or
drunk. Probably both.” Jillian was suddenly uncomfortable
about being alone and wondering where she’d stashed her cell
phone when a row of dull orange spots appeared like eyes on
the other truck’s roof. Jillian made out the rack of hunters’
floodlights just as they powered on.
Dammit! Jillian slapped at the rearview mirror, flipping its face
to the ceiling. “Stupid asses!” She cursed vehemently as white
light shot back at her from the side mirrors, the dashboard
glass, everywhere. Pain stabbed her tired eyes. She cupped a
hand around her brow as a flimsy shield and tried to focus on
the road ahead. The light was bright . . . and getting brighter.
She wanted to slow down. She’d been under the fifty miles per
hour speed limit for the gravel road, but not by much. She
touched her brakes lightly, once, twice, hoping the other truck
was paying attention and wouldn’t run into her.
A bright yellow diamond flashed into view on her right,
dazzlingly bright in the other truck’s lights. She squinted at the
highway sign and deciphered its symbols: a hill with a steep
grade. She realized at once where she was. At the bottom of the
hill would be the narrow steel bridge that spanned Little Burnt
Creek. If the other truck was going to pass her, it would have to
do it soon. She prayed it would pass. Her nerves were already
rubbed raw by the assault of light and sound.
Suddenly the headlights swung away to her left, leaving her
in abrupt darkness and temporarily blind.
She took her foot off the gas pedal as her eyes fought to
adjust and her unknown antagonist thundered by, bass
pounding so loud it hurt Jillian’s ears and stabbed at her brain,
vibrated in her very bones. “Stop it! Stop it!” she yelled, unable
to even hear herself. The vehicle passed her in a blast of
impossible noise and a rattle of gravel, hurtling down the hill.
She caught a glimpse of a large red pickup with shiny chrome
roll bars before the darkness swallowed it. The mind-numbing
bass faded into the distance and was finally gone.
Shaken and disoriented, Jillian pulled the truck to the
shoulder of the road. It wasn’t there. There was nothing under
the right front wheel as she tried in vain to steer the still-rolling
truck back to solid ground. Suddenly there was a sickening
lurch as the rear passenger wheel dropped over the road’s
edge as well. The truck teetered on the crumbling brink, and she
realized she couldn’t make it back onto the road. Jillian steered
instead for the deep ditch, trying to take it at an angle so the
truck wouldn’t tip. But then the ditch itself dipped and
disappeared into darkness. The brakes couldn’t stop the
momentum of the heavy truck as it hurtled down the steep
embankment through a stand of brush.
Thick branches slapped at the windshield, cracked it. Books
and packages on the seat flew up and struck her as the vehicle
lurched and bounced crazily. She saw the dark surface of a
creek in her headlights, then glittering plumes of water all
around her as she struggled to steer through it. A roaring filled
her ears, her brain. There was no time to hope that the water
wasn’t too deep, to pray that the engine would keep going. And
no time at all to react as the darkness in front of her suddenly
resolved itself into a tree. It was the last picture in her mind as
something enormous punched her full in the face.
Awareness faded then rushed back like a tidal surge. Heavy
folds of white material swamped her, and Jillian screamed as
she tried to bat it away. The air was thick with dust, choking her.
Finally her brain kicked in and she realized she was fighting
with the air bag.
Her whole body jellied in relief, and she was grateful she was
already sitting down. For several minutes Jillian just sat there
with her hands gripping the wheel. She took a deep breath that
sent her into a coughing fit. When it abated, she hit the button to
roll down the window and leaned forward to rest her head on
the steering column and let the cool air wash over her until her
heart stopped hammering. Until she felt steady. Steadier. Well,
almost steady.
Looking around, she assessed the situation. Truck. Tree.
Water. She was half in and half out of the shallow creek, the
front of the truck resting against a large poplar on the opposite
bank. The hood didn’t look bashed in from here. Maybe the
vehicle was still drivable. Maybe she could walk the truck out in
four-wheel drive. But first she’d have to lock the hubs on the
front axle by hand. Note to self: Next time, pick a vehicle you can
shift into four-wheel drive from the inside. Jillian popped the
shoulder belt and spent a few minutes fumbling behind the seat
for a flashlight. It was hard work. Her body was sore and her
face felt like she’d tried to stop a train with it. One of her hands
didn’t seem to work very well. She cursed repeatedly as new
pains flashed here and there, as her feet kept getting tangled in
the deflated air bag. There seemed to be enough of the sagging
white material to make a goddamn hot air balloon.
She kicked free of it and paused to catch her breath. “Okay,
then, I’m okay. Everything’s okay. Let’s get it done.” Jillian
swung open the door, saw it skim the surface of the water but
didn’t hesitate to jump down. She gasped at the iciness of the
water, as the fast current both shoved and pulled at her. It had
to be mountain runoff—it felt like it came straight off a glacier.
Reaching for the door with one hand and gripping the flashlight
with the other, she took a step forward. And discovered too late
that the bottom of the creek was slick with mud and algae.
Without warning, her feet flew out from under her, plunging
her beneath the icy water. The current immediately dragged her
along the bottom. Panicked, Jillian clawed and flailed at the dark
surface—the creek couldn’t have been more than three feet
deep—but there was something in her way, something she kept
banging her head and body against, that kept her submerged.
Her lungs were screaming, her mind was screaming as she
fought blindly for her life.
Then something grasped her arm, gripped it tight. She fought
that too, but it was strong and towed her along the icy bottom,
then up into the blessed, blessed air. A moment later she was
on her hands and knees on dry ground, coughing and choking
and puking up water.
It took a little while before she became aware that someone
had an arm around her waist, supporting her, pounding her
back. Jillian gulped in air in huge, ragged breaths and
collapsed, her strength utterly spent. Powerful arms encircled
her, lifted her, cradled her in warmth.
“It’s okay, doc, you’re okay now. It’s over, just breathe now,
baby. Just breathe.”
With a jolt she realized she was sobbing like a child.
Embarrassed, she scrubbed a hand over her face and yelped
when both her hand and face protested the contact. Opening
her eyes, she found herself face-to-face with a Viking.
“What the hell are you doing here?”
Chapter Twenty-three
Her voice was strangled and raw—not to mention annoyed—
but it sounded terrific to him. Carefully he pushed her dripping
blond hair away from her face, brushed the water from around
her wide green eyes. “Jesus, doc, you scared the hell out of me.
The next time you want to go diving for pearls, take some
equipment.”
“I . . . I couldn’t get out, I couldn’t get out of the water,
something was holding me under.” She tried to push him away
but started coughing again. When she regained her breath, she
simply sagged against him, exhausted.
He wrapped his arms tightly around her. He was as wet as
she was, but he could at least share his naturally high body
heat. “You were underneath the truck, doc. The water’s up to
the running boards, and you must have kept trying to come up
under the chassis.” Christ, she must have been terrified. It had
certainly terrified him. In wolfen form he’d raced full out,
crossing the miles as the crow flies, utilizing all the speed a
Changeling was capable of—and then some. Not knowing what
was wrong, only that there was danger and he must hurry. The
compulsion whipped him mercilessly, drove him to a nearimpossible
pace until his heart was ready to burst. Just as it
was the night he’d raced to Evelyn’s side. Past and present had
blurred in James’s mind as he ran. Fear that he might be too late
had clamped icy jaws around his throat, making it harder to
breathe even as his lungs burned for air.
Fortunately, the connection the wolf had with Jillian had led
him straight to her. James had caught her scent as he crested
the hill, followed the wide swath of freshly broken brush leading
down the ditch and into the creek. He spotted the truck when he
was halfway down the slope, was relieved to see Jillian open
the door. Then relief turned to horror as she stepped out into
the water and slipped beneath it. He Changed as he leapt into
the creek, splashed and skidded on his hands and knees in the
dark icy water, while he felt around frantically for something,
anything, he could grab.
With a start, James realized he was shaking almost as much
as Jillian. He pulled her even closer, tucked her head under his
chin and simply held on. Grateful he was sitting down, grateful
to have her gathered in his lap and wrapped tight against him.
Safe. He drew her scent into his lungs, again and again, each
time holding it there, close to his heart. He listened to her
breathing, listened to her heart beating, the rhythms of life, her
life. He rubbed his cheek over her wet hair as powerful
emotions shook him to the core. Dear God, he had been in time.
He had been in time.
James radiated his Changeling body heat to warm her as
much as he could. Finally, when their shaking had subsided
and both of them were steadier, he relaxed his hold on her, but
not before he brushed his lips over her brow, her head. The
sudden taste and tang of blood jolted him, reminded him that
Jillian might be alive but she needed more than affection to stay
that way. “Keep this on, okay?” His jacket was wet but he
wrapped it snugly around her just the same. At least it had some
residual warmth in it, and it would keep the breeze off her until
he found something drier. “I’ll be right back.”
He waded out to the truck. A check of the ignition revealed
that the battery was dead. So was the radio. There was a cell
phone on the floor but it was in pieces. James took a quick look
around the cab for anything else useful, then made his way to
the back of the truck. Here he had more luck. The canopy had
kept the cargo dry, and he had no trouble finding matches and
supplies, for which he blessed his brother’s name. There was
no shortage of blankets and clothing either, the preparations of
a vet who had made too many farm calls in bad weather.
There was dead willow along the bank and James worked
fast to gather an armful and coax a fire into life. The flames
gobbled the twigs and dried grass greedily, moved on to the
larger bits of wood without a pause. He set a duffel bag on the
ground beside Jillian and knelt to study her in the firelight. The
orange glow should have lent color to her face but she was
paper-white. Trickles of blood had emerged from her hairline,
merged into a single rivulet that ran steadily down the side of
her face. Her green eyes were wide, too wide, the pupils dilated
even though she was looking straight at the flames. Not good,
not good at all, he thought. “Take your clothes off.”
“What?” She looked startled.
James opened the bag and rifled through it. “You’ve got to
get out of those wet things right now.”
“What for? Why can’t you just take me home?”
“I don’t have a vehicle with me, Jillian.” Please, God, don’t let
her ask any questions. I can’t exactly say I ran here. He rushed on
before she could say anything. “Your truck is out of
commission, and we’re a hell of a long way from town. The
radio’s out. I don’t have a cell phone, and yours is broken. We
could be here a while, so you need to be warm and dry. Step
one is to take off those wet clothes.”
As she opened her mouth to protest, James simply picked her
up and placed her on her feet. Steadied her. “You don’t get a
choice here, Jillian. You’re not thinking straight. Hypothermia is
dangerous, and I’m betting you’ve got a concussion as well.”
He had removed his jacket from her shoulders, taken off her
jacket and was starting on her shirt when her temper flared and
she backed up a step, fists clenched.
“Don’t touch me.” Jillian flung the words at him like stones.
“Just don’t. I don’t know what kind of privileges you think you
have, but undressing me isn’t one of them.”
That momentary flicker in her eyes, anger mixed with
something very like humiliation, cut him to the core. Guilt
roughened his voice. “This isn’t the time, Jillian. You want to go
a few rounds with me, fine, you can have all the free swings you
want later. Right now we need to take care of you.”
“I can take care of myself just fine, thank you.”
He didn’t want to fight with her. He raised his hands in a
conciliatory gesture, praying he wasn’t making a mistake. “Suit
yourself. But if you’re not peeled out of those soggy clothes in
five minutes, I’ll do it whether you want me to or not.” He meant
it. Her eyes flashed but her anger was a bonus—it would keep
her adrenaline up, and God knew she needed it. “You’ve almost
died once tonight, doc, and I’m not about to let you try for
twice.” He yanked out a big flannel shirt, some jeans, and a
wool blanket, and placed them on top of the bag for her. He
pulled out an outfit for himself and stalked to the other side of
the fire, keeping his back turned to give her some privacy.
Besides, if he didn’t look at her, maybe he could concentrate.
He had to keep trying to contact Connor or some other member
of the Pack. It was a long shot, literally, to succeed at mind
speech over such a distance. But there was little traffic on this
road, even less at this time of night, and it was miles to the
nearest farm to get help. True, he could Change again and
cover the distance on four feet, but he would have to leave
Jillian alone—and that he didn’t dare do.
Suddenly he felt a connection. It was odd—as if his mental
call were a fish and someone was reeling it in. That someone
couldn’t be a Changeling, the energy was different. Birkie!
Chapter Twenty-four
Jillian kept an eye on James. At first it was to guard the privacy
she’d insisted on, but unexpectedly she found herself staring.
The campfire glow highlighted his powerful build, the angles of
his face. Even naked, he looked like a warrior, and it annoyed
her that she found that so appealing, that it played on some
sensitive primal nerve within her. That she flat-out wanted him. .
. .
She forced herself to look away then. How could she still want
James Macleod after he’d slept with her, then ditched her? It’s
just a physical thing, she told herself sternly, a knee-jerk
reaction she had no control over. But who knew the desire
would be so strong? And worse, that her heart would be
tangled up in it as well? Because here it was three weeks later,
and she was still missing him. They hadn’t even dated, didn’t
even have a relationship to speak of, and yet she missed him
constantly. And just as constantly she told herself that it was
silly infatuation, that she needed to get out more, she needed to
meet more people, she needed a hobby, she needed to date
more. She watched James zipping up his jeans on the other
side of the fire and wished she had the nerve to walk over and
unzip them. Her core clenched hard. See, she told herself. Just
plain old physical attraction. So why did her heart feel like it had
a hole in it?
“I must have hit my head,” she muttered under her breath.
After all, her head did hurt an awful lot. So did everything else,
for that matter. Jillian’s stomach muscles were sore inside and
out from retching up water, and her ribs felt bruised from trying
to expel the fluid from her lungs. There was a bright fiery pain
starting to make itself known in her arm, her hands. James had
said she was under the truck. That was ridiculous. She didn’t
remember getting out of the truck. And where did all the water
come from? There were headlights, lots of lights, blinding her . .
. but she found she could remember nothing else.
She forgot all about James then too. Her hands were numb
and sore at the same time—which she couldn’t understand—
and her body was cold and awkward. Except her arm, which
was on fire. Her teeth chattered uncontrollably as she fought
with wet fabric. She cursed the buttons as they defied her
efforts. Her anger gave way to frustration, and then nearly to
tears. She couldn’t think, she was so damned tired, and her
fingers would not obey her. Jillian was only mildly surprised
when her legs suddenly gave out. Barely noticed when strong
arms caught her before she hit the ground.
“I think I must have slipped,” she murmured. Something was
fluttering at her cheek, patting it lightly. She tried to brush it
away but her arm hurt.
“Come on, doc, I know you’re tired but you need to stay
awake for a while. Wake up for me, Jillian.”
“Quit it. Go away,” she moaned and turned her head away,
but a large hand cupped her cheek.
“Jillian! Wake up now.”
“What the hell are you doing?” Her voice was raspy. She tried
to sit up and a tight groan of pain escaped her.
“Easy there, doc. You passed out. My fault. I didn’t realize
how bad you were hurt.” Gently James helped her into a more
upright position. “Just take it easy for a few minutes, okay?”
“Yeah, okay.” She was too tired and sore to argue, too
confused to think. It all took energy, and she didn’t seem to
have any. Jillian let herself lean back against him, was surprised
that his body heat seemed to be flowing right into her. There
was a fire at her feet, but there was almost as much warmth
radiating from James. In spite of all the pains that were
competing for her attention, she felt almost cozy in this big
Viking’s lap.
Those warm and cozy feelings were short-lived as the Viking
proceeded to inspect her scalp. “Ow, dammit!”
“Got a couple of cuts here that might need stitches. You’re
bleeding quite a bit, but head wounds always do. My younger
brother Devlin cut his head open when we were little and I
thought he was going to die, there was so much blood
everywhere. Scared me. But two stitches were all it needed. He
turned around and walloped me with a stick not twenty minutes
later so I needed three stitches myself. Luckily Mom was pretty
good at it.”
“You are not going to stitch—” Jillian fought with the blanket
to get an arm free. Although her temper lent her a few drops of
adrenaline, the blanket nearly won. She was surprised to find
her right arm bandaged and splinted from palm to elbow,
surprised too to find her hands battered and bleeding, knuckles
and nails fairly singing with pain. Was even more startled to find
she was naked under the blanket. “Where the hell are my
clothes, you goddamn pervert? I’m sure I told you not to touch
me.”
“You certainly did, so I guess your short-term memory’s
intact. Saves me from having to ask you what day it is and all
that shit. Maybe the concussion isn’t too bad.”
“I don’t have a concussion. And I want my clothes back, right
now.” She wrenched her head away from his probing fingers.
“You’re not stitching anything.”
“Settle down before you hurt yourself more. I wouldn’t think
of taking a needle and thread to you, doc. Connor’s got plenty
of adhesive closures in the first-aid kit.”
She struggled anyway. “I don’t care. Just let go of me. I want
my clothes and I want you to leave me alone.” She’d made it out
of his lap, trying to clutch the blanket around her with her
battered fingers and stand up at the same time. If only she
wasn’t so damn dizzy. Suddenly James was in front of her, his
powerful hands on her shoulders. Jillian’s temper flared,
thinking he was trying to restrain her. Then a glimmer of sense
kicked in, and she realized he was actually holding her up.
“Easy there, doc. You almost passed out again.”
“I did not.” She said it without heat however. She didn’t have
the energy left to argue and breathe at the same time.
“Jesus Murphy, woman,” he muttered and steadied her as
she sat heavily on the ground. James grabbed a corner of the
blanket and tucked it more firmly around her. He sat back on his
heels and waited until she glared up at him. “Look, Jillian, help’s
coming, but it’s going to take a while for it to get here. I know I’m
not your first choice of rescuer right now, but you’re stuck with
me. You’re mad as hell, and you’ve got damn good reason to be,
but now isn’t the time to fight about it. You’re injured.”
“I’m fine.”
“That so? Guess I splinted your wrist for nothing then. And
what about this?” He pressed his finger on her left collarbone,
and she yelped in spite of herself.
“That hurt, you bastard.”
“It ought to. You’re purple from chin to shoulder on that side.
I’d be surprised if it’s not broken too. You get into a fight with
someone?”
“No, why—ow!” She tried to swat his hand away from where
he was carefully poking at her cheekbone.
“I’m certain your face was a different shape when I last saw
you. I’d say there’s some swelling going on here. Definitely a lot
of bruising.”
“Goddamn air bag went off in the truck,” she muttered,
wishing he’d stop staring at her.
His eyebrows shot up. “The air bag did that? I thought they
were supposed to protect people, not beat them up.” James
reached for the top of her head then, and she flinched before
he’d even made contact. He withdrew his hand without
touching her. “Okay, enough with the show and tell. I was just
going to point out that your head’s cut in at least two different
places, possibly three. Worse than that, I have to say I don’t like
the way you’re coherent one minute and confused the next.
You’re a doctor for God’s sake. You know you’re injured. At the
very least we need to stop the bleeding. Now will you please let
me help you?”
She frowned. Wavered. “What about my clothes?”
“I’ll get you some clothes, doc, I promise. Truce?”
She nodded and the sudden movement made her head throb
viciously. She could see the sense in what James had said—a
hot trickle down the side of her face told her she was bleeding—
but she dared not let any truce continue for one minute longer
than necessary. She needed to be mad, needed her anger.
Various parts of her body throbbed with pain—but it was
nothing compared to the growing pain in her heart. She couldn’t
explain to James that to be so close to him, able to see him and
feel him and touch him, was turning into slow torture. She
wouldn’t tell him how much he had hurt her, what a
disappointment it was to know that he didn’t want her.
“I’m going to put some butterfly closures on these cuts, just
to stop the bleeding until we can turn you over to a
professional. Okay?”
“Okay. Don’t forget my clothes.”
“I won’t forget.” James knelt beside her and began gently
blotting the cuts on her head with gauze. “These are bleeding
pretty freely, but there’s a lot of gunk in your hair.”
“Gunk? Is that a technical term?”
“Debris. Flotsam. Leaves and mud plus God only knows what
kind of bacteria live in that creek. There’s a lot of runoff right
now from rain in the hills, and that means the water is full of all
kinds of garbage from upstream. You don’t need some damn
infection on top of everything else, so I’d like to use some
peroxide here. Okay with you?”
“Hey, I’m already a blonde so it can’t hurt.” Tilting her head
back made her horribly dizzy, and Jillian was grateful for the
steady supporting hand that cupped the back of her neck. She
stifled a groan as the cold stinging liquid fizzed on her scalp.
James continued to work on the area until he was satisfied
the adhesive closures would stick. Once he’d patched up her
scalp, he turned his attention to her hands. She held them out in
front of her, prepared to be stoic again. But a loud yelp escaped
her when he poured the peroxide over her cuts and scrapes.
“Sorry, doc.”
“My head didn’t hurt like this,” she hissed through gritted
teeth. Her hands trembled as the fiery liquid bubbled and
foamed, but she kept them outstretched so James could work
on them.
“Your head just had a couple of cuts. It wasn’t scraped all to
hell.” His touch was light as he bandaged the worst of the
damage. He paid particular attention to carefully wrapping the
ends of her fingers that had split nails. “We don’t want you to
snag these on anything or they’re going to hurt a lot more.”
“I don’t understand what happened to my hands. I don’t
remember them being in this condition.” She’d always kept her
nails trimmed as short as possible. How could they possibly
have gotten so horribly broken?
James finished another fingertip, started wrapping the next. “I
imagine you did this on the underside of the truck.”
“The truck? I—omigod.” For a horrifying moment she was
under the water again, struggling in the icy darkness with the
unyielding thing that held her under. Terrified as she tried to
claw her way through it—
“Stay with me, doc.”
“What?” The nightmare dissolved, and she was sitting on the
ground, dry ground. There was a fire at her back and a Viking
was putting things into a first-aid box. The box looked
ridiculously tiny next to his big hands, but his movements were
competent and sure. Then the Viking looked at her with blue,
blue eyes. He frowned and gripped her chin with his fingers,
forcing her to pay attention.
“Jillian, you’re scaring the hell out of me. Breathe.”
Startled, she complied. Breathed in and out several times until
her head cleared. And relaxed a little as she surveyed her wrist,
her fingers. Although she was a medical professional, Jillian
hated being doctored herself. But she had to admit, grudgingly,
that this man was pretty good at it. “I’m surprised you’re not a
veterinarian like Connor,” she blurted at last.
“Me? Too much of a farmer at heart. I’d rather raise animals
than patch them up all day long. But you end up having to learn
some of this stuff because a vet’s not always handy. Neither is a
doctor.”
“Well, thanks for patching me up. And I guess I should thank
you for not letting me drown.”
“I’m just glad I was in time.”
He got up, rather abruptly she thought, and checked the fire.
As if he suddenly didn’t want to look at her. Jillian felt her face
heat and pain stabbed her heart again. She sighed and tried to
change the subject. “How did you get all the way out here,
anyway? You said you didn’t have a car.”
James didn’t answer. Just as she decided to repeat the
question, he knelt by the duffle bag and started rifling through it.
“I promised you some clothes, doc. Let’s see what we can do.”
By the time help arrived, Jillian was dressed. Sort of. All the
clothing in the duffle bag belonged to Connor. The jeans were
far too large to be of any real use, so she ignored them. The
thick flannel shirt hung just past her knees once she had
struggled into it. She’d been forced to let James fasten the
buttons and roll the sleeves while she fumed. Her wrist was
throbbing and her usually slender fingers felt as thick and
ungainly as bananas, useless for anything requiring fine motor
skills. She tried to put socks on herself but soon threw them
down, swearing.
“Here, let me.” James picked up the big pair of woolen socks
and eased them onto her as if she was a child. They went up to
her knees, meeting the shirt. He pulled a sling from the first-aid
kit and arranged her arm more comfortably, then tucked the
blanket back around her just as Connor and Zoey drove up with
Birkie.
Chapter Twenty-five
There was no hospital in Dunvegan, and the entire medical
clinic would have fit into the livestock wing of the North Star
Animal Hospital. In the cramped waiting room, James voiced his
opinion that maybe Jillian should be taken to the city for proper
treatment, but Birkie just patted his hand and smiled.
“Lowen and Beverly Miller are excellent doctors. I’ve known
them for years.”
Connor looked around from behind Zoey, who was sitting in
his lap. “Give yourself some credit for being a pretty good
medic yourself, James. They took an X-ray of Jillian’s wrist and
decided to plaster right over what you’d already done. Lowen
said he couldn’t improve on how well those bones were set.”
James said nothing, just kept watching the door, feeling his
patience wearing thin with waiting. He wanted to see Jillian.
Period. He knew she was all right, yet he needed to see for
himself, see that she was alive and well. It could be a long time
before he got his fill of seeing her, of hearing her talk. Hell, of
listening to her breathe. It had been close, much too close. The
entire drive to Dunvegan he’d been thinking about what could
have happened, and thanked the heavens over and over that he
had been in time.
When the doctors emerged, they didn’t have a chance to say
a word before James was out of his chair and in the doorway of
the treatment room. Jillian was sitting in a chair, dressed in
green hospital scrubs and booties.
“New duds?”
“Yeah, they loaned me a set to go home in. I think I like the
blue ones we’ve got at the clinic better.”
“I don’t know. These kind of bring out your eyes.” They did,
too. Her short blond hair stuck out in all directions; her faery
features were obscured by bruising and swelling. James would
bet money that she’d have two shiners by the next day, and still
those sea-green eyes arrested him.
“Ha. I think I’d have to wear red to bring out my eyes at the
moment.”
“Jillian, we need to talk.” He wasn’t sure what he was going to
say, how he was going to explain, but he knew he had to make
a start somewhere.
“No.” She shook her head carefully but kept a hand on it as if
to brace it for the movement. “No, we don’t. Please. I really do
appreciate what you did for me tonight. Thanks for the
underwater rescue and the first aid.” She waved her cast at him.
“The doctors say you’re a natural. Guess you have another
career to fall back on if you get tired of farming.”
“Guess so. Look Jillian, I’m sorry that I—”
“Don’t. I mean it.” The light tone vanished from her voice, and
her delicate mouth was set in a straight line.
Jesus Murphy, what am I doing? “I should have thought. It’s not
a good time. I’ll wait a couple days until you’ve had a chance to
rest. But I have things I need to say to you.”
“No, James. You already said them. You’re not interested and
that’s that. I don’t want you to feel sorry for me and think you
should hang around.”
“It’s not like that.”
“No? Let me tell you what it’s not going to be like. It seems to
be very trendy to have sex and then just be friends, but I’m not
wired that way. So let’s just say a nice, clean goodbye, okay?
End of story. And as for tonight, thanks again for what you did
for me, but I have other people to help me now.” She rose and
headed for the door. Waited with folded arms for him to move
out of the way. “I’m really tired, James, and I’m going home with
Birkie now.”
“I’ll call you.” He felt like the ground was crumbling away from
under his feet.