to stop the bleeding. Only
when Roderick sat up and started looking around for his
weapon did she remember him. “You bastard! You goddamn
bastard!” He was between her and the gun. If he reached it, she
was dead and so was the wolf. She had no choice but to let go.
Jillian launched herself on top of her assailant, punching and
kicking, screaming for someone to help her at the top of her
lungs. It was more like wrestling than the kind of fighting she
practiced, but she knew how to put power behind her punches.
She managed to drill him solidly with a quick succession of
blows, although a vulnerable spot was hard to come by from
this position and she hadn’t quite regained all of her strength
after the accident. Harrison reeled, then rallied, surprising her
with a powerful backhand. With his greater weight behind it, the
blow knocked her flying. She landed on the pavement next to
the wolf, rolled nimbly to her hands and knees. Dizziness had
her pausing for a second, only a scant second, but it was long
enough to hear the bolt of a rifle being slid back.
She looked up fast, fully expecting to be shot, but nothing
was pointed at her. Douglas Harrison had a rifle trained on his
father.
“Put it down, Dad.”
Roderick had just closed his fingers around the stock of his
own weapon. He spun around on his knees at his son’s voice,
his rifle in his hands. Beyond him, Jillian could see Connor
emerge from the clinic at a dead run, then stop still when he saw
the situation. She could hear sirens in the distance. Someone
had called the RCMP. Could she make a break for it now—or
would running set Roderick off? The man was still armed. Still
crazy, unpredictable. And seemed more irritated than worried
that his son was trying to stop him. Meanwhile, the wolf lay
beside her, bleeding. If she left now, he would die.
Quickly Jillian kicked off her shoe and peeled off a sock with
one hand, folded it into a makeshift compress and mashed it
into the gaping exit wound. She pressed the heel of her palm
against it tight and held it, searched through the bloody fur with
her other fingers for a pressure point, an artery. Something,
anything, she could press to stem the supply of blood. She
glanced up, saw that Connor had edged closer to the scene. Bill
Watson was with him. She also saw that Roderick was on his
feet now, rifle at the ready.
“They’re werewolves! Every damn one of them!” Roderick
was saying. “Thanks to you, we didn’t finish this white bastard
off that night, and now look. There’s a whole fucking nest of
them. Someone’s got to make a stand. Someone’s got to stop
them.”
“No, Dad,” said Douglas, never relaxing his grip on the rifle.
“Someone has to stop you. I was too young and too scared to
stand up and stop you before, but not this time. Put the gun
down.”
“Want me to believe you’ll actually use that? You couldn’t pull
the trigger that night when there was a werewolf right in front of
your face. I told you to shoot. I told you, and you just stood
there sniveling.” Roderick spat on the pavement. “Think I don’t
know you haven’t picked up a gun since? All you can pick up
now is a glass. You couldn’t shoot me if you tried.” He pointed
his rifle then, not at Douglas, but at Jillian.
“I mean it, Dad.”
“It’s still the best strategy. You know that killing these two
creatures will draw the rest out. There’s a couple over there
already.” Roderick nodded his head toward the clinic. “More will
come. We could get rid of the whole bunch at once if you helped
me.”
“I won’t let you do this again. Put it down, Dad.”
Roderick ignored him, sighted on his target. There was a twin
explosion of sound. And the old man was on the ground, his
hands wrapped around his leg and a look of incredulity on his
face. His own shot had gone wild, and his rifle had tumbled to
the pavement. He made a wild reach for it, and Douglas fired
again, placing the shot between his father’s fingers and the
fallen gun. Roderick snatched his hand back as if it was burned
and glared at his son. “You don’t understand. They won’t let
you walk away. You’ll pay for letting these creatures go. They’ll
make you pay.”
Douglas simply walked over and kicked the rifle across the
parking lot, threw his own after it. “Pay what? I’ve already paid
for the ones you killed. Paid and paid, my whole life. I’m telling
the story to the authorities as soon as they get here.”
“You called the damn cops on me?” Roderick’s face turned
purple with rage. “I raised you like a son. Even after your mother
ran off, I raised you like my own son.”
“She didn’t run off,” Douglas said quietly. “And the
werewolves didn’t kill her, either, did they? I talked to Rosa and
we figured it out. Maybe you didn’t mean it, maybe it was an
accident. But afterward you had to make up a story you could
live with. It’s too bad more people had to die just to feed your
fantasy.”
“It’s not a fucking fantasy. They’re werewolves, every last one
of them. I’d never have hurt her if they hadn’t kept luring her
away. It’s their fault.” Roderick pointed a shaking finger at
Douglas. “Their fault that I . . . that I. . . .” He was silent then,
holding his leg and rocking back and forth. He didn’t look at
Douglas again.
Bill had already knelt by Jillian’s side. He threw a beefy
tattooed arm around her shoulders and gave her a surprisingly
gentle squeeze. “Are you okay, lovey?”
Connor was feeling the wolf’s head as if searching for a fever,
and closed his eyes for a long moment. “He’s there, but barely,”
he pronounced. “We’ve got to take him inside.” He didn’t even
glance at Jillian, just gave instructions. “Bill and I will carry him,
and you keep your hand right where it is.” He didn’t wait for an
answer. She had to move fast to stay in position as the men slid
their hands under the wolf’s body and lifted.
Sergeant Fitzpatrick and two of his officers ran by them as the
trio made their way slowly toward the clinic with the injured
wolf. Jillian glanced back only once. Roderick was still on the
ground, hunched over and clutching his leg. He seemed
shrunken. Defeated. One officer was kneeling in front of him,
talking into a radio, requesting an ambulance. Another was
gathering up the rifles from the pavement. Douglas stood with
his arms folded, talking with Fitz. Everything seemed under
control.
Jillian wished she had things under control. They were
moving slowly and carefully, yet the crumpled sock she was
using to put pressure on the wound was soaked through. She
called for them to stop so she could kick off her other shoe and
utilize that sock too. She folded it, packed it on top of the first
sock and held it down tight. “Okay, I’m ready.”
“No you’re not,” said Bill. “You’ve got bare feet now.” He
looked at Jillian and jerked his head toward the back entrance
to the clinic, the one she had used only a short time ago. There
was a sea of glass glittering on the pavement. The door itself
was not only missing its window but was leaning outward and
hanging askew, one of its hinges broken. It looked as if
something had exploded through it . . . “And we’re not bloody
likely to fit through that door all together-like.”
Connor considered. “We’ll go in the truck bay and through
the livestock wing. But we’ve got to move faster.”
In the truck bay they were met by Culley and Devlin, who took
over carrying the wolf while Connor ran ahead to the Small
Animal Surgery. Bill offered to take Jillian’s place but she shook
her head. She was using both hands and dared not move either
of them, not yet.
They laid the wolf on the biggest table in the surgery. It would
have been on the small side for Cujo, Ruby Ferguson’s illtempered
dog. The wolf’s body covered the stainless steel
surface completely, his broad head hung over one end, and his
long legs draped limply over the side.
Connor had a wheeled tray of sterile instruments laid out. He
came around and stood by Jillian. “Okay, let’s see what we’ve
got.”
Gingerly, she removed the socks, unrecognizable now. They
were just wet red wads, little distinguishable from the damaged
tissue itself, surrounded by blood-soaked fur. She sucked in
her breath as she took a good clinical look at the wound. It was
huge. Jillian didn’t know what kind of gun Roderick had used,
only that while the entrance wound was relatively small, the exit
wound was a gaping hole. As far as she could tell, parts of the
shoulder had been blasted clean away, bone, hide and all.
Connor darted straight into the gory mess with fine instruments,
seeking to clamp the blood vessels. Jillian blotted the welling
blood with gauze pads, then started an IV.
They worked together, taking turns stitching the terrible mess
as best they could. Connor’s sister, Kenzie, had slipped into the
room somewhere along the line and proved herself a capable
nurse, keeping both vets supplied with whatever they needed.
Jillian checked the vital signs frequently. The wolf was still alive,
but barely. Finally she took Connor’s arm.
“This isn’t going to work. The damage is just too great.
There’s no way to fix it.”
He didn’t look at her, just continued to work. “We’re fixing it.”
“But there’s so much missing. The socket’s gone, the
attachments for the muscles. This animal is going to be
permanently crippled and in pain, even if it survives. It’ll have to
live in captivity for the rest of its life.”
Connor appeared to ignore her. She became aware then that
not just Kenzie was in the room, but Culley and Devlin. Bill and
Jessie were in the hallway, looking in. They weren’t paying
attention to her. In fact, no one appeared to have heard her. All
eyes were on the wolf.
What was going on here? She’d never seen them all together
in the same room, and none of them had been in this room. Had
they all been here visiting at the clinic when the situation
erupted? Everyone seemed so intense, as if it was a family
member in a hospital emergency room. Was she not the only
one the wolf had visited? Maybe all of them knew about the
wolf, had a relationship with it just like she did. After all, James
seemed to be familiar with it . . . And just where was James? She
hadn’t had a moment to notice before, but his absence now
seemed very odd. If all his family and friends were here, if it was
important to them, it would be important to him as well. And
surely someone had called him to mention that a lunatic had
held her at gunpoint. If he couldn’t get here, he would have
phoned, wouldn’t he? Of course he would. Likely had, several
times, but she’d been a little busy. And who knew if anyone was
answering the phones? It was long after hours and Birkie was
safely home. He’s probably on his way right now, she thought.
He’d be mad as hell that he hadn’t been there to protect her and
even madder that he couldn’t get through to her.
“I need you, here.” She knew Connor was talking to her.
“Right here, your hands are smaller.” She turned her attention
back to the wolf, took another turn putting fine stitches in a
seemingly futile effort to reassemble what wasn’t there.
Connor lifted the lips of the wolf. The gums were pale, almost
white. Connor swore, ripped open a drawer and rummaged
through it. Pulled the wrapper off some transfusion tubing.
There was an IV insert at both ends and a squeeze pump in the
center. It was used to take blood directly from donor to
recipient. It made perfect sense to Jillian. What Connor said next
did not. “Devlin, you’re up first.”
What the hell? She stopped what she was doing and watched
incredulously as Devlin pulled off his shirt, as Connor swabbed
the inside of his elbow. “Wait! What are you doing?”
“We need blood. He’s fading fast.”
“Connor, have you lost your mind? You can’t give human
blood to a wolf. Are you that tired? You’ll kill him.”
All eyes were on her then, and it was uncomfortable. Their
expressions seemed a bizarre mix of patience and pity, as if she
were a small child who had just said something embarrassing.
She automatically dismissed the odd impression as ridiculous.
“There’re no bags of canine blood left in the fridge until the
supply truck gets here tomorrow—that amputation on the Great
Dane took all we had. We could check with Sergeant Fitz if he’s
still here, ask if we could use his big Shepherd. Or Dalin Boyd
has a Rottie and he lives just down the road. Maybe both.”
Connor rubbed a hand over his face. “There are things here
you don’t understand and there’s no time to explain them.”
“I understand that donor and recipient have to be genetically
close.”
“Trust me, Devlin’s close. In fact, he’s a perfect match. We’ve
done this before.” He stopped talking to her, and instead,
instructed Devlin to hop up and sit on the counter by the sink.
“We need some height here or it won’t flow properly. Hold your
arm like this. That’s right.”
What? What? Jillian stood open-mouthed, her bloodied hands
arrested in mid-stitch. “You can’t do this! I care about this wolf
very much. I don’t think we can save it, but I’m damn well not
going to let you experiment on it.”
Connor inserted the IV into Devlin’s arm, taped it down. “I
care about this wolf more than you know. I need you to either
trust me or leave.”
Bill came up behind her and put a huge hand on her shoulder,
and Jillian was immensely relieved. “Tell him, Bill, something’s
wrong with him. Stop him. Make him understand.”
“There’s a lot you don’t know about this creature, lovey. And
a lot you do know. It’s not really a wolf, you see.
“It’s James.”
Chapter Thirty-two
The sun came up. It was almost a surprise, considering the
whole world had gone insane the night before. At least her
world had. Jillian hadn’t slept, but lay on her bed with a
pounding headache that had nothing to do with the fading
remnants of her concussion, and everything to do with
launching herself at Connor when he tried to put the IV into the
wolf’s leg. She’d gone in swinging, determined to save the white
wolf, and suddenly everyone was holding her; she was the one
being dragged from the room. She’d struggled and screamed
until her chin connected with someone’s elbow. She hadn’t
knocked herself out, but it had stunned her. Long enough for
them to barricade the surgery door against her.
She’d shouted and banged on the door to no avail. She ran to
her apartment and phoned Birkie but there was no answer. She
called the RCMP, the SPCA, and any other authority in the area
she could think of. It wasn’t office hours for anyone but the
police, but she knew the individuals, found their home numbers
in the phone book. Called long distance and got her old
genetics instructor, Ian Craddock, out of bed. Told them all what
her boss was doing and every one of them had the same
reaction—they laughed. Connor’s reputation was far too solid
for someone like her to shake in any kind of a hurry, especially
with such a bizarre story. If only James were here. He’d believe
her. He’d make his brother see sense too, would save the wolf.
Would have. Past tense. If he’d only been here. Hours had
gone by now.
The wolf, her wolf, the beautiful white wolf that had saved her
life and shown her such affection, that had come to symbolize
hope and all things good, had just saved her life a second time
—this time at the cost of its own. If it survived the surgery—
which was doubtful—it wouldn’t have survived the crossspecies
transfusion. And there wasn’t a single blessed thing
she could do to change that. Grief welled up and spilled out,
and she cried as she hadn’t in years, cried even harder that
James wasn’t there to hold her. She had no idea where he was,
only that she needed him. Her world had been turned inside out,
and the only place it could ever make sense again was in his
arms.
Where was he? She thought for sure he’d show up in the
night. Or call.
Damned if she wanted to ask any of his family where he was.
Or his friends. If what Bill had said was meant to be some sort of
weird comic relief, not only had it fallen flat, it was in bad taste.
Yet no one had said a word. Was it some sort of strange family
joke? What kind of reaction had they been hoping for? It made
no sense. They made no sense. She thought she’d gotten to
know these people a little, thought they liked her. She had liked
them a great deal, felt affection and acceptance from them.
She’d started to feel that she could belong here. And now
James was missing and his family and friends had somehow
turned on her.
There was a knock at the door. “Jillian? Jillian, honey, can I
come in?”
“Birkie!” Jillian hurried to the door, pushed away the table
and chairs she’d angrily shoved in front of it. That hadn’t served
any purpose except to retaliate in kind—they’d blockaded her
from the surgery? Fine, she’d make sure they couldn’t get in
here. Except no one had tried to get in. No one had come at all
until now. Not even James. She nearly pulled Birkie into the
room, hugged her thoroughly, cried some more although she
thought she’d finished.
“There, there, hon, everything’s going to be fine.”
“Oh, it’s not fine. Nothing’s fine! The wolf is dead, my beautiful
wolf. You didn’t see what Connor was doing, you don’t know—”
Birkie patted her arm. “Your wolf is still alive, hon. And
reasonably stable too. They’ve got him recovering in the
livestock wing—”
Jillian bolted for the door. She was prepared to take on
anyone or anything that got in her way, but she encountered no
one. The doorway to the livestock wing was wide open. The
wolf had been bedded down in very human fashion, resting on
a wide mattress and covered by blankets. Jillian stopped her
headlong flight at the sight, approached slowly, almost
hesitantly. Was it real? The rise and fall of the blankets was
faint, difficult to discern. It looked like the wolf was breathing,
but was that just what she wanted to see? She knelt and
listened to the animal’s muzzle, fingered an eyelid open with her
gentle but shaking hand, and her heart caught at the sight of the
familiar blue eye, rejoiced when the pupil shrank with the
sudden light. She couldn’t help herself. She placed a hand on
each side of the animal’s broad skull, touched its forehead with
her own. And sobbed out her relief.
It was some moments before she could sit back, several more
before she caught her breath and quit hiccupping and sniffling.
She wiped her face on her shirt and perched on the edge of the
mattress, hugging her knees and rocking a little. Peace was
here. The world had gone berserk but peace was here with the
wolf, just like always. After yesterday, she wasn’t sure where
she belonged anymore. Except here, with the wolf. Watching
over him the way he had watched over her.
“So how bad is it, bossman?”
“The glass for the back door will be here this afternoon. The
contractor says he’ll have to replace the entire doorframe, but
it’ll all be done by the end of the day so we can lock up tonight.”
Connor rested his elbows on the top rail of the clinic corral.
Sighed. “Good Christ, he kept asking what happened to tear out
the steel hinges like that. I had to lie through my teeth and tell
him a steer escaped from the livestock wing and rammed
through it.”
“Well, you could hardly tell him that your brother went
through it. But that’s not what I was asking about. I want to
know how bad things are with Jillian. Culley says things got a
little tense around here.”
“Jesus, Birkie, that’s the understatement of the century. It was
a tough surgery, an impossible surgery. I was trying so hard to
forget it was James because I couldn’t afford the distraction.
Well, I forgot all right, and I also forgot I had a non-changeling in
the room. She thought I was trying to kill him.”
“Well, you have to give her credit for determination. You
wouldn’t believe how many phone messages you’ve gotten this
morning from agencies and people she called to try to stop
you.”
He groaned. “I have a lot of those on my cell too. Thank God I
know most of these folks. I’ll have to call them all back
eventually, although I don’t know what to say. They already
think she must have a screw loose—except her teacher, he
wanted to know what I’d done to her—and it’s not fair to her to
agree with them. But I can’t tell them the truth either.” He rubbed
his hands over his face, held them there for a minute. “God,
Birkie, I can’t believe this is happening. What are the chances of
James getting shot again? It’s even the same damn shoulder.
And Fitzpatrick took me aside this morning and told me this is
the same murdering bastard that shot James before.”
“And killed our Evelyn. Yes, Fitz came by and told me. The
son confirmed it.”
“The whole thing is just uncanny, it’s twisted, it’s . . . it’s just
damn fucking wrong, is what it is.”
“It’s a chance for things to turn out right this time.”
He groaned. “Fat chance of that.”
“You’re worried for James and Jillian both, aren’t you?”
“Christ, yes! He’s hurt bad. If he makes it—”
“He’ll make it, Connor.” Birkie’s voice was firm.
“You haven’t seen the damage. It’s going to be weeks—
maybe months—before he’ll be able to Change. And what kind
of hell will that be for her? Not knowing where he is. Not hearing
from him. No matter what excuse we made up, it wouldn’t
account for it. If he was called away to visit a sick aunt, I would
be too. And he could still phone. In fact, if he was in a coma in
Timbuktu and couldn’t phone, someone would still notify us
and she’d be on the next plane.”
“So what are we going to do, bossman?”
He wiped his face on his sleeve. Sighed heavily. “I don’t know
what to do. No idea. She loves him and what is she supposed to
think except that he’s taken off? And you know what the worst
thing is? She’s pregnant. James told me yesterday, had only
just learned it himself.”
“I thought she was. Her aura’s been different for a while now. I
felt a bit guilty but there was no way to warn her that human
birth control methods are usually ineffective against Changeling
males. She still thinks James is human.”
“Which brings us to a very human problem. As far as Jillian
knows, James went missing on the same damn day he found
out she’s expecting.” He rested his arms on the top rail again,
laid his forehead on them. “What’s that going to look like?”
“Like he didn’t want the baby—or her.”
“What else could she think? Never mind the fact that she
doesn’t deserve that kind of heartbreak and stress. When he
finally shows up, what’s he going to say? What’s the damage
going to be to their relationship? And what’s the damage going
to be to James if he loses their relationship?”
“You’re thinking too far ahead, Connor.”
“Like hell I am. James loves her. I wasn’t sure he could,
wasn’t sure he’d let himself, but he loves her. He’s happy—
you’ve seen him with Jillian.”
“He’s come a long way.”
“We all prayed that James would come back to us, Birkie.
Thirty damn years we prayed he’d come back. I’m scared
shitless he’ll go back to being a wolf and . . . and. . . .”
“You don’t want to let him go.” Birkie put a hand on his back
as he buried his face in his arms.
“I can’t let him go. I can’t. He’s my brother. We only just got
him back.”
“Well, there’s only one thing to do then.”
“What?”
“We have to tell her the truth.”
Connor laughed harshly without looking up. “Oh, that’ll work
well. Bill already tried that. And besides, she doesn’t trust any of
us, not after this, and she especially doesn’t trust me. She won’t
let me within a hundred yards of her.”
“She trusts me. And maybe she won’t let you near her in
human form, but there’s another option.”
“You’re kidding.” He dropped his hands and turned to stare at
her. “You must be.”
“Desperate times call for desperate actions, hon.”
At the sound of Birkie’s voice, Jillian sat up and ran a hand
through her hair. She’d been lying down, half on, half off the
mattress, her face next to the white wolf’s.
“I’m sorry, dear, were you sleeping?”
“No. No, just resting.” She reached up and accepted a hug
from the older woman, scooted over so Birkie could sit on the
edge of the mattress. “I’m sorry I took off, I just—”
“You just had to see your wolf, I understand that.” Her friend
smiled at her, patted her arm. “You didn’t know he was still with
us. Sounds like he’s a hero too.”
“Yeah. Yeah, he saved my life. Again.” Jillian felt herself tear
up once more. Was it pregnancy hormones that had her
blubbering at the drop of a hat? She felt like she’d cried more in
two days than she had in her whole life. Sighing, she rubbed
her eyes with the heel of her hand, then related yesterday’s
events in the parking lot. She was thankful anew for the fact that
she could tell her friend anything. Sure, there was a very real
white wolf lying right there, but Birkie had believed her from the
beginning.
“The wolf loves you a lot, hon. He was there for you,
protected you.”
“I tried to protect him too, but everyone got so weird. Birkie,
they even threw me out of surgery! God, I wish James had been
here to help me.” Her eyes filled again, and she swiped at them
irritably. “In fact, I just don’t understand why he’s not here now.
Do you know where he is?”
Birkie took her hand, squeezed it. “Well now, yes I do, but it’s
going to take some explaining.”
“Where—”
“Are we friends, Jillian? Do you trust me?”
“Well, yes, of course. Did something happen to James? Is he
all right?” Her eyes widened suddenly. “He left again, didn’t he?
I told him I was pregnant and . . . and. . . .” She couldn’t finish.
“And I’ve never seen a man so thrilled. I am too, by the way.
We all are. Of course James didn’t leave.”
“Then where the hell is he? Look, please stop being
mysterious and just tell me straight out.”
Birkie shook her head. “Honey, I need to ask for your
patience. I’ll tell you absolutely everything, I promise, but I need
a promise from you that you’ll hear me out, that you’ll listen with
an open mind and an open heart. Can you do that?”
“I’m not liking this.” Jillian had never seen her friend so
serious. “But okay, I’ll try.”
“Last night Connor was doing something you didn’t
understand.”
“Ha! Doesn’t take much understanding. Blood’s not generic,
you can’t mix species. That’s elemental enough for a thirdgrader.”
“Ordinarily that’s true. If your wolf was an ordinary wolf. But
he’s not.”
Jillian frowned, put a hand on the animal’s head. “The DNA
test said he’s a wolf. I showed it to you.”
“And exactly what kind of wolf did it say he was?”
“Well, that was inconclusive, but he’s still a wolf.”
“What if I told you he wasn’t? Better yet, what if I showed you
he wasn’t?” Birkie turned and whistled softly.
Jillian was about to reply but her voice suddenly caught in
her throat. An enormous wolf had appeared in the doorway. It
filled the doorframe for a long moment, then stepped cautiously
into the room at Birkie’s beckoning wave.
“Birkie!” she managed to whisper as she grabbed her friend’s
arm and held it tightly. “It’s as big as my wolf. My God, there’s
more than one.”
“Oh yes. Quite a few, actually. These two are brothers.”
Jillian goggled briefly at her friend, but had to turn her eyes
back to the newcomer. It turned slightly, and she could see the
silvery pelt was marked with a blanket of black over the
shoulders—a saddleback pattern that was rare in wolves. Birkie
extended a hand to it, and the huge creature trotted over
immediately to lie at their feet. Jillian swallowed hard, opened
her mouth to speak, closed it again.
“Here, you can pet him if you want to. He’s mostly tame.”
Birkie rubbed the dark wolf behind the ears.
Jillian reached over to offer a hand to the handsome creature
when she got a good look at its eyes. They weren’t green but
gray. Pale gray. For an instant she felt she was on the verge of
remembering something. Then whatever it was eluded her,
leaving her strangely disappointed. “He has really unusual eyes
for a wolf,” she managed.
“Yes, he does. So does your wolf, doesn’t he?”
“Well, yes. It’s one of the things that I can’t explain. Wolves
don’t have blue eyes. Yellow eyes, brown, sometimes green.
But not blue. And not gray either. It’s like a whole new
subspecies.” The wolf touched its nose to Jillian’s hand, licked
her fingers, then bumped its head under them to be petted. “He
seems to be just as friendly as my wolf, too.” She sighed, shook
off her fascination with the new animal and turned to her friend.
“This is one hell of a secret you’ve been keeping. Why? Why
didn’t you tell me about this? After everything I confided in you
about the white wolf, you couldn’t mention you already knew
about him, that you had a wolf, too?”
“Oh, he’s not my wolf, hon, he’s a friend. They’re both good
friends. And because of that, I wasn’t free to tell you about them.
I told you once that I keep confidences and I do.” Birkie spoke
to the dark wolf then. “I think you’d better show her now.”
The wolf rose and trotted a few yards away.
“What does this have to do with James? Where is he?”
Suddenly Jillian’s scalp prickled strangely. She touched her
hair and was surprised to find it standing straight up. She ran a
hand through it, felt it crackle and snap with static. “What the—”
She looked at Birkie. Her friend’s hair was always perfectly
styled, but there were stray hairs unwinding themselves now,
and all of them were drifting upward.
A cold draft gusted through the room, and a shiver ran
through Jillian from neck to tailbone. She glanced around for
the source but the windows were closed and only a hallway lay
beyond the door. The loft door was high above and behind her,
but the breeze wasn’t coming from there. It was coming from—
The dark wolf. Tiny bits of straw and hay were eddying
around the floor, slowly at first, then faster. They swirled about
the wolf, and blue sparks snapped and popped in the air. I’ve
seen all this before. But that was—
Without any warning, the big animal was gone and in its place
stood Connor Macleod. He looked just as he usually did, with
his denim shirt and torn jeans, and his hands resting in the
pockets of a rumpled lab coat. The breeze died away. A few blue
sparks crackled in the air, fell to the concrete and went out.
Stunned, Jillian felt as if her brain had winked out as well, as if
a fuse had blown. Her mind was blank for a long moment, then it
was suddenly bombarded with an avalanche of thoughts and
ideas, all coming together at once. Bill’s words. The vision in the
loft. The wolf in her apartment. The stories she had read, the
legends she had studied. Brothers, Birkie had said, the dark wolf
and the white wolf. Gray eyes—and blue.
She put her hands to her head, held on tight as it threatened
to explode. Then the thoughts converged, neatly, like streams
feeding into a river. They merged, melded, flowed smoothly and
effortlessly into a whole. Jillian put her hands down, drew a
deep breath. Another. Put her shaking hand on the white wolf’s
broad forehead, stroked it gently, let calmness and peace fill her
until she was steady and could open her eyes.
“Are you okay?” It was Connor. Birkie was looking at her, too.
“Is that a trick question? A wolf just turned into my boss right
in front of me, my boyfriend turns out to be a wolf I’ve known for
years, and I’m supposed to be okay?” Jillian laughed a little, ran
her hand through her hair. “Actually, a lot of things make sense
now, and that’s what scares me. It’s a good thing to be worried
about being crazy, though, isn’t it? Like if you think you might
be insane, you’re really not?”
“You’re not crazy, not at all.” Birkie slid an arm around her
and squeezed. “In fact, you’re doing just great, honey. Give
yourself some time. It’s a lot to take in, a lot to get used to.”
Jillian shook her head in wonder. “Oh God, it feels like I woke
up on another planet. A few moments ago, werewolves lived
only in movies and books. Now they’re real. And I can barely
believe I said that.” She looked up at Connor. “You were using
Devlin’s blood last night because he’s a werewolf, too, isn’t
he?”
“A Changeling, yes. Our whole family. Bill and Jessie.
Fitzpatrick. A few others.”
“Fitzpatrick? Sergeant Fitzpatrick? You’re telling me that the
head of our local RCMP detachment is a werewolf?” Although
why that should be any more shocking than the rest, she didn’t
know.
“Changeling,” Connor corrected. “Yes, Fitz is a Changeling
just like the rest of us.”
“Changeling.” She tried out the word. “Well, at least it sounds
a little less Hollywood than werewolf.” Jillian turned to Birkie
then. “Is everyone in town a Changeling? Are you a Changeling
too?”
Birkie smiled and shook her head.
“Well, that’s a relief. I was starting to feel like the only human
left.” Jillian looked down at the wolf as she stroked its ears. The
blanket was rising and falling steadily now; she didn’t have to
strain to see if he was breathing. He. The wolf. James. Cold fear
abruptly squeezed her heart. “I think . . . I think I’d rather believe
that James left me than believe that he’s lying here hurt like this.
Is he going to be okay?”
“I can’t promise anything,” said Connor. He checked the
white wolf’s vitals, then laid a hand on her shoulder. “I wish I
could, but you’re a vet. You saw the damage for yourself, and
you can guess that James isn’t out of the woods yet. Ask me
again in forty-eight hours, ask me when he wakes up. He’s
stable right now; we’re all hoping and praying he stays that
way.”
He was right. As a vet, it was exactly the prognosis she’d give,
but it still hit her hard. The wolf could die, and she’d already
shed plenty of tears at the thought of losing her lupine friend.
But to never see James again . . . Dear God. She shoved the
terrifying thoughts to the back of her mind, slammed the door
on them tight. Tried to focus outside herself. Thought about
Connor—what had it been like to have to operate on a family
member?
A family member. Jillian thought of the others who had been in
the operating room, and realized she wasn’t the only one
scared to death.
Chapter Thirty-three
His hand on the white wolf’s broad forehead, Connor’s eyes
were closed. He sat perfectly still as if listening. Long minutes
passed before he finally looked up. “I can’t reach him. I’ve tried
and tried since this happened, but I can’t seem to connect with
him.”
At Jillian’s puzzled expression, Birkie leaned over and
whispered, “Telepathy, dear. Most Changelings can talk to each
other in their minds.”
“Of course they can.” Jillian felt as if she’d just slipped a few
notches further down the proverbial rabbit hole. Can they fly,
too?
Connor continued. “James may need help finding his way
back to us. If you talk to him, it could help.”
“You mean he’s in a coma?”
“Not in human terms. He’s not only inside the wolf’s body, but
he could be locked in the wolf persona as well,” said Connor.
“For all intents and purposes, he is a wolf. And James needs to
be reminded he’s human. It’s the human side we need to
connect with. He’ll listen to you. You’ve got a powerful
connection to both the wolf and the man.”
“What do I say?”
“Anything at all,” Birkie explained. “The sound of your voice
might give him something to latch onto. Like a lifeline.”
“And then he’ll wake up? Will he be himself, I mean, will he be
human then?”
“No. But just waking up would be a hell of a lot of progress,”
said Connor. He looked like he was about to say more, but
shook his head and abruptly left the room.
Birkie hugged Jillian. “I imagine you’d like a little time to
yourself, honey. We’ve dumped a lot of information on you. I’ll
bring you some lunch in a while, answer more questions if you
have them. I imagine you’ll have a lot. Are you okay for now?”
“Yeah, I’m mostly fine. Thanks.” She put on a brave face,
managed a smile even as emotions surged through her. But as
soon as Birkie left, the tears began to fall and this time she
didn’t try to stop them. Some were out of relief, and some were
out of fear. Eventually they slowed enough to let her find her
voice. “They tell me you’re in there somewhere, James,” she
said to the wolf, stroking its ears, its face. “I’m scared to believe
it and scared because I am believing it. I need you to come back
to me and help me understand it all. I’m pretty lousy at asking
for help, James, but I’m asking now. Come back to me and help
me sort this out, because I’m worried I’ve gone crazy. I’m scared
the concussion has hurt something in my head and I’m
delusional. Or maybe being pregnant has affected my brain.”
The tears started again, and she knotted her hand in the wolf’s
thick mane, held onto it as if she was dangling from a cliff and it
was the only thing left to hang onto.
“What I’m most afraid of is that you’re gone. You know I love
you, James, but you don’t know how much. I didn’t know how
much. And I’m so scared it’s too late and I won’t get to tell you
face-to-face just how much you mean to me. I really want to
build that life with you. Come back to me.”
Deep within the wolf, a faint awareness stirred. James
struggled against the thick gray haze that seemed to blanket his
mind. Pain was on the other side of the fog, searingly bright,
waiting to stab at him. And he was tired, more tired than he’d
ever thought possible. Exhaustion pressed down on him like a
weight. A stray thought surfaced that he must be still alive.
Surely he couldn’t be this damn tired if he was dead.
Someone was talking to him. A woman. He should know her,
she was important. Green eyes. He knew she had green eyes,
so he should know who she was, shouldn’t he? He worried at
the puzzle for a few moments, then let it be. Just listened to the
soothing, pleasant voice, felt it stroke his mind with familiar
fingers. Listened until the dull waves of oblivion began to pull
him under again.
No. He couldn’t let himself fade out, he had to find this
woman. Somehow, everything would be all right if he could just
find her . . . if he could just find. . . . Jillian! I’ve got to get to Jillian!
Memories flooded back like an inrushing tide. James had
been in the clinic’s lunchroom, putting together a meal for two.
He’d had his head in the fridge when the most god-awful fear
had gripped him by the throat. Fear for her. He raced for the
apartment but she wasn’t there, wasn’t anywhere. The sense of
danger screamed along every nerve he had; the wolf within
snapped and snarled. The wolf will know where she is. It always
knows where she is. Instantly he’d called the Change, given the
wolf its head. And the wolf had wheeled and raced for the back
door with all the power and speed at its command, hurled itself
through the narrow window in an explosion of metal and glass.
He’d barely touched the pavement when James caught sight
of the gun trained on the woman he loved. His heart stuttered
for a single beat. And then he bounded across the heated
pavement, leapt with bared fangs. . . .
Then what? He wasn’t quite sure what happened after that.
He’d been injured, probably shot, but it didn’t matter. What
mattered was that he must have been in time, James and his
wolf together, they must have been in time to save Jillian. She
was alive, he could hear her, sense her, feel her, right here next
to him. She was all right. And the child within her, his child, must
be all right too. Safe. All safe. James relaxed into the wonder of
it, his heart satisfied, peaceful. He focused contentedly on
Jillian’s voice, listened to her words.
“—please come back to me, James. I miss you and I’m so
confused. They tell me you’re in there somewhere but I can’t
feel you. I need you to come back and explain all this to me,
make it make sense—”
Wait! I’m right here. He had never heard Jillian sound so lost,
so sad. Not since the wolf had found her on the trail all those
years ago. With a start, James realized he was in wolf form now
too. He shouldn’t be, he should have Changed—unless he
couldn’t. Just how bad am I hurt? He turned inward then, felt
carefully along the edges of his awareness where gray fog hid
the bright lines of pain. Followed those lines to their source and
discovered his shoulder to be all but missing. Again? Good
Christ, it had taken months to recover last time and this wound
felt even worse. But he hadn’t been trying then, couldn’t have
cared less if he lived or died last time. Now, he not only wanted
to heal, he wanted to be human again. He had to get to Jillian,
had to reach her, talk to her. Hold her. Especially hold her. But
there would be no Changing with this kind of injury. A
Changeling had considerable regenerative powers, but they
could be accessed only in wolfen form. Not only that, his lupine
side would not permit him to Change. Period. The wolf was
devoted to James’s survival and all energy would be funneled
into healing.
Meanwhile, Jillian needed him, and here he was lying down
on the job.
Not for long, he decided. If the only way he could comfort the
woman he loved was by licking her face and wagging his tail, he
was damn well going to do that much. Slowly, tentatively,
James began the long agonizing climb through the haze toward
consciousness.
The full moon silvered the rocks on Elk Point, touched the
tips of the trees with sterling. Not to be outdone, the stars
blazed overhead in a deep velvet blue canopy. Jillian wrapped
her arms around her knees and allowed herself, just for a
moment, to forget everything except the vivid beauty of the
night. She drank it, breathed it, drew it into her lungs as if she
couldn’t get enough, drew it into her soul. There was a harmony
here that spoke to her deeply, that she had missed in the past
few years in the eastern city. Missed without even knowing
what it was she was missing. The work at the clinic fed her
mind. The northern countryside was unexpectedly feeding her
spirit, comforting it.
Coming here seemed to be good for the white wolf too. She
looked down at the magnificent animal stretched out on a rock
beside her, his snowy coat glowing in the moonlight. James.
James is in there. She reminded herself of that often, although
her wolf still felt like, well, a wolf. The massive creature might
have eyes that were the same shade of Viking blue as James’s
eyes—but she couldn’t see James behind them. Her throat
tightened with grief even though James wasn’t dead. At least,
everyone said he wasn’t dead, that he was right there inside the
wolf. But she couldn’t feel him there.
Blue eyes looked up at her, and the wolf nudged her arm with
its nose. Jillian complied, putting an arm around his neck so he
could lay his massive head in her lap. There won’t be much room
for that soon. She wondered if the wolf knew about the baby. She
wondered if James remembered the baby, or her, or anything at
all. Was he thinking as a wolf or as a man?
I should be grateful he’s alive at all. I should just be glad for that.
After surgery, it had been four whole days before the wolf
awakened. Four long, terrible days when she didn’t know if he
would live or die, if she would lose both her beloved wolf and
the man she loved. She had watched over him, night and day.
And on the fifth day, she had awakened to a large pink tongue
licking her face.
Things had been better then. She talked to the wolf endlessly
as she cared for him, although she still couldn’t think of him as
James. The handsome creature seemed to pay attention to
every word, was even more affectionate than before. Sometimes
she heard its voice in her mind, reassuring her that she wasn’t
alone. But it was never more than a few stunted words, it wasn’t
really James’s voice—did the wolf have its own personality,
separate from the man?—and it didn’t diminish the pain of
missing James. She still felt a great calm when she was near the
wolf, but there was sadness underneath, an ache that never
went away no matter how hard she fought it.
While he could offer no guesses as to when her James might
return, Connor had been right about the incredible regenerative
powers of Changelings. The white wolf’s shoulder was largely
intact now, healed from the inside out. The gaping wound had
closed over recently, but not before Jillian saw that fresh bone
and joint and tendon had replaced the broken and the missing.
Exercise was the best medicine then. Small amounts at first,
slow circles around the clinic before and after closing time, until
the injured leg would bear the creature’s weight. Then longer
walks outside. Always at night of course. The presence of a
giant white wolf at the North Star Animal Hospital would raise
eyebrows if not alarms. Lately, as the wolf’s limp became less
pronounced, Jillian had been driving out to the riverside trails
below Elk Point. It was still a covert operation. The wolf hid
under a blanket in the back of the truck, and they could go only
at night. Occasionally Connor had accompanied them,
sometimes Birkie. But most nights she preferred to walk alone
with the white wolf. And every night she wished she was
walking with James.
She swiped at her eyes with her sleeve. This whole werewolf
thing is really getting on my nerves. For a human being, she
thought she’d been pretty damn patient, accepting of the
impossible, understanding of the bizarre. She’d seen not just
Connor but the other members of his family Change into wolves
several times now, had met all the members of the Pack and
gotten to know their stories. It had been fascinating at first,
especially to a veterinarian. But right now she was just a woman
who needed her man’s arms around her. And she had no idea
when that would happen—or if.
“Damn,” she sniffled. It was getting much too easy to feel
sorry for herself. She pushed the sadness back, imagined
packing it into a box and mailing it to Antarctica. It didn’t really
work, nothing worked, but it distracted her a bit. After all, James
wasn’t dead. He was alive somewhere, and she should be glad
for that. She was determined to try to stay positive, both for
herself and the baby. But it was harder every day.
The wolf nudged her arm, sat up next to her, dwarfing her.
She leaned against the thick soft fur, felt the wolf’s tongue on
her forehead. He pushed her again with his nose, leapt down
from the rock and trotted away. Perhaps he was getting a drink.
The wolf was often restless lately, a good sign that he was
recovering fully.
Jillian watched the moon’s reflection glimmer in the river
below. The night was warm and dry, and she considered
sleeping right here in the circle of stones. She’d be warm
enough next to the wolf, and certainly safe.
Without warning, a blast of wind surged out of nowhere,
whipped leaves around her, chilled her. She yanked the edges
of her jacket together, but the icy current of air had already
ceased. What on earth was that? Wind sheer? A micro burst?
She glanced up at the stars and froze. One seemed to be
moving, falling—and suddenly she realized it wasn’t a star at all,
but a spark. A tiny blue spark. It drifted down and landed on the
rock beside her, sizzled the edge of a dry leaf and winked out.
“Jillian.”
She whipped around to see James standing in the stone
circle. Her heart caught in her throat and she began shaking.
“Are you real?” she managed at last.
In answer, he opened his arms and she ran to him.
“You’re alive, oh God, you’re alive, you’re back, you’re here,
omigod please tell me you’re really here,” she sobbed out as
she was enfolded in the familiar strength, the heat. She
breathed him in, smelled him, tasted him with frantic kisses, ran
her hands over every part of him she could reach.
His big hands were moving too, running over Jillian’s body,
through her hair, cupping her face so he could cover it with
kisses, thumb away the tears. “God, honey, don’t. It’s all right,”
he murmured, tucking her head under his chin and wrapping
his arms around her tightly, rocking her. “It’s all right now.”
She couldn’t settle, couldn’t relax. Her entire body was alight
with raw, instinctive need and she struggled to get her hands
under his shirt. “Just touch me, oh God, James, please touch
me. I need you, I need—” Words failed as urgency overpowered
her. She had to get to his skin, had to press her skin to his. Had
to. Some primeval switch had been thrown, and she might die or
implode if she didn’t get these damn clothes out of her way.
The wildness infected him too. James’s lips became hungry
on hers, and the offending clothes disappeared rapidly. Hands
flew, his and hers, in frenzied need, to touch, to grasp, to glide
over trembling flesh. Lips left hot trails of rapid, desperate
kisses. Hearts beat with a primal need to be in one skin. They
tumbled to their knees, still entwined around each other. He
bore her backward and paused, about to thrust into her, and
touched her belly with a question in his eyes.
“It’s all right,” she whispered. Jillian gasped as he filled her,
as he reared back and filled her again and again. Oh, yes. This
was exactly what she wanted, what she craved. Yes, yes, yes . . .
She clung to him with arms and legs, breathed his name into
his mouth and rose to meet him. It felt so good, so damn good
as his much larger body moved over hers, into hers. He
overwhelmed her with heat and strength, yet she wanted it.
Wanted him, heart and soul and body. All the worry and fear and
loneliness of the past few months slid away as she called for
him to bring her. They peaked together, and on the long, slow
drift back to earth, she felt the world right itself.
James stirred reluctantly and found himself facedown in the
sand, half on Jillian, half off, but probably still too heavy for her.
Sense rushed in then and quickly he raised himself on his
elbows and looked at her. There were tears on her face.“Oh
Christ, I’ve hurt you.” He sat up at once, scooped her into his
lap, wiped the tears with his knuckles as he scanned her body
frantically. “I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to be so rough, it’s just . . . I
just . . . and the baby. I was worried about the baby, but—”
She put her fingers over his mouth. “Relax. The baby’s fine.
I’m fine. Everything’s fine.”
“But—”
“But I totally loved it. But I’m happy.” Her eyes were dreamy,
delighted as she looked at him. “You didn’t hurt me, so quit with
the sorries, okay? The doctor said that sex wouldn’t bother the
baby in the least.”
“Really?”
“I promise. Here, check for yourself.” She pulled his big hand
over her stomach, rested her hands over it. “See?”
Her belly was sweetly rounded, just beginning to bloom. Had
he lost more time than he thought? “Um, just how long have I
been MIA?”
“About three months or so.”
Jesus. He hugged her to him then, kissed her forehead. “I’m
sorry to have left you on your own for so long.”
“If you say you’re sorry again, I’ll have to hit you. Yes, I
missed you like crazy, I was scared and worried, and I had to
take everyone’s word for it that you were still alive. And why
was that? Because you saved my life. Because I needed you
and you came. Don’t be sorry for that.” Her voice gentled then
and she cupped his face with her hands. “We’ve both been
through a lot. Let’s just focus on the now, okay? I just want to
spend a lot of time enjoying you.”
In answer, he kissed her long and deep and slow, rubbed her
tummy in lazy circles—and froze.
“What? What’s wrong now?”
“Shhh—nothing. Here, move this way.” James sat up
straighter, pulled her into the vee of his long legs with her back
against him. Kissed her temple to distract her as he reached his
hands around her, all senses alert. He sought a spot low on her
belly, skimmed his hands back and forth over the warm skin like
a caress. And suddenly there it was. Life. Carefully he sought to
discern, to sense, to sort the shimmering vibrations he felt into
—
Two. James’s heart skipped a beat as he realized there were
two. No mistake. The delicate sensations fluttered beneath his
hands and in his mind like faery wings. Joy and wonder surged
through him, and he began to laugh.
“What’s so funny? Did the baby move? I didn’t feel anything.”
James only laughed harder, the sound full and rich and deep,
booming through the stone circle and echoing across the
valley. That little frown appeared between Jillian’s brows and
still he couldn’t stop the laughter. Finally, he flopped weakly
back on the sand.
Jillian found her sweater, blotted his face with the sleeve. “Are
you okay? Are you done now?”
“Yeah. Yeah, I think so.” For God’s sake, he was practically
wheezing. And his sides ached, but oh, it felt so good.
“Are you going to let me in on the joke or was that just postwolf
hysterics?”
“There’s no joke, honey. We’re gonna need two cribs.”
She goggled. “What?”
“Twins, we’re having twins.”
“We are not.”
“Trust me, there’s two in there.” He watched her struggle to
come up with an argument, shook his head at her. “Sorry but
Changelings can tell. Have you ever seen Connor use that
fancy new ultrasound at the clinic?”
“Of course I—well, I don’t see him do a lot of things,” she said
defensively. “We’re both busy.” Her face changed suddenly and
she grabbed his arms. “This isn’t some cute little way of telling
me we’re having a litter, is it? How could I have been so dumb?
The baby’s a Changeling isn’t it? I’ve been so worried about
you that I didn’t even think—”
He nearly burst out laughing again at the alarm on her face,
but wisely decided to choke it back. “Twins don’t constitute a
litter, honey.”
She didn’t look reassured. “You think this is funny, but I’ve
never seen any werewolf children. No one in your family has
any kids except some sister I’ve never met.”
“Carlene. In Wyoming,” he supplied. “She has three.”
“Whatever. For all I know they’re all running around on four
legs.”
“Only when they want to. No, wait!” She was trying to move
away from him, but he caught her and pulled her firmly back
into his lap. “I’m sorry, I can see I’m not taking this seriously
enough. You deserve a straight answer. My brothers and sisters
and I are all Changelings but we started out like normal human
children. Looked like them, acted like them, played and fought
and laughed and cried like them. No pointed ears, no fangs, and
no fur. No eating of raw meat. Definitely no tails.”
“You’re sure?”
“Cross my heart.”
“Really sure?”
He waved a hand at the circle of stones around them. “Elk
Point is a sacred place. I couldn’t tell a lie here even if I wanted
to.”
“The baby’s fine?”
“Babies,” he corrected. “Yes, they’re just fine. In fact, they’re
wonderful and so are you.”
She placed her hands over his where they rested warm on
her belly. Her fingers were trembling. “Oh God, James, it’s all so
much. We’re going to have a family. We’re going to be parents.
I’m going to be—”
“My wife. And a brilliant partner at the North Star Animal
Hospital. And the director of an innovative new wildlife
rehabilitation center. And the most beautiful mother on the
planet.” He moved his hands up to cup her breasts, nuzzled
over her hair to plant kisses on the sensitive nape beneath.
“You’re going to be busy, honey. I think we’d better do this
again while we can still fit it on your calendar.”
“Do what?” she laughed, although he could tell she knew.
In answer he simply cradled her against him and sought her
lips. And loved her slowly, sweetly, thoroughly.
Epilogue
The October day was a gem. Warm, bright sun and cool,
pleasant air. Perfect, James thought, for the official opening of
the Northern Lights Wildlife Center. He surveyed the crowd
assembled in the middle of the new complex, noted the TV
news crew and the dignitaries with no small sense of pride as
Jillian Macleod stepped down off the podium amid a long clatter
of applause. She’d been a bundle of nerves for days, rewriting
her speech constantly. But when the time came, she’d set the
speech aside and simply talked to the audience about what
animals meant to her, and how grateful she was to work with
them. It was perfect. She was perfect.
He shifted the toddler dozing on his shoulder, wondered if
Culley still had her brother. Or maybe Devlin had stolen Hunter
by now. There was fierce competition for the twins among
James’s siblings, and he counted himself lucky to have gotten a
turn to hold even one of his children. He planted a kiss on little
Hailey’s forehead, breathed in the soft smell of her hair. The
twins were almost two now and their very existence amazed
him. He imagined he’d still feel that way when they were twenty.
He lost sight of Jillian as the crowd milled about, inspecting
the facility. Among them, he knew, were fellow veterinarians,
zoo directors, and representatives from other wildlife centers
across the continent. James couldn’t resist putting his
Changeling senses to good use and listened in on bits of
conversation, picked up their surprised and approving
comments on his wife’s innovative design. He recognized
plenty of local people as well, clients from the clinic, farmers
and ranchers from the area. Jillian had gained quite a following.
He saw Douglas Harrison, acknowledged him with a nod.
After the arrest of Roderick, James had learned there were more
victims than he knew—and realized Douglas was one of them.
He’d asked Fitzpatrick to arrange a meeting. “I don’t imagine I
can ever forgive what happened to Evelyn, but I do know it’s not
your fault,” James had said to Douglas. “You were a kid, you
weren’t responsible for what your father did. You couldn’t have
stopped him either. I wish he hadn’t done it, but I wish just as
much that you hadn’t seen it.” He’d left it at that. Fitz kept him
updated, let him know that Douglas was doing well. Roderick
on the other hand would be spending his remaining years in a
psychiatric ward rather than prison. The man’s mental state had
deteriorated rapidly when police unearthed Corena Harrison’s
sad remains in the wooded area of his ranch.
Finally the crowd seemed to be thinning. James wondered
how long it would be before he saw his wife again when
suddenly she appeared in front of him. He kissed her soundly,
then scooped an arm around her to pull her closer and kissed
her again. “You were great up there. I liked what you said, and I
think everyone else did too. Did you finish your tour already?”
“I gave a couple of interviews and then Zoey handed out
press releases. Connor took over the tour for me.” She plucked
the child from him and settled her on one hip. Hailey stretched,
grinning sleepily at her father. “Birkie wants to take her home
now. She and Kenzie are watching them both tonight.”
Tonight. The night of the full moon. Jillian’s left hand was
bandaged and he reached for it, intending to inspect the bite
wound beneath the gauze, but she yanked it away. “It’s still fine
since the last time you looked at it. I’m a vet, trust me.”
He settled for grabbing her other hand, held it firmly. “You’re
feeling all right?”
“Never better,” she said lightly and turned to walk away but
he didn’t let go.
“I mean it, Jillian. It’s your first Change.” They’d talked about it
for months. She’d made her decision to join his world fully—yet
only by biting her could he give her that gift. It was the hardest
thing he’d ever done. And now, with her first Change imminent,
he was the one needing reassurance.
“Are you trying to scare me? You weren’t this nervous when
Hunter and Hailey were being born. I got through that and I’ll get
through this, and you know that both Zoey and Jessie have
been coaching me.” She stood on her tiptoes and kissed his
cheek. “Okay, I’m nervous, too. But all my life I’ve dreamed of
understanding animals better. This is more than I ever imagined
possible, and I want it, James. I want all of it. I want the wolf and
I want you.”
He held her, just held her, for a long moment until Hailey
became restless. He tickled her and she squealed, breaking the
bubble of tension within him.
“You know,” Jillian stage-whispered, “if you let me give this
child away, we could have a couple of hours to ourselves
before dark.”
He let go of her immediately. Jillian laughed as she walked a
few steps, then thought of something and returned.
“Are you going to the house, hon? Could you please put this
in some water?” She pulled open her lab coat to reveal a
carefully rolled-up paper napkin protruding from the inner
pocket. “Someone left it on the podium for me.” She gave him a
long lingering kiss, filled with the reassurance James needed—
and a promise for later that he was looking forward to
collecting.
He watched as Jillian and Hailey bounced away across the
complex. Saw them meet up with Birkie and Kenzie. Culley and
Devlin were playing with Hunter—and James didn’t need
Changeling ears to hear Hunter’s delighted yells. He chuckled
and looked down at the napkin Jillian had placed in his hand.
Unrolled it carefully to reveal a tiny stalk of lily of the valley that
didn’t seem to know how out of season it was.
A return to happiness. He looked again at his family. Knowing
more than happiness. Knowing joy.
Good girls should NEVER CRY WOLF.
But who wants to be good?
Be sure to pick up Cynthia Eden’s latest novel, out now!
Lucas didn’t take the woman back to his house on Bryton
Road. The place was probably still crawling with cops and
reporters, and he didn’t feel like dealing with all that crap.
He called his first in command, Piers Stratus, to let him know
that he was out of jail and to tell him that there were two
unwanted coyotes in town.
The woman—Sarah—didn’t speak while he drove. He could
feel the waves of tension rolling off her, shaking her body.
She was scared. She’d done a fair job of hiding her fear back
at the police station and then at the park, at first anyway. But as
the darkness had fallen, he’d seen the fear. Smelled it.
Sarah had known she was being hunted.
He pushed a button on his remote. The wrought-iron gates
before him opened and revealed the curving drive that led to his
second LA home. In the hills, it gave him a great view of the city
below, and that view let him know when company was coming,
long before any unexpected guests arrived.
When the gate shut behind him, he saw Sarah sag slightly,
settling back into her seat. The scent of her fear finally eased.
Like most of his kind, he usually enjoyed the smell of fear. But
he didn’t . . . like the scent on her.
He much preferred the softer scent, like vanilla cream, that he
could all but taste as it clung to her skin. Perhaps he would get
a taste, later.
With a flick of his wrist, he killed the ignition. The house was
right in front of them. Two stories. Long, tall windows.
And, hopefully, no more dead bodies waited on the steps
here.
He eased out of the car, stretching slowly. Then he walked
around and opened the door for Sarah. As any man would,
Lucas admired the pale flash of thigh when her skirt crept up.
And he wondered just what secrets the lovely lady was keeping
from him.
“We’re going in to talk.” An order. He wanted to know
everything, starting with why the dead human had been at his
place.
She gave a quick nod. “Okay, I—”
A wolf bounded out of the house. A flash of black fur. Golden
eyes. Teeth.
Shit. It wasn’t safe for the kid. Not until he found out what was
going on—
The wolf ran to him. Tossed back his head and howled.
Sarah laughed softly.
Laughed.
His stare shot to her just in time to catch the smile on her lips.
His hand lifted, and almost helplessly, he traced that smile with
his fingertips.
Her breath caught.
Lucas ignored the tightening in his gut. “Shouldn’t you be
afraid?” After the coyotes, he’d expected her to flinch away
from any other shifters. And Jordan was one big wolf, with
claws and teeth that could easily rip a woman like Sarah apart.
She looked back at the wolf who watched them. “He’s so
young, little more than a kid. One who is glad you’re—”
No.
Understanding dawned, fast and brutal in his mind. I’m more
than human. She’d told him that, he just hadn’t understood
exactly what she was. Until now.
His hands locked around her arms and Lucas pulled her up
against him. Nose to nose, close enough so that he could see
the dark gold glimmering in the depths of her green eyes.
“Jordan, get the hell out of here.” He gave the order to his
brother without ever looking away from her.
The wolf growled.
“Go!”
The young wolf pushed against his leg—letting me know he’s
pissed, ’cause Jordan hates when I boss his ass—and then the wolf
backed away.
“Now for you, sweetheart.” His fingers tightened. “Why don’t
we just go back to that part about you not being human?”
Her lips parted. She had nice lips—sexy and plump. He
shouldn’t be noticing them, not then, but he couldn’t help
himself. He noticed everything about her. The gold hoops in her
dainty ears. The streaks of gold buried deep in her dark hair.
The lotion she’d rubbed on her body—that vanilla scent was
driving him wild.
He was turned on, achingly hard, for a woman he barely
knew. Not normally a big deal. He had a more than healthy sex
drive. Most shifters did. The animal inside liked to play.
But Sarah . . . he didn’t trust her, not for a minute, and he didn’t
usually have sex with women he didn’t trust. A man could be
vulnerable to attack when he was fucking.
“You know what I am, Lucas,” she said and shrugged, the
move both careless and fake because he knew that she cared,
too much.
“Tell me.” Her mouth was so close. He could still taste her.
That kiss earlier had just been a tease.
Try MISTRESS OF THE STORM,
the third in Terri Brisbin’s sensual trilogy, out now!
Every possible space in the hall of Duntulm Keep was filled.
Many of those who owned land in the surrounding areas
attended the early autumn feast hosted by Davin to meet the
men from Orkney and take their measure. Though invited to sit
at table with him, Duncan declined Davin’s invitation, choosing
to sit away from the guests so he could observe them. It
seemed the fires of hell had left his sense of curiosity intact
when they burned away all the rest, so he listened and learned
much about the visitors from the north.
Greeted as cousins, they were related to Davin through the
marriage of their grandparents or some other ancestor, and the
welcome he gave was warm. Foodstuffs and ale were plentiful
and everyone ate and drank their fill. Ornolf placed a bowl and
cup before Duncan, bothering him every so often so he would
eat and drink. The smoke grew thick as the fires burned lower,
offering heat but not much light. The torches and rushlights
added what they could, but Duncan could see clearly through
the dimness and the haze.
It was a strange effect he’d noticed the last few months, and
served him well in his attempts to watch and learn. He was
studying the similarities in appearance between Davin and the
one called Ragnar when the woman arrived. The room suddenly
grew brighter and the chatter lessened as though everyone
wanted to see her at once.
Nothing she wore was ostentatious, but the cut of her gown
drew every man’s eyes to her body. He could not identify the
material of it, but it draped her curves as though painted over
her flesh instead of being a garment. Duncan noticed the
tightened nipples of her very full breasts as the gown molded to
them and the way it fell into the junction of her thighs. When she
turned to sit down, he and every other man noted the way it
hugged her arse, flowing into the indentation of the cleft and
outlining her strong legs. Watching her move in it, he did not
have to imagine what her body was like—he could see it.
He let his gaze wander over her, waiting for her to be seated
so he could see her face.
Something he had not felt in months coursed through him in
the moment their eyes met. A heat, a need, a wanting made him
ache. Her eyes widened as though she knew her effect, but she
looked away when someone spoke her name.
Isabel.
Who was she?
What was she?
How could she cause him to feel the blood heating and
rushing through his body when he’d thought himself empty of
such things? Duncan shifted in his chair and continued to
watch as the attention of those gathered began to drift back to
the honored guests. But he realized every man eventually
turned back to watch Isabel.
She’d gathered and arranged her hair in a way that made her
look well bedded. Its black waves accentuated every move she
made and framed the creaminess of her skin perfectly. It was
her mouth that sent waves of heat through him; her lips were
bow-shaped and red as though well kissed. The blush in her
cheeks added to the display—one he could tell was
orchestrated carefully for its effect. Tearing his gaze from her,
Duncan looked at the people she had followed into the feast.
Strange.
The man and younger woman she’d walked behind had taken
seats much closer to their host, while she remained farther
away. Was she the girl’s maid? Neither of the women resembled
the man in any way for he was as light as they were dark in hair
and eye coloring. Duncan thought the women might be related
based on the frequent glances they shared, cousins probably,
though mayhap even sisters.
But, if sisters, why did they so clearly separate themselves at
table?
The meal continued and Duncan resumed his perusal,
watching her as she ate the food placed before her, and as she
spoke to others, seeming to watch every move made by the
man with whom she’d entered. It was only when she lifted her
chin, gazed up at the ceiling of the chamber and closed her
eyes that Duncan realized he’d seen her before. Searching his
memory, he finally remembered where and when.
In the early hours just as the sun rose, when unable to sleep,
he would walk the battlements of the keep, gazing down at the
sea and the village outside the walls. Several times in the last
months he’d noticed her leaving the keep just before dawn, and
walking to the south beach.
With nothing more than curiosity to keep his attention,
Duncan would watch as she took off her clothes and flung
herself into the water. Her practice was the same each time he’d
watched—dipping twice under the surface of the water and
scrubbing her skin as she did. Then she would plunge down
and remain in the freezing waters until he thought she’d
perished. He remembered several times when he began
counting how long she stayed under the water, wondering if
she would rise from it at all.
Over the months he’d witnessed her behavior, the changes
within him making any tension he felt as he counted out the
seconds lessen—until he’d watched in complete disinterest, no
matter how much he knew he should be concerned.
Watching the way she tilted her head, he was reminded of the
way she looked up at the sun as she walked, sometimes
struggling, out of the waves. In the earlier times he’d seen her,
he’d thought she might be a selkie or water spirit. But, lately, he
observed her actions from an emotional and physical distance
—until she lowered her head and gazed at him through her
lashes.
That heat seared him again, letting him feel things he’d not felt
in months. Was she a selkie risen from the sea or some
otherworldly creature capable of giving him back all he’d lost?
His moments of disinterested watchfulness were over, for his
body and his soul knew she was more than she appeared, and
his mind knew he must discover her secrets and their link to his
own. Standing, his feet moved before he could think on what
words to say or what he wanted. All he knew was that he
wanted . . . her.
Don’t miss DEAD ALERT by Bianca D’Arc,
Coming next month . . .
Fort Bragg, North Carolina
“I’ve got a special project for you, Sam.” The commander, a
former Navy SEAL named Matt Sykes, began talking before Sam
was through the door to Matt’s private office. “Sit down and
shut the door.”
Sam sat in a wooden chair across the cluttered desk from his
commanding officer. Lt. Sam Archer, US Army Green Beret, was
currently assigned to a top secret, mixed team of Special Forces
soldiers and elite scientists. There were also a few others from
different organizations, including one former cop and a CIA
black ops guy. It was an extremely specialized group, recruited
to work on a classified project of the highest order.
“I understand you’re a pilot.” Matt flipped through a file as he
spoke.
“Yes, sir.” Sam could have said more but he didn’t doubt Matt
had access to every last bit of Sam’s file, even the top secret
parts. He had probably known before even sending for him that
Sam could fly anything with wings. Another member of his old
unit was a blade pilot who flew all kinds of choppers, but fixed
wing aircraft were Sam’s specialty.
“How do you like the idea of going undercover as a charter
pilot?”
“Sir?” Sam sat forward in the chair, intrigued.
“The name of a certain charter airline keeps popping up.” Matt
put down the file and faced Sam as his gaze hardened. “Too
often for my comfort. Ever heard of a company called Praxis
Air?”
“Can’t say that I have.”
“It’s a small outfit, based out of Wichita—at least that’s where
they repair and maintain their aircraft in a company-owned
hangar. They have branch offices at most of the major airports
and cater mostly to an elite business clientele. They do the odd
private cargo flight and who knows what else. They keep their
business very hush-hush, providing the ultimate in privacy for their
corporate clients, or so their brochure advertises.” Matt pushed a
glossy tri-fold across the desk toward Sam.
“Looks pretty slick.”
“That they are,” Matt agreed. “So slick that even John Petit,
with his multitude of CIA connections, can’t get a bead on
exactly what they’ve been up to of late. I’ve been piecing
together bits here and there. Admiral Chester, the traitor,
accepted more than a few free flights from them in the past few
months, as did Ensign Bartles, who it turns out, was killed in a
Praxis Air jet that crashed the night we took down Dr.
Rodriguez and his friends. She wasn’t listed on the manifest
and only the pilot was claimed by the company, but on a hunch
I asked a friend on the National Transportation Safety Board to
allow us to do some DNA testing. Sure enough, we found
remnants of Beverly Bartles’ DNA at the crash site, though her
body had to have been moved sometime prior to the NTSB
getting there. The locals were either paid off or preempted.
Either option is troubling, to say the least.”
“You think they’re mixed up with our undead friends?” They
were still seeking members of the science team that had created
the formula that killed and then turned its victims into the
walking dead. Nobody had figured out exactly how they were
traveling so freely around the country when they were on every
watch list possible.
“It’s a very real possibility. Which is why I want to send you in
undercover. I don’t need to remind you, time is of the essence.
We have a narrow window to stuff this genie back into its bottle.
The longer this goes on, the more likely it is the technology will
be sold to the highest bidder and then, God help us.”
Sam shivered. The idea of the zombie technology in the
hands of a hostile government or psycho terrorists—especially
after seeing what he’d seen of these past months—was
unthinkable.
“If my going undercover will help end this, I’m your man.”
He’d do anything to stop the contagion from killing any more
people.
Sam opened the flyer and noted the different kinds of jets the
company offered. The majority of the planes looked like Lear
35’s in different configurations. Some were equipped for cargo.
Some had all the bells and whistles any corporate executive
could wish for and a few were basically miniature luxury liners
set up for spoiled celebrities and their friends.
“I’d hoped you’d say that. I’ve arranged a little extra training
for you at Flight Safety in Houston. They’ve got Level D flight
simulators that have full motion and full visual. They can give
you the Type Rating you’ll need on your license to work for
Praxis Air legitimately.”
“I’ve been to Flight Safety before. It’s a good outfit.” Sam put
the brochure back on Matt’s desk.
“We’ll give you a suitable job history and cover, which you
will commit to memory. You’ll also have regular check-ins while
in the field, but for the most part you’ll be on your own. I want
you to discover who, if any, of their personnel are involved and
to what extent.” Matt paused briefly before continuing. “Just to
be clear, this isn’t a regular job I’m asking you to do, Sam. It’s
not even close to what you signed on for when we were
assigned as zombie hunters. I won’t order you to do this. It’s a
total immersion mission. Chances are, there will be no
immediate backup if you get into trouble. You’ll be completely
on your own most of the time.”
“Understood, sir. I’m still up for it. I like a challenge.”
Matt cracked a smile. “I hear that. And I appreciate the
enthusiasm. Here’s the preliminary packet to get you started.”
He handed a bulging envelope across the desk. “We’ll get the
rest set up while you’re in flight training. It’ll be ready by the time
you are. You leave tomorrow for Houston.”
“Yes, sir.” Sam stood, hearing the tone of dismissal in the
commander’s voice.
“You can call this whole thing off up until the end of your
flight training. After that, wheels will have been set in motion
and can’t be easily stopped. If you change your mind, let me
know as soon as possible.”
“Thank you, sir.” Unspoken was the certainty that Sam
wouldn’t be changing his mind any time soon.
BRAVA BOOKS are published by
Kensington Publishing Corp.
119 West 40th Street
New York, NY 10018
Copyright © 2011 Dani Harper
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in
any form or by any means without the prior written consent of
the Publisher, excepting brief quotes used in reviews.
Brava and the B logo Reg. U.S. Pat. & TM Off.
ISBN: 978-0-7582-7219-5