         
               Chapter 1
   
      Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is
unhappy in its own way.
       Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house.
The wife had discovered that the husband was carrying on
an intrigue with a French girl, who had been a governess
in their family, and she had announced to her husband
that she could not go on living in the same house with
him. This position of affairs had now lasted three days, and
not only the husband and wife themselves, but all the
members of their family and household, were painfully
conscious of it. Every person in the house felt that there
was so sense in their living together, and that the stray
people brought together by chance in any inn had more in
common with one another than they, the members of the
family and household of the Oblonskys. The wife did not
leave her own room, the husband had not been at home
for three days. The children ran wild all over the house;
the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper, and
wrote to a friend asking her to look out for a new
situation for her; the man-cook had walked off the day
before just at dinner time; the kitchen-maid, and the
coachman had given warning.
      Three days after the quarrel, Prince Stepan
Arkadyevitch Oblonsky—Stiva, as he was called in the
fashionable world— woke up at his usual hour, that is, at
eight o’clock in the morning, not in his wife’s bedroom,
but on the leather-covered sofa in his study. He turned
over his stout, well-cared-for person on the springy sofa,
as though he would sink into a long sleep again; he
vigorously embraced the pillow on the other side and
buried his face in it; but all at once he jumped up, sat up
on the sofa, and opened his eyes.
      ‘Yes, yes, how was it now?’ he thought, going over his
dream. ‘Now, how was it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a
dinner at Darmstadt; no, not Darmstadt, but something
American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was in America. Yes,
Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the tables
sang, Il mio tesoro—not Il mio tesoro though, but
something better, and there were some sort of little
decanters on the table, and they were women, too,’ he
remembered.
      Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he
pondered with a smile. ‘Yes, it was nice, very nice. There
was a great deal more that was delightful, only there’s no
putting it into words, or even expressing it in one’s
thoughts awake.’ And noticing a gleam of light peeping in
beside one of the serge curtains, he cheerfully dropped his
feet over the edge of the sofa, and felt about with them for
his slippers, a present on his last birthday, worked for him
by his wife on gold-colored morocco. And, as he had
done every day for the last nine years, he stretched out his
hand, without getting up, towards the place where his
dressing-gown always hung in his bedroom. And
thereupon he suddenly remembered that he was not
sleeping in his wife’s room, but in his study, and why: the
smile vanished from his face, he knitted his brows.
    ‘Ah, ah, ah! Oo!...’ he muttered, recalling everything
that had happened. And again every detail of his quarrel
with his wife was present to his imagination, all the
hopelessness of his position, and worst of all, his own fault.
‘Yes, she won’t forgive me, and she can’t forgive me.
And the most awful thing about it is that it’s all my fault—
all my fault, though I’m not to blame. That’s the point of
the whole situation,’ he reflected. ‘Oh, oh, oh!’ he kept
repeating in despair, as he remembered the acutely painful
sensations caused him by this quarrel.
     Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on
coming, happy and good-humored, from the theater, with
a huge pear in his hand for his wife, he had not found his
wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise had not found
her in the study either, and saw her at last in her bedroom
with the unlucky letter that revealed everything in her
hand.
     She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over
household details, and limited in her ideas, as he
considered, was sitting perfectly still with the letter in her
hand, looking at him with an expression of horror,
despair, and indignation.
     ‘What’s this? this?’ she asked, pointing to the letter.
And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so
often the case, was not so much annoyed at the fact itself
as at the way in which he had met his wife’s words.
There happened to him at that instant what does
happen to people when they are unexpectedly caught in
something very disgraceful. He did not succeed in
adapting his face to the position in which he was placed
towards his wife by the discovery of his fault. Instead of
being hurt, denying, defending himself, begging
forgiveness, instead of remaining indifferent even—
anything would have been better than what he did do—
his face utterly involuntarily (reflex spinal action, reflected
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology)—
utterly involuntarily assumed its habitual, good-humored,
and therefore idiotic smile.
     This idiotic smile he could not forgive himself.
Catching sight of that smile, Dolly shuddered as though at
physical pain, broke out with her characteristic heat into a
flood of cruel words, and rushed out of the room. Since
then she had refused to see her husband.
‘It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all,’ thought
Stepan Arkadyevitch.
‘But what’s to be done? What’s to be done?’ he said to
himself in despair, and found no answer.

           

                Chapter 2


      Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations
with himself. He was incapable of deceiving himself and
persuading himself that he repented of his conduct. He
could not at this date repent of the fact that he, a
handsome, susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in love
with his wife, the mother of five living and two dead
children, and only a year younger than himself. All he
repented of was that he had not succeeded better in hiding
it from his wife. But he felt all the difficulty of his position
and was sorry for his wife, his children, and himself.
Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sins better
from his wife if he had anticipated that the knowledge of
them would have had such an effect on her. He had never
clearly thought out the subject, but he had vaguely
conceived that his wife must long ago have suspected him
of being unfaithful to her, and shut her eyes to the fact.
He had even supposed that she, a worn-out woman no
longer young or good-looking, and in no way remarkable
or interesting, merely a good mother, ought from a sense
of fairness to take an indulgent view. It had turned out
quite the other way.
    ‘Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!’ Stepan
Arkadyevitch kept repeating to himself, and he could
think of nothing to be done. ‘And how well things were
going up till now! how well we got on! She was
contented and happy in her children; I never interfered
with her in anything; I let her manage the children and
the house just as she liked. It’s true it’s bad HER having
been a governess in our house. That’s bad! There’s
something common, vulgar, in flirting with one’s
governess. But what a governess!’ (He vividly recalled the
roguish black eyes of Mlle. Roland and her smile.) ‘But
after all, while she was in the house, I kept myself in hand.
And the worst of it all is that she’s already...it seems as if
ill-luck would have it so! Oh, oh! But what, what is to be
done?’
       There was no solution, but that universal solution
which life gives to all questions, even the most complex
and insoluble. That answer is: one must live in the needs
of the day—that is, forget oneself. To forget himself in
sleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; he could
not go back now to the music sung by the decanterwomen;
so he must forget himself in the dream of daily
life.
     ‘Then we shall see,’ Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
himself, and getting up he put on a gray dressing-gown
lined with blue silk, tied the tassels in a knot, and, drawing
a deep breath of air into his broad, bare chest, he walked
to the window with his usual confident step, turning out
his feet that carried his full frame so easily. He pulled up
the blind and rang the bell loudly. It was at once answered
by the appearance of an old friend, his valet, Matvey,
carrying his clothes, his boots, and a telegram. Matvey was
followed by the barber with all the necessaries for shaving.
‘Are there any papers form the office?’ asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch, taking the telegram and seating himself at
the looking-glass.
       ‘On the table,’ replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring
sympathy at his master; and, after a short pause, he added
with a sly smile, ‘They’ve sent from the carriage-jobbers.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced
at Matvey in the looking-glass. In the glance, in which
their eyes met in the looking-glass, it was clear that they
understood one another. Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes
asked: ‘Why do you tell me that? don’t you know?’
Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out
one leg, and gazed silently, good-humoredly, with a faint
smile, at his master.
       ‘I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to
trouble you or themselves for nothing,’ he said. He had
obviously prepared the sentence beforehand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a
joke and attract attention to himself. Tearing open the
telegram, he read it through, guessing at the words,
misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and his face
brightened.
       ‘Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here
tomorrow,’ he said, checking for a minute the sleek,
plump hand of the barber, cutting a pink path through his
long, curly whiskers.
‘Thank God!’ said Matvey, showing by this response
that he, like his master, realized the significance of this
arrival—that is, that Anna Arkadyevna, the sister he was so
fond of, might bring about a reconciliation between
husband and wife.
        ‘Alone, or with her husband?’ inquired Matvey.
Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber
was at work on his upper lip, and he raised one finger.
Matvey nodded at the looking-glass.
      ‘Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?’
      ‘Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders.’
     ‘Darya Alexandrovna?’ Matvey repeated, as though in
doubt.
    ‘Yes, inform her. Here, take the telegram; give it to
her, and then do what she tells you.’
‘You want to try it on,’ Matvey understood, but he
only said, ‘Yes sir.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed
and ready to be dressed, when Matvey, stepping
deliberately in his creaky boots, came back into the room
with the telegram in his hand. The barber had gone.
‘Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is
going away. Let him do—that is you—as he likes,’ he said,
laughing only with his eyes, and putting his hands in his
pockets, he watched his master with his head on one side.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. Then a goodhumored
and rather pitiful smile showed itself on his
handsome face.
     ‘Eh, Matvey?’ he said, shaking his head.
     ‘It’s all right, sir; she will come round,’ said Matvey.
     ‘Come round?’
     ‘Yes, sir.’
     ‘Do you think so? Who’s there?’ asked Stepan
Arkadyevitch, hearing the rustle of a woman’s dress at the
door.
     ‘It’s I,’ said a firm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and the
stern, pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the
nurse, was thrust in at the doorway.
       Well, what is it, Matrona?’ queried Stepan
Arkadyevitch, going up to her at the door.
Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the
wrong as regards his wife, and was conscious of this
himself, almost every one in the house (even the nurse,
Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.
     ‘Well, what now?’ he asked disconsolately.
     ‘Go to her, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will
aid you. She is suffering so, it’s sad to hee her; and besides,
everything in the house is topsy-turvy. You must have
pity, sir, on the children. Beg her forgiveness, sir. There’s
no help for it! One must take the consequences..’
      ‘But she won’t see me.’
      ‘You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir,
pray to God.’
     ‘Come, that’ll do, you can go,’ said Stepan
     Arkadyevitch, blushing suddenly. ‘Well now, do dress
me.’ He turned to Matvey and threw off his dressinggown
decisively.
      Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s
collar, and, blowing off some invisible speck, he slipped it
with obvious pleasure over the well-groomed body of his
master.

            Chapter 3


      When he was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled
some scent on himself, pulled down his shirt-cuffs,
distributed into his pockets his cigarettes, pocketbook,
matches, and watch with its double chain and seals, and
shaking out his handkerchief, feeling himself clean,
fragrant, healthy, and physically at ease, in spite of his
unhappiness, he walked with a slight swing on each leg
into the dining-room, where coffee was already waiting
for him, and beside the coffee, letters and papers from the
office.
      He read the letters. One was very unpleasant, from a
merchant who was buying a forest on his wife’s property.
To sell this forest was absolutely essential; but at present,
until he was reconciled with his wife, the subject could
not be discussed. The most unpleasant thing of all was that
his pecuniary interests should in this way enter into the
question of his reconciliation with his wife. And the idea
that he might be let on by his interests, that he might seek
a reconciliation with his wife on account of the sale of the
forest—that idea hurt him.
eBook brought to you by
    Create, view, and edit PDF. Download the free trial version.
    When he had finished his letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch
moved the office-papers close to him, rapidly looked
through two pieces of business, made a few notes with a
big pencil, and pushing away the papers, turned to his
coffee. As he sipped his coffee, he opened a still damp
morning paper, and began reading it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper,
not an extreme one, but one advocating the views held by
the majority. And in spite of the fact that science, art, and
politics had no special interest for him, he firmly held
those views on all these subjects which were held by the
majority and by his paper, and he only changed them
when the majority changed them—or, more strictly
speaking, he did not change them, but they imperceptibly
changed of themselves within him.
     Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political
opinions or his views; these political opinions and views
had come to him of themselves, just as he did not choose
the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply took those that
were being worn. And for him, living in a certain
society—owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years
of discretion, for some degree of mental activity—to have
views was just as indispensable as to have a hat. If there
was a reason for his preferring liberal to conservative
views, which were held also by many of his circle, it arose
not from his considering liberalism more rational, but
from its being in closer accordance with his manner of life.
The liberal party said that in Russia everything is wrong,
and certainly Stepan Arkadyevitch had many debts and
was decidedly short of money. The liberal party said that
marriage is an institution quite out of date, and that it
needs reconstruction; and family life certainly afforded
Stepan Arkadyevitch little gratification, and forced him
into lying and hypocrisy, which was so repulsive to his
nature. The liberal party said, or rather allowed it to be
understood, that religion is only a curb to keep in check
the barbarous classes of the people; and Stepan
Arkadyevitch could not get through even a short service
without his legs aching from standing up, and could never
make out what was the object of all the terrible and highflown
language about another world when life might be so
very amusing in this world. And with all this, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a
plain man by saying that if he prided himself on his origin,
he ought not to stop at Rurik and disown the first founder
of his family—the monkey. And so Liberalism had
become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked his
newspaper, as he did his cigar after dinner, for the slight
fog it diffused in his brain. He read the leading article, in
which it was maintained that it was quite senseless in our
day to raise an outcry that radicalism was threatening to
swallow up all conservative elements, and that the
government ought to take measures to crush the
revolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, ‘in our opinion
the danger lies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra,
but in the obstinacy of traditionalism clogging progress,’
etc., etc. He read another article, too, a financial one,
which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped some
innuendoes reflecting on the ministry. With his
characteristic quickwittedness he caught the drift of each
innuendo, divined whence it came, at whom and on what
ground it was aimed, and that afforded him, as it always
did, a certain satisfaction. But today that satisfaction was
embittered by Matrona Philimonovna’s advice and the
unsatisfactory state of the household. He read, too, that
Count Beist was rumored to have left for Wiesbaden, and
that one need have no more gray hair, and of the sale of a
light carriage, and of a young person seeking a situation;
but these items of information did not give him, as usual, a
quiet, ironical gratification. Having finished the paper, a
second cup of coffee and a roll and butter, he got up,
shaking the crumbs of the roll off his waistcoat; and,
squaring his broad chest, he smiled joyously: not because
there was anything particularly agreeable in his mind—the
joyous smile was evoked by a good digestion.
But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to
him, and he grew thoughtful.
       Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized
the voices of Grisha, his youngest boy, and Tanya, his
eldest girl) were heard outside the door. They were
carrying something, and dropped it.
‘I told you not to sit passengers on the roof,’ said the
little girl in English; ‘there, pick them up!’
‘Everything’s in confusion,’ thought Stepan
Arkadyevitch; ‘there are the children running about by
themselves.’ And going to the door, he called them. They
threw down the box, that represented a train, and came in
to their father.
      The little girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly,
embraced him, and hung laughingly on his neck, enjoying
as she always did the smell of scent that came from his
whiskers. At last the little girl kissed his face, which was
flushed from his stooping posture and beaming with
tenderness, loosed her hands, and was about to run away
again; but her father held her back.
     ‘How is mamma?’ he asked, passing his hand over his
daughter’s smooth, soft little neck. ‘Good morning,’ he
said, smiling to the boy, who had come up to greet him.
He was conscious that he loved the boy less, and always
tried to be fair; but the boy felt it, and did not respond
with a smile to his father’s chilly smile.
‘Mamma? She is up,’ answered the girl.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. ‘That means that she’s not
slept again all night,’ he thought.
‘Well, is she cheerful?’
      The little girl knew that there was a quarrel between
her father and mother, and that her mother could not be
cheerful, and that her father must be aware of this, and
that he was pretending when he asked about it so lightly.
And she blushed for her father. He at once perceived it,
and blushed too.
      ‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘She did not say we must do
our lessons, but she said we were to go for a walk with
Miss Hoole to grandmamma’s.’
‘Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute,
though,’ he said, still holding her and stroking her soft
little hand.
      He took off the matelpiece, where he had put it
yesterday, a little box of sweets, and gave her two, picking
out her favorites, a chocolate and a fondant.
     ‘For Grisha?’ said the little girl, pointing to the
chocolate.
    ‘Yes, yes.’ And still stroking her little shoulder, he
kissed her on the roots of here hair and neck, and let her
go.
     ‘The carriage is ready,’ said Matvey; ‘but there’s some
one to see you with a petition.’
     ‘Been here long?’ asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
     ‘Half an hour.’
     ‘How many times have I told you to tell me at once?’
     ‘One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least,’
said Matvey, in the affectionately gruff tone with which it
was impossible to be angry.
     ‘Well, show the person up at once,’ said Oblonsky,
frowning with vexation.
The petitioner, the widow of a staff captain Kalinin,
came with a request impossible and unreasonable; but
Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he generally did, made her sit
down, heard her to the end attentively without
interrupting her, and gave her detailed advice as to how
and to whom to apply, and even wrote her, in his large,
sprawling, good and legible hand, a confident and fluent
little note to a personage who might be of use to her.
Having got rid of the staff captain’s widow, Stepan
Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped to recollect
whether he had forgotten anything. It appeared that he
had forgotten nothing except what he wanted to forget—
his wife.
       ‘Ah, yes!’ He bowed his head, and his handsome face
assumed a harassed expression. ‘To go, or not to go!’ he
said to himself; and an inner voice told him he must not
go, that nothing could come of it but falsity; that to
amend, to set right their relations was impossible, because
it was impossible to make her attractive again and able to
inspire love, or to make him an old man, not susceptible
to love. Except deceit and lying nothing could come of it
now; and deceit and lying were opposed to his nature.
       ‘It must be some time, though: it can’t go on like this,’
he said, trying to give himself courage. He squared his
chest, took out a cigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it
into a mother-of-pearl ashtray, and with rapid steps
walked through the drawing room, and opened the other
door into his wife’s bedroom.
     
                    Chapter 4

    
      Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with her
now scanty, once luxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up
with hairpins on the nape of her neck, with a sunken, thin
face and large, startled eyes, which looked prominent from
the thinness of her face, was standing among a litter of all
sorts of things scattered all over the room, before an open
bureau, from which she was taking something. Hearing
her husband’s steps, she stopped, looking towards the
door, and trying assiduously to give her features a severe
and contemptuous expression. She felt she was afraid of
him, and afraid of the coming interview. She was just
attempting to do what she had attempted to do ten times
already in these last three days—to sort out the children’s
things and her own, so as to take them to her mother’s—
and again she could not bring herself to do this; but now
again, as each time before, she kept saying to herself, ‘that
things cannot go on like this, that she must take some step’
to punish him, put him to shame, avenge on him some
little part at least of the suffering he had caused her. She
still continued to tell herself that she should leave him, but
she was conscious that this was impossible; it wasimpossible
 because she could not get out of the habit of
regarding him as her husband and loving him. Besides this,
she realized that if even here in her own house she could
hardly manage to look after her five children properly,
they would be still worse off where she was going with
them all. As it was, even in the course of these three days,
the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesome
soup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner
the day before. She was conscious that it was impossible to
go away; but, cheating herself, she went on all the same
sorting out her things and pretending she was going.
      Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the
drawer of the bureau as though looking for something,
and only looked round at him when he had come quite
up to her. But her face, to which she tried to give a severe
and resolute expression, betrayed bewilderment and
suffering.
       ‘Dolly!’ he said in a subdued and timid voice. He bent
his head towards his shoulder and tried to look pitiful and
humble, but for all that he was radiant with freshness and
health. In a rapid glance she scanned his figure that
beamed with health and freshness. ‘Yes, he is happy and
content!’ she thought; ‘while I.... And that disgusting good
nature, which every one likes him for and praises—I hate
that good nature of his,’ she thought. Her mouth stiffened,
the muscles of the cheek contracted on the right side of
her pale, nervous face.
    ‘What do you want?’ she said in a rapid, deep,
unnatural voice.
     ‘Dolly!’ he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. ‘Anna
is coming today.’
     ‘Well, what is that to me? I can’t see her!’ she cried.
     ‘But you must, really, Dolly..’
     ‘Go away, go away, go away!’ she shrieked, not
looking at him, as though this shriek were called up by
physical pain.
     Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when he thought
of his wife, he could hope that she would come round, as
Matvey expressed it, and could quietly go on reading his
paper and drinking his coffee; but when he saw her
tortured, suffering face, heard the tone of her voice,
submissive to fate and full of despair, there was a catch in
his breath and a lump in his throat, and his eyes began to
shine with tears.
     ‘My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God’s sake!....
You know....’ He could not go on; there was a sob in his
throat.
     She shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at him.
‘Dolly, what can I say?.... One thing:
forgive...Remember, cannot nine years of my life atone
for an instant...’
She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he
would say, as it were beseeching him in some way or
other to make her believe differently.
      ‘—instant of passion?’ he said, and would have gone
on, but at that word, as at a pang of physical pain, her lips
stiffened again, and again the muscles of her right cheek
worked.
     ‘Go away, go out of the room!’ she shrieked still more
shrilly, ‘and don’t talk to me of your passion and your
loathsomeness.’
She tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back
of a chair to support herself. His face relaxed, his lips
swelled, his eyes were swimming with tears.
     ‘Dolly!’ he said, sobbing now; ‘for mercy’s sake, think
of the children; they are not to blame! I am to blame, and
punish me, make me expiate my fault. Anything I can do,
I am ready to do anything! I am to blame, no words can
express how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive me!’
She sat down. He listened to her hard, heavy breathing,
and he was unutterably sorry for her. She tried several
times to begin to speak, but could not. He waited.
     ‘You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them;
but I remember them, and know that this means their
ruin,’ she said—obviously one of the phrases she had more
than once repeated to herself in the course of the last few
days.
     She had called him ‘Stiva,’ and he glanced at her with
gratitude, and moved to take her hand, but she drew back
from him with aversion.
     ‘I think of the children, and for that reason I would do
anything in the world to save them, but I don’t myself
know how to save them. by taking them away from their
father, or by leaving them with a vicious father—yes, a
vicious father.... Tell me, after what...has happened, can
we live together? Is that possible? Tell me, eh, is it
possible?’ she repeated, raising her voice, ‘after my
husband, the father of my children, enters into a love affair
with his own children’s governess?’
     ‘But what could I do? what could I do?’ he kept saying
in a pitiful voice, not knowing what he was saying, as his
head sank lower and lower.
     ‘You are loathsome to me, repulsive!’ she shrieked,
getting more and more heated. ‘Your tears mean nothing!
You have never loved me; you have neither heart nor
honorable feeling! You are hateful to me, disgusting, a
stranger—yes, a complete stranger!’ With pain and wrath
she uttered the word so terrible to herself—stranger.
He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face
alarmed and amazed him. He did not understand how his
pity for her exasperated her. She saw in him sympathy for
her, but not love. ‘No, she hates me. She will not forgive
me,’ he thought.
‘It is awful! awful!’ he said.
    At that moment in the next room a child began to cry;
probably it had fallen down. Darya Alexandrovna listened,
and her face suddenly softened.
She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few
seconds, as though she did not know where she was, and
what she was doing, and getting up rapidly, she moved
towards the door.
     ‘Well, she loves my child,’ he thought, noticing the
change of her face at the child’s cry, ‘my child: how can
she hate me?’
      ‘Dolly, one word more,’ he said, following her.
      ‘If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the
children! They may all know you are a scoundrel! I am
going away at once, and you may live here with your
mistress!’
      And she went out, slamming the door.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a
subdued tread walked out of the room. ‘Matvey says she
will come round; but how? I don’t see the least chance of
it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And how vulgarly she
shouted,’ he said to himself, remembering her shriek and
the words—‘scoundrel’ and ‘mistress.’ ‘And very likely the
maids were listening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!’ Stepan
Arkadyevitch stood a few seconds alone, wiped his face,
squared his chest, and walked out of the room.
It was Friday, and in the dining room the German
watchmaker was winding up the clock. Stepan
Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about this punctual,
bald watchmaker, ‘that the German was wound up for a
whole lifetime himself, to wind up watches,’ and he
smiled. Stepan Arkadyevitch was fond of a joke: ‘And
maybe she will come round! That’s a good expression,
    ‘come round,’’ he thought. ‘I must repeat that.’
    ‘Matvey!’ he shouted. ‘Arrange everything with Darya
in the sitting room for Anna Arkadyevna,’ he said to
Matvey when he came in.
    ‘Yes, sir.’
Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out
onto the steps.
    ‘You won’t dine at home?’ said Matvey, seeing him off.
   ‘That’s as it happens. But here’s for the housekeeping,’
he said, taking ten roubles from his pocketbook. ‘That’ll
be enough.’
    ‘Enough or not enough, we must make it do,’ said
Matvey, slamming the carriage door and stepping back
onto the steps.
    Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the
child, and knowing from the sound of the carriage that he
had gone off, went back again to her bedroom. It was her
solitary refuge from the household cares which crowded
upon her directly she went out from it. Even now, in the
short time she had been in the nursery, the English
governess and Matrona Philimonovna had succeeded in
putting several questions to her, which did not admit of
delay, and which only she could answer: ‘What were the
children to put on for their walk? Should they have any
milk? Should not a new cook be sent for?’
     ‘Ah, let me alone, let me alone!’ she said, and going
back to her bedroom she sat down in the same place as she
had sat when talking to her husband, clasping tightly her
thin hands with the rings that slipped down on her bony
fingers, and fell to going over in her memory all the
conversation. ‘He has gone! But has he broken it off with
her?’ she thought. ‘Can it be he sees her? Why didn’t I ask
him! No, no, reconciliation is impossible. Even if we
remain in the same house, we are strangers—strangers
forever! She repeated again with special significance the
word so dreadful to her. ‘And how I loved him! my God,
how I loved him!.... How I loved him! And now don’t I
love him? Don’t I love him more than before? The most
horrible thing is,’ she began, but did not finish her
thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put her head in
at the door.
     ‘Let us send for my brother,’ she said; ‘he can get a
dinner anyway, or we shall have the children getting
nothing to eat till six again, like yesterday.’
     ‘Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But
did you send for some new milk?’
And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the
day, and drowned her grief in them for a time.

                 
                      Chapter 5

        Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school,
thanks to his excellent abilities, but he had been idle and
mischievous, and therefore was one of the lowest in his
class. But in spite of his habitually dissipated mode of life,
his inferior grade in the service, and his comparative
youth, he occupied the honorable and lucrative position of
president of one of the government boards at Moscow.
This post he had received through his sister Anna’s
husband, Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin, who held one
of the most important positions in the ministry to whose
department the Moscow office belonged. But if Karenin
had not got his brother- in-law this berth, then through a
hundred other personages— brothers, sisters, cousins,
uncles, and aunts—Stiva Oblonsky would have received
this post, or some other similar one, together with the
salary of six thousand absolutely needful for them, as his
affairs, in spite of his wife’s considerable property, were in
an embarrassed condition.
       Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations
of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He was born in the midst of those
who had been and are the powerful ones of this world.
      One-third of the men in the government, the older men,
had been friends of his father’s, and had known him in
petticoats; another third were his intimate chums, and the
remainder were friendly acquaintances. Consequently the
distributors of earthly blessings in the shape of places,
rents, shares, and such, were all his friends, and could not
overlook one of their own set; and Oblonsky had no need
to make any special exertion to get a lucrative post. He
had only not to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not to
be quarrelsome or take offense, all of which from his
characteristic good nature he never did. It would have
struck him as absurd if he had been told that he would not
get a position with the salary he required, especially as he
expected nothing out of the way; he only wanted what
the men of his own age and standing did get, and he was
no worse qualified for performing duties of the kind than
any other man.
      Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who
knew him for his good humor, but for his bright
disposition, and his unquestionable honesty. In him, in his
handsome, radiant figure, his sparkling eyes, black hair and
eyebrows, and the white and red of his face, there was
something which produced a physical effect of kindliness
and good humor on the people who met him. ‘Aha! Stiva!Oblonsky! 
Here he is!’ was almost always said with a smile
of delight on meeting him. Even though it happened at
times that after a conversation with him it seemed that
nothing particularly delightful had happened, the next day,
and the next, every one was just as delighted at meeting
him again.
       After filling for three years the post of president of one
of the government boards at Moscow, Stepan
Arkadyevitch had won the respect, as well as the liking, of
his fellow officials, subordinates, and superiors, and all who
had had business with him. The principal qualities in
Stepan Arkadyevitch which had gained him this universal
respect in the service consisted, in the first place, of his
extreme indulgence for others, founded on a consciousness
of his own shortcomings; secondly, of his perfect
liberalism—not the liberalism he read of in the papers, but
the liberalism that was in his blood, in virtue of which he
treated all men perfectly equally and exactly the same,
whatever their fortune or calling might be; and thirdly—
the most important point—his complete indifference to
the business in which he was engaged, in consequence of
which he was never carried away, and never made
mistakes.
     On reaching the offices of the board, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, escorted by a deferential porter with a
portfolio, went into his little private room, put on his
uniform, and went into the boardroom. The clerks and
copyists all rose, greeting him with good-humored
deference. Stepan Arkadyevitch moved quickly, as ever, to
his place, shook hands with his colleagues, and sat down.
He made a joke or two, and talked just as much as was
consistent with due decorum, and began work. No one
knew better than Stepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the
exact line between freedom, simplicity, and official
stiffness necessary for the agreeable conduct of business. A
secretary, with the good-humored deference common to
every one in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s office, came up with
papers, and began to speak in the familiar and easy tone
which had been introduced by Stepan Arkadyevitch.
      ‘We have succeeded in getting the information from
the government department of Penza. Here, would you
care?...’
       ‘You’ve got them at last?’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
laying his finger on the paper. ‘Now, gentlemen...’
And the sitting of the board began.
       ‘If they knew,’ he thought, bending his head with a
significant air as he listened to the report, ‘what a guilty
little boy their president was half an hour ago.’ And his
eyes were laughing during the reading of the report. Till
two o’clock the sitting would go on without a break, and
at two o’clock there would be an interval and luncheon.
It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the
boardroom suddenly opened and someone came in.
All the officials sitting on the further side under the
portrait of the Tsar and the eagle, delighted at any
distraction, looked round at the door; but the doorkeeper
standing at the door at once drove out the intruder, and
closed the glass door after him.
When the case had been read through, Stepan
Arkadyevitch got up and stretched, and by way of tribute
to the liberalism of the times took out a cigarette in the
boardroom and went into his private room. Two of the
members of the board, the old veteran in the service,
Nikitin, and the Kammerjunker Grinevitch, went in with
him.
     ‘We shall have time to finish after lunch,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch.
     ‘To be sure we shall!’ said Nikitin.
     'A pretty sharp fellow this Fomin must be,’ said
Grinevitch of one of the persons taking part in the case
they were examining.
      Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch’s words,
giving him thereby to understand that it was improper to
pass judgment prematurely, and made him no reply.
‘Who was that came in?’ he asked the doorkeeper.
‘Someone, your excellency, crept in without
permission directly my back was turned. He was asking for
you. I told him: when the members come out, then..’
     ‘Where is he?’
     ‘Maybe he’s gone into the passage, but here he comes
anyway. That is he,’ said the doorkeeper, pointing to a
strongly built, broadshouldered man with a curly beard,
who, without taking off his sheepskin cap, was running
lightly and rapidly up the worn steps of the stone
staircase.b One of the members going down—a lean
official with a portfolio—stood out of his way and looked
disapprovingly at the legs of the stranger, then glanced
inquiringly at Oblonsky.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the
stairs. His good-naturedly beaming face above the
embroidered collar of his uniform beamed more than ever
when he recognized the man coming up.
      ‘Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!’ he said with a
friendly mocking smile, scanning Levin as he approached.
     ‘How is it you have deigned to look me up in this den?’
  said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and not content with shaking
hands, he kissed his friend. ‘Have you been here long?’
     ‘I have just come, and very much wanted to see you,’
said Levin, looking shyly and at the same time angry and
uneasily around.
     ‘Well, let’s go into my room,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who knew his friend’s sensitive and irritable
shyness, and, taking his arm, he drew him along, as though
guiding him through dangers.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost
all his acquaintances, and called almost all of them by their
Christian names: old men of sixty, boys of twenty, actors,
ministers, merchants, and adjutant-generals, so that many
of his intimate chums were to be found at the extreme
ends of the social ladder, and would have been very much
surprised to learn that they had, through the medium of
Oblonsky, something in common. He was the familiar
friend of everyone with whom he took a glass of
champagne, and he took a glass of champagne with
everyone, and when in consequence he met any of his
disreputable chums, as he used in joke to call many of his
friends, in the presence of his subordinates, he well knew
how, with his characteristic tact, to diminish the
disagreeable impression made on them. Levin was not a
disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with his ready tact, felt
that Levin fancied he might not care to show his intimacy
with him before his subordinates, and so he made haste to
take him off into his room.
     Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their
intimacy did not rest merely on champagne. Levin had
been the friend and companion of his early youth. They
were fond of one another in spite of the difference of their
characters and tastes, as friends are fond of one another
who have been together in early youth. But in spite of
this, each of them—as is often the way with men who
have selected careers of different kinds—though in
discussion he would even justify the other’s career, in his
heart despised it. It seemed to each of them that the life he
led himself was the only real life, and the life led by his
friend was a mere phantasm. Oblonsky could not restrain a
slight mocking smile at the sight of Levin. How often he
had seen him come up to Moscow from the country
where he was doing something, but what precisely Stepan
Arkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeed he
took no interest in the matter. Levin arrived in Moscow
always excited and in a hurry, rather ill at ease and irritated
by his own want of ease, and for the most part with a
perfectly new, unexpected view of things. Stepan Arkadyevitch 
laughed at this, and liked it. In the same way
Levin in his heart despised the town mode of life of his
friend, and his official duties, which he laughed at, and
regarded as trifling. But the difference was that Oblonsky,
as he was doing the same as every one did, laughed
complacently and good-humoredly, while Levin laughed
without complacency and sometimes angrily.
     ‘We have long been expecting you,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, going into his room and letting Levin’s
hand go as though to show that here all danger was over.
     ‘I am very, very glad to see you,’ he went on. ‘Well, how
are you? Eh? When did you come?’
Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of
Oblonsky’s two companions, and especially at the hand of
the elegant Grinevitch, which had such long white fingers,
such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, and such huge
shining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they
absorbed all his attention, and allowed him no freedom of
thought. Oblonsky noticed this at once, and smiled.
     ‘Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you,’ he said. ‘My
colleagues: Philip Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch
Grinevitch’—and turning to Levin—‘a district councilor, a
modern district councilman, a gymnast who lifts thirteen
stone with one hand, a cattle-breeder and sportsman, and
my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, the brother of
Sergey Ivonovitch Koznishev.’
      ‘Delighted,’ said the veteran.
      ‘I have the honor of knowing your brother, Sergey
Ivanovitch,’ said Grinevitch, holding out his slender hand
with its long nails.
Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned
to Oblonsky. Though he had a great respect for his halfbrother,
an author well known to all Russia, he could not
endure it when people treated him not as Konstantin
Levin, but as the brother of the celebrated Koznishev.
‘No, I am no longer a district councilor. I have
quarreled with them all, and don’t go to the meetings any
more,’ he said, turning to Oblonsky.
       ‘You’ve been quick about it!’ said Oblonsky with a
smile. ‘But how? why?’
       ‘It’s a long story. I will tell you some time,’ said Levin,
but he began telling him at once. ‘Well, to put it shortly, I
was convinced that nothing was really done by the district
councils, or ever could be,’ he began, as though some one
had just insulted him. ‘On one side it’s a plaything; they
play at being a parliament, and I’m neither young enough
nor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on
the other side’ (he stammered) ‘it’s a means for the coterie
of the district to make money. Formerly they had
wardships, courts of justice, now they have the district
council—not in the form of bribes, but in the form of
unearned salary,’ he said, as hotly as though someone of
those present had opposed his opinion.
        ‘Aha! You’re in a new phase again, I see—a
conservative,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘However, we
 can go into that later.’
     ‘Yes, later. But I wanted to see you,’ said Levin,
looking with hatred at Grinevitch’s hand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.
‘How was it you used to say you would never wear
European dress again?’ he said, scanning his new suit,
obviously cut by a French tailor. ‘Ah! I see: a new phase.’
Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush,
slightly, without being themselves aware of it, but as boys
blush, feeling that they are ridiculous through their
shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and blushing still
more, almost to the point of tears. And it was so strange to
see this sensible, manly face in such a childish plight, that
Oblonsky left off looking at him.
       ‘Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very
much to talk to you,’ said Levin.
Oblonsky seemed to ponder.   
       ‘I’ll tell you what: let’s go to Gurin’s to lunch, and
there we can talk. I am free till three.’
     ‘No,’ answered Levin, after an instant’s thought, ‘I have
got to go on somewhere else.’
     ‘All right, then, let’s dine together.’
     ‘Dine together? But I have nothing very particular,
only a few words to say, and a question I want to ask you,
and we can have a talk afterwards.’
      ‘Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we’ll
gossip after dinner.’
‘Well, it’s this,’ said Levin; ‘but it’s of no importance,
though.’
His face all at once took an expression of anger from
the effort he was making to surmount his shyness.
      ‘What are the Shtcherbatskys doing? Everything as it
used to be?’ he said.
       Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin
was in love with his sister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly
perceptible smile, and his eyes sparkled merrily.
     ‘You said a few words, but I can’t answer in a few
words, because.... Excuse me a minute..’
A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the
modest consciousness, characteristic of every secretary, of
superiority to his chief in the knowledge of their business;
he went up to Oblonsky with some papers, and began,
under pretense of asking a question, to explain some
objection. Stepan Arkadyevitch, without hearing him out,
laid his hand genially on the secretary’s sleeve.
‘No, you do as I told you,’ he said, softening his words
with a smile, and with a brief explanation of his view of
the matter he turned away from the papers, and said: ‘So
do it that way, if you please, Zahar Nikititch.’
     The secretary retired in confusion. During the
consultation with the secretary Levin had completely
recovered from his embarrassment. He was standing with
his elbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was a
look of ironical attention.
      I don’t understand it, I don’t understand it,’ he said.
      ‘What don’t you understand?’ said Oblonsky, smiling as
brightly as ever, and picking up a cigarette. He expected
some queer outburst from Levin.
     ‘I don’t understand what you are doing,’ said Levin,
shrugging his shoulders. ‘How can you do it seriously?’
     ‘Why not?’
     ‘Why, because there’s nothing in it.’
     ‘You think so, but we’re overwhelmed with work.’
     ‘On paper. But, there, you’ve a gift for it,’ added
Levin.
     ‘That’s to say, you think there’s a lack of something in
me?’
     ‘Perhaps so,’ said Levin. ‘But all the same I admire your
grandeur, and am proud that I’ve a friend in such a great
person. You’ve not answered my question, though,’ he
went on, with a desperate effort looking Oblonsky straight
in the face.
      ‘Oh, that’s all very well. You wait a bit, and you’ll
come to this yourself. It’s very nice for you to have over
six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district, and such
muscles, and the freshness of a girl of twelve; still you’ll be
one of us one day. Yes, as to your question, there is no
change, but it’s a pity you’ve been away so long.’
      ‘Oh, why so?’ Levin queried, panic-stricken.
      ‘Oh, nothing,’ responded Oblonsky. ‘We’ll talk it over.
But what’s brought you up to town?’
      ‘Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on,’ said Levin,
reddening again up to his ears.
      ‘All right. I see,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch. ‘I should ask
you to come to us, you know, but my wife’s not quite the
thing. But I tell you what; if you want to see them,
they’re sure now to be at the Zoological Gardens from
four to five. Kitty skates. You drive along there, and I’ll
come and fetch you, and we’ll go and dine somewhere
together.’
    ‘Capital. So good-bye till then.’
    ‘Now mind, you’ll forget, I know you, or rush off
home to the country!’ Stepan Arkadyevitch called out
laughing.
      ‘No, truly!’
And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in
the doorway remembering that he had forgotten to take
leave of Oblonsky’s colleagues.
      ‘That gentleman must be a man of great energy,’ said
Grinevitch, when Levin had gone away.
       ‘Yes, my dear boy,’ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding
his head, ‘he’s a lucky fellow! Over six thousand acres in
the Karazinsky district; everything before him; and what
youth and vigor! Not like some of us.’
      ‘You have a great deal to complain of, haven’t you,
Stepan Arkadyevitch?’
      ‘Ah, yes, I’m in a poor way, a bad way,’ said Stepan
Arkadyevitch with a heavy sigh. 
 