“Now that’s just a shame. It’s a damn fine skin.” Her chuckle
was deep and rich.
Awareness dawned. James snatched a shirt from the closet
and held it in front of him. “God, I’m sorry. I didn’t think.” And he
hadn’t, he realized. He was busy getting clothes in case of a
possible future need for, well, camouflage. Was he so
accustomed to his wolf skin that he couldn’t even notice when
he was bare-assed naked?
“Oh, don’t spoil it by apologizing, James. My pleasure
actually. An old bird like me doesn’t get such a pleasant view
very often. Tell you what, why don’t you get yourself together
and meet me in the lunchroom? We can talk over a meal.” She
disappeared without waiting for an answer.
Goddammit. He didn’t want to sit down and visit, and definitely
not with this woman, as much as he liked and respected her.
She wasn’t a Changeling, but the power she could wield made
both Jessie, the Pack leader, and his father, Ronan, look like
amateurs. Yet it wasn’t her magic that bothered him.
He wasn’t surprised she had detected him, either. He should
have thought of that. She was more than able to discern a
Changeling at a hundred yards even if it wasn’t in lupine form.
Birkie had always claimed it was the aura that gave
Changelings away, noting that wolfen beings had a halo of light
around them that was distinctly blue. But that didn’t bother him
either.
No, he was ill at ease because she was Evelyn’s great aunt.
She’d been a frequent and favorite visitor to their home, and
Evelyn adored her. He’d enjoyed her immensely too. But he
wasn’t interested in a trip down memory lane, definitely didn’t
want to talk about Evelyn. The fact was, she’d been alive the last
time he’d spoken with Birkie.
Yet he couldn’t see any way to say no. It would be, it would be
. . . rude. That was the word. And worse, it would hurt her
feelings. He sank heavily onto the couch with a pair of socks
and wondered at this turn of events. Yesterday he’d been a wolf
minding his own wolf business. Today he was a human
negotiating a maze of human considerations. He’d ignored his
instincts to leave and ended up having a full-scale human
conversation with Connor, who would now expect it from him.
Human convention dictated that James find suitable clothing for
his human form, and it had delayed him long enough to get
caught in that form. Now he’d been seen. Really seen, he
amended, noting that human social mores also had him
covering himself—belatedly—in the presence of a woman.
Human manners plus human emotion now boxed him in,
prevented him from turning down Birkie’s invitation to visit over
lunch.
If he could ever get the damn clothes on.
James frowned and cursed as he fought to put on socks. It
required fine motor skills, a challenge for hands that had been
paws for decades. He counted himself lucky that the first pair of
jeans he found had fit him, and that he’d managed the button
and zipper a little better this time. Shirts were another story.
James had always been broader across the shoulders and
chest than Connor and it took several frantic minutes to locate
something large enough. He soon gave up on trying to put
anything back on a hanger and simply left the discards in a pile
on the floor. Given the state of the room, Connor was unlikely to
notice.
The buttons were a nightmare and finally he just left the shirt
open. Had to settle for sneakers to replace his boots. Luckily he
and his brother wore the same size in that department, but no
way in hell was James going to attempt those laces. He tucked
the loose ends in roughly and made his way across the room.
Ended up having to almost slide his feet to avoid losing the
shoes.
God, he missed being a wolf.
Although he’d found the kitchen earlier and would have been
able to locate it again by memory, this time it was easier to
simply follow his nose. The scent of food, human food, was
almost overpowering. And very nearly foreign. Not only was it
laden with spices, but the food was cooked. It enticed and
repelled at the same time.
Birkie had just added a bag of warmed buns to a table already
laden with food. She waved a hand at him to sit. James pulled
out a chair, feeling awkward as he slid into it. There was a plate
in front of him, a knife and fork. A glass. He eyed them warily.
“I remember you used to like lasagna quite a bit, so I set this
aside for you when the Watsons filled the fridge this week. It’s
Bill’s own recipe. Everything they bring is packaged in
individual servings of course, but the portions are large. Have to
be, to feed Connor.”
James took the steaming dish from her, sniffed it carefully.
The spices were heady, nearly overwhelming, but he could
identify all the ingredients, pick them out from one another.
Suddenly a huge and ravenous hunger made itself known, and
he almost dropped the dish. Only a supreme effort kept him
from burying his face in it. Quickly, James dumped the pasta on
his plate and shoved his hands in his lap where Birkie wouldn’t
see them clenching.
“By the way, you can relax while you’re here, son. Connor’s
at his farm with Zoey. Jillian’s out on a call. She’s all the way
over by Spirit River, and she’s got another call after that. We’re
not going to be interrupted anytime soon.”
“Jillian—she’s okay?”
“She’s just fine. Why wouldn’t she be?”
“I scared her, that’s all. Not on purpose,” he added quickly at
the woman’s questioning glance. “Figured she might be mad or
upset or something.”
“You startled her,” corrected Birkie. “You’ll find that Jillian
Descharme doesn’t scare easily, and while she’s capable of a
real good mad, she doesn’t hold onto it like some people.
Interestingly, she was concerned about you.” She poured milk
into both of their glasses, took something else out of the
microwave. “Usually we eat off paper plates around here, but I
thought you might find those a bit flimsy to practice on. So
these are stoneware. Solid but not breakable.” Birkie winked at
him. “Human coordination probably takes a little getting used
to.” He didn’t dare look at the lasagna on his plate, but the smell
was driving him wild. He concentrated on Birkie’s words even
as he began to sweat. “You always were very perceptive. And
considerate.” James’ voice sounded strained even to him. He
needed to eat. He had to eat. A wolf wouldn’t wait, but a human
must. Would the woman ever sit down?
“And you were always very independent. You could have
asked for a little help with the buttons and the shoelaces, you
know.” She laughed at his scowl. “I have to say, it’s good to see
you again. I’ve missed you, boy.” She gave him an airy wave
with one hand while she slipped into her chair and picked up
her fork. “Of course I don’t expect you to have missed me,
James. Or anyone else for that matter. Being a wolf surely
precludes a lot of emotions. I imagine that’s why you’ve been
one for so long.”
There didn’t seem to be anything he could say to that, so he
grabbed a fork too. The sensation of holding a slim metal object,
the concept of using it as a tool, seemed bizarre and that
annoyed him. It wasn’t as if he’d never been human before.
Gritting his teeth, James gave the lasagna an experimental
poke. Birkie cleared her throat, and he glanced up to see her cut
the stacked pasta neatly with the side of her fork. He tried it,
succeeded in dragging the first layer off his lasagna instead. On
the second try, he managed to cut a forkful but it ended up on
his bare chest. Finally a bite made it to his mouth.
The meal continued like that, with Birkie making conversation
and James making a mess. She didn’t turn a hair when half of
his milk landed in his lap, the result of accidentally trying to lap
from a glass. And she completely ignored his curses and noises
of supreme frustration.
James was determined to eat like a human being, to
remember how. And gradually, he did. Mostly. But there was no
holding back his non-human appetite. He quickly worked his
way through most of the Watson’s menu. Birkie simply talked
while he ate, occasionally warming up more food and placing it
on the table, clearing away empty containers. She seemed to
deliberately stay away from any mention of the distant past, and
instead brought him up to speed on the everyday workings of
the clinic, the growth of the town, the latest issues that were
making headlines in the Dunvegan Herald Weekly. And gradually
she segued into the daily lives of his brothers and sisters. Their
human lives. Connor’s marriage, Culley’s business, Devlin’s
books, Kenzie’s studies, Carlene’s children. Things he knew
nothing about, and it bothered him suddenly that he didn’t.
“You know, I think you’ve gotten the hang of it, son,” Birkie
said at last, as the last bun disappeared from the bag. “And I
must say, you’re a lot neater at it than Connor, and believe me,
I’ve seen him pack away food after a Change. I don’t know what
it’s like to shapeshift, but I imagine it uses up a truckload of
calories.”
James nodded. The truth was, he’d completely forgotten
about that little detail. For years, he’d lived with only a wolf’s
natural appetite. He was unprepared for his stomach to turn into
a snarling bottomless pit, a black hole with an appetite for entire
galaxies, but knew he should have expected it. Too many
Changes, not enough chow. He blamed his wolf side for that. If
it had just cooperated, paid attention to wolf business instead of
trailing after Jillian, then he would have hunted this week. “I
guess I’d better thank you for lunch. Looks like I needed it more
than I knew.”
“Don’t worry about it. I’m used to Connor’s habits. He gets so
involved in his work that he often forgets about eating until he’s
desperate. Bill and Jessie noticed that about him years ago,
that’s why they fill the fridge here every week. Then if he
perishes from starvation, it won’t be on their conscience. But
even with the food right here, I still have to remind him from time
to time.”
James chuckled at that and startled himself. Both the sound
and the ticklish sensation it gave the back of his throat were
strange. When was the last time he’d laughed or smiled or done
anything of the sort? When was the last time he sat at the table
with a friend? He tried to fend off those thoughts and caught
only the tail end of something Birkie was saying.
“. . . and besides, all this practice will come in handy when
you ask Jillian to go to dinner with you.”
A fork clattered to the floor, and he stared at her. “What?”
“Oh, don’t look at me like that. You like her, don’t you?”
“Dammit, Birkie—” he began, but she raised a hand.
“First off, let me assume you’re embarrassed and
uncomfortable because I’m Evelyn’s great aunt. Don’t be. I
loved Evie like a daughter. More importantly, I know that you
loved her. My dear boy, no one could have seen you with her
and not known that. We all grieved when she died and her baby
with her, grieved when we thought we lost you as well. But you
survived. What about your life?”
“My life is fine.” His words were tight, almost bitten off.
“Your wolf’s life is fine, hon,” she corrected. “Your own is a
little lopsided.”
“It’s the way it has to be.”
“It’s the way you think it has to be.”
“I said I’m fine.”
She rolled her eyes then. “There’s no point in being defensive
with me, James. You know I see far too much for that.”
He knew, all right, and scowled at the truth of it. Birkie could
see his human skin, and likely every single thought that lay
beneath it as well. There just had to be some way out of this
conversation. “Look, I really don’t want to talk about it right
now.” Or ever.
“I’m certain that you don’t, and normally I wouldn’t press you.
But there’s more than just you involved. I happen to like Jillian
very much, and I’m concerned for her as well.”
“I’m not interested in Jillian,” he roared.
She didn’t even blink at his outburst. “And that’s why you’ve
been following her around? Because you’re not interested?”
“You don’t understand. The goddamn wolf is following Jillian.
And I don’t know why. I don’t know what it wants, so now I’m
following her too, hoping to figure it out.” He scrubbed a hand
over his face and suddenly felt very tired. “And that sounded
crazy even to me.”
“You’ve met Jillian before.”
“Yes—at least I think so—but I can’t remember her exactly
and the wolf won’t tell me a damn thing. And if you need more
details on that situation, ask Connor. I’m not up to explaining it
all over again.”
The older woman sat back then, folded her arms in front of
her and studied him intently for a long moment. “Maybe your
wolf will explain it.”
“What—” The hair on the back of James’s neck prickled, as
the atmosphere in the room shifted, changed. A phantom taste
burst on his tongue and the scent of it filled his senses:
evergreen, wild rose, buffalo berry, bindweed, milk thistle, a
bouquet from the very heart of the forest. Deep within him, the
wolf stirred, restless and alert.
Birkie spoke then—he could see her lips moving—yet as
much as he strained, he could hear nothing. It took some
moments before he realized the wolf was responding to her,
while he himself had been firmly shut out of the conversation.
James struggled to regain control, his frustration escalating
until finally his temper exploded. He shoved the wolf out of the
way, shoved it deep into some inner compartment and slammed
the door.
Birkie found herself face-to-face with a very angry man.
Chapter Twelve
“What the hell are you doing?” James growled at Birkie.
Sparks of iridescent green flashed in his blue eyes, a sure sign
of an enraged Changeling. “Why are you talking to the damn
wolf instead of me?”
She didn’t flinch, didn’t flicker an eyelash, but regarded him
gravely. “You heard nothing?”
“Not a goddamn word and you know it.”
“No.” She shook her head, surprise evident in her face. “I
didn’t know it. I knew there was some schism between you and
your inner wolf, but I didn’t know it was like this. I’ve never seen
this before, and I’ve studied Changelings for a very long time.”
He clenched and unclenched his fists, trying to regain control
of himself. “I’ve had enough of the wolf taking over whenever
the hell it feels like it.”
“I imagine so. And I have an idea as to what the problem may
be. A Changeling’s human side is in control no matter what form
he’s in. That’s the rule. But you know from Changeling history
that there are a couple of exceptions to that rule. Important
exceptions.”
The anger began to ebb. James took a deep breath, then
another. Considered. The wolf could rise involuntarily in any
Changeling to ensure their survival. The wolf might also come
out to defend a mate. “I don’t get it. Those situations don’t apply
to me, not now.”
“I’ll bet they do, just not the way you might think. Believe it or
not, the wolf is on your side. It’s looking out for you, protecting
you. Ensuring your survival.”
“But that makes no sense. I’m not in any danger. I have
survived.”
“Depends on how you define survival. How a wolf defines
survival.”
James shook his head. “I’m not sure what you’re getting at.”
“Evelyn died. It was horrible, it was unfair, it was wrong, but it
happened. You were mortally wounded. What was your first
impulse when you realized she was gone?”
He was silent, though he knew it would do him no good.
“You wanted to follow her, didn’t you? Of course you did,
that’s a natural impulse. But what did the wolf do?”
Ah, damn. James sat heavily and stared at the floor. “It took
over.”
“It had to, to save your life. Believe me, I know. When the Pack
found you, Jessie called me to come and help if I could. I saw
what had happened to you, James. You were hit by a shotgun,
twice, at fairly close range.” Her voice was grim, but she stood
beside him, put a gentle hand on his shoulder, the shoulder that
had been wounded. “It’s a miracle you didn’t die outright. And if
you’d remained in human form, you would have died for sure.
Your wolf knew that.
“Changing in that condition could have killed you too, of
course, but your wolf is very strong, you’re very strong. You got
through it and the shift stopped a lot of the bleeding, bought
you some time until we could work on you.”
He sat quietly for several moments, staring off into the past
and absently running his fingers over the places where the
wounds had been. Finally, he looked up at her. “I didn’t know
that. I don’t remember much after the Change, but I guess I
should say thanks.” He sighed. “But I’m not wounded, and I’m
not in danger now. I’m trying to see it, Birkie, but I just can’t
make any connection between that situation and this.”
“You’re not thinking like a wild wolf, a real wolf, especially an
alpha wolf. What does a wild alpha wolf do if it loses its mate?
Does it spend the rest of its life alone?”
Apprehension prickled the hair on the back of his neck. “It’s
not the same, Birkie.”
“The wolf will mourn his mate, but then he’ll go on with his
life. Survival means going on with your life in all ways.”
“It doesn’t apply here.” Suddenly he realized where she was
going with this, and his voice took on a warning note. “Birkie—”
She ignored him. “The wolf finds another mate because he
isn’t designed to be alone. Your wolf has found one. I should
say you’ve found one, but only your lupine side seems to have
recognized her.”
“No.” He got up, backed up, knocked over the chair. Pointed
at her and shook his head. “No. Don’t tell me that, goddammit!
You’ve got it all wrong.” Dishes clattered noisily to the floor as
he backed into the counter.
“Why do you think the wolf is so focused on Jillian? Why do
you think it took steps to find her and ensure her survival years
ago, just as it’s working to ensure yours now?”
“Jesus Murphy, Birkie!” Was the woman deaf? “How many
times do I have to say I’m not interested in Jillian? And I’m
especially not interested in having my wolf side pick out women
for me.”
“You’re not interested or you don’t want to be interested?”
“I can’t be interested, goddammit!”
“Son.” She caught his gaze and held it. “I know you miss
Evelyn, and part of you is always going to miss her. But surely
you know that she wouldn’t want you to spend your entire life
mourning her and never moving on.”
Her eyes were unwavering, the soul within them ancient. He
felt like an unruly child and it pissed him off even further. Still,
he fought to stay in control, to be civil. “I know you’re trying to
help, Birkie,” he said through gritted teeth, “but you don’t
understand.”
“What I understand, son, is that you’ve already spent thirty
years alone. And I understand that you fully intend to spend the
next thirty like that too.”
He moved toward the door but she was in front of it. “You
don’t get it. I can’t be with anyone. Not Jillian, not anybody. I
can’t do that to someone again.”
“Do what, James?” she asked quietly.
Pain hoarsened his voice, wrenched the words from him.
“Evelyn’s dead because of me. Didn’t you know that, Birkie,
didn’t you see that in your goddamn crystal ball? It’s my fault.
Some bastard killed her because she married a Changeling.”
“You don’t know that.”
He took a step toward her, then another. Leaned down until
he was nose to nose with her. Although his words were quiet
and deliberate, there was a terrible certainty to them that struck
like a hammer blow. “Instinct tells me that. My gut tells me that. I
do know it and I know I brought that to her. It’s my fault she’s
dead. I won’t do that to someone again. Not to Jillian. Not to
anyone.”
James pushed past her then. He could hear Birkie calling
after him, but he ignored it. Rude or not, he had had enough of
human concerns and human manners and human emotions
and human goddamn everything. He had the necessary clothes,
he’d had enough conversation to last him years, and he’d had
more than enough of his wolf dictating his life. He was done
with it all and especially with Jillian Descharme. He was going to
do what he should have done on Day One, which was the right
thing, the best thing, the safest thing for her. Get out of her life.
He strode quickly, purposefully down the hall, intent on
reaching the back door. It was still light outside, but he knew he
could duck into the thick stand of trees near the building. There
would be enough cover there to Change and—
He ran straight into Jillian.
Jillian rubbed the back of her head where it had struck the
floor and looked around for the bus that had hit her. Instead she
saw James Macleod. For a moment he just stared back, then
knelt quickly beside her.
“Did I hurt you? Are you all right? Christ, I’m sorry.”
“I’m fine I think. Hey, don’t you know the local speed limit is
25?” She sat up and reached for the papers that had spewed
out of the folder she was carrying, but he was already gathering
them—or trying to. For every one he managed to pick up, two
flew farther away.
“I didn’t see you. I said I was sorry.” He looked at her hard, as
if daring her to disagree.
“You don’t look sorry, you look angry.” The intensity of his
eyes was like a physical punch, almost making her dizzy. Still,
she could swear there was something behind them, something
that pulled at her. “Is something wrong?”
“No. Nothing.”
She saw it then. Like twin lightning flashes, sadness and
deep pain played across his rugged face. Then the fierce frown
returned.
He seized the last of the papers and stuffed them into the
folder, handed it to her. “I’m just in a hurry, that’s all.”
“Well, hell, don’t let me keep you.” She reached over to the
wall, intending to stand. Then powerful hands gently caged her
waist. She was lifted up and set on her feet as if she weighed
exactly nothing. The hands lingered. She could feel the strength
behind them, yet sensed also that the immense force was
deliberately tempered, carefully reined. James was close, so
close that she could feel the heat from his body and suddenly
she couldn’t breathe, couldn’t speak, could only look up into his
face.
He released her so abruptly that Jillian lost her balance and
landed on her butt, hard. Every individual vertebra from stem to
stern protested the jolt. She swore, but it was at empty air.
James was gone. Just gone. All she saw was the door swinging
shut at the far end of the building.
She was still sitting there, dumbfounded and staring at the
door, when Birkie rushed up behind her. “My heavens, girl, are
you hurt? What happened?”
“I’m fine, I’m okay,” she said as Birkie insisted on helping her
up. “I’ve just had another close encounter of the James kind.”
“Swept you right off your feet, I see.”
“Ha. Dumped me on my ass is more like it.” She went to
straighten her clothes and realized she was still in her dirty
coveralls. Rubbed the back of her head and discovered a
sizable lump had developed where she had banged it on the
floor. Shit! “You think that’s strange, you should have been with
me on my last call. Why are men so damn weird?”
“They can’t help it. They’re wired that way.” Birkie stepped
back, hands on hips and surveyed Jillian. “How long will it take
you to shower and change?”
“For a good cause, fifteen minutes or less. Finer Diner?”
“Frankly, I was thinking the Jersey Pub. I need a cold beer,
hon. And I’m betting you could use one too.”
“God, yes! And a plate of nachos to go with it. I’ll be ready in
ten.” She hurried down the hallway to her apartment, paused
halfway in the door. “You know, if I had to guess, I’d think that
James has a split personality. He can be so nice sometimes but
other times, he’s got to be the strangest man I’ve ever met in my
life.” She disappeared into her apartment.
Birkie shook her head. “Honey, you don’t know the half of it.”
Chapter Thirteen
The wolf emerged from trees near the clinic at a dead run. Its
belly was low to the ground, its limbs reached long and
pistoned hard as it crossed the fields to the far forest, a sleek
white comet tinged with the gold of the fading sun.
Nature had designed the wolf’s body for running, and an
ordinary wolf could cover sixty miles in a single day, a
Changeling, many more. James raced flat out for hours, through
narrow game trails in the dense forest, along the very tops of
the coulees high above the river, until amber twilight gave way
to deep velvet night. Still he ran, swift as white water through a
spillway, devouring the miles. The moon rose, its glow revealing
a silvery shape arrowing through forests, across fields. James
ran on until flecks of bloodied foam flew from his drawn lips,
until his throat nearly closed for want of water. And still he could
not outrun the pain in his heart, or the dilemma of his dual
nature.
Dawn was not far off when James slowed at last and
splashed into the river’s edge to drink, flanks heaving, lungs
burning for air. He stretched out on the bank, heedless of the
mud, and gave in to exhaustion and the blessed oblivion it
promised. The promise proved false, however, as oblivion
dissolved into a dream, the very same dream James had begun
in the loft.
Deep in the river valley that divided the city, the air was thick
with the metallic tang of human blood. The white wolf
discovered five men standing over the fallen figure of a small
blonde woman. One was raising a thick metal pipe over his
head.
A deep-throated growl was sufficient to make the men turn,
their prey forgotten. The sound vibrated along their nerves,
resonated in their bellies. Five pairs of eyes gleamed wide as a
monstrous nightmare stalked stiff-legged from the cover of the
trees. The moon touched its white coat, rimmed it with unearthly
silver. The creature’s lips were drawn back to expose long
deadly teeth; its eyes glowed with green fire. Suddenly there
was shouting, screaming, a mad scramble to escape. The man
with the metal pipe flung it at the giant wolf but the pipe fell wide
of its target as he fled down the trail.
The wolf howled once, short and sharp, a hunting call to
panic the men further. The urge to chase the men was powerful.
But another instinct was stronger, drawing the wolf away from
its quarry. The woman needed help and quickly. And so the
white wolf went to her.
Still dreaming, James struggled deep within the wolf, seeking
a path to the surface, to awareness within the dream. He
recognized now that this dream was a window to the past, knew
his only hope of understanding his situation was to somehow
see this vision as a man. He wrestled with his wolf nature but
could not subdue it completely. Instead, with a sudden rush of
clarity, he became both wolf and man at the same time, saw
Jillian through eyes that were now both animal and human. And
as he watched, the present slipped away and his dual nature
became fully immersed in the past.
Her blond hair was long and matted with blood. The fine
angles of her faery face had been battered by ruthless fists; her
features were swollen and bruised. His heart twisted at the sight
even as fury glowed white-hot within him. Until her eyes
opened. Green. Sea green. And infinitely sad as she waited to
be killed by the wolf. As she grieved not for what had been done
to her, but for being alone. That had jolted him, temporarily
doused his rage. He could hear her thoughts. James suddenly
felt himself struggling for words. It had been so long, so very
long, since he had used any.
Not alone. Here with you. Carefully, tenderly, he lapped the
blood and tears from her face. There was little or no danger that
his saliva would carry the Change into her bloodstream, not
with her wounds bleeding so freely. Only a deep bite could
accomplish that. He concentrated on cleaning the abrasions as
he listened to the outpouring of grief and pain in her mind and
heart. Learned that her name was Jillian. Sent her calming,
soothing thoughts and laid his powerful body close beside her
broken one, radiated Changeling heat to warm and to heal. Yet
instinct told him it wasn’t enough. Finally, as the sky blushed
with dawn, he gave her of his own life energy. A transference
from aura to aura. To save her.
Hours passed before the morning sun was high enough to
give her its own warmth. It was then that his wolf hearing
detected a small truck laboring up the trail. Only then did he
leave the girl’s side. He watched with narrowed eyes from the
nearby cover of bushes as the park maintenance workers found
her, as they covered her with their coats, called for help on their
radio. And as the wolf kept careful watch, James talked to her in
her mind, reassured and comforted her until an ambulance
came and took her away.
The white wolf slipped away when the police began to search
the trail. He didn’t go far—he didn’t have to. With so much cover
it was easy to keep from being discovered by humans, and no
dog would willingly follow a Changeling’s scent. And when they
left the area after dark, he began to hunt. Not elk this time but
human prey—the brutal men who had raped and beaten Jillian.
The wolf had memorized each and every scent from her
damaged body. The five would have gone to ground by now,
hidden themselves in the concrete warrens of the human city,
but it would not be enough to elude nature’s swift justice.
It was Sunday. Wonderful, glorious Sunday. Jillian rolled over
and slapped off the alarm, snuggled back into the deliciously
soft quilts. She was still on call. But the clinic was closed today,
and she had a second chance to laze in bed until someone
phoned her with a problem. And that could be hours from now.
Maybe not at all. Instead of falling back asleep, however, Jillian
found herself staring up at the white ceiling and recalling
yesterday’s visit to Pine Point Ranch.
Werewolf. That was the term Douglas’s father had used. Good
grief. The poor man was obviously not in his right mind, but he’d
spoken of a big white devil with blue demon eyes. What else
could it be but her wolf? Birkie had said it only made sense that
Jillian wasn’t the only person to encounter it. Although that
thought caused a tiny finger of disappointment to poke at her.
After all, she was used to thinking of it as her wolf. Her
imaginary friend and real-life hero. Logically, though, she had to
agree with Birkie. And if Harrison Senior had seen the wolf
somewhere, maybe werewolf seemed a reasonable explanation
to him for the existence of such an enormous and unusual
creature. After all, she’d been trying to define the wolf herself,
even started reading lupine myths and legends. Who was she to
say that werewolf sounded weird?
She’d recognized her cue to leave and driven away from the
ranch, but not before seeing something in Douglas’s face as he
struggled with his father. Fear. It seemed out of place on such a
strong intelligent face, but it was there nonetheless. Was he
afraid for his father, afraid of what she might think, or was he
afraid of something else altogether? Come to think of it, he had
looked pretty spooked on the trail when she’d asked him about
the white wolf. . . but that was before she knew what he was
dealing with at home. Maybe he had always thought his dad
was imagining the white wolf, and it was scary to hear about it
from someone who didn’t have Alzheimer’s. Although she had
probably come across as a complete loon at the time.
Jillian yawned and stretched. Last night she’d nursed a single
beer over a giant plate of nachos and chili, then said goodbye to
Birkie at about nine. She loved the older woman’s company, but
Jillian simply had to lie down. It had been a very long week. And
to her surprise she not only fell asleep right away, she stayed
asleep. Of course, it might be due to the bump on the back of
her head. She reached around to feel it and winced at the touch.
What was it with James, anyway? Every encounter she’d had
with him seemed like something out of a TV show, but she
couldn’t decide if it was a drama or a sitcom. She’d been scared
shitless to find him in her apartment, he’d surprised her in the
loft—and that had been scary too—and then he’d run over her
in the hallway. At least she hadn’t been afraid that time. It had
happened too fast.
What would it be like to just meet him on the street like a
normal person? Or better yet, why couldn’t he have shown up
in the Jersey Pub last night and asked if he could buy her a
beer, sat and talked with her, maybe asked her to dance?
A slow dance. That painted a delicious picture in her mind. In
the loft, she’d been held captive by James’s powerful arms, had
felt his rock-hard body pinning her. But in the clinic hallway
she’d felt those same muscles held carefully in check, those
hands filled with a heart-melting gentleness. It had mesmerized
her in spite of herself. In fact, she could still feel James’s hands
on her waist, and it wasn’t hard to imagine being surrounded by
his tempered strength on the dance floor.
Mmmmm. Jillian half-closed her eyes and smiled, held out her
arms as if holding a partner. She’d only circled the room twice,
enjoying the fantasy in spite of feeling a little foolish, when a
brand new thought struck, one that doused her passions more
thoroughly than a bucket of ice water could have. She lowered
her arms, her uneasiness laced with prickles of fear.
James was a real man. A little on the strange side maybe, but
living, breathing real. He had admitted to being in her apartment.
But up till then she’d concluded that whole first episode was a
dream because she had seen the white wolf on the couch. How
could I have been awake to see James and then suddenly asleep to
dream of the wolf? No, that made no sense at all to her. For
heaven’s sake, she’d been throwing out drawers in search of a
knife to defend herself with. Surely no one could fall asleep after
that.
Had she fainted out of some bizarre sense of relief when she
saw James was gone? Had she gotten the sequence of events
mixed up? Maybe she passed out and then saw the wolf on the
couch. Okay, maybe. I don’t like it, but maybe. Jillian didn’t really
think she was the fainting type—but she had awakened on the
floor the next day. So, as wussy as it made her feel, it was a
given that she must have been asleep or passed out. She knew
why James had been there, or at least why he said he’d been
there. So there were plenty of explanations for everything—
except for why a giant wolf was hanging around in her
apartment.
Maybe she had been hallucinating? Maybe she needed to feel
safe, so her mind obligingly produced the white wolf, just as
Marjorie had said all along. Wait a minute. I can’t suddenly go
along with her theory now. I met the wolf, and he’s as real as James
is. Of course, just because the wolf was real didn’t mean she’d
stopped dreaming about him. For that matter she’d had some
pretty explicit dreams about James. She swore in frustration as
a tingle ran through her body as if on cue. She gritted her teeth
and focused. It had to have been a dream, because a real wolf
couldn’t get into her apartment. But James wasn’t supposed to
be there either. Had he left a door open somewhere and
inadvertently let in the wolf? Was that possible? And even if it
was, why on earth would a wolf be waiting outside, looking for
an opportunity to get in? The prickling feeling on the back of
her neck made her shiver. And pushed her to walk to the couch
on the far side of the room. Gingerly she picked up the
newspapers she’d tossed there from the past few days. The
opened mail. Books. Like peeling back the layers of an onion,
she removed everything that hadn’t been there before that
night.
Suddenly her blood chilled, and she had to struggle to draw a
breath. There were white hairs, many white hairs, clinging to the
worn fabric of the couch.
Chapter Fourteen
Jillian sealed white hairs into sample bags. It had taken an hour,
with gloves and tweezers, to gather enough—labs preferred to
have at least fifty strands to work with—and to make sure they
were of decent quality. She’d had to view the strands under the
microscope in the lab to make certain there were roots attached
to the hairs so that DNA could be extracted.
It looked like ordinary dog hair, ordinary everyday white dog
hair. Which it probably was, she told herself, probably fell off her
clothing. After all, a collie had been boarding in the clinic kennel
that was mostly white except for the black patches over its eyes
and ears. A snowy Samoyed had come in to have its teeth
cleaned. There was no lack of sources for white canine hair at
the clinic, no lack of possible explanations for its presence in
her apartment. But not in such quantities and not on her damn
couch. She seldom sat on the couch, and although she was
hard-pressed to keep it from becoming a catchall for books and
papers, she seldom tossed her clothes there.
Thorough by nature, Jillian had already gone through the
books from the library, studied everything they contained on
wolf legend and lore. She probably would have skipped the
parts about werewolves—after all, some things were just too
farfetched—but thanks to that little incident at the Pine Point
Ranch, she read those too. She didn’t believe anything she
read, yet she felt a need to cover all bases.
Now, however, it was time to get serious and let science have
its say. She had a few—very few—facts to work with, but they
were rock-solid. One was her firsthand knowledge that the
white wolf was a real animal (hence the hair). However, she also
believed that it wasn’t an ordinary wolf. There were too many
obvious physical and behavioral differences. It had occurred to
her that perhaps it was a brand new subspecies—and wouldn’t
it be exciting to be its discoverer?
Of course, there were other, more mundane, possibilities.
Because dogs and wolves could interbreed, her wolf could be
either an accidental or deliberate hybrid. Canis Lupus meets
Canis Familiaris. Jillian figured it might be possible to combine,
say, the heavily muscled body and white coloration of a Great
Pyrenees with the lush coat and blue eyes of an Alaskan
Malamute, then mix them with a large breed of wolf. It might
even explain the creature’s curiously benevolent attitude, its
unusual desire to protect humans. Or at least one human,
anyway.
She reminded herself of the white wolf’s apparent
benevolence frequently. Jillian was grateful that the massive
animal had saved her life years ago, was glad to have met up
with the wolf again and know that it wasn’t just a dream. But
now she was, well, nervous. “It’s all fun and games until you
find a wolf in your apartment,” she muttered.
So here she was, packaging bagged samples into an
envelope. Wolves and dogs were so closely related that there
was less than a one percent difference in their genetic material
—but there was a difference. And if the animal was a hybrid,
tests existed that would show genetic input from a wolf,
although not necessarily how much or when it had occurred in
the animal’s family tree.
Jillian stripped off her gloves and prepared a mailing label.
The samples would go out by priority mail the next day to a lab
owned by her genetics instructor from veterinary college, Ian
Craddock. She’d told Craddock that the animal had turned up in
her practice, and that she was naturally curious due to her
interest in wolves. Plausible. Sane. At least saner than saying
she’d found it in her apartment.
The DNA tests would take about six weeks to complete. And
the price of the testing would take most of her next paycheck.
As much as she needed the money for other things—and her
hopes of that really nice digital camera just fizzled—it was well
worth it if a state-of-the-art laboratory could help her solve this
puzzle. Besides, if she was going to be a lunatic, then she was
at least going to do it up right.
For now, maybe she needed a change of scenery. Birkie was
planting some of her outdoor garden today—maybe she could
use an extra hand. Jillian knew she’d feel a lot better just being
around someone.
Immediately her thoughts jumped to James. After the midhallway
collision yesterday, she’d noticed that he had finally
changed his clothes. That blue denim shirt looked great on him,
even if it wasn’t done up. Okay, maybe especially since it wasn’t
done up.
Where had he been going last night? Why such a hurry? And
why so damn rude? It was hard to conjure much indignation,
however. She was too busy wondering what might have
happened if they’d stood there, together, another moment or
two. Because she had the oddest feeling he’d been about to
kiss her.
Something inside her did a flip-flop at the thought of kissing
James. Down, girl, she chided herself. It was just plain oldfashioned
physical attraction and nothing more. “He doesn’t
even know me. I don’t know him. We don’t have a relationship,
just a very bizarre hit-and-run acquaintanceship.” And still she
wondered what it would be like to kiss him.
“That’s enough!” Jillian pulled at her hair with both hands.
“I’m not hanging around here with my raging hormones. I’m
going to dig in the dirt at Birkie’s.” And if that didn’t cool her
thoughts about James Macleod, she could always throw herself
into Birkie’s fishpond.
The dream had long since faded, but James couldn’t seem to
wake up. Instead, he drifted slowly toward full consciousness
like a diver rising in measured stages from the depths of some
dark ocean. The wolf was there too, with him and part of him at
the same time. Despite the strange duality, James knew he
wasn’t dreaming anymore. And he found himself able to ponder
the meaning of the dream. Memory. It wasn’t a dream, it was a
memory. And if it was a memory, that meant he had killed
Jillian’s attackers. Even though he had never taken human life
before, even though it was forbidden to do so by Changeling
law, he had no regrets. Not only was he certain the men would
have preyed on others if left alive, the protection of another
Changeling or a pack member was a higher law. Protection of a
mate superseded all.
A mate. Why did that cross his mind?
The wolf stirred within. Mate. Mine. Ours.
Not that again. Look, hanging around with Jillian is going to put her
in danger—
Protect her. Mate. Ours.
Stop saying that. We need to leave her alone, do you hear me?
Alone, danger. Together, safe. Mate. Ours.
Goddamn it, since when do you know how to talk? I can’t believe
I’m arguing with—
James woke at last, but the wolf was gone. At least his
awareness of the wolf was gone; he could no longer be certain
that the damn wolf ever really left. Exasperated, he rolled over
and opened his eyes—and froze as he realized two things
simultaneously. One, he was in the hayloft at the animal clinic
again. And two, he was human.
He sat straight up, ran his hands over his face, his fingers
through his hair. Human. No mistake. He must have Changed in
his goddamn sleep, because he certainly hadn’t done it on
purpose. Had the dream brought it on somehow, or had the wolf
called the Change? And just how the hell had he managed to
get all the way back to the North Star Animal Hospital?
James struggled to his feet, feeling disoriented and strange,
needing to get to the window and determine the time of day—of
whatever the hell day it was—by the angle of the sun. He leaned
a hand on the window frame to steady himself.
It was early morning, maybe six o’clock or so at this time of
year. And considering just how far he’d run as a wolf when he’d
left this place, he’d lost at least one day, maybe two. But that
was a minor concern compared to other things. James gulped
in the fresh dew-moistened air and took stock of his impossible
situation.
Connor didn’t seem to think that wolf and human personas
could separate, but for James, the evidence was indisputable.
And if Birkie was correct—and he had no doubt now that she
was—then his wolf side had indeed recognized Jillian, sensed
her, and come to her aid in the past. And now the wolf was
trying to maneuver James into complying with its current plan
for survival, a plan that centered around Jillian.
James was dead set against the idea, yet there appeared to
be limits to his choices. He could control his human side. The
wolf, however, had become a wild card and was becoming
bolder in its determination to take the lead. If James had no
control over his wolfen side, could not order it to stay away
from her, then Jillian was already in danger. Sooner or later the
presence of a white wolf would interfere with her life in any
number of ways. And such a large creature couldn’t stay hidden
forever. Eventually it would attract the attention of her fellow
humans, and from there it was only a matter of time before
someone either figured out the secret or sensed it. Birkie could
discern a Changeling as surely as she could sense rain
approaching—she couldn’t be the only person with that gift.
Mate. Mine, the wolf had declared. But Jillian was a human
woman, with human needs and wants. What if she went out on
a date, what if she fell in love, what if she wanted to make a life
with a human male? The thought rankled, brought a deep growl
to James’s throat even though he was in human form. He feared
to think of what the wolf might do in the face of direct
competition.
A mate. Even if he wanted such a thing, he didn’t deserve it.
Not after what had happened to Evelyn. Weary in body, heart,
and soul, James sank onto a bale and dropped his head into his
hands. The crushing weight of guilt on his shoulders was as
familiar as the endless litany that echoed through his mind.
Should have known there was danger, should have been more alert,
should never have left Evelyn alone. Should have been strong
enough to walk away from her in the first place, should never have
gotten involved with her. His fault, all his fault, accusing him every
time his human awareness surfaced within the wolf. Small
wonder that he’d lived as a wolf, hunted and howled as a wolf,
lived and breathed and existed solely as a wolf.
He wished he was in lupine form now. Being a wolf was easy.
Too easy. It was certainly tempting to submerge himself
beneath the wolf persona right now and not have to feel
anything, think anything. Shit. Wasn’t that exactly how he got
into this impossible situation? He’d buried the man deep inside
the animal, so deep that now the animal was determined to take
over not only his life but Jillian’s too.
He couldn’t allow that. Nor could he allow Jillian to be harmed
in any way. He had brought danger to Evelyn and their unborn
child, danger and death. And he would bring the same to Jillian
if he didn’t find a way to stop the wolf within. But the only way
he could think of was to remain human, and that he could not
bear.
James pounded a fist into one of the heavy bales, knocked it
flying off the top of the stack. Pounded another until it burst.
And another. His heart was going to explode, he was going to
explode. He beat upon the heavy, hard-packed bales, dozens
upon dozens of them with all his Changeling strength, until his
hands were bloody and not a single bale was left unbroken. He
fell to his knees in the midst of the straw and howled, a long
ululation from his very soul. Howled again. And again.
But he did not Change. He dared not. He couldn’t trust the
wolf, couldn’t make it stay away from Jillian, therefore, he would
not be a wolf. He would damn well walk out of this town—and her
life—on two legs, if he could believe for one moment that the
wolf would let things be, would give up on its quest to be near
Jillian. But James knew now that wasn’t going to happen. The
first time he fell asleep, the wolf was likely to take over and make
its way right back here.
Jesus Murphy. Looked like he was not only stuck with being
human, but stuck with staying here.
“Fine,” he said aloud, baring his teeth in defiance at whatever
Fates insisted on screwing up his life. “If that’s what has to
happen, then fine.” He felt anything but fine about it. Frustrated,
pissed off, apprehensive and even—if he admitted it—pretty
much scared shitless at the prospect of resuming a human life.
But he wouldn’t shy away from this decision. He would protect
Jillian from the wolf and from anyone or anything else too. At all
costs.
Chapter Fifteen
Connor hadn’t been at the North Star Animal Hospital for a
week. The tall vet had drafted Caroline for an annual trip to a
number of small isolated communities further north. And that
meant Birkie and Jillian had been running the clinic, and
running, literally. Today had already included two cesareans
(one cow, one dog), four pet spays (two dogs, one cat, one
ferret), an overweight hamster, a snake with a skin condition, a
goat with a broken leg, and a blur of vaccinations and checkups.
As much as Jillian enjoyed the work, was stimulated and
challenged by it, the sheer volume was something she had
never experienced before. She couldn’t imagine how on earth
Connor had managed it on his own for such a long time. She
wasn’t certain how she had managed it in his absence, but
fortunately she’d continued to sleep well. She blessed Birkie’s
name frequently for that. Although Jillian had been skeptical at
first, the herbs seemed to be doing the trick. Even the dream
catcher seemed to be working, since she couldn’t remember a
single dream. She smiled at that. The dream catcher’s power
probably lay in suggestion, but that was fine by her. Whatever
worked.
However, she had to admit she was certainly tired now. A
headache was throbbing behind her eyes, probably because
she’d had nothing but coffee since breakfast. Come to think of
it, there hadn’t been any breakfast. As soon as the clock struck
five, she had plans to go straight to her apartment and either eat
or lie down. Maybe eat and lie down at the same time. The
ancient Romans were said to have dined like that, so maybe she
could too. Connor and Caroline would be back sometime
tonight and would be at work in the morning. She only had to
get through the rest of today. . . .
Jillian made her way to the front reception area to ask Birkie
something but what was coming through the door made her
forget all about it. A very small woman with blood-spattered
jeans was dragging in the largest dog Jillian had ever seen, a
Great Pyrenees. The giant breed was often used to protect
livestock from predators—and this one’s thick white fur was
soaked and matted with blood. One of its ears was mostly torn
off. Even injured, the dog looked formidable as it growled with
lowered head and showed its sizable teeth.
The woman jerked the leash as they cleared the door.
“Goddammit, quit that snarling this minute.” She looked up from
under a broad-brimmed hat, nodded at Birkie, then fixed bright
black eyes on Jillian. “You’d be the new one. Name’s Ruby. We
had a little trouble with some coyotes. Cujo’d taken care of most
of them by the time I got out there with the .22, but as you can
see, the coyotes got a piece or two of him.”
Jillian directed the pair to an examination room, and Ruby
hauled on the leash like she was leading a recalcitrant steer.
Cujo followed his mistress but glanced back at the vet and
growled all the way down the hall, in spite of the trail of bright
blood he was leaving.
“You can tell by the name that Ruby’s a die-hard Stephen
King fan,” explained Birkie. “Most of the time, Cujo’s actually
quite a friendly and loveable fellow. But he hates this place.
Some animals just get bad associations, no matter how good
we are to them. Last time he was here, he’d been in a fight with a
black bear and had the skin peeled off one of his hindquarters.
Connor had to roll it up like a big sock and sew it back on. Time
before that, one of his feet was bitten clear through.”
“Dog’s a real warrior then.”
“Has to be. Ruby runs the biggest sheep operation in
northern Alberta. And there’s nothing a Pyrenees won’t do to
protect his flock.” Birkie stood up from her desk and
straightened her pristine lavender jacket. “Connor just called to
say he’s still finishing up inspections at that new bison
processing plant. He’ll be back tonight, but it’ll be a good six to
eight hours at the very least. Caroline’s with him of course, so
there’s just you and me and Ruby. I figure if we all pile on Cujo,
we might be able to get a shot into him. But it’ll have to be an
elephant tranquilizer—that boy doesn’t go down easy.”
Jillian took a deep breath and considered her options.
Although she appeared old enough to be someone’s great
grandmother, Ruby was clearly tough as nails. Tough enough
to put a muzzle on her injured pet? Or hold it down? The heavily
muscled dog had to weigh in at over 200 pounds, bigger than
even a St. Bernard and certainly a lot heavier than Ruby. And
although Birkie was adept at restraining small animals, throwing
an arm around this beast promised to be a real rodeo.
Jillian ran both hands through her hair and thought out loud.
“I’m reluctant to give him a tranq or even a muscle relaxant. He
may be on his feet, but his eyes look shocky to me, probably
from blood loss. I wish we could wait for Connor, but we’ve got
to stop that bleeding. Plus, that ear’s got to be stitched back
together quick or we’ll lose it,” she said. “And if Cujo hasn’t
eaten us by then, every one of those bite wounds will have to be
washed out and sewn up, or there’ll be infection from hell.”
She grabbed a large muzzle and walked quickly down the hall
—sideways to avoid the blood—and entered the surgery. Ruby
had both hands on the dog’s collar and was trying to pull him
into a sitting position, but he snarled and lunged at the vet the
moment she appeared. The massive jaws snapped shut with a
chilling ring, as Ruby swore like a construction worker and
muscled the animal back a couple steps. He twisted free and
ran to the other side of the steel table, where he crouched
behind a chair, dwarfing it. There he continued to bare his teeth
and growl, even at his owner.
“Just leave him be, Ruby. Move back away from him for now.
He’s in pain and he’s pretty scared, plus I think he’s in shock.
Sometimes injured animals will lash out at their owners without
meaning to. Birkie. . . .” Jillian knew the receptionist was close
behind her. “I don’t want you to come in here right now.”
Knowing her only hope lay in gaining the animal’s cooperation,
she stood still and spoke quietly to the dog. “Hey Cujo, you’re
not very happy to be here, and I don’t blame you a bit. But you
need a little help, so we’re going to see what we can do for
you.” Slowly she began to move, intending to try to restrain the
animal herself, when suddenly a tall, broad-shouldered man
pushed roughly past her. For a moment she thought it was
Connor—and then her brain registered the blond hair. “Hey,
what the hell do you think you’re doing?”
He shushed her with a backward wave. All his attention was
on the dog. He didn’t communicate with four-legged creatures
in quite the same way as his brother—Connor could have whole
conversations with animals if he wanted to—but James’s
Changeling abilities could easily quiet a dog, even a monster
like this one. A few murmured words and a light touch was all it
took before Cujo’s lips relaxed back over his teeth, and the
growling ceased. A muzzle was no longer necessary, but
James knew the humans in the room would feel a whole lot
better with one in place. Quickly he took a roll of heavy gauze
from the wall and tethered the threatening jaws with a simple
but effective figure eight, then lifted the dog to the stainless
steel table. “Atta boy,” whispered James and lightly placed a
powerful hand on the animal’s thick neck while sending
soothing thoughts. Cujo lay quietly on the table as Jillian
approached, remained still while she tended to the injured ear.
Ruby talked incessantly about the sheep market while her dog
was stitched up, but James paid little attention to the
monologue. He was too busy wondering why Jillian was so
angry. Fury radiated from her in waves.
In fact, Dr. Jillian Descharme didn’t say a single word to him.
Not until she was done, her patient was on his way home with
his owner, and Birkie had left the building.
“Okay, what the hell did you think you were doing?” Her sea
green eyes were bright with indignation as she wiped down the
table with antibacterial spray. “I don’t need untrained people
jumping into dangerous situations like that.”
James went over to the sink and washed his hands, even
though they really didn’t need it. Every movement was calm and
deliberate, not just because he had to remember how to do this
task—and the water felt strange, almost ticklish on his human
skin—but because he was trying to measure out how to
respond to Jillian when he didn’t have a clue what the problem
was. “Exactly right, doc. It was a very dangerous situation. The
owner was in danger, and your receptionist. And so were you.”
“I knew what I was doing. I’m not helpless, you know.”
“I didn’t say that. No one’s accusing you of being helpless.
But trying to handle everything yourself isn’t necessary or
smart—”
“What the hell do you know about what’s necessary?” she
snapped. “I have to handle stuff like this every day on my own.
If I can’t do the job, I have no business being here.”
He glared back. Why the hell was she so upset? “The job
doesn’t require you to place yourself in harm’s way.”
“Dammit, I’m a licensed veterinarian—” she began but he cut
her off.
“Yes, you are, and because you are, you know damn well that
going into that situation alone was stupid. If it had been a
poodle or a cocker spaniel, it might have been different.” James
shook the towel out before putting it back on the rack, aware
that he’d like nothing better than to shake Jillian. “But that
animal outweighed you, was injured and in pain and looking to
tear into you. And not one soul in that room, including you, doc,
would have been able to stop it.” The mental picture clutched at
his gut.
“So you decided you should just waltz in and rescue us
females?”
James’s voice dropped lower, his eyes narrowed to steely
blue slits. He stalked forward until he was nearly nose-to-nose
with her, although he had to lean over to achieve that. “Don’t
you reduce this to gender shit. That just demeans both of us. I
stepped in because I had the experience and the muscle to do
what was needed in this particular situation. So you could then
do what you’re skilled and experienced at. What I did is nothing
against you, and if you think it is, then you’re not as smart as I
pegged you for.”
She was spitting mad. James could see the rage radiating
from Jillian like smoke from a wildfire. If looks could kill, he
wouldn’t be breathing. But there were other things in those
glaring green eyes. Tiredness. No, more like all-out exhaustion.
And pain. A headache? Suddenly concerned, he skimmed her
cheek with the back of his knuckles—and caught her lightning
fist in his hand an instant before she connected with his face.
Caught the other fist too and held them both captive. Then
James did something else completely reflexive. Still holding her
hands, he bent his head and kissed that angry mouth.
For a split second he was certain she would either bite him or
head-butt him. He could feel the outraged shock vibrate right
through her; then something shifted subtly, changed. Whether
it was in him or in her, or both, he didn’t know, but there was a
sudden spark of surprised recognition. The spark flared. He
released her hands, and she didn’t pull away. The kiss
deepened, and they all but fell into each other. Her lips were
both giving and demanding, and so were his. Hungry. Needing,
then needing more. Neither of them was steady on their feet
when they finally stepped back from each other.
“Why the hell did you do that?” Her voice was still angry but
also a little shaky. Then he looked in her eyes and saw not
anger but desire. Raw desire. The surprising power of it
punched him in the gut a full three seconds before her fist did.
By the time he got his wind back, Jillian was gone.
Jillian tried walking for an hour to distract herself, calm down.
Then she shopped in every store along Main Street. She needed
a giant economy package of work socks, didn’t she? But even
with her body still vibrating like a plucked string, tiredness and
hunger won out. She had to find a place to sit down, refuel and
regroup. She considered going to the Jersey Pub but
remembered there was a baseball game on the big screen TV
tonight, which would draw a large and boisterous crowd.
Instead she headed over to the Finer Diner. Birkie had brought
her there during her second day in Dunvegan, claiming it was
the best place in town to eat. The little gas station and
convenience store combo hadn’t looked promising as a
restaurant, but Jillian was a believer after that meal. Although
she could sample much of the Finer Diner cuisine from the staff
fridge anytime, microwaving a container just didn’t equal the
fresh-made experience.
She waved at the big man working the till as some teenagers
purchased giant cups of soda and multiple bags of chips. Bill
Watson was nearly as tall as Connor and built like a champion
wrestler—which at one time he was—with a multitude of both
tattoos and freckles covering his muscled arms. The
backstreets of London and the outback of Australia blended in
his voice, along with pure good humor. Deep and loud, his
words boomed easily across the store to the red vinyl booth
where Jillian had planted herself.
“Right then, lovey, no doubt you’ll be looking for supper. The
special is fish’n’chips, and Jessie’s made her best-ever slaw to
lie down wi’ that.”
“Sounds great.” She leaned back and surveyed the store,
glanced out the window at the row of businesses across the
street and watched the gaggle of folks who stopped in front of
the post office to chat or to sort their mail. It never failed to
surprise her how much she enjoyed the little northern town and
the people who lived here. There was a sense of community
she’d never experienced before, even though she was more of
an observer than a participant.
She certainly hadn’t been just an observer when James
kissed her. That kiss . . . Good God, she could still taste him.
Jillian sighed a little in spite of herself. She remembered the way
James had pulled her close, the feel of his hands running up
and down her body, the incredible heat that radiated from him,
that blond beard surprisingly soft against her face.
And then she remembered the way she’d plowed her fist into
James’s solid body before running like a rabbit. Her cheeks
flamed. That had been dumb, just plain dumb, a reaction worthy
of a school playground kiss. She could have just said no thanks,
could have backed off, could have not kissed the man back in
the first place—but she’d have to be made out of stone not to
respond to James Macleod. Okay, maybe she could have kissed
him and then said something supremely mature and dignified
that would—what? Let him down easy? Discourage him? Was
that what she really wanted?
Leaning her head on her hands, Jillian closed her eyes
wearily. Okay, I admit it, I’m attracted to him. But who wouldn’t be?
She supposed she should probably apologize for hitting him.
But having James pissed off at her was good insurance against
a repeat of that kiss, and right now she wanted some insurance
like that. Deep down, she was just a little afraid of being kissed
like that again. Who knew what might happen? Something,
anything. Everything.
She furrowed her brow and deliberately recalled the events
that preceded the kiss. Like his lecture. And the way he’d
arrogantly pushed her aside and taken over restraining the dog.
Jillian tried so hard to find her edge, drum up some anger so
she could ruthlessly douse the little fires his kiss had kindled.
Couldn’t do it. The truth was, James hadn’t been arrogant,
hadn’t been showing off or trying to take over anything. He’d
been trying to keep her from being badly mauled.
Oh, crap. As much as she hated to admit it, he’d been right,
totally, absolutely right. She’d been too tired to see just how
risky and stupid—he’d certainly picked the right word there—
she’d been to even think of touching that monstrous dog
without extra help. Her instructors back east would be the first
to give her an earful about “risk management.” Connor would
have been within his rights to fire her for endangering herself
like that. His employee insurance rates would have skyrocketed
if anything had gone wrong. And the dog could well have
injured not only her, but the other women in the room too. Now
I’ll probably have to thank James or something.
She sighed then. Right after I apologize to him. She’d been
rude. Snarky, bitchy rude. Sure, she was tired, she was hungry,
she had a killer headache, she had all sorts of leftover
adrenaline in her system, but those things weren’t James’s
fault. The fact that he reminded her powerfully, simply by
existing, that she hadn’t had sex in a long, long time—okay, she
could blame him for that one. But the rest, no.
However, in order to thank him or apologize or anything,
she’d have to see him again. And how was she ever going to
look him in the face after that killer kiss? Especially when
something inside her went liquid at the thought of being
wrapped in those powerful arms, held tight against that hot, hot
body.
She jumped as a steaming platter of fish and chips appeared
in front of her. “Thanks,” she managed. Bill winked broadly and
hurried back to the counter where a man was waiting to pay for
gas. At once she recognized the dark red hair curling out from
under the hat. Douglas Harrison. He was looking right at her,
but for a split second, she thought he was going to walk out
without acknowledging her. Then he seemed to think better of it
and approached her table.
“Evening, Dr. Descharme.”
“Jillian. How’s the mare doing?”
“The foot’s real good. The heat’s out of it now, and she’s not
favoring it much. You did a good job with her.”
“Thanks. I’m glad we could do something for her. She’s got a
great temperament.”
“Yeah, she does, but Dad sure as hell doesn’t these days. I
wanted to apologize for his behavior.”
“That’s not your fault—or his. I didn’t take any offense from it.
Please don’t apologize.”
Douglas seemed to relax somewhat then. “He’s not like that
all the time, really. It’s the damn Alzheimer’s. He just gets these
spells and goes off the deep end, doesn’t recognize people.”
“Or sees things that aren’t there?” she ventured. “It must be
very hard on you, on all of your family.”
He nodded. “Some days are harder than others. Fortunately
he still has some good days too, and that helps. Anyways, I
don’t want to interrupt your meal there.”
“That’s okay, I was just waiting for it to cool off a little.” She
had an idea. “Your dad mentioned werewolves, but he also said
something about a white wolf with blue eyes. Do you know if he
ever saw a real wolf or maybe a wolf-dog cross around here that
matched that description? Something that might have given him
the werewolf idea?”
Some people’s skin turned pale when under stress. Others
colored. Douglas turned a bright rose right to the roots of his
auburn hair and looked so uncomfortable that Jillian was
almost sorry she’d asked the question.
“Dad’s lived here longer than either of us has been alive, built
his cattle ranch in the early 20s by clearing away raw forest. I
imagine he saw plenty of wolves in every color back then. Not
now though. There’s no wolves around the place now.”
“You keep saying that but—”
“I’ve got to go. Thanks again for your work on our mare.” He
quickly walked out of the store.
Jillian watched him through the window, saw him get into a
pickup and take off with a surprising squeal of tires. Nervous,
she thought. The wolf thing made him nervous, as if he was
scared of something. Why would that be? And why are all the
attractive men I meet so weird? She was glad to find her food still
hot and settled into eating, determined not to think about
Douglas or James or any other members of the male species for
the rest of the night.
Restless and edgy, James paced the parameters of Connor’s
farm. What he really wanted to do was Change and race
through the sprawling fields and forest that comprised his
brother’s land. But he didn’t trust the wolf, and so he was trying
to work off his frustrations the slow way—as a human being on
foot. He’d walked all the way here from the clinic. And now he’d
walked most of the fence lines. So far, however, all the walking
seemed to be simply aggravating him more.
He was sick to death of being human. His head was crammed
with too much information, conflicting thoughts and multiple
considerations, all underpinned with complex emotion. And
over all, a new awareness of Jillian he’d rather not have.
Damn, the woman can kiss.
He sighed, swore. It had to be lust. Attraction, then lust. Hell,
he hadn’t had a woman in years. Decades to be correct,
although he still struggled to accept the amount of time that had
passed. It was perfectly normal to act on the attraction he felt for
Jillian. But he had no right to what was normal, no right to
encourage things between them. Encourage, hell. Although
James had been out of the picture for thirty years, he was
relatively certain that grabbing a woman he’d technically just
met and kissing her senseless still wasn’t the norm. Even more
disconcerting was how much he wanted to do it again. And
again. One of the most important lessons learned by every
young Changeling was control. Discipline. Restraint. He’d never
had a problem with it before, not in all his long life. Until now.
Now, both wolf and human nature appeared obsessed with
Jillian Descharme. He was supposed to be protecting her, not
seducing her. Obviously he’d lost not just his control but his
mind somewhere along the line.
He shouldn’t have kissed her, shouldn’t have gone anywhere
near her—what had he been thinking? James snorted. Thinking
with his hormones most likely. It only made sense that a return
to human form would bring human desires with it. Except his
desires were for something more than sex, and that both
confused and infuriated him. It was the wolf’s fault, plainly. His
wolf nature had introduced the notion of a relationship with
Jillian, and now his human side seemed to be entertaining the
idea.
Not that Jillian was encouraging things, however. She
seemed to be pissed off at James every time he saw her. Of
course, maybe he hadn’t exactly caught her at her best. He tried
to look at it from her point of view. He’d broken into her
apartment in the night. Grabbed her in the loft. Run over her in
the hallway. Small wonder she wasn’t glad to see him when he
tried to do something proactive like keep her from being eaten
alive by a giant dog. But it still surprised him that she saw it as
interfering. Maybe she liked to fight her own battles.
James considered that. She definitely had a warrior spirit.
He’d glimpsed it that night in her apartment and admired it.
There had been no screaming, no pleading, no fear at all in her
—at least, no fear that she’d revealed. When she’d failed to deck
James, she’d gone for a knife to gut him. Strange how that just
increased her appeal.
A warrior spirit. She’d defied him in the loft when she had no
hope of escaping, when she thought he meant her harm. More
than a warrior. Because instead of fleeing when she had the
chance, she’d paused and actually expressed concern for him.
It stunned him, then and now. He’d knocked her flying in the
hallway, and she hadn’t complained, but again, there was
concern for him in those sea green eyes. It had nearly undone
him. James wiped a hand over his face, found himself sweating
as he remembered helping her up, remembered those aching
seconds when he couldn’t make himself let go of her. When he
very nearly kissed her.
Which made the kiss after the Cujo incident a whole lot less
surprising. And the possibility of kissing Jillian Descharme
again much more likely. How was he ever going to get out of her
life and back to his own four-footed one? All he knew for sure
was that the longer he stayed in human form, the more
complicated his life seemed to get.
And what he was about to do would complicate it even
further.
Chapter Sixteen
The doorbell rang, startling Connor into dropping the spoon
into the soup he was stirring on the stove. He hadn’t heard a car
come in the lane and none of the dogs had barked. Only a
Changeling could get to his home unannounced, and Zoey was
in the city until tomorrow. Anyone else would have given him
some mental warning. The heavy front door was wide open,
letting the breeze come through the screen door. Whoever was
there could easily have spoken to him, called out a greeting,
even stuck their head inside. Something. Connor approached
the doorway cautiously, silently, and looked out.
A man stood on the covered porch, looking out over the yard.
The twilight silhouetted him, revealing only his shape and not
his features, but it was enough. The powerful form definitely
belonged to a Macleod. He was tall, like all of the Macleod
brothers, broad of shoulder and heavily muscled. Only one of
them, however, had the white-blond hair, visible even in the
fading light, that tumbled almost to this man’s collar and
matched the pale close-cropped beard that followed his jaw.
James.
The man whirled. He recognized his brother and relaxed. A
little.
Connor opened the door carefully, half-wondering if he was
seeing things and half-afraid of scaring James off. Took a
couple of steps outside. “You selling Girl Scout cookies or
magazine subscriptions? What the hell are you doing ringing
the doorbell like some stranger?” He searched his brother’s
face. The strong features, the intense eyes, were tempered with
both knowledge and sorrow, but it was the face Connor had
carried in his heart all these years. “God, James. I—” He
couldn’t finish for the emotions that squeezed his heart. He
closed the distance between them and seized his brother in a
rough embrace. I never thought I’d see you again, not like this.
They held each other for a long moment then stood apart.
Connor kept a hand on James’s shoulder, feeling a little foolish
yet unable to let go. “I’m glad you came.”
James shook his head. “I’m . . . I’m not really sure what I’m
doing here.”
His brother’s voice seemed a little deeper, a little rougher, but
it was the voice Connor knew. He had to swallow hard, twice,
before he could respond. “Doesn’t matter. You can take your
time, sort it out as you go along.”
James waved an arm at the yard to change the subject.
“Place looks good. Lots of potential.”
“Place looks like hell.” Connor snorted. “And as for potential,
I’ve had it for over ten years now, and it’s almost as run-down
as when I took it over. I just don’t get much time to work on it. A
few years ago I hired people to come in and renovate the house,
but it’s a lot tougher to find someone to renovate a farm. Maybe
you can give me some advice over supper.” He held the door
open. “Zoey’s not here so I’m heating up some soup, got a
couple loaves of Bill’s cheese bread to go with it. You coming in
to eat, or are you going to stand out here on the porch all
night?”
“Guess I could help you with that soup.”
The soup was stuck to the bottom of the pot but luckily hadn’t
burned yet. While they ate, Connor kept looking across the
table. His brother James was actually sitting in his kitchen. It
seemed normal and surreal at the same time. Connor made
small talk about the farm, about the week he’d just spent up
north with a mobile clinic, but towards the end of the meal, he
just had to ask, “What made you come here in human skin?”
James was caught off guard by the question, seemed almost
embarrassed. “I just thought about what you said, that’s all.
Made sense to give it a try.”
“And?” Connor said expectantly.
“There’s no ‘and.’”
Connor rolled his eyes. “Don’t bullshit me. I just phoned
Birkie a while ago to get my messages. She said that my brother
showed up today and assisted Jillian with a patient. Maybe you
could elaborate?”
“Jillian was going to get hurt. They all were. I didn’t get a
chance to think about it. I was sound asleep in the damn loft
and suddenly there was this overwhelming sense of danger. It
was like being jolted awake with a cattle prod. I was down the
ladder and in the room before I was even fully awake.”
“Birkie mentioned it was a pretty dangerous situation. She
was trying to figure out a way to use some of her mojo on the
dog when you came in. Said she was damn glad to see you.”
James shook his head. “Jillian was already in harm’s way
with nothing but a leather muzzle between her and—hey, you’re
not going to give her grief about this, are you?” The last words
came out almost as a snarl.
Connor was surprised to see a glimpse of the white wolf in
the blatant warning that flashed across his brother’s face, but
he wasn’t intimidated. “Damn right I will. She’s a good vet, going
to be a great one, but she doesn’t have years of experience
under her belt yet. I’m her boss and the senior vet, and that
gives me the right to chew her out when necessary.”
James got up without a word and went back out to the porch.
Connor followed.
“So, that’s quite a protective streak you’ve got going on there,
bro.”
“I know it.”
“You’re in human form because of Jillian.” He made it a
statement.
James leaned against a post. “Yeah. Wish I could give you a
more noble reason, like I want to return to being a productive
member of society, but that’s not why I Changed. I won’t lie
about that.” He turned and faced his brother. “The truth is,
being human is the only thing I can think of to do, the only way
to protect her. I can’t control the wolf, so I can’t be the wolf.”
“For how long?”
“I don’t know. As long as it takes, I guess, whatever it takes to
make sure she’s safe.”
Connor thought James was mistaken about not having a
noble reason. He could hear the determination in his brother’s
voice, see the absolute commitment to this path in his face. And
just how uncomfortable this path was for him. Still, there were a
lot of loose ends to this new plan. “And when you’re certain
she’s safe, what then? You’ll just go back to being a full-time
wolf? Run on four legs for another thirty years?”
James swore in exasperation. “For Christ’s sake, I’ve already
gotten an earful from Birkie on the subject.” He left the porch,
stalked across the yard to the nearest corral. Rested his arms
on the top rail and watched the horses within.
Connor watched the horses too, his horses, as their heads
came up and they looked with curious eyes at the blond
stranger leaning on the fence. He chuckled as they all trotted
over to his brother. “I’ll be damned,” he said to himself.
“Animals still act like puppies around you. You haven’t lost your
touch, bro.” He watched the horses bumping each other, all
trying to nuzzle James at the same time. Even the cranky old
pinto, which didn’t like people at all as a general rule, made an
exception for him and was eagerly nosing in for a pat. “Small
wonder you were able to deal with Ruby’s monster dog.” Again
he wondered if James ever missed the land and the livestock he
was so talented with.
Connor wanted nothing more than to leave things alone, take
this time with his brother and just enjoy being with him. But
there were things his brother needed to hear, and putting them
off wouldn’t make it easier. Even to say them was to risk
alienating him. Good Christ. Why do I get to be the one to do this?
His shoulders felt heavy as he crossed the yard to stand beside
James, who waved a hand at the horses and sent them to the
other side of the corral.
“Leave it alone, Connor.”
“You have to listen.”
“I don’t have to listen to a goddamn thing. Leave it be.”
“It’s way too late, you know.”
“Too late for you to shut the hell up?”
“Too late to just go back to being a wolf. You’re so damn used
to being an animal that you’ve forgotten the complex emotional
world of human relationships. Think, for God’s sake. You’re on
two legs, but you’re still acting like a wolf, focused solely on one
thing and that’s Jillian. I agree that you need to look out for her,
but there’s a whole lot more you need to consider, other people
you need to think about here.”
“I haven’t thought about anything yet.” James faced his
brother with both fury and frustration in his blue eyes. “I’ve
been human for two damn days, and I’ve already had enough.
You don’t know what it’s like. You don’t know what the hell
you’re asking. I feel like my skin’s missing and all the nerves are
exposed. I just want to Change and—”
“Run away? That’s been your answer to everything, hasn’t
it?” A fist lashed out in response, but Connor had expected it
and spun neatly out of reach. Just barely. James had always
been fast. “You can’t run forever.”
The follow-up blow connected solidly and split Connor’s lip.
With a growl that was more animal than human, he ducked his
head and charged James. They grappled like boxers, like bears.
Connor got a hand free and hammered his brother’s ribs. James
hooked a right into Connor’s chin and followed it with an
uppercut, staggering him. Before Connor could regain his
balance, James tackled him, taking them both between the
fence rails and into the corral. There they rolled together in the
dirt, wrestling, punching, swearing. Connor was strong, but
he’d never had his brother’s skill as a fighter. In moments,
James had straddled Connor and punched him solidly twice
more. But just as James was drawing his fist back for a third
time, a flash of light and a sudden explosion of electricity
knocked him flying backward.
He came to about a dozen feet away, lying flat on his back in
the dirt. A crackle of sparks still played in the air around him.
James shook his head and blinked, hard, to clear his vision.
And saw a very large wolf sitting beside him, watching him. The
grinning animal was silver with a blanket of black over his
shoulders—and James knew there was only one Changeling
with that rare saddleback pattern. “No fair Changing in the
middle of a fight, you cheating bastard.” He said it without heat,
however. Whatever anger he’d had before had been effectively
blown away. Changing in close proximity to anyone wasn’t
recommended. It took energy to become the wolf, and an
experienced Changeling automatically drew it not only from his
own reserves but also from the earth, the air. The static build-up
was immense. James remembered when he’d first learned that.
“Seems to me you pulled that little stunt when we were kids
too.” He’d been sitting on Connor then as well, and punching
him in the face—God, were they ten? Twelve?—and Connor
had Changed. The blast of static had thrown James a good
twenty feet in a flurry of blue sparks.
Still seems to be the only way I can beat you. You didn’t fly so far
this time, though. Must have gained a few pounds.
“Get your smart ass over here and help me up, why don’t
you?” James struggled to his knees and just stayed there for a
few moments. He was winded and a headache was starting to
pound in the back of his head. At least he was still breathing. If
he’d been human instead of Changeling, his heart might have
stopped and he wouldn’t be breathing at all.
A large hand appeared in his field of vision. James gripped it
and let Connor pull him to his feet. “What the hell were we
arguing about again?” He made his way to a fence post and
gripped it hard to steady himself.
“I was telling you to quit running away.”
“And I was telling you to back off, goddammit. I need a
chance to think.”
“You’d better think, and think hard, bro. You’ve been gone for
thirty years. Three decades. Just how do you think the family is
going to respond? Hell, how do you think Mom and Dad would
react if they knew you were here, like this? Walking around in
human form?”
James’s irritation drained away abruptly. “What, our folks
don’t want me back?”
“No, James, they do want you back. You don’t know how bad
they want you back. They pray for it every day, every single day.
They’ll welcome you with open arms, just like all the rest of us
will, believe me. What I’m saying is, don’t fool around with their
hearts.”
“What are you talking about? You make it sound like I plan to
hurt them or something.”
“You’re planning to be human for a little while, then disappear
again. How do you think they’ll feel? You can’t just pop in and
out of people’s lives. It’s not right.” Connor ran a hand over his
face and jammed it back in his pocket. “Good Christ, James,
you’ve been dead. Maybe not physically, but for all intents and
purposes, as far as your family is concerned, you’ve been dead
for three decades. You can’t come back from the dead and then
disappear again.”
Tentatively James let go of the fence post and straightened,
stretched. He felt as if he’d been beaten with a sack of hammers.
“Maybe I’d just better stay dead then.”
“It’s a little late for that. Think you can go back to being a wolf
now and that’ll fix everything? Because it sure as hell won’t.
Birkie’s already seen you. Jillian’s seen you. They know the
family, they know the Watsons. Put it together.”
Realization dawned. “The rest of the family is going to find
out I was in human form,” he said slowly as all the implications
began to sink in. “I should never have Changed. I should have
stayed a wolf,” he said, half to himself. “I should Change back
now, before things get any more tangled.”
“Which brings us right back to my original point, that it’s way
too late for that. The family, the Pack, our friends—hell, even
Zoey will be devastated that she didn’t get to see you and I—
shit, James, I don’t want you to go.” He paced and waved a
hand as he struggled for words. “Look, you did what you had to
do to survive when Evelyn died. You Changed and you stayed a
wolf for a long time. I get that, I understand that, James. I didn’t
blame you for it, I never blamed you.
“But then the years went by and you were still a wolf.
Decades went by, and that’s what I have trouble understanding.
Even for a Changeling, thirty years is one hell of a long time.”
“It didn’t feel like a long time.”
“Not to you. Not to you, but you ought to feel it from this side.
From the side of all the people you left behind to miss you.
Christ, you’re my brother, James, and I miss you every damn
day of my life.”
Douglas set the grocery bags on the kitchen table, a
shapeless heap of red and white plastic. There was milk and
other things that should go in the refrigerator, but they could
wait. What he wanted, needed, was in the brown paper bag. He
looked around, checked the coffeemaker, smelled it. The coffee
had been on too long, at that stage where it was just this side of
syrup, but at least it hadn’t burnt. It would be strong, but maybe
he needed it strong today. He poured two thirds of a cup, then
drew the black-labeled bottle from the bag, topped up his cup
with the amber liquid and drank it down greedily.
Better. Douglas felt his jangled nerves settle as the warmth
spread through him. Filled the cup again, half and half this time.
Why won’t she leave things alone? He liked the lady vet but she
just had to bring up the goddamn white wolf. Okay, okay, so
he’d panicked and lied when there was no real reason to lie.
She was right, there were real wolves in the region. Lots of
them, in fact. He wished that what Dr. Descharme suggested
was true, that years ago Roderick Harrison had seen a genuine
wolf or two or twenty that now inspired delusions of
werewolves in his confused mind.
If wishes were horses . . . What he wished for most was that he
hadn’t seen the white wolf for himself. He wished he had never
seen it become a tall blond man in the blink of an eye, or
witnessed him discovering the woman on the floor. Douglas
especially wished he had never heard that inhuman howl of
unspeakable anguish. He had awakened twice this week in a
sweat, with the howl ringing in his ears. Always, for the first few
heart-pounding seconds at least, he was certain it was real and
not in a dream. He poured another cup, mostly whiskey this
time.
Werewolves. His father had never mentioned the subject
again, at least not in his son’s hearing. But the old man had still
gone out at night, alone, sometimes. He always took his guns.
He invited Douglas once, but he stayed in bed under the
blankets with his eyes squeezed tight and pretended to be
asleep. His father had made a disgusted noise and never asked
him again. Thank God. Being an accessory to one murder was
enough. Two, said the little voice inside. Two murders, it was a
double-murder. She was pregnant, just like Rosa. You watched your
father do it, Dougie, watched him shoot her, kill her and her unborn
child and you did nothing.
He drank the cup quickly, hoping to drown out that little voice,
but he kept thinking about Dr. Descharme’s questions. Come to
think of it, his father never said much about how he found out
about the werewolves, only that he’d seen them often. Knew
their habits, knew their secrets. But how? How did he know so
much about them? And did he learn it before or after they killed
his wife?
Filled with liquid courage, Douglas headed for his father’s
room. He stood in the doorway and watched his father snore.
The old man had been wild for the rest of the night after the lady
vet had driven away. But when morning came, he was
remarkably clear-headed. He’d dressed, eaten, then saddled his
horse. He rode out and checked over the livestock, inspected
the fences, as if there wasn’t a single thing wrong with him and
never had been. Douglas wouldn’t let him drive no matter what,
not even an ATV in the pasture—and God, he hated the fights
they had over that—but his dad’s favorite horse was a sensible
old mare who didn’t put up with any nonsense. If his dad
slipped into an Alzheimer’s fog, the horse seemed to know. She
simply brought him back to the house and stood there, waiting
for someone to come out and get him.
Usually when Roderick Harrison had good days, he didn’t
have good nights. At best he would thrash in uneasy dreams,
murmur unintelligible words. Sometimes he would wake up
screaming that the wolf was coming, that the white devil was
going to get him. Douglas would have to comfort his father like
a small child.
But not lately. Last night the old man had slept peacefully
without waking, and thanks be to Jesus, it looked like he would
do so again. For a moment Douglas contemplated the drink in
his hands, considered pouring it out. If his father was sleeping,
he might be able to as well . . . but the drink was his insurance
against dreams. He took a quick swallow, then another and
headed down the hall to his room, taking the glass with him.
The moon was high, and James was still standing on the
porch. He hadn’t moved in an hour. Connor stood at the kitchen
window, watching his brother and wondering for the hundredth
time if he had done the right thing. He had argued hard for this
decision, but it was James who had to make it. And he had.
There would be no going back now.
Connor had called the family. Their parents, Ronan and
Gwyn, were presently in Scotland, and one sister, Carlene, was
in Wyoming. The rest lived here in Dunvegan and they were on
their way.
He sensed the approach of Changelings in wolfen form,
moving in swiftly from the southeast, heard the mental banter
that hallmarked the twins, Culley and Devlin. He noted that their
sister Kenzie was with them and knew that James heard them
too and saw him stiffen. For a brief second Connor wondered if
he’d pushed James too far, too fast. If he was going to Change
or leave. Or both.
Quit worrying, Connor. Since when has anyone ever talked me into
doing something I didn’t want to do? I made the decision and I’ll deal
with it.
Connor’s throat tightened and his eyes stung as James sat
slowly, deliberately, on the top step and waited for his family to
find him.
Chapter Seventeen
“The cow had a little problem, that’s all. She threw a big calf.
These things happen all the time with livestock. You’re not a
cattle rancher, so I don’t expect you to understand.”
Jillian folded her arms and glared up at the dark-haired man.
Gerald Mountney Junior looked too well dressed to be a serious
farmer. Although his tanned face was almost magazine-cover
perfect, she could see something worse than cruelty behind it.
Indifference. “I understand that the cow had a prolapsed uterus.
And it’s a hell of a lot more than a little problem when an animal
in that condition doesn’t receive timely medical attention. It’s a
wonder she isn’t dead.”
It was a veterinarian’s nightmare. Sometimes after a cow gave
birth, the powerful contractions would push part of the actual
uterus outside of the body, where it was susceptible to both
massive infection and injury. As the responding vet, it was up to
Jillian to wrestle the swollen, discolored organ back into place
and put in the stitches that would hold it there. It had been a
long, difficult, miserable job with no guarantee that the creature
would survive. Her arms felt like spaghetti and would likely be
sore for days.
“ ‘Medical attention’ is what I’m paying you for.” The smile
became a hard line, the black eyes narrowed and glittered with
anger. The smooth voice rose. “You just stick to your cutting
and sewing, and leave the opinions to an experienced
cattleman.” He began to push past her, but she quickly stepped
in front of him.
“If you’re such an experienced cattleman, maybe you could
explain to me why you dumped the cow in one of our corrals
without telling anyone. And why you disappeared so we didn’t
even know whose animal it was when we finally found it.” Jillian
met the man’s eyes without a flinch. “And every experienced
cattleman I know hangs around to give us a hand with their
animal. They don’t drop it off like goddamn dry cleaning.”
His face was far less attractive when it was flushed purple
with rage. “I don’t know who the hell you think you are, but you
have no fucking idea who you’re dealing with.”
“I appear to be dealing with someone who shouldn’t be
allowed to own animals. That cow should have been brought in
immediately, not a day later. Better yet, it should have been a
farm call. You should have called us to come out. We could
have fixed it on the spot so the animal didn’t have to go through
the additional stress of being transported.”
“That’s the opinion of someone with a shiny new diploma
who thinks she’s better than everyone else. It’s your word
against mine.”
“That’s the opinion of a trained veterinarian. You’ll find it
holds up well in court.”
He took a quick step toward her and she braced herself,
brought her fists up to ready in a classic Tae Kwon Do stance.
Suddenly Mountney stopped dead, his eyes traveling upward
and over her head. There was something else besides temper in
his face now. A flicker of fear? To her surprise, he backed up a
step, then another. Tried to speak and couldn’t seem to get
anything out. Finally he spun on his expensive boot heel and
stormed to his truck, a shiny club cab pickup in metal flake
cherry. He spun gravel as he pulled out of the parking lot.
Jillian whipped around, thinking it was Connor behind her.
“Hey, I had this under control. You didn’t need to—”
She was struck speechless as she found herself face to face
with James Macleod. More like face to chest, since he was so
tall.
“You’re right, you didn’t need any help,” he said. “But the
man’s a bully, and sometimes the best way to deal with a bully
is to stack the odds against him. I figured if he saw he was
outnumbered, he might take up a lot less of your valuable time.”
The timbre of James’s voice stroked something deep inside
her. Her cheeks went hot as her body clenched then went
liquid. Get a grip, girl! Her body ignored her, making her annoyed
at herself and now twice as annoyed at James. She scowled up
at him even as she ran a hand through her disordered hair.
“Don’t you have anything better to do than follow me around
and interfere with my work?”
“I didn’t interfere. Didn’t say a single word.”
Jillian narrowed her eyes at him, and he had the nerve to look
innocent. It wasn’t a look that suited his rugged features. “I’m
not going to say thanks.”
“ ’S not required. You didn’t ask me for help.”
“I didn’t need help. What I need right now is to get back to
work. Maybe if you had a job, you’d have a lot less time on your
hands to spend meddling with mine.” She saw the flash in his
eyes as the dart hit home, and was feeling just petty enough to
enjoy his irritation. Jillian knew she’d be mortified, even
ashamed, later, but right now, she didn’t want to be the only one
frustrated and annoyed.
“As a matter of fact, doc, I’m here on business. I need a vet’s
signature so Birkie or Caroline can dispense some things on
my list.”
“What list?”
He shoved a sheaf of paper into her hands. “This list. It’s for
Connor’s farm. And since I have some feed to load, I’ll pick up
these papers and the stuff later. Maybe you’ll be in a better
mood then, but I doubt it. I don’t think I’ve seen you in a good
humor yet.”
“I’m just fine until you show up.” Dammit! Would he quit
looking at her with those eyes? Who told him he could have
such sexy eyes? “And don’t think for a moment that I’m going
to apologize for hitting you the other day.”
“That’s fine. I’m sure not apologizing for kissing you. Might do
it again too. Consider yourself warned.”
She stood with her mouth open as he walked away. And
cursed herself for noticing how well those jeans hugged that
muscled butt.
“I know it’s close to closing, hon. But Connor’s still out in the
corral with that injured heifer, and I need to ask if you’re up to
seeing just one more appointment today.” Birkie held up a file.
Although she had endless patience for the animals that
needed her help, Jillian found it was often downright difficult to
extend that patience to some of the owners. Especially the ones
who came in near the end of the day. Still, it wasn’t the animals’
fault if their owners couldn’t bring them in when Jillian was
feeling more tolerant. James’s comments about her mood
sprang to mind, and she worked up a smile for her friend. It
turned out to be a faint one, but it was a smile. “I’d be glad to.
Not a wild elephant with a toothache, is it?”
“Nope, just a small dog. It’s the owner that’s wild.”
Jillian didn’t dare ask, just took the file marked “Pinky” and
headed for the exam room. She was scanning Connor’s notes
when Charmaine Forrester breezed in. Or rather, her hair did.
Platinum curls were piled high atop the woman’s head, where
they tumbled down in a caricature of an outdated Nashville
style. The fluffy cascade almost hid a tight black T-shirt and
finally ended where rhinestone-studded jeans seemed painted
over sharp narrow hips. Jillian found herself mentally
calculating as to which weighed more, Charmaine or her garish
hair.
As the young vet watched, fascinated, the woman pulled a
shoulder bag from under her bleached tresses, drew out a silky
mass of white and black hair and plunked it on the stainless
steel table. There it coalesced into a purebred Shih Tzu.
“This must be Pinky,” Jillian managed at last and
automatically ran her hands over the dog’s body. Thin, too thin.
Female, and with the permanently enlarged teats of a creature
who’d given birth in recent months and not for the first time. The
dog’s ankle-length coat was dull and falling out. Her eyes were
dull as well. “What seems to be wrong with her?” she asked.
“Nothing’s wrong with her,” snapped Charmaine. “I just want
to know if it took.”
“If what took?”
“Well, the breeding of course.” The woman looked at Jillian as
if she was an idiot. “I paid two hundred bucks for Pinky to have
an afternoon with a purebred stud, and I don’t want to pay
another two hundred if I don’t have to. It’s bad enough that it
costs me forty dollars to see you to find out. Where’s that goodlooking
Connor, anyway?”
Jillian ignored the question. “Normally we do a blood test to
check for a hormone called relaxin, but this dog is obviously in
no shape for breeding.” She wished she’d had more time to
read the file. “When was her last litter, and how many litters has
she had?”
“Why she’s had lots, because that’s her job, to make cute little
puppies. Isn’t it, girlie-girl?” Charmaine hugged the dog to her
and made smoochy noises at it. Pinky regarded Jillian with
weary eyes.
She tried another tactic. “Guess you get a good price for
those puppies, huh?”
“Six hundred dollars each, purebred, unregistered. If I get a
real good stud and can register the puppies, I charge another
three hundred.” The woman bounced Pinky up and down. “She
usually has six puppies too, and last time she had eight,” she
announced proudly.
Eight? Jillian imagined the tiny dog struggling to feed eight
growing puppies. The nutritional demands of lactation called for
high-quality food and lots of it, but even if Pinky was being fed
like a champ—which she somehow doubted—the dog wasn’t
getting any real recovery time. She took a deep breath and
sucked back her anger, remembering the words of one of her
instructors: Most pet owners who fail to care for their pets do so out
of ignorance rather than malice. There must be a persuasive
argument that this client could respond to.
“Can you hurry it up with the blood test, doc? I’ve got a nail
appointment.”
So much for the educational approach. “A nail appointment?
You’re using your dog as a goddamn puppy machine and
you’re worried about a nail appointment?
“Hey, who the hell do you think you—”
Jillian cut her off. “This dog is exhausted. Do you get that?
Completely and totally exhausted. Don’t you care about her at
all?”
“Don’t you tell me I don’t care about my girlie-girl. What the
hell do you know?”
“I know that Pinky’s practically skin and bones. She doesn’t
have the physical resources to produce a litter. And if you keep
pushing her to breed, Pinky’s going to die an early death, either
during whelping or, if she survives that, from eclampsia when
she tries to feed more pups.”
Charmaine’s face turned scarlet under her makeup and she
clutched the dog to her, although whether to protect it or shield
herself, Jillian couldn’t guess. “How dare you say things like
that to me! Pinky’s been doing this for years. She’s a . . . she’s a
career mom and she’ll be just fine.”
The argument gained both volume and intensity, and moved
out into the empty waiting room until Charmaine Forrester
finally whirled on her high-heeled boots and left in a huff,
slamming the door so hard that the adoptions bulletin board fell
from the wall in a flurry of papers, tacks, and photos.
Jillian stalked back down the hallway, clenching and
unclenching her fists. It was some minutes before she was able
to calm down. And a few more before she realized what an
unprofessional ass she’d been to lose her temper like that.
Arguing with a client, for God’s sake. Sure, she’d confronted
that Mountney character, but she’d kept her cool and reported
him to the authorities afterward. But she’d actually yelled at
Charmaine.
She didn’t know where Caroline and Birkie were or what they
must be thinking, but she was dead certain they’d heard it all.
Connor might have heard it too, if he’d come in. Crap. If he’d
been three counties away, he’d still have heard it all. Embarrassed
color flamed bright along her cheekbones. Crap, crap, crap. She
didn’t want to lose her first real job because she couldn’t
control herself. Could I have been more of an idiot? What would
her “Client Relations” instructor say? She’d done exactly what
he had emphasized a vet should never do—gotten emotionally
involved.