Sometimes we raise our kids and sometimes our kids raise us.
This story is for Jordan, Jaime, Abby and Sam, who continue to
be very good parents to their mom.
Love will find a way through paths where wolves fear to prey.
—LORD BYRON
Prologue
September 30, 1981
Tendrils of smoke rose ghostly white against the night sky like
escaping spirits. Two days had passed and the house had
collapsed to one side in a heap of charred beams and ash. No
human could have survived such devastation.
James Macleod was not human.
Far beneath the blackened beams, he lay burned, bleeding,
and broken. Close to death but as yet unable to embrace it. Now
and then, he broke the surface of unconsciousness, only to be
dragged under again by relentless agony and despair.
The waning moon hid its face as James opened his eyes at
last. For a fleeting moment he thought he was blind, then
realized night had fallen, although which night it was he had no
idea and didn’t care. He was still alive—barely—and didn’t care
about that either. His broken ribs screamed at him as he began
to cough up more blood and soot, but this time oblivion
stubbornly refused to take him back.
Evelyn. He couldn’t see her beneath the debris, but he could
just reach her delicate fingertips. They were cold and
unyielding. He felt again the slash of agony in his heart that was
far greater than the pain in his body. She had been human.
Vulnerable, both she and the child within her, his child. He had
failed them both, failed to protect them, failed even to discern
any danger to them. He had been moving the cattle to summer
pasture in the deep coulees along the river when a calf
blundered into the fast-moving water. Saving the young animal
and regrouping the herd had set him back an hour, then two.
Just two scant hours in which all that was dear to him was left
defenseless.
He’d known at once. James had barely turned his truck for
home when cold terror suddenly clawed his heart and his wife’s
voice echoed briefly in his mind. Gunning the old pickup, he’d
kept it on the rough dirt road by sheer force of will. Faster, faster,
heedless of the rugged terrain. He had to get home, had to reach
her. When an axle broke, James left the crippled truck and raced
flat out, first on two legs, then on four.
The house had been strangely dark when he reached the
yard. Evelyn always left a light on for him. Always. And then he
had spotted the smoke churning from an upstairs window. He
caught no stranger’s scent as he ran into the burning house, as
he shifted his shape and shouted for his wife. He had smelled
blood, however, mixed with the thickening smoke. He followed
the metallic tang of it straight to the dining room, knowing and
not wanting to know that it was her blood. And that there was
far too much of it. Dear God. James had squeezed his eyes shut
against the ugly gunshot wounds that had stolen her life even
as he cradled her small body against him. She was gone. Their
child within her, already loved, was gone as well.
It was his fault, all his fault, although James had no idea who
had done this. Few people could even find his ranch. It was
remote, all but hidden, with the nearest neighbor miles away. He
knew no enemies in this country, yet in his shattered heart he
also knew it was no random act that had taken his loved ones
from him. He should have known better. He should have known.
His family’s entire sept of Clan Macleod had been forced to
leave Scotland more than two centuries earlier, when fear of
Changelings caused all wolves to be slaughtered to extinction
there. Why had he thought it would be better here, safer now?
Why had he assumed humans were any more civilized now, any
less driven by fear and hatred of those who were different? But
then there had been Evelyn, and she was wholly, completely
human. Evelyn, who embodied all that was good about
humanity, who knew what he was and accepted him, who loved
him with a heart that was bigger than she was. Evelyn who had
just paid for that love with her all-too-human life.
Already half-mad with pain and grief, his own human side
wanted nothing more than to follow his loved ones.
Changelings were long-lived and tough, gifted and powerful.
But they were not immortal. And not immune to bullets even if
they weren’t silver. Evelyn’s killer had still been in the house,
waiting for James, and James hadn’t known. Perhaps he hadn’t
cared then either. The last thing he saw was his whole world in
his arms—then nothing.
Left for dead. Now, his Changeling nature was automatically
trying to heal the horrendous wounds, weakly attempting to
regenerate burned skin and tendon, repair and replace broken
bone. But with so much damage and so little energy left, the
process was winding down before it had really begun. Soon it
would stop altogether and he would get his wish.
For one clear moment that wish coalesced in his mind—a
soul-deep desire for death. James embraced it without
reservation, forgetting that his inner wolf was driven by a
powerful and primitive instinct to survive. Without warning,
fresh agony slammed into him from every direction. His heart
was being squeezed through his ribs, his very bones felt as if
they were exploding. The animal within had gone completely
wild. Unbidden, it frantically clawed its way to the surface.
Dark clouds diffused the moon, hid the massive wolf that
crawled out from under the charred wreckage, veiled the singed
white fur in shadow. Sides heaving, the creature limped on
three legs to the edge of the clearing and collapsed. James lay
there for a long time and regarded the wreckage. Fists of sorrow
beat inside him, but his lupine eyes could not weep. Instead, a
cry of anguish was ripped from his throat, gaining in strength as
it sliced through the silence. It rose and became an ululating
lament echoing over the ruins of his home, his heart, his life.
As he howled out his grief, the sky cleared. The moon was far
from full but still it blanketed him with pale silvery light, lent him
its peculiar strength that only Changelings knew. James stood.
So his wolf nature wanted to survive? Then it could damn well
do it without him. He would set it free and never walk upright
again.
The wind picked up. Although only three legs would obey
him, the white wolf began to run. Run, to outpace the agony that
could rip and tear a human heart. Run, to outdistance the
human grief that could not be borne. Run, to be as the moon, a
swift white shape gleaming in the night. Run, to be a wolf and
only a wolf.
As he raced away into the welcoming arms of the night,
James was only fleetingly aware that he had just buried his
human self alongside Evelyn. And then he was aware of
nothing.
Chapter One
March 31, 2011
The wolf dream again.
Jillian Descharme rolled over on the lumpy folding couch that
doubled as her bed and squinted to read the alarm clock. 3:29
A.M. She didn’t need to reach for the light—the dream was no
nightmare. Far from it. Fifteen years ago, a great white wolf had
emerged from the darkness and saved her life.
Her counselor, Marjorie, had favored other theories. She felt
that the white wolf was something Jillian’s mind created to
protect itself, to protect her very sanity from a trauma that
couldn’t be borne, from a brutality beyond imagining. “The wolf
is a symbol your mind has adopted,” Marjorie said. “And in the
study of dream images, a white wolf in particular symbolizes
both valor and victory, plus the ability to see light in the darkest
hours. It’s an extremely powerful and positive image.”
Marjorie was a skilled counselor, as well as a kind and loving
person. She had helped Jillian work through a great deal of
pain, and Jillian knew she owed her a lot. That was why she
always felt a little bit guilty. Because although she stopped
insisting the wolf was real, she never quite stopped believing it.
And she didn’t stop dreaming of it. Jillian dreamed of the
white wolf when she moved away from home, when she entered
veterinary college, when she wrote exams, when she applied for
jobs, when she competed in martial arts tournaments—pretty
much any time she was nervous, stressed, or even lonely. Okay,
especially when she was lonely.
Not alone. Here with you, the wolf always said to her. She didn’t
hear the words so much as felt them in her mind. Not alone. And
in the presence of the wolf, she could believe it. Jillian always
felt soothed, comforted, safe. Between them was a connection
that defied description. A sense of wholeness she had never
conceived possible.
“Nothing like being codependent on an imaginary friend.”
Jillian got up for a drink of water, realized that wasn’t enough to
get rid of the fuzzy taste in her mouth, and decided to brush her
teeth.
Popping open the tube of toothpaste seemed to jog a memory
at the same time. Jillian always welcomed the wolf dream and
the calm it brought her whenever there were changes in her life.
But in the past few years she’d noticed a new pattern—the wolf
dream also seemed to show up just before something in her life
changed. And this was the third night in a row she’d had the
dream.
That had never happened before. Back in bed, she lay with
her eyes open, wondering what the dream meant, wondering
what was coming. She hoped it wouldn’t be the bank calling
about her student loans again. That thought was enough to
keep her awake for the next hour. When her alarm went off at
six, however, there was nothing unusual about the morning
except that it took three cups of coffee to jumpstart her brain
instead of one. There was nothing different about the weather. It
was the same as it had been for weeks, just another humid
scorcher in southern Ontario. There was nothing different at
work. There were no new animals at the environmental center,
and no unusual visitors. She accidentally sat on her lunch bag,
but except for being squished, her peanut butter and honey
sandwich tasted exactly the same.
Later, at the post office, she had nothing but bulk mail in her
box. She dropped the flyers and ads into the trash by the door
as she left. At least there weren’t any bills. But there was no
winning envelope from Publishers Clearing House either. She
attended the last of her weekly Tae Kwon Do classes—she
couldn’t afford any more—but there were no breakthroughs
there. She had yet to master all 29 movements of the hyung, the
complicated practice sequence that would allow her to
progress to the next level.
The feeling of letdown was heavy by the time Jillian opened
the door to her tiny rented room. It was silly, it was childish, but
she couldn’t deny she was disappointed that not a single outof-
the-ordinary thing had occurred that day. On top of that, she
was tired to the point of being downright cranky. Maybe the
stupid dream didn’t mean anything this time. Maybe it isn’t
supposed to mean anything. Maybe Marjorie was right and this
whole wolf thing really is a figment of my—
The phone rang, making her jump, and she snatched up the
receiver with a growl. With any luck it might be a telemarketer
and she could unload a little of her frustration. Petty, she knew,
but it would be something. She promised herself to feel guilty
later. “Yes?”
“Is this Dr. Jillian Descharme?”
“What are you selling?”
The caller didn’t even pause. “A job. I’d like you to come work
for me. My practice is running me ragged, and I need a hand. If
you’re as good as your instructors say you are, it could turn
into a partnership. That is, if you like northern Alberta.”
She fumbled with the receiver then, certain that reality had
taken a complete holiday. “What?” Her brain finally kicked in.
“Wait a minute. I forgot what day it is—this is a stupid April
Fool’s joke, isn’t it?” Jillian wracked her brain to figure out who
might pull such a prank. A coworker? A former classmate? “Of
all the mean, rotten—”
“No, it’s no joke, honest. Hey, if I’d realized what day it was, I
would have waited until tomorrow to call you. I promise you,
this is a real call about a real job. Look, it’s calving season and I
haven’t slept in two days, so if I sound desperate, I am. Will you
come?”
“I don’t know you from Adam. And you haven’t even met me.
You haven’t seen my résumé. I haven’t even applied for the job
yet. I didn’t even know there was a job.” She certainly hadn’t
looked for anything that far away, had never been to that part of
the country. Mentally she pictured a map of Canada and
visualized Alberta. It was one of the largest provinces,
stretching from the American border all the way up to the Arctic
Circle. Just how far north was this clinic? Was there still snow
on the ground there?
“I’ve been friends with a couple of your instructors for a long
time. That’s where I got your name. They both said you’re good,
and that’s good enough for me.” He rattled off their names and
enough personal details to prove he was telling the truth. Or
that he’d really done his research. He seemed to read her mind
then. “Call them up. Ask them about Connor Macleod, and
they’ll tell you I’m not a nutcase or a stalker.”
“But I have a job.”
“I heard. I also heard your present position’s temporary. I
happen to know the director of the place—he thinks you’re
extremely talented too, by the way. Says he’ll even let you go
early, if you decide you want the job here.”
She sighed and swore, forgetting that the man could hear her
through the receiver. She ran a hand through her choppy blond
hair, causing it to stand straight up in places. It was all too true
that her job at the environmental center was up at the end of the
month. She’d tried hard to find another opportunity to work with
wildlife, especially wolves, but most positions these days were
filled by volunteers. Those that weren’t were largely
government-funded—and that funding had dried up
considerably after the last election.
Tapping the phone against her chin, Jillian figured that this
Macleod guy really must be flat-out desperate. Why else would
he call someone on the other side of the country for God’s
sake? It was on the tip of her tongue to say no, to tell him she’d
rather patch up coyotes and feed orphan skunks than work
with livestock and pets. Not only were they more interesting to
her, but coyotes and skunks didn’t have owners to deal with.
She wasn’t as good with people as she was with animals. Okay,
she could be downright lousy with people, especially ones that
didn’t take care of their animals.
But she couldn’t make herself say no, especially when
Macleod told her that living quarters were part of the deal.
Jillian hadn’t been out of veterinary college very long. She
desperately needed a full-time position, any position that would
give her a chance to pay off her massive student loans and get
on her financial feet. She might have a DVM after her name now,
but that was all she had to her name. No cash, no savings, no
car, no furniture, no apartment. No family that could help her out
either, not since an accident had claimed her parents when she
was in college. She didn’t even have her textbooks anymore—
she’d been forced to sell them last month to keep her small
room near the environmental center.
“Hello? Hey, are you still there?”
She realized she’d left the man hanging. “Sorry, just thinking
things through. It’s a big move. You’re just about on the other
side of the country.”
“Let me make it easier then. Commit to giving us six months,
and I’ll pay your way here. If you really hate us after that, or we
can’t stand you, no harm done. I’d pay your way home, too.”
She could do six months. That wasn’t a long time. She could
keep her temper, make nice with clients for six months.
Probably. Macleod likely ran a cramped, shoestring operation in
the middle of nowhere, but the guy was offering good pay and a
place to live. And surely there must be wildlife rehabs she could
look into while she was there. Maybe she could work for
Macleod’s clinic for a while and then move on to what she really
wanted to do with her career. Besides, how bad could it be?
Making a mental note to check this guy out with her instructors
and maybe even the RCMP before she actually packed any
suitcases, she said yes.
And remembered the wolf dream as she hung up the phone.
The full moon called and the Pack answered. The lights of the
town of Dunvegan were left behind as seven creatures ran
silently, effortlessly, mile after mile. Nothing could cover
distance as efficiently as a wolf’s perfect form. Charcoal and
tawny, gray and silver, gold and black, the wolves were a
diverse group, yet they moved as one with the smooth grace of
long practice. Eventually a white wolf joined them, easing into
the band without a ripple.
The Pack loped along the game trails at the very tops of the
coulees, high above the Peace River valley. The wolves’ path
seemed almost suspended between sky and water, moon
above and moon reflected below. Joy, fierce and bright, was all
around.
Stars wheeled overhead, revealing the constellations of the
early morning as the Pack leader turned toward Elk Point.
There, she slowed at last and picked her way along the rocky
promontory until the trees parted to reveal a sweeping view.
Tongues lolling, sides heaving, the wolves flopped down on the
stone plateau just as a wind gusted up from the valley. Dry
leaves swirled into a lazy vortex around the group. The air
crackled, flashed here and there with tiny sparks, as static
electricity began to collect. The power built until the ground
thrummed with it, until the very rocks vibrated.
Sudden silence burst as loud as a thunderclap. Human
laughter and human words flowed in quickly to fill the vacuum.
The breeze died away, the leaves fell to earth. Where eight
wolves had been, there was now only one. A lone white wolf
and seven human beings.
Connor Macleod automatically reached out a hand and ruffled
the thick soft fur. His older brother was not just the only one in
the family with such a snowy pelt, but the only Changeling that
Connor had ever seen with that coloration—not an albino but a
true white. Their father had often called James a winter wolf, but
there was always a touch of sadness in his voice when he did
so. Connor had pressed him for an explanation once. It’s a verra
long journey until spring for a winter wolf, lad. A verra long journey.
Connor had been too young to attach any meaning to his
father’s words. Now he saw that they had been all too
prophetic.
He spoke to his older brother in his mind. All of them had that
ability; it was part and parcel of being Changeling. Good to see
you, bro. Have you eaten tonight?
Old moose, lame. Easy hunting. Full now.
James’s words were always clear in Connor’s mind, but they
were few and labored, as if it were a strain to use human words
at all. As if running as a wolf for thirty years made it difficult to
even remember the language. Seven words in a row nearly
counted as a speech.
It might have given Connor a tiny glimmer of hope, but he
hadn’t allowed himself that luxury in many years. His hand fell
away from the thick white pelt as he automatically blocked the
rest of his thoughts from his brother. What possible good could
it do to tell James how much he missed him, ached to talk with
him, to joke and laugh with him, hell, even to fight with him?
How the whole family grieved for James, as if he was dead. And
he was dead to them. Even as a wolf he very seldom ran with the
Pack or came near any of them except Connor on occasion.
James had forsaken his human self entirely, and it was unclear
if he was bound to the Macleods by remembered human ties or
merely a wolf instinct to be part of a Pack.
But not one of us blames him for it. Good Christ, how could we?
We weren’t there. We were too far away, all of us too damn far away.
He shook his head. By the time they’d arrived at James’s farm,
the house was a heap of blackened beams and cold ashes. Too
damn late to do anything but bury poor Evelyn. It had nearly been
too late for James as well. The Pack had tracked him through
deep wilderness for two days, unable to catch up with him until
he finally collapsed from his horrific wounds. Over thirty years
had passed and still Connor shivered at that memory. He had
barely recognized the blackened and battered creature that
once was the white wolf. Changeling or not, it was a miracle
James had lived.
But the miracle was incomplete. The wolf came back to them,
but not the man. Connor glanced over at his brother. The
massive white creature was stretched out on the ground beside
him as if relaxed, but the vivid blue eyes flicked from person to
person. Alert. Ready, Connor knew, to disappear. Everyone else
knew too. Connor noticed that each member of the Pack, family
and friend alike, would glance over at James and then quickly
turn away, not knowing what to do or say. Fearing to break
some unknown spell, fearing that the white wolf would leave
them even sooner than he usually did.
It’s hard on James but it’s hard on all of us too. Your older brother
has lost his balance, his ability to be comfortable in both worlds.
Jessie Watson’s voice was warm and strong in Connor’s
mind. He knew the Pack leader was focusing her speech so
only he could hear it. He did the same. I don’t know how to help
him.
You’re doing all you can. James is doing all he can, too. He’s
chosen to stay here, for one thing. He wanders but always returns. He
still feels a connection to this land that your family claimed and
settled, a bond to something that symbolizes roots. And he responds
to you, Connor. Cares for you as a brother, not just a Pack-mate,
even guards you. Haven’t you sensed him on some level when
you’ve been working late at the clinic?
Connor looked across the fire, saw it brush golden highlights
over Jessie’s dark skin. There was always something regal
about her, a sense of power. She was a small woman,
downright tiny when standing next to her husband Bill. Yet she
possessed a formidable blend of courage and wisdom, as well
as more exotic gifts. Including magic. He didn’t doubt her, but
the news came as a surprise. James has been at the clinic?
Many times. Perhaps you haven’t noticed his physical presence
because thoughts of James are always in your mind. Take a walk
tomorrow and use your Changeling senses to check the stand of
trees behind the building. Scent the air, the ground. Watch for hairs
in the hay bales in the compound, prints along the fences in the
corrals. He watches over you, Connor. He watches over the others
too. Well, then he should be fired—he didn’t make sure everyone was
dressed tonight. Connor tried to lighten the subject, a little
uncomfortable with the notion that the older brother he worried
so much about was guarding him. He turned his attention to
where his younger brother Devlin was mercilessly teasing his
twin Culley about missing shoes and socks. Anything—
clothing, objects, tools—that touched a Changeling’s body as it
shifted to wolf was automatically suspended in a another
dimension until human form was resumed. What or where that
dimension was exactly, Connor didn’t know, only that the
current theory favored the existence of many more dimensions
than the four that Einstein declared. That was Devlin’s passion,
exploring the physics associated with Changeling life. Culley,
however, couldn’t care less. Always in a hurry, he often
Changed without checking to make sure he was fully clothed.
It wasn’t a problem unless they had to shift back to human
form unexpectedly. Explaining why their youngest brother was
barefoot in the middle of the night could be tricky. Culley had no
jacket either, only a light T-shirt, but a Changeling’s ambient
body temperature was much higher than that of a human.
Connor shook his head, nearly smiled. That boy would be
comfortable if he was buck-naked in a snowstorm. Then he saw
Culley steal a wistful glance at the white wolf and the
heavyheartedness returned full-force.
They think he avoids them, Jessie. And he does, he steers clear of
everyone. Except me, Connor thought. And he doesn’t exactly
hang around much with me either. They were just a year apart in
age, and they’d been inseparable when they were growing up.
Even when Evelyn entered James’s life, they’d remained close.
Close before everything went to hell. I miss him, Jessie. It drives
me crazy, wishing I could help him.
You are helping him. You’re there for him. How many months was
it before James even attempted to communicate? Yet he speaks to
you now in your mind. How many years before he would venture near
the Pack? Yet he often runs with us now, ran with us tonight. Progress
is slow and subtle, very hard to see when it’s happening—but James
has been opening the door a little at a time. He doesn’t know it, but
he is ready to be healed. And because of this, the healer will come.
What healer? Who?
I don’t know. I haven’t seen that. I just know that the Universe
reaches out to us when we make an effort, when we show we are
ready. James is ready. The healer will come. She broke the
connection then, turning her attention to something Bill was
saying.
Connor looked down to find the white wolf gone. Good Christ,
I didn’t sense a thing. James was like a damn ghost at times. His
brother might be talking—well, technically, using mind speech
—a little more, but if he was making any real progress, Connor
couldn’t see it. He couldn’t imagine who or what could possibly
heal his brother’s shattered soul. Still, Jessie’s words gave him
a little actual hope. He let himself feel it this time, savor it. Hope
that James could find his way back to his human self, hope that
he would find a reason to want to come back. And stay.
Douglas Harrison heard the song of wolves in the distance
and shivered as he sat by his father’s bedside. The old man had
been dreaming again, and thrashed the blankets and sheets
into a twisted wad. He took his father’s hand from where it
clawed the air, clasped it, and remembered how that hand had
once seemed so large, so powerful. The fingers were always
cold now, the tough calluses covered with the velvet-soft skin
of age. His dad’s grip was still strong, but not nearly as strong
as it once was. The old man licked dry lips and whispered
fiercely, “It’s here, son. We didn’t kill it. It’s still here, walking
among us. I know it’s here. Get your gun, Dougie, we gotta get it,
gotta finish it off.”
A chill zipped down Douglas’s spine, tingled like ice-cold
electricity. He tried to keep his voice calm, level. “We took care
of that bear, Dad. Made a big rug out of it, remember?”
“You know what I mean, boy.” His father’s eyes fastened on
him, angry and a little wild. His voice was hoarse but rapidly
gained in volume. “The werewolf, the white one. The one you
didn’t shoot when I told you to shoot. You stood there and
bawled like a damn baby until I had to drag you out of there.”
Oh God, not that again. Douglas was thankful that none of the
caregivers who came to their home believed his father’s stories,
but he found himself checking behind him just the same to see
if anyone was listening. “Dad, I—”
“I told you. I told you we had to finish him. He’s alive, and he’ll
be tracking us, hunting us both unless we hunt him down first.
Get my .338 out of the truck, boy, the one I use for bear.”
It took an hour this time to get his father settled. When he left
the room, Douglas felt wrung out and apprehensive, even
though he knew that the old man was unlikely to remember any
of this in the morning. Wisps of an Alzheimer’s fog had settled
over Roderick Harrison’s mind in recent years. More and more,
the past mingled with the present. Including a part of the past
his son would much rather forget.
It had to be the full moon. His father was always worse during
the full moon. Last month during this lunar phase, Roderick had
been found halfway down the lane in his pajamas, carrying a
broom like a rifle, determined to destroy the creature that filled
his dreams.
Douglas had gathered up all the hunting rifles after that
incident and sent them over to the ranch manager’s house for
safekeeping. A decision about a nursing home needed to be
made soon—but he didn’t feel like making it right now. He
couldn’t picture his father in such a place, away from the ranch
he had ruled with such fervor. Knew too that in his dad’s lucid
moments he would feel betrayed by his son.
A small voice within mocked him. What about that long ago
betrayal by your father? What about that night your dear old dad took
his young son along to help him commit murder? Face it, Dougieboy,
you don’t want to put your father in a nursing home because
you’re too afraid someone might start listening to his stories, that
somebody might believe.. . .
Douglas tucked his father in and decided against going back
to bed himself. Instead, he headed downstairs to the bar for a
drink. Maybe several drinks. As many as it would take to make
that small inner voice shut up.
Chapter Two
Despite the fact that it was still April, despite the early morning
hour and Jillian’s fervent wishes to the contrary, it was already
hot and humid in the city of Guelph, Ontario. She got on a
crowded Greyhound, praying that its air conditioning could
handle the unseasonable heat wave that had plagued eastern
Canada all month.
Dr. Macleod had wired enough money for a first-class plane
ticket and some extra besides, but the cash she saved by
choosing the bus had paid off the rest of her rent, the balance
on her phone bill, plus her tab at the little corner grocery store.
No loose ends, she thought with some satisfaction. Nothing left
behind, either. Everything she owned was in a battered
knapsack and three large boxes held shut with duct tape. Fiftyseven
hours and twenty-one minutes later, she arrived at the
little northern town of Dunvegan, Alberta, with only the
knapsack, a pounding headache, and a determination to
strangle, then sue, every bus line employee she could find.
The clerks at the small terminal—which apparently doubled
as a dry cleaning establishment—never knew their danger.
They were spared the moment Jillian stepped down off the bus.
She caught only a glimpse of a white-haired woman in a citrusgreen
suit before she was swept into a bone-crunching hug.
“You made it. You must be exhausted, dear.” The woman
stepped back, still holding on to Jillian’s arms, and looked her
up and down with hawk-bright eyes. “Name’s Birkie Peterson.
I’m officially the receptionist at the clinic and unofficially the
glue that holds the place together, and I, for one, am damn glad
to see you. Been trying to tell the bossman he needs another
pair of hands for years now. Welcome to the north.”
“Um. Thanks. Thank you.” Feeling a little off base, Jillian
noticed that the woman’s white hair was elegantly styled, her
suit tailored and crisp. Tasteful gold jewelry gleamed at her ears
and throat. And those shoes, those lovely little slings, looked
like real leather. Next to Birkie’s cool and polished exterior,
Jillian felt like a rumpled, sweaty mess wrapped in rags. Fashion
had never been her top priority, but she was dead certain that a
homeless person would possess more style than she did at that
moment.
Birkie didn’t seem to notice. If she did, she didn’t think a thing
of it. “Let’s get you out of this heat, hon. At least you’ve left the
humidity behind you. We’re dry as the proverbial bone here, and
I’ve got a cold beer with your name on it, or a cola if you’d
rather. Connor would have been here himself, but he got called
to a foaling out at Vanderkerke’s not half an hour ago, and
they’re two hours north of here in Eureka. We’ll be lucky to see
the bossman before tomorrow. How much luggage did you
lose?”
“What? Some boxes. How did you know?”
“Honey, hardly anyone comes off that bus with all of their
possessions. It’s almost a tradition around here—things tend to
get rerouted over to Spirit River or up to Fort St. John. I’ll give
them a call, get them to track down your stuff. Should get it back
in a couple days at the most. Truck’s this way.”
Jillian let herself be steered by the arm and found that Birkie
was as good as her word. There was an ice-filled cooler with an
assortment of drinks, but after the lengthy bus trip, it was the
beer that appealed to her the most. The air conditioning in the
bright red pickup felt delicious. Jillian took her first deep breath
since Winnipeg and began to unwind a little. She thought the
older woman was a bit of a puzzle, but a friendly and interesting
one. With such an impeccable appearance, Birkie might look
more at home in the back of a limousine, yet she handled the
big truck as if she’d been born behind the wheel. And her earthy
humor made the grand tour of the town a memorable
experience.
“That’s Kinney’s. If you want a good deal on furniture, you go
to them, but you won’t need anything right away. Apartment’s
fully furnished, you know. And make sure you see Greg Kinney,
not Bob. Bob wouldn’t give his own mother a good deal on the
time of day. Besides, he farts something awful.
“That apartment of yours, by the way, is right inside the clinic.
Northwest wing, down the hall from the lunchroom. Good
location for getting to work on time, not so good for getting a
break from your work. You’ll want to watch that.
“Have to go to Macklin’s down the street here if you want any
sporting goods. Do you fish? I like to go for trout on the
weekends, sometimes get a few perch to fry up. Sergeant
Fitzpatrick, now, he likes to fish for sturgeon. I see him on the
river quite a bit. When he’s not fishing, he heads the RCMP
Detachment in these parts, and if he asks you for a date, say
yes. He’s a good man. Connor is too, but he’s taken. Mind you,
his younger brothers are still available and all the Macleod men
are easy on the eyes.”
Jillian goggled, not certain how to respond to such bluntness.
Birkie peered sideways at her and grinned. “Just letting you
know how things are. By the way, Connor’s wife, Zoey, runs the
newspaper here. You’ll like her. And she likes you already just
because she’ll finally get to see more of her husband now that
you’re here to hold the fort. Zoey’s in Vancouver at a publishers
conference right now but she’ll be back next week. In fact, she’ll
probably contact you for an interview first thing.”
“Whatever for?”
“Not from a small town, are you? New people are news around
here. Everyone will be wondering who you are and where
you’re from and so forth. Probably put your picture right on the
front page.”
Alarm must have shown on Jillian’s face because the older
woman suddenly burst out laughing and thumped the steering
wheel.
“Don’t you worry, Zoey’s very kind. She won’t print a thing
you’re not comfortable with, and she doesn’t ask embarrassing
questions. If there are any skeletons in your closet that brought
you all the way up north, she won’t rattle them.”
“No skeletons here—it’s my empty bank account that rattles. I
have student loans to pay.”
Birkie nodded. “Tough to get ahead these days. No one
makes a fortune in the veterinary business but you’ll do all right
here. Heaven knows there’s no lack of work to do.” She waved
to a man with wild gray hair who was just leaving a drugstore.
“That’s our lawyer, Herb Salisbury. He’s the only lawyer in town,
but a good man and honest. Damned unusual for someone in
his profession, it seems.
“On that corner is Chez Mavis. It’s a sandwich shop, belongs
to Mavis Williams. She’s got a hot bacon salad that’ll put you in
heaven right before the cholesterol kills you.
“But you want the best food in town, you go to the Finer
Diner. Bill and Jessie Watson own that operation. I’ll take you to
lunch there in a day or so when you’re settled. Although you
can sample plenty of their wares in the lunchroom at the clinic—
they keep the staff fridge stocked for us. Probably the only
reason Connor hasn’t starved to death with the hours he puts
in. Now that you’re around, maybe he won’t work himself to
death either.”
Birkie continued to rattle off facts about everything and
everyone and Jillian’s frame of mind improved with each block
they passed. Dunvegan might be remote, but it looked both
friendly and prosperous, not the tiny rundown village she had
feared it would be. And there were definitely no igloos or
dogsleds anywhere—so much for the northern stereotype.
Slowly she relaxed and forgot her headache. Forgot her
missing boxes. And nearly forgot her own name when she
caught sight of the clinic. The North Star Animal Hospital was a
sprawling modern building, and inside it turned out to be as
well-equipped as the college labs had been.
Agitated, the white wolf paced the shadows in the trees just
behind the clinic. The massive creature didn’t know why he was
here, only that he needed to be. He had been here countless
times on numberless nights, watching, guarding when Connor
stayed late. But his brother wasn’t here. None of the family,
none of the Pack, was here. Yet something had tugged him away
from the hunt, drawn him from the tall forests along the steep
coulees, pulled him away from the deep shadows and bright
starlight. Even the newly full moon couldn’t compete with this
urge. He couldn’t ignore it, didn’t want to resist it. The wolf had
felt this sense, this something before, followed it before. . . .
Not something but someone.
Scents lingered around the outside of the building, on the
pavement, in the yard, in the corrals. Hours old, days old, even
weeks old. Many animals had been here. Many humans. And
Changelings. He could identify every smell—except one.
The massive wolf stopped in his tracks. His nostrils flared,
taking in the subtle traces. Human. A woman. It was her scent
that lingered here and there in the corrals, in the doorway, in the
yard. She was somewhere in the building now. He inhaled
deeply, drawing the tiny molecules over the delicate olfactory
tissues, seeking information. The scent was fresh, and it was
not one that he had ever encountered here. He snorted and
inhaled again. There was something vaguely familiar—and
important—about this strange woman. But the wolf could not
discern what it was and whined softly in frustration.
Not a wolf.
The sudden thought jarred him. Intruded on his senses,
confused him. The thought came again, stronger this time. I am
not a wolf. It felt dangerous, threatening in some way. The white
wolf growled low in his throat and crouched as if to leap at an
enemy. Suddenly another awareness stirred, deep inside. It
reached out to the creature, calmed it. And for the first time in
years, took control.
James Macleod blinked. Still in wolf form, he was fully awake
as he hadn’t been in a very long time. Aware. Cocooned in the
body of a wolf, James didn’t have to think unless he wanted to,
could sink down beneath the surface of the animal, enough so
that human thoughts and human emotions were dulled, or he
could sink even deeper and silence them altogether. So that the
raw edges of grief and pain couldn’t slice at him, couldn’t even
find him. So that he could breathe, could keep on breathing.
Aware. His human self was no longer submerged beneath the
wolf, and after all this time it was strange, almost alien to him. He
turned his head slowly, taking in his surroundings with this new
and foreign perspective. Dawn was burning a thin bright line
along the eastern horizon. It was a color; there was a word for it.
Red. The sky was red. He pondered that for a moment, had no
idea what to feel about it.
I’m not a wolf. He didn’t know how he felt about that either. But
he did know that whatever—whoever—had drawn him here,
coaxed him back to full awareness, was inside Connor’s clinic.
Animal instincts warned James that he was far from the forest
with daylight almost upon him. The urge to head for cover was
strong. But the man within the wolf wanted to see this woman,
learn what she was to him . . . and was surprised at how
powerful the desire was.
James wavered for a few moments until a pair of headlights
appeared on the road beyond. He slipped smoothly back
beneath the animal persona. The wolf shook himself hard, then
wheeled away and raced across the open fields to the trees
beyond, a white streak in the morning mist.
Chapter Three
Closing time at last. While Birkie was putting the sign on the
waiting room door and drawing the blinds, Jillian leaned against
the counter in the lunchroom and wiped her face with a paper
towel. Frowned at the dirt that appeared on it. Technically only
eight hours had passed, but it felt a lot more like twelve. So far,
each day of her first week at the North Star Animal Hospital had
felt about the same and today was Day Five. Or was it Day Six?
Thursday? Friday? Or later? Lack of sleep was definitely
fogging her brain. She had expected the wolf dreams to stop
once she got to Dunvegan. Instead, she was now being
awakened by them every single night. They were good dreams,
but there was no getting back to sleep afterward. Too restless
to read, she’d begun practicing her hyung in the open area of
the livestock wing before the sun rose. At least she was
remembering the 29 moves more easily now. Or perhaps she
was too tired to notice when she missed any.
Jillian rubbed her eyes and refilled the coffee machine.
Connor hadn’t been exaggerating when he’d told her his
practice was busy. She had served practicums at many busy
clinics before graduating—but those practices boasted several
veterinarians each and a brigade of animal health technicians to
support them. Still, she wouldn’t dream of complaining. After all,
according to Birkie, Dr. Macleod—who preferred to be called
Connor, even by the clients—had been practicing pretty much
solo for the past ten years. How he’d managed it was a mystery
to Jillian, at least logistically. There was no doubt in her mind
that the man had enough talent for three vets, maybe four.
Pretty easy on the eyes too, as Birkie so bluntly put it. Connor
was one of the tallest men Jillian had ever met, yet his lean
frame was packed with muscle almost as if he bench-pressed
cows for fun. He was dark-haired but fair, with pale gray eyes
that were startling in their intensity. Nope, looking at him was no
hardship at all.
Not that she had much time to look at Connor. The busy
practice consisted mostly of a constant parade of cows and
horses, cats and dogs. But to Jillian’s delight, that parade was
also punctuated by wildlife. A young deer, an injured fox, two
fledgling owls, and a hawk with a sprained wing. And yesterday,
a trio of honest-to-god beaver kits. She was going to gain some
experience with wild animals after all. Caroline—a levelheaded
and competent assistant who freely admitted to having a crush
on Connor—had mentioned that a wolf cub had been brought in
last fall. Jillian couldn’t help but hope that might happen again.
She studied every printed word on canis lupus she could find
and surfed the Internet for more studies, more data, but there
was just no substitute for observing the real thing. Only one had
ever passed through the wildlife center Jillian had worked for, a
young black female with a permanently lame front leg. The wolf
had been checked over by the head vet and sent on to a zoo,
but not before Jillian got to examine the beautiful animal
thoroughly. She was determined to someday specialize in these
creatures. Closing her eyes, she envisioned a future where she
was the director of her own wildlife center. Pictured herself
giving lectures, imagined someone introducing her: Dr. Jillian
Descharme, world-renowned authority on wolves.
The picture in her mind blurred, shifted. The lecture theatre
became a forest. Instead of standing at a podium, she was
seated on a large flat rock—and the white wolf sat beside her.
Without hesitation she leaned into the massive creature’s fur,
felt the warmth that radiated from its muscled body even as she
sensed the warm presence in her mind.
“They say you shouldn’t wake sleepwalkers, but I’m just not
sure what to do about sleepstanders.”
Jillian’s whole being felt jolted as she snapped into the here
and now to find herself leaning against Connor. “What? Oh,
jeez.” Awkwardly, she tried to sidestep away from him—until
she realized that he had a firm hold on her arm, holding her up.
“I’m okay, I’m fine, thanks.”
He nodded and steered her neatly to a chair. She sank into it
gratefully, feeling disoriented and slightly ridiculous. “I’m
sorry,” she stammered as she rubbed her hands over her face.
“I must have drifted off. I haven’t been sleeping well, and I guess
it caught up with me.”
“I’m not surprised. You’ve had a lot thrown at you in a single
week. It’s not usually this busy around here. I’m out on farm
calls a lot, and when I’m gone, most small pet owners take their
animals over to the clinic in Spirit River.” He placed a cup of
coffee in front of Jillian, took a long sip from one himself. “But
the word’s gotten around that we’ve got another vet here, and
now everyone wants to check you out.”
“Great. They’ll be really impressed if they find me asleep
standing up.”
“Hasn’t been bad for business so far. It’s the busiest Saturday
we’ve had in years.”
“Saturday. It’s Saturday already?”
“Oh, you have had a long week.” Connor grinned at her.
“Trust me, it’ll get better. Wait till the novelty wears off. Business
will settle down to its normal manic pace.”
She drank the entire cup of coffee and half of the next one he
poured for her. It cleared her head and revived her somewhat,
although she knew it wouldn’t last. “Guess I’m going to bed
early tonight. I just have to check on Poodle—”
“Damn! I forgot all about Poodle. Look, I can come in and do
that. You don’t have to get up.”
“That makes no sense. I’m right here, and Birkie says you live
several miles out of town. I promise I’ll have a nice long nap
before supper, and then I’ll be just fine. I can check Poodle a
couple times during the night and go right back to bed.”
He looked unconvinced. “I just don’t want to wear you out
completely in your first week,” he said. “Are you sure?”
“Absolutely certain. And I’m the one that worked on him, so I
really want to follow up and make sure he’s okay.”
Connor nodded. “I get that. I’d feel the same way. At least you
can sleep late tomorrow.”
“I can?”
“Just because we started working you the second you got off
the bus doesn’t mean you’re a slave.” He laughed. “You’ve got
two whole days off, Sunday and Monday.”
“What about you?”
“I’m on call tomorrow, and I’ve got surgeries scheduled for
Monday. So I’ll be holding the fort.” Before she could protest, he
raised a warning finger. “Next weekend, you can be on call and
do Monday morning surgeries. For now, just take a breath and
get settled in. There must be dozens of things you’ve been
waiting to do.”
“Explore,” Jillian said at once. “Hike probably, maybe along
the river. See the countryside, take some photos. Are there any
good trails around here?”
“Plenty but if you’re into photography, I think Elk Point will be
your best choice. You can see lots from there. I’ll draw you a
map before I go home.”
The moon sailed across the night sky, full and bright, the
Huntress in her silver chariot. Behind her she drew the tides,
tugged at the night breezes, lured the creatures that roamed the
other side of day. Normally she pulled at the white wolf too,
demanded he follow the hunt. But not now. Something else was
drawing him, calling him. Not a sound or a scent but a nameless
sense as tangible as the migration season which called the
geese, and as powerful as the instinct for survival. A
restlessness teased at his consciousness during the night, the
same one that had whispered in his wolfen dreams during the
day.
Finally he could no longer resist. It was almost summer, a time
of warmth and plenty, but the white wolf was compelled to leave
the forest. He glided through the moonlit fields like an icy
shadow, passed ghost-like over roads and ditches, skirted
sleeping farms and approached the town itself. Unseen,
unheard, he unerringly made his way through dim and
darkened streets to the far outskirts of Dunvegan. To the North
Star Animal Hospital.
The building was dark. Silent. Animal senses told him that the
woman was within, and other senses surfaced in response.
James took control more easily this time, and his human self
studied the clinic for options. He paced slowly, thoughtfully,
circling the building once. Then he suddenly bounded up the
hay bales that were stacked outside, leapt a span that would
have been impossible for an ordinary wolf, and landed in the loft
above the stable area. And discovered that the loft was not only
open to the outside, but opened to the clinic within as well.
Dr. Jillian Descharme blindly reached for the alarm, slapped it
into snooze mode, and lay in the dark until her eyes focused.
Three in the morning was traditionally known as the midnight of
the soul. It was actually four in the morning, and she had no idea
what that might be called, only that it was too damn early.
Groaning, she scrambled out of the bed that took up half of the
room in her tiny apartment within the North Star Animal
Hospital. It was time to check on Poodle again.
She winced as she realized the name sounded just as
ridiculous in the middle of the night—or perhaps even more so
—than it did in broad daylight. Throwing a threadbare pink robe
over her pajamas, Jillian headed down the hallway under a
series of skylights. The pale moonlight silvered everything it
touched and deepened the shadows, like walking through an
old black and white movie. The clinic seemed larger than ever,
stretching off into darkness in all directions. It was quiet.
Peaceful. And the tiled floor was a lot colder than she expected.
Her bare feet were starting to cramp by the time she padded by
the X-ray lab. She made it past the pharmacy, cursing aloud, but
finally had to stop for a few moments. The mat in front of
Connor’s office was like a tiny island in an icy sea.
Jillian balanced on one foot and placed the sole of the other
against her calf muscle in an instinctive attempt to warm it. She
stood like a flamingo for a while, squinting at the collection of
comic strips and articles that almost completely covered the
door. Birkie had said there were “enough letters after the
bossman’s name to start a whole new alphabet.” On a whim,
Jillian lifted a sheaf of papers to read the nameplate: Head
Janitor. She grinned and shook her head—no one would ever
accuse Connor of taking himself too seriously.
When her feet felt warm enough to brave the tiled floor again,
she padded quickly through the staff kitchen where a low
wattage bulb acted as a nightlight. Made a left at the examining
room, zipped through the small animal surgery and came to a
halt in front of a stainless steel kennel. A faint raspy mew
sounded from the depths of the big wool blanket within.
“Hey, Poodle. There now, Poodle, it’s okay. It’s good to see
you awake.” Jillian reached in and stroked the velvety fur of a
Siamese cat of indeterminate age. “Mrs. Malkinson must be
missing you a lot.” The animal was the constant companion of
Mrs. Enid Malkinson, also of indeterminate age. All Jillian could
figure out was that both of them were exceedingly old for their
respective species, both a thin collection of angles and sharp
points, yet with a curious dignity. It was difficult to accord them
that dignity with a straight face however when both had watery
blue eyes that were crossed just enough to be comical. If ever
there was a case study for pets and their owners looking alike,
this was it.
They didn’t act alike, however. Enid was best described as a
classic worrywart, fearful and cautious, while Poodle seemed to
thrive on finding trouble. This time trouble had come in the form
of a rhinestone earring—a heavy vintage piece with the screwon
backing and flashy stones of its era—that had lodged in
Poodle’s throat. Why the cat insisted on trying to swallow it in
the first place, Jillian had no idea, but she’d spent over an hour
in surgery to remove the stubborn piece of jewelry.
Jillian trailed her fingers through the water dish and dripped a
little onto the cat’s tongue, which hung out the side of his
mouth. “Come on, Poodle, you must be pretty dry. There now,
doesn’t that feel better?” A rusted-out purr threatened to shake
the bony body apart. How he managed to manufacture the
sound so soon after throat surgery, Jillian couldn’t imagine, but
the sound vibrated up her arm as she petted him. Forgetting her
cold feet, she spent a long time gently running her hand over
the cream and sable fur, until the old feline fell back asleep with
his tongue still hanging out. Jillian smothered a laugh and
gently poked the errant tongue back into the mouth where it
belonged.
Satisfied that Poodle was fine, she closed the door and
wandered back through the halls toward her apartment.
Shadows draped in the corners, pooled on the floor. Deep and
black. Except one. One was white.
Jillian stopped dead, her heart seeming to stop as well, as the
white shadow suddenly stood and shook itself, resolving into
an immense specimen of an impossible animal. Canis lupus. A
wolf.
She couldn’t form a single thought. Couldn’t move, couldn’t
breathe. Could only stare as the creature turned its massive
head in her direction, stared back at her for a long moment with
strange blue eyes that seemed lit from within. Then it vanished.
The abruptness of the disappearance shook her from her
paralysis.
“No.” Jillian lunged forward, ran to the spot where her mind
had insisted a white wolf had stood. “Wait! Wait, don’t go!
Please! You can’t go!”
Connor had understated this place. The view was nothing
short of astonishing. It had taken much of the day for Jillian to
make her way to this rocky spot, but a view like this was worth
every bug bite, every scratch from a wild rosebush and every
stretch of muscle it took to climb the steep grade. She emerged
from the brush, sank onto a sandstone boulder, and took a long
draw from her last water bottle. She drank in the view too.
Numberless coulees converged into the valley floor far below.
Forests of spruce and groves of poplar, chalky cliffs and fertile
floodplains, tumbled-down cabins and tidy farms—all were
linked together by the broad Peace River. The sweeping Scurves
of flowing water glistened in the sunlight of the late
afternoon.
She regarded her old 35mm camera affectionately. It was too
late in the season to capture images of prairie crocuses in the
grass, but Indian Paintbrush and other wildflowers were just
coming into bloom. She had photographed an old riverboat that
was beached near the bridge, then veered off the tourist’s
graveled path in favor of following some of the game trails that
led up and down the hills, to and from the river. The detour had
paid off with the sighting of a female moose with twin calves
foraging for cattail bulbs at the edge of a pond. Jillian hoped her
shots would turn out, wondered if she should have taken more
to make certain. If she ever got out of debt, she was so getting a
professional grade digital camera, one with every lens
attachment known to man and extra memory cards. Back east,
she’d drooled many times over just such a camera in the
electronics store down the street from the bus stop.
She might be able to afford a camera like that if she stayed.
And she had to admit she might do that, might stay more than
the six months she had committed to. The hours were long at
the clinic, but the pay was pretty good, especially with a place to
live thrown in. Jillian had initially regarded the job as a
necessary evil, something to cover the bills until she could land
a job working with wildlife. She hadn’t planned on actually liking
the clinic. And Birkie, Caroline, and Connor already seemed like
family. Some of the clients did as well. The food was a real
surprise too—the fridge and freezer in the lunchroom were
always well stocked with microwavable foods but not from any
grocery store shelves. The savory array of single-serving
soups, casseroles, and meat pies came directly from the Finer
Diner. Birkie affirmed that Bill and Jessie Watson replenished
the food every week. Jillian had never seen anything like it,
almost a miniature catering service, all for their friend Connor.
And anyone lucky enough to work for him. Jillian’s tiny
apartment had kitchen facilities, but she didn’t have to use them
much, thanks to the unusual job perk. A person might be willing
to work for free just to be fed so well.
Of course, finding time to eat was a challenge. The clinic was
a busy place, which was just the way Jillian liked it. But she had
to admit she’d like it better if she could get some uninterrupted
sleep. A dream of the white wolf had awakened her every single
night since her arrival. And last night the dream had occurred
not once but several times, waking her even more often than the
alarm clock she had set so she could check on her patient.
Small wonder she’d had such a realistic vision last night. And
small wonder that she had actually gone from room to room to
hunt for a live wolf. Of course, it seemed pretty silly in the light
of day. As if a live wolf is going to get inside the clinic with all the
doors locked.
Still, it was disconcerting to be dreaming about the wolf at all.
The dream had certainly warned her of impending changes to
her life before Connor offered her this job. But now that she was
here, shouldn’t the dream disappear?
Even the rugged beauty she encountered during her hike
couldn’t shake the thoughts from her mind. Why was she still
having the wolf dream? And why so frequently? As she sat
gazing out at the river valley below, Jillian wondered if she
should call up her old counselor, then dismissed the notion
with a snort. It had been years, years for God’s sake, and
Marjorie was probably not even there anymore. And what would
she say to the woman? Help me, I’ve had a few dreams? Actually,
they’re really good dreams, it’s just that there’s a lot of them and. . . .
“Okay, maybe not,” she said aloud. “Let’s save the
counseling for someone with scarier problems.” But maybe
thinking of Marjorie could be helpful just the same. What would
she say about all this? “She’d probably tell me to consider
anything that’s different in my life.” Well, that was a no-brainer—
only everything. New job, new digs, new town, even a new part
of the country. New people, new boss. New equals change
equals s-t-r-e-s-s. No matter how positive all these new things
were, they still caused stress.
“Simple.” Jillian felt much better. Now she had something
tangible she could point to. “It would be amazing if I wasn’t
having dreams.” Just ordinary stress, pure and simple, due to a
huge list of new things to get used to all at once. And that meant
that as she became accustomed to her new life, the dreams
would stop.
So why didn’t that explanation satisfy her? Truth be told,
she’d miss the white wolf, even if he was only a dream. His
appearance brought her a feeling like no other, a powerful
peace. Warmth radiated from the enormous wolf as if from a
banked fire, a warmth that relaxed and replenished.
Jillian sighed and turned her attention back to her camera to
shoot several frames of the stunning landscape. The light was
slanted now, tingeing the shadows with gold and gilding the
river. Her stomach tried to remind her that she hadn’t eaten
since breakfast, but she didn’t want to reach for her energy bars
right now. All she wanted was to get some photos and head
back down the hillside before dark. The scolding of a red
squirrel made her start and turn around. “What?” she laughed.
“What’s the matter, am I too close to. . . .” Jillian’s thoughts
trailed off as the evening sunlight suddenly illuminated a stony
plateau behind her. “How did I miss this? It’s almost as beautiful
as the view.” She must have bypassed it when she came
through the brush and trees on the west side, focused only on
gaining a vantage point of the valley below. Jillian rose and
slowly made her way around the wide, flat-topped boulders that
formed a rough circle, a circle with a floor not of earth or stone
but soft reddish sand, a testament to ancient seas. Tall spruce
marched right up to the edges of the stony ring but did not enter
it, only stood as sentinels around it. No brush grew in the center
of the plateau, only the occasional wisp of grass. A few charred
bits of wood suggested there had been a recent campfire in the
sand.
What a wonderful place to practice Tae Kwon Do. She could
picture herself in this peaceful setting, her energies balanced,
her timing perfect, as she performed every block, strike, and
stance of the hyung without flaw. Heck, she might even get the
order right at last.
Jillian hopped up to sit on one of the bigger rocks, and swung
her feet like a first-grader on a grown-up’s chair. The stone was
warm beneath her hands, tempting her to stretch out on it.
Maybe she could find not only balance here but uninterrupted
sleep. Unfortunately, the sky was deepening to amber, and she
knew she ought to leave while she could still find her way back.
She packed her camera away and hefted her backpack. She’d
taken no more than a step when one of her water bottles came
loose, bouncing and rolling off among the rocks. Swearing, she
chased it down and reached to retrieve it, but her hand froze in
mid-air. Prints. Three perfect paw prints in the sand and several
partials. Large. Deep. Dog-like yet elongated. Wolf.
Chapter Four
Jillian sat on her heels and gazed at her find for a long time.
Wolf prints. There were honest-to-God wolves living here.
Giddiness and a bone-deep reverence mixed chaotically within
her as she unpacked her camera and strained to find an angle
that would give enough contrast. Only after she’d shot several
frames did her excitement allow her to realize something
unusual about these prints. The sand sparkled slightly as Jillian
traced the outline of one print with her finger in wonder. It was
more than merely large. Including the claws, it was as big as her
entire hand. Nothing she had ever read, nothing she had ever
seen, prepared her for the sheer size of the animal. Jillian knew
some Alaskan wolves could top 175 pounds. But this creature?
The hair on the back of her neck prickled as she found a quarter
in one of her pockets, set it by one of the untouched paw prints
as a size reference, and shot the last of her film.
Jillian scanned the ground around the rocks and quickly
discovered dozens more prints. All were on the large side, but
there were enough variations in size to indicate several wolves,
likely a pack. The sand revealed plenty of shoe prints too, also
of varying sizes. She identified no less than five distinctive
treads, from assorted sneakers to hiking boots. Somebody had
been barefoot too. But the prints were all mixed together, and
she was unable to discern which had come to this spot first, the
humans or the wolves.
Probably the humans, she thought. If they had a fire, they
probably had food. And if there had been food, perhaps the
wolves had simply followed their noses and checked it out after
the humans left. Jillian’s stomach reminded her once more that
it was empty. She straightened, blinked, and realized she’d
been squinting at the prints. The light had faded considerably. It
was past time to leave.
She put the camera away quickly, fastened the errant water
bottle to her pack, and set off down the hill the way she had
come. As much as she wanted to hurry, the thick brush
wouldn’t permit it. The game trail was narrow, crisscrossed with
other narrow trails and fallen trees. Nothing looked familiar in
the fading light and she had to concentrate to choose the right
direction, focus to place her feet carefully. One wrong step
along this steep, rugged path and she would have a lot more to
worry about than the dark.
What kind of woman runs after a wolf?
James was no closer to answering that question than he had
been many hours before when he had paused in the clinic loft,
two bounds away from the open window, and listened to the
human calling after the white wolf. He had been startled to find
the woman up and around so close to dawn, but more
surprised by her reaction when she spotted him. She should
have been terrified, should have been screaming. Instead she
had stopped still, remaining quiet until he melted back into the
darkness—then had plunged forward in a vain attempt to follow
him. She acted as if she knew the wolf, but how could that be?
There was something else too; something in her voice had
almost compelled him to—what? Answer her? Reveal himself?
He didn’t know. The woman had gone from room to room then,
switching on every light, searching.
He wasn’t surprised when she didn’t check the loft. After all, it
was fifteen feet above the ground floor and accessible only by a
vertical ladder. A wolf couldn’t climb it, and she had no way of
knowing that what she pursued was not a wolf and that the
ladder was no impediment to him at all. The stack of bales
outside, from which he had initially leapt, was more than thirty
feet from the loading door of the loft. Only a very large tiger
might cross such a span. Or a Changeling.
James felt a strange disappointment tugging at his senses,
almost a regret that the woman had not found him. Who are you?
Why do I know you? Within his lupine body, James chuffed out a
breath in frustration. And why do I care? The angle of the fading
light told him it was time to hunt, that deer would be on the
move. Weary of human thoughts and human concerns, he
relaxed into his wolf nature and disappeared beneath it.
“What a tourist I am!” Jillian berated herself for not bringing a
cell phone, for not paying more attention to the time, for
traveling in the bush alone, for not packing at least a chocolate
bar. Two chocolate bars. Maybe three. The energy bars she’d
brought tasted like wet cardboard. She made a long mental list
of the things she was going to do to be more prepared for the
next hike, because as difficult as the trail was, she simply had to
go back to that rocky plateau, had to see if the wolves would
return. Was it part of their territory or were they just passing
through?
The sun was long gone. Stars were pinning a deep indigo
sky, and a full moon was floating just above the horizon. It had
climbed enough to glimmer through the trees and lay a broad
swath of light over the surface of the river when Jillian finally
found the marked hiking trail. Compared to the goat path she’d
been traveling, the graveled corridor was like a wide paved
highway, level and free of overhanging brush and fallen logs. It
promised easier, faster travel in spite of the darkness. She was
still two and a half, maybe three, miles from the truck she had
borrowed from the clinic, but at least now she had a direct
route.
The flashback broadsided her without warning.
It might have been the crunch of gravel beneath her feet, the
rustle of leaves in the trees, or the scent of the river, but
whatever the trigger, she was suddenly on another trail by
another river. Phantom images, sounds, even smells burst
vividly upon her senses. Jillian stumbled forward and fell to her
knees, skinning them both right through her jeans. She rolled
and sat, but clasped her hands to her head rather than to her
wounds. “Don’t close your eyes, don’t close your eyes. You’re
not there, it’s not real, it’s over. Jesus, it’s over, it’s over and
you’re okay. You’re okay.” She spoke slowly, deliberately,
coaching herself until the shaking stopped. “It’s a different
place and a different time. I’m not back there, I’m here. I’m here
and I’m okay.” I’m okay, I’m okay.
But she wasn’t, not yet. She rocked back and forth in the
gravel. “My name is Jillian Descharme and I’m a licensed
veterinarian and I’m okay. I’m thirty-two years old and I’m in
Dunvegan, Alberta, and I’m okay. Nothing is threatening me,
nothing is wrong, I’m okay.” She drew a long shaky breath and
rubbed her runny nose with her sleeve like a child. “I’m okay.
Jeez! Jeez goddamn Louise!” She was cold, freezing cold, her
clothes soaked with sweat and her skin clammy, but the fear
had her by the throat and she couldn’t move. She had to think
of something fast, something to help her break away from this
terror, break out of this inertia or she’d be here all night. And
then it came. The image of the white wolf—the memory, the
dream, flowed into her, warmed her like brandy. Jillian clung to
that mental picture like a life preserver in rough seas, let the wolf
’s unspoken words fill her mind and calm it. Not alone. Here with
you.
She rose at last on trembling legs and cursed as her knees
made their condition known. The sharp stinging cleared the last
of the flashback from her head however, banished the nausea
from her stomach. She stood for several moments, hugging
herself, rubbing her hands over her upper arms. She sucked in
great lungfuls of the cool moist air until she felt steady again,
and took a few tentative steps along the dark path—but had to
resist the impulse to run. If she ran, she might never stop.
“Think of the white wolf, think of the white wolf.” Calm, she
had to be calm. Take big breaths. “Walk like a normal person.
It’s okay to walk fast because I’m busy, got things to do, places
to go, people to see, but I don’t have to run. I can walk because
nothing’s wrong, I’m okay.” She was in control, she would stay
in control. As she walked, however, she couldn’t stop her
senses from being on hyper-alert. Jillian’s eyes flicked rapidly
from side to side, searching the darkness, her ears straining to
hear any rustle of leaf or snap of twig. She noticed the tiny
brown bats that dipped and whirled in the air above her. She
noted the calls of night birds, of loons settling and owls
hunting. A mouse hurried in front of her, crossing and
recrossing the path. A few moments later, a weasel followed it,
in a slinky rolling motion. Jillian was keenly aware of everything
—the blood pounding in her ears, the sound of her footsteps in
the gravel, the liquid sounds of the nearby river—but not the
tree root bulging up through the path.
She yelled in surprise, then in pain as her knees hit the gravel
again. She rolled to a sitting position, cursing the sharp stinging
and her own clumsiness—hadn’t she just successfully
negotiated a rugged game trail down a steep hillside for
heaven’s sake? She couldn’t see much even with the moon’s
light, but a quick examination showed both knees were
bleeding, her jeans in shreds. She cursed even more as she
picked out a few obvious shards of gravel, but cleaning and
bandaging were just going to have to wait until she reached the
truck. At least it wasn’t anything worse. Annoying, damn painful
and embarrassing, but not a broken ankle or snakebite. Her
eyes strayed to the underbrush in spite of herself—there
weren’t any poisonous snakes this far north, were there?
“Good grief!” Jillian yanked her mind firmly away from that train
of thought and was pondering whether it was possible to stand
without bending her knees when she heard the howl.
She sat bolt upright as if an electric current had suddenly
passed through her, every hair on end, every sense alert. The
call came again, closer. Deep, primal, long and low. Drawn out
and out and out, an ancient song, mournful yet somehow
sweet. When it fell silent, Jillian felt as if time itself had stopped.
And she found herself straining to hear the song again,
fascinated, even as her brain told her to run and instinct told her
to freeze.
The moon was higher now. The pale light filtered down
through the trees and laid a dappled carpet of silver on the
stony path. There was no wind, no breeze. Jillian held her
breath, listening, watching, but all was still. Her heart was
pounding hard with both excitement and fear. Normally she
would have loved to get a glimpse of a wolf in the wild, but the
idea was a lot less attractive when she was alone in the dark.
There were few recorded incidents of wolves attacking or killing
humans, but all the data in the world wasn’t very reassuring
when she was sitting there bleeding. Immediately she wished
she hadn’t thought of that. It was just a little blood, but she
struggled to get the image of a wounded fish in a shark tank out
of her head.
A movement at the edge of the path beyond seized her
attention. A pale shape emerged from the shadows, seemed to
coalesce in the moonlight and grow larger until it was a vivid
white creature of impossible size. Jillian’s heart stuck in her
throat as the great wolf slowly turned its massive head and
stared directly at her.
Oh, Jesus. She had studied wolves more than any other
wildlife, but only from books and captive specimens. Wolves
don’t attack humans, she reminded herself. Wolves don’t attack
humans—but there had been cases in Alaska. She gritted her
teeth and sat perfectly still, afraid to breathe as the wolf began
to slowly move in her direction. The creature approached within
ten feet, then abruptly sat on its haunches and stared at her.
It was enormous. She swallowed hard, realizing if the wolf
attacked there would be nothing she could do. Nothing. She
wouldn’t even manage a scream before it was on her. Not one
bit of her martial arts training would help, especially when she
was sitting on the ground. Nevertheless she scanned the
ground with her peripheral vision for anything she might use as
a weapon. Her fingers inched toward a rock, closed around it as
the wolf rose, took a slow step toward her, into a pool of
moonlight. Instantly its snowy fur gleamed and its eyes were . . .
its eyes were. . . .
Blue.
Jillian felt as if the air had been knocked from her body. The
rock rolled out of her palm. Trembling, shaking, she reached a
tentative hand toward the animal. “You. It’s you,” she choked
out. “Oh, my God, it’s you, isn’t it? You’re real.”
The wolf closed the gap between them and licked her
outstretched fingers. Omigod, omigod. She couldn’t move at
first, both enthralled and terrified—until the animal nudged its
head under her hand like a dog asking to be petted. Jillian
moved her fingers lightly across the broad skull, scratching
hesitantly at first. Then fear fell away, and she worked both
hands behind the sensitive ears, into the glossy ruff. The wolf
stood panting mildly, the immense jaws slack and the great pink
tongue lolling out in apparent pleasure. Jillian had no illusions
about the animal’s power—it might behave like a big dog but
those jaws could easily crack the leg bones of a moose, those
teeth could tear out the throat of a bull elk in full flight. And as
surely as she knew those facts, she knew the wolf would not
hurt her. It wasn’t sensible, it wasn’t logical, but the certainty
was core-deep. Instinct? Intuition? Insanity? She didn’t know
and didn’t care. The wolf held steady as Jillian wrapped her
arms around its great neck and buried her face in its thick white
fur. “I thought I dreamed you. You came to me. You came when
no one would come, but they all told me I dreamed you because
no one saw you but me. And I looked and looked for you, but I
couldn’t find you.”
Here now. Found you.
The voice in her mind was real. The fur beneath her hands
and face was real. The heat radiating from the wolf’s body was
real. Her voice hitched as joy overwhelmed her. “You’re in my
dreams all the time. I’m so glad that you’re here, that you exist.”
And that I am not crazy. Although her rational brain told her there
was certainly something crazy about being in the forest at night,
hugging a giant wolf. But she couldn’t think about that right
now; she had this moment in time and she had things to say. “I
owe you a lot; you don’t know how much you’ve done. You
saved my life all those years ago, but you saved my sanity too.
When things were hard and horrible, and I didn’t want to face
them, I thought of you and it helped me get through. I got
through the hospital and the counseling and the therapy and
came out on the other side, because of you.” She wiped her
cheek on the soft fur, but couldn’t stop the tears. “I thought I
was done then, I really did. But after a while I felt like it wasn’t
enough to be alive, that I hadn’t really survived until I started
living my life again. And you helped me do that too. I thought
about what to do with my life and it was so plain to me—I
wanted to work with animals, work with wolves. Because of
you, I found that dream inside me. You did that for me, and I
can’t tell you how thankful I am, how grateful I am that you were
there for me. Even now, just handling ordinary life, I feel like I’m
never really alone.”
Not alone. Here with you. The wolf nuzzled and licked at her
hair, then lay down beside her. Gradually the tears subsided,
and Jillian tumbled into an exhausted sleep with her arms still
around the wolf’s neck.
He couldn’t remember who she was. Within the body of the
wolf, James struggled to understand how her scent could be so
familiar yet her identity elude him. All he knew was that she was
important. Vitally important. In her presence, both his wolf and
human natures were strangely in accord, balanced. Almost at
peace. As she slept, he had nudged her to softer ground by the
side of the trail as he would do for a cub. He had even felt
compelled to try to heal her injured knees as he would do for a
Pack-mate. Yet she was neither cub nor Pack-mate. Not a
stranger. What was she?
As he had lapped the dirt from her torn skin, he was shocked
to discover that he had tasted this blood before. Her blood. But
he had no idea where or why. James eased himself away from
the woman and sat up on his haunches, but remained close
enough to share his warmth with her. He knew he had done that
before too. Last night her words had resonated with truth and
deep emotion, but they had shed no light on the mystery. He
wished she had said more—not only in hopes of learning more
about her, but because he liked the sound of her voice.
The sun had almost topped the horizon when James slipped
away into the forest. He paused and looked back at the small
figure in the brush by the side of the trail. For a split second he
saw another trail, another forest. Saw the woman much
younger, barely a teenager, lying just off the path and looking
more like a discarded doll than a human being. Her blond hair
was long and matted with blood. But her eyes were open.
Green. Sea green. And infinitely sad as she observed the wolf—
and waited for it to kill her. As she grieved not for the ending of
her life, but for being alone.
James shook himself hard, looked again, and there was only
the woman sleeping peacefully as before, full-grown and
uninjured except for her skinned knees. Her hair was short, and
tufts of it stuck out in odd directions as if it had a mind of its
own.
What the hell had he just seen? A vision? A memory? An
hallucination? Was it confirmation that the white wolf had
encountered her before? Come to her aid, even comforted her?
And last night he had certainly comforted her again. Even
though his human self was controlling the wolf this time, he had
wanted to comfort this woman. He wished he knew why. Why
being near her somehow comforted him, why he didn’t want to
leave. . . .
The wolf was licking her face again. Jillian was reluctant to
awaken from the best sleep of her life and shoved at the
creature’s soft muzzle, mumbled at it to stop, but it persisted. An
excited whine had her fluttering her eyelids, wondering what on
earth was—
“Hey!” Her shout caused the young Labrador to bounce back
and fall over its own big feet, but it was too friendly to stay
away. Jillian sat up hurriedly, trying to keep the silly black
creature from licking her face again.
“Good God, are you all right? I’m really sorry, ma’am. Buster,
get down! Get off her!”
Jillian looked up to see a stranger trying to offer her a hand
and shoo the dog away at the same time. The man was dressed
like most of the farmers who came into the clinic, including a
baseball cap advertising the local grain buyers. Auburn hair
curled out from under the cap, amber freckles dusted the strong
face but his eyes were an unexpected golden brown. And far
older than the rest of him, as if he had seen too much. He would
have been handsome—very much so—if he’d smiled, but
something told her that happened rarely, if at all.
“I’m all right, I’m fine. Really. Don’t worry about the dog.” She
tried to wave him away but instead he grabbed her hand and
pulled her to her feet as if she were weightless. “Ouch!”
“Oh, Christ, are you hurt? Damn dog. He just gets so excited.
I’m sorry he knocked you down. Jesus, just look at your jeans.”
Luckily he was trying to put a leash on an unwilling Buster
and was too distracted to notice the faces Jillian made as she
gingerly flexed her legs. Her knees were stiff and sore, although
not as bad as she had expected. They didn’t look too bad either,
but she’d better get some peroxide on them soon. The wolf—
“Where’s the wolf?” Panic grabbed her by the throat. Jillian
looked frantically over the spot where she’d been lying, looked
off into the woods, scanned the brush in every direction.
“Where is he?”
The man came back with the now-captive dog, frowning.
“What’s wrong? Did you lose something?”
“The wolf, he was right here. He was here with me and I don’t
know what happened to him.” She whipped around and
grasped the man’s shirt, causing him to back up a step. “Did
you see a white wolf? Maybe you just saw part of something, a
big white animal, maybe you thought it was a dog or a—a calf or
something.”
“No. No, nothing.” He backed up further, pushing her hands
from his shirt. His face had paled and his eyes darted about.
“There’s no wolves around here, lady.”
She stared at him. “Of course there are. I saw prints all over
Elk Point yesterday, big ones. And there was a white wolf right
here—”
Jillian realized suddenly how bizarre she sounded. The dog’s
owner was glancing down the trail, sidling away from her and
giving every sign of wanting to be gone. The morning air was
cool, but she could swear the guy was sweating. Small wonder.
She was probably coming across as a little deranged. The guy
must think he had a crazy woman on his hands. She ran her
hands through her untidy hair, straightened her jacket and
decided to make light of her outburst. “Well, I guess I must have
seen something else and made a mistake. City girl, you know.
Maybe this is how those Sasquatch stories get started,” she
chuckled, expecting him to laugh along. He didn’t. She tried
something different. “Say, I work at the North Star Animal
Hospital. Buster’s a great-looking dog. Has he had his shots?”
“What? Oh, yeah. A couple months ago when Dr. Taku was at
our place doing a herd check.”
She leaned down and petted the ecstatic canine straining to
reach her even as his owner was moving slowly in the other
direction. “George Taku? Guess you must go over to the Spirit
River clinic then. Well, I guess I won’t see much of you, Buster.”
She looked up at the man. He didn’t look receptive to shaking
her hand so she didn’t offer it. “I’m Jillian by the way. Thanks
again for stopping. And you are?”
There was the slightest hesitation before he answered.
“Douglas. Douglas Harrison. See you, ma’am.” He turned and
walked quickly down the trail, with the reluctant dog in tow. He
called loudly over his shoulder, “You be careful in these woods
now.”
She shook her head as she watched him disappear around a
bend. Too late. I’ve already spent the night with a wolf. Even Red
Riding Hood didn’t do that.
Chapter Five
The day promised to be a hot one. There was no dew on the
fields, and only a few birds were singing from the roadside
brush as Dr. Connor Macleod struggled to drive, stay awake,
and keep tabs on the bundle on the seat beside him. He’d been
called out of bed to deliver twin calves and discovered there
were actually three in the tangle. Two were already dead and it
had taken the better part of the night to make sure the lone
survivor wouldn’t join them. The first-time mother had
completely refused to bond with the undersized calf. Now it was
wrapped in a blanket on the front seat, another orphan to be
nursed at the North Star Animal Hospital. At least the weather
was good—cattle producers in the Peace region tended to calve
their herds in either January or May. If he had to get up in the
middle of the night to attend a calving, Connor certainly
preferred it to be at this time of year.
Thank God for Birkie. He was going to be late for his
surgeries but at least the North Star Animal Hospital was in
capable hands. The receptionist’s efficiency bordered on the
superhuman. By now, Birkie would have opened the clinic,
noticed his absence, checked his whereabouts with dispatch—
and formulated a battle plan. Anything that didn’t require a
licensed veterinarian would be passed to Caroline. Anything
that did would be rescheduled.
And next weekend Connor wouldn’t have a single qualm
about directing their dispatch service to call the new vet instead
of him. He was pleased with how well Jillian had fit into the
practice in such a short time. She was highly skilled, passionate
about her work, and eager to learn more. A potent combination
in his books. He’d just have to keep an eye on her to make sure
she didn’t work herself into the ground.
Meanwhile, it would be a real treat not to work himself into the
ground. Before he’d married Zoey, Birkie had often been on his
case about putting all his passion into his practice. It had been
hard not to. The work he did absorbed him; he lived and
breathed it. He still did, to a degree, but he had to admit he’d
rather spend time with Zoey whenever possible. She was busy
too, and loved her newspaper as much as he loved animals, but
nothing else existed when they were together at the end of the
day. Sometimes they just collapsed on the couch like any hardworking
couple. Most of the time, they called the Change and
chased each other all over the farm and throughout the river
valley.
To run as a wolf was freedom and joy and a tremendous
sense of wholeness wrapped together. And it was all the more
so now that Zoey was by his side. He’d lived a very long time,
but nothing he’d experienced held a candle to the wonders of
having a mate.
Like all of the Macleods, Connor was far older than he
appeared, would live beyond several human lifetimes, but there
were few Changelings left in the world. Most of his kind built
relationships with humans. Fortunately, a human could become
a Changeling too, could share in the gifts. Just like in the old
werewolf tales, anyone bitten by a Changeling would become
one. Their saliva contained a unique peptide. A single bite could
inject enough of the substance into the bloodstream to activate
a gene, one that existed in every human being. Not all human
partners chose this path, but most did.
There were success stories all around him. The Pack leader,
Jessie Watson, had Changed her human mate, Bill. Within his
own family, Connor’s mother had done the same for his father
half a millennia ago. Both had been well prepared and
welcomed the gift of the wolf with joy. It had been different for
Connor’s wife, Zoey. The gift was forced on her by a Changeling
gone rogue, before she even knew that such creatures existed.
Despite such a rough beginning, however, Zoey loved her new
life. She’d not only adapted well but displayed a talent for
shapeshifting beyond Connor’s own abilities.
James and Evelyn had discussed the Change many times,
but then she became pregnant and they had decided to wait
until after the baby came. Connor had wondered for years if
Evelyn might have been able to save herself if she had been
able to call forth the Change. Did James wonder that as well?
Was it one more weight added to an already unbearable
burden? Connor questioned anew if his brother was ever going
to return to his human self. Would he ever even want to after
losing so much? Jessie seemed so certain that James was
improving but Connor just couldn’t see it.
Come to think of it, he was probably too tired to see anything.
Even Changelings had to rest sometime. He’d been out on farm
calls almost every night this week, and the second calving
season of the year had barely begun. The tall vet left off thinking
about his brother and focused instead on hopes of hot coffee
and a hot shower as he pulled into the bay at the back of the
North Star Animal Hospital. He tucked the blanket more
securely around the tiny calf and carried it inside—and
suddenly every wolfen sense flared to attention. A Changeling
had been inside the clinic in wolf form. And it wasn’t just any
member of the Pack. There was no mistaking the white wolf’s
scent. It hung in the air, as three-dimensional as a holographic
image to Connor’s lupine senses. What the hell?
He blinked and found that Caroline had already taken the
undersized calf from him, and was asking something about an
IV. He rubbed a quick hand over his face and found his voice.
“Sorry, I’m not all here. Yeah, an IV would be good. And I milked
out some colostrum from the mother—I almost forgot. Thanks.”
He pulled the quart jar from a deep jacket pocket, thankful that
he’d remembered it before he broke the damn thing, and
handed it to her. “It’s not much. I left the owner milking out the
rest. He’ll bring it by in an hour or so.”
Calf and assistant disappeared from his sight and his mind.
Connor inhaled carefully, certain that thoughts of his brother
must have influenced his senses. But there was no mistake. He
walked slowly forward, following the airborne traces to the large
livestock area . . . the stack of bales . . . the hallway. What on
earth had brought James inside the clinic? He had no answer
for that.
A noise from down the hall signaled the arrival of another
truck in the bay. A moment later Jillian came through the
doorway with her knapsack and something else. The scent of
the white wolf enveloped her, swirled around her and preceded
her down the hall like a live thing. A human could never have
detected it, but to Connor it was as powerful as a punch to the
head. He found he couldn’t say a word or form a thought, only
stare at her.
“Hey there,” she said as she approached. “I’m a little messy,
but I don’t look that scary do I?”
Connor shook himself mentally and found his voice. “No, not
at all. I mean, you look a little tired maybe.” The scent of the wolf
was overwhelming, the scents of the forest strong as well.
Connor could have named the places she’d been right down to
the plants she’d touched. “Did you get to see Elk Point?” He
knew full well she had.
“Sure did. It was great, even better than you described. I’ll
have to bore you with my thousands of photos one day. Say, do
you know that a wolf pack has been in that area?” “Really?”
Good Christ, there was white hair all over her jacket. Had James
lost his mind?
“Tons of prints everywhere.”
Connor nodded, tried to act casual. Normal. Anything other
than how he felt. “You’re a pretty good tracker for a city girl.
Maybe you’ll get to see more. I know you’re interested in
wolves.” And one of them seemed to be interested in her for
some reason. How the hell did she get so damn close to him?
And why did he let her? There were a hundred questions
Connor was dying to ask the young vet and no plausible way to
do so. What on earth could he say? Hey, did you see my brother
the wolf?
She didn’t give him any more information either. Instead she
studied him intently. “Are you sure you don’t need me today?
It’s barely Monday, and you look exhausted.”
“No, you go ahead and enjoy your day. In this business, you
take your time off when you can get it. I’m looking forward to
having the next weekend when my wife will be home.” Connor
realized Jillian was looking at his stained coveralls. He probably
looked like he’d delivered a dozen calves. “I was just on my way
to get cleaned up.”
“Okay, well, I’ve got some errands to run downtown. Thanks
again for the use of the truck.”
“You’re going to use it often enough when you’re called out
to a farm. Might as well get some enjoyment out of it as well.”
She smiled at that, then continued on past him down the
hallway and into her apartment. When her door clicked, Connor
leaned on the wall for support and rubbed both hands over his
face, hard.
“Jesus. Sweet Jesus Christ.” He knew he wasn’t going to get
much more information out of Jillian, not without raising her
suspicion. That was okay. He would Change tonight and go
looking for his older brother himself. James Macleod had a hell
of a lot of explaining to do.
Douglas sat in the kitchen and poured a double shot of Jack
Daniels into his coffee. Drank it down. Tried to reassure himself
that it didn’t mean a thing when Jillian had said there were
wolves. Of course wolves lived around here, just like bears and
cougars did. Good God, he had even hunted wolves, ordinary
wolves, when he was just a kid.
But the woman had been looking for a white wolf. White.
Maybe he didn’t hear her right. Maybe she was mistaken
completely, maybe she saw just what she suggested—a dog or
a calf or who knows? But he knew who she must be. He’d
heard about the clinic’s new lady vet and figured that anyone
who made it through seven years of veterinary college wasn’t
stupid or prone to seeing things. If she thought she saw a white
wolf, she likely did.
“But so what?” He refilled his cup with more Jack Daniels
than coffee and pondered the question. So what if she saw a
white wolf? Wolves were known to come in a wide variety of
colors, and white wasn’t uncommon. Hell, most of the wolves in
the arctic were white for Christ’s sake. And none of them lived
for thirty fucking years either. It wasn’t the same creature, it
couldn’t be. It just wasn’t possible.
But then he hadn’t thought it possible for werewolves to exist.
And he wished for the millionth time that he had never seen one.
Wished he hadn’t heard the back door close just after
midnight. Wished he hadn’t been so fucking nosy, wished he
hadn’t crept outside to find his father loading the Remington 12-
gauge as if to go hunting—and hunting for something big too.
Jesus, he’d all but begged to go along. After all, they’d stalked
deer and moose since the boy was old enough to walk,
sometimes even bear or wolf. Maybe the old man was going for
the cougar their neighbor had spotted recently. His father had
hesitated at first, tried to make him go inside. Then he relented—
and told him a story that made his young blood chill. He’d
grown up thinking his mom had simply left them. His sister,
Rosa, was old enough to remember their mother, and said she
had run away when he was still a baby. His father had never
said anything at all. Roderick had refused to talk about her or
answer any questions, had refused to even let the subject be
mentioned. But now his father was telling him that his mother
hadn’t run away at all, that she’d been killed, and not by
anything ordinary. By werewolves. Holy fucking crap,
werewolves for real, just like in the movies and the comics. It
was terrifying and exciting at the same time. No way could
Douglas stay home.
But when they’d made their way to the Macleod farm, it wasn’t
what he expected, not at all.
“Dad, she don’t look like a wolf,” he had dared to say at last.
He didn’t look at the crumpled figure in the middle of the bloody
floor but saw it all too clearly in his mind. Douglas had owned a
rifle since he’d been large enough to carry one, gone on
countless hunting trips and had never once been squeamish.
But this was different and his stomach felt like it had crawled into
his throat. “Isn’t she supposed to turn into a wolf after she’s
dead?”
“That’s an old wives’ tale. They don’t change unless they
want to. Don’t need a full moon either, but they’re stronger at
the full moon. That’s why we had to come tonight, when the
moon’s getting small.”
“But she . . . she looks like Rosa. She looks like Rosa and you
shot her anyways.” Dougie’s voice quavered in spite of himself.
Rosa was married now and expecting his niece or nephew any
day now. At fourteen, he thought it was going to be really cool
to be an uncle.
His father turned on him at once, shoved him hard into the
wall and gripped the front of his shirt. The old man’s voice was
a whip. “Don’t you go feeling sorry for these damned creatures.
That’s how they fool you, by looking like us. You get it through
your head that they’re predators, deceivers and predators
through and through.” He gave the boy a sharp shake to
underscore the words, then tossed him back to slam against
the wall again. “Once a pair starts breeding like this, we’ll be hip
deep in the bastards before you can blink. You want that,
Dougie? You want them going after our livestock? Maybe going
after Rosa like they did your mother?”
“No, no, I didn’t mean—”
“You watch, boy, you just stay right here and watch. You
haven’t seen these animals like I have. That’s why you can’t
believe. You wait. And then you’ll see and you’ll know. We’ve
taken care of one and now her mate will have to come here. He’ll
be drawn here and we’ll be waiting for him.” The man stood in
the shadows of the darkened house, the pump action shotgun
resting across his arm, watching both the front and the side
windows.
An hour went by in silence, then two. Finally his father spat in
disgust. “It’s been too goddamn long. I don’t know where the
son of a bitch is, but I’m not waiting any longer to destroy the
den. We’ll have to go after the male another night.” He gathered
up the gas cans and headed for the stairs. “You stay here and
keep watching, hear me? I don’t want any of those bastards
sneaking up on us.”
The boy turned to the window again, feeling both older than
his fourteen years and much, much younger. He was grateful
that the smell of the gas covered up the stink of blood in the air,
glad for the beginning crackle of flames above that almost
drowned out the thoughts whirling in his head. His dad was
nuts, completely and totally a nut case, shooting some poor
lady thinking she was a werewolf. Using a shotgun of all things
like she was dangerous, like in some movie. He should have
stopped him, should have made his dad stop—but he hadn’t
stopped him, oh Jesus, he hadn’t even realized what the old
man was going to do before it was done . . . and neither had
she.
The boy welcomed the waft of smoke that stung his eyes,
gave him an excuse for the tears that filled them. He rubbed
them and tried to focus on the line of trees beyond the barn. The
moon’s light was weak and the forest looked black and
ominous. Suddenly there was a flash of white and a great
silvery shape sprang from the darkness, running hard.
“Hey—hey, there it is. I see it!” He stared at it, terrified and
fascinated at the same time. “Holy shit! It’s big, it’s fuckin’
huge.”
His father was beside him at once. Thick smoke was now
hovering near the ceiling and there were loud popping and
crackling noises as flames consumed the rooms above them,
but the old man was determined to finish what he’d started.“Get
back behind the wall over there. Let him come all the way
through the door, then pull the trigger. Got it? Aim for the head if
you can.”
“But the fire—” It was getting hard to breathe.
“There’s time, we can get him. We gotta get him. Listen to what
I tell you.” The old man ducked back to the other corner of the
dining room.
Seconds later the front door burst inward as it was struck by
the massive animal. Dougie flinched at the explosive noise of
shattering wood and nearly dropped the gun. He swallowed
and forced himself to peer around the corner, his heart
pounding so hard it hurt his chest. A great white wolf stood in
the doorway, nearly filling half of it. Then abruptly, instantly, it
became a tall, blond man. It was almost more than the boy could
do to remember to breathe and yet keep from gasping aloud.
His throat constricted with the effort. Holy Jesus. Dad was right.
He was fuckin’ right! The teen pressed his back to the dining room
wall and gripped the rifle in one shaking hand and his crotch in
the other, praying he wouldn’t piss his pants like a baby. That’s
when he heard the sound—not a sound he’d ever heard in his
life and not one he ever wanted to hear again. A wild keening of
terrible grief, unendurable pain. The unearthly howl pierced his
head, stabbed at his heart. He couldn’t stop himself from
peering around the corner again. The blond man was kneeling
on the bloody floor, cradling the woman’s body, rocking back
and forth.
Without warning the old man sprang out and fired twice in
deafening succession. The son stepped away from the wall as
well, but his .22 was slack in his nerveless hands. He watched
as their quarry slumped to the floor in a strange kind of slow
motion. Even dead, the man seemed to curl himself protectively
around the woman.
Dougie’s father shouted at him, urged him to shoot, shoot
now, but the boy could only stand and stare through the
thickening smoke with helpless tears running down his face.
Suddenly an ominous crash sounded right above them and a
great shower of sparks and wood collapsed into the stairway.
His father grabbed his arm and hustled him out the back door,
both of them coughing and choking. Dougie nearly fell twice as
they ran across the backyard and into the forest beyond where
the truck was hidden. And all the way home he could still hear
that terrible outcry of grief in his head.
Thirty years later, Douglas Harrison still heard that howl in his
dreams. Still woke up sweating, sometimes in tears like the boy
he had been. Tears were running down his cheeks now, as he
held his coffee cup in front of him with both hands as if in
supplication, praying for forgetfulness.
Chapter Six
Connor had every intention of hunting down his brother for an
explanation. But when night came, the tall vet was tied up for
hours with an emergency surgery on a boxer that had been
struck by a car. By midnight, the anxious owners had gone
home, and the dog was recovering from the anesthetic in a
kennel. By one a.m., Connor was sure the dog would live, but
he was less certain that he would. He didn’t dare try to Change,
not until he had eaten and slept and eaten again. Changing
burned up an ungodly number of calories. Add a rapid
metabolism to that, and the need for rest and nutrition became
paramount. Two things he hadn’t had enough of in well over a
week. The hunt for James would have to wait.
It didn’t prevent him from thinking about his brother, however.
As Connor drove home, he wondered how on earth Jillian had
encountered the white wolf. She would never hurt the wolf, of
course, that wasn’t the danger. But was James being
deliberately careless? It shouldn’t be possible for Jillian to find
James by accident. Even the Pack couldn’t find James if he
didn’t want to be found—the white wolf simply seemed to melt
into the forest and disappear. Connor wasn’t completely certain
he could find his brother either.
Why would James reveal himself to a human? He was still
mulling that question when he climbed into bed and fell into a
dreamless sleep.
Far on the other side of Dunvegan, James was wondering the
same thing. He had submerged himself beneath the animal
persona from the time he left the woman on the trail. He didn’t
want to think about her, didn’t intend to see her again. He
resolved to stay away from the clinic, the trails, anywhere he
might encounter her. It was safer that way. He was
unconcerned about possible danger to himself. But he was all
too aware that he could bring danger to this woman.
Associating with Changelings had proved perilous to humans
throughout history. They had nothing to fear from the
Changelings—it was forbidden among them to harm humans—
but everything to fear from their fellows. James was certain that
death had visited Evelyn, had taken her because she was
married to him, and someone had known what he was. Humans
as a whole tended to be suspicious of those who were different,
fearful of anyone not like themselves, and their fears sometimes
erupted into violence.
Yet the wolf resisted James, refused to take shelter in the
deeper forest even though it was broad daylight. Refused to do
anything but lie barely hidden under a spruce canopy, head on
its paws, facing in the direction of the town. James began to
wonder if he had finally lost his mind. He was the wolf; how
could he be so at odds with himself? It felt uncomfortably like
the wolf was becoming a separate entity and surely that way lay
madness.
