Maybe if he figured out who the woman was, he could solve
the puzzle and be able to leave it alone. If he could just get
some answers, maybe then he could stop struggling with his
animal self and slip comfortably into oblivion again.
Jillian signed up for a post office box, transferred her eastern
bank account to a local branch, and explored a few shops, but
was unable to achieve any kind of distraction. There was a
poster for a new wolf stamp at the post office. Wolves ran along
the front of her complimentary wildlife-themed checkbook
cover. The faces of wolves stared out from greeting cards,
puzzles, T-shirts and framed wildlife pictures. A poster in a DVD
rental outlet advertised a movie with wolves. A child in a stroller
held a stuffed wolf—okay, it was supposed to be a husky, but it
had blue eyes for God’s sake.
Jillian knew that on any other day, she would barely have
noticed these things. Okay, maybe she might have noticed
some of them because she liked wolves. But last night she had
met a real wolf, her wolf. And there was just no way to
rationalize away that experience even if she’d wanted to. When
she’d undressed to shower, she’d discovered white hairs on
her clothes—a few black ones from the enthusiastic Buster but
dozens upon dozens of pure white hairs. Evidence that she had
not only seen a white wolf, but touched and even hugged a
white wolf. And it had permitted the contact. The whole idea was
exhilarating and terrifying at the same time. By some accident of
fate, she’d somehow stepped outside the bounds of normalcy
and made a connection with the unknown for the second time
in her life.
There was no proof, of course, that the wolf had
communicated with her, had spoken in her mind. She would
allow that she might have imagined that in the grip of emotion.
But all the rest was absolutely, completely true.
Her brain was churning as she walked along Dunvegan’s red
brick sidewalks. Maybe a little research was in order. Jillian
stopped at the public library and signed up for an hour on the
Internet. Three hours later, she was still there. There were still
no wolves over 175 pounds on record anywhere in the world.
Her wolf was far bigger than any canine she’d come across, and
she’d had experiences in college with very large dog breeds
such as the St. Bernard and Great Pyrenees, both of which
easily topped 200 pounds. Plus, there were the eyes . . . Wolf
eye color typically ranged from yellow to brown, occasionally
green. But not blue. Not clear, brilliant blue. Conclusion One,
she thought, was that the wolf was physically unusual, unique
among its kind.
The wolf had appeared on two similar occasions, both times
when she was alone on a trail at night and was injured in some
way. Okay, that first time she had been near death. The skinned
knees barely counted as an injury by comparison, but still it
seemed too much of a coincidence. How had the wolf known
that she was in trouble? Why had it come to her? And how
about the fact that the first time had been in eastern Ontario,
while this latest visitation was nearly two thousand miles west
of that province? How had the wolf known where she was? And
just what would motivate a wolf to travel so far? Conclusion
Two, she decided, was that the wolf possessed unusual
abilities, could do things that couldn’t be explained by normal
means.
Those conclusions led her to expand her fields of research.
She found articles and stories suggesting that the wolf could be
a metaphysical being, a totem animal, a spirit guide, even an
Irish pooka. But it didn’t seem likely that such a mystical
creature would leave hair on her clothes.
She looked at the facts again and decided to scratch
Conclusions One and Two. Wolves simply didn’t live that long,
not in the wild. She had been attacked, what, fourteen years
ago? Fifteen? The white wolf that had driven off her assailants
had been unquestionably full-grown at the time. Although zoos
reported wolves living close to twenty years in captivity, a wild
wolf typically had a lifespan of only five or six years. Ten to
thirteen at most. And an aged animal wasn’t difficult to spot. Its
muscle mass would be diminishing, its coat dull, its teeth worn.
There was a look, a feel to the body that no veterinarian could
miss. And the wolf she had just encountered on the trail seemed
to be very much in its prime.
So which was more far-fetched, that it was the same wolf that
saved her years ago, or that there were two completely identical
wolves, and both of them seemed determined to protect her?
Jillian had a pounding headache and not a single answer by
the time she headed home. She had a stack of books beside her
on the seat of the truck, but there was no way she was going to
open them tonight. Instead, she picked up a container of
chocolate pecan fudge ice cream and resolved to eat it in front
of the TV until she forgot all about wolves for a while.
Within the wolf, James padded silently through the shadowed
clinic. Dogs and cats slept in kennels, a cow and two horses
dozed in the livestock wing. None stirred as the Changeling
passed by them in the darkness. He wasn’t hunting them.
Instead, he inhaled deeply, drinking in the woman’s unique
scent, and followed it unerringly. Doors presented no
impediment. Every door in the clinic had levered handles that
were easily pawed open. Connor had done that on purpose, no
doubt. Bet he didn’t expect me to use them. Within minutes, the
white wolf stood outside the room where a small, blond woman
thrashed in the grip of restless dreams.
James could sense the tension as he pawed open the door.
Was she having a nightmare? Operating with both wolfen
instinct and human caution, he moved silently until he stood by
her bed, his nose nearly touching her arm. Her blankets were
tangled, her skin shiny with perspiration. She moaned, then
suddenly went still as if on some level she sensed the wolf’s
presence. Her eyes didn’t open, but her fingers coaxed him
closer, her lips murmuring soundlessly. To his surprise, her
thoughts shone clearly in his mind. I missed you. I’m so glad you
came back. She stroked the great animal’s head, buried her
hands in the snowy ruff. The doctors tried to tell me you were just a
hallucination, but I knew you were real. I knew it inside. I hung onto
that, knew I wasn’t alone. I knew you’d come.
She smiled broadly, her eyes still closed, relaxed and drifting
down into a deep and peaceful sleep. James watched her for a
long time, puzzled by this new development. He shouldn’t be
able to hear her thoughts. Changelings could usually only hear
the thoughts of other Changelings. And he was confused by the
feelings she stirred in him, confused even to have feelings. He
had spent so many years buffered from emotions. As a wolf, he
instinctively wanted to guard her, protect her. Not like a cub or
even a member of its Pack. More than that. It was important to
keep her safe, if only from her dreams. But deep within the wolf,
James himself was restless. He wanted something else,
something more, something he didn’t recognize.
And then suddenly he did. With the blinding intensity of a
lightning flash, James suddenly understood exactly what it was
that he wanted. Needed. To see her with a man’s eyes. To touch
her with a man’s hands. To puzzle out the connection between
them as a man. The unexpected urge to resume his human form
was so powerful that he ached with it—and was nearly
overwhelmed by it. The white wolf jumped back from the bed as
if it was on fire, and James fought to stay in control. He wanted
nothing more than to bolt down the hallway and out of the
building, to race for the forest. But there would be no sanctuary
there as long as the riddle of who this woman was—and who
she was to him—remained unsolved.
Maybe if he slipped out of the wolf’s skin . . . if he was in his
human form just for a moment . . . maybe then he could
remember her.
A sudden breeze stirred the air in the room although there
was no window open. A flurry of blue sparks eddied about the
wolf as static electricity built. The animal vanished. A tall,
powerful man stood in its place—and abruptly sat down hard
on the floor.
Ow! Jesus! His teeth had snapped together with enough force
to make his head ring. Luckily his tongue hadn’t been in the
way, and thank God he hadn’t made too much noise. James’s
skin prickled as a new awareness stole over him. He was
different. Human skin. He’d forgotten how it felt, wasn’t sure that
he liked it. And everything else seemed different too. Not only
was his outward form changed, but his senses had shifted,
altered. Almost dulled. In human form, Changelings possessed
stronger senses of sight and smell and hearing than real
humans—yet not nearly as powerful as what they experienced
as wolves. The sudden difference was confusing, almost
frightening. James held his hands out as if for balance, in spite
of the fact he was still sitting down. He glanced over and
marveled that he had hands, waggled the fingers on one, then
the other. He had forgotten what that was like too. Had it been
so long?
His heart hammered against his ribs. Emotions assailed him
and were beaten back as James struggled to stay in control, to
orient himself to this new state of affairs. He tried to breathe
normally, succeeded mostly. Awkwardly he pushed his hair
away from his face, glanced down quickly, and was relieved to
find clothes. They felt odd—they just didn’t move with him the
way that fur did—but thank God he was dressed. It hadn’t even
crossed his mind when he called the Change. The woman was
certain to be upset if she awakened to find a stranger in her
room. A naked stranger would likely have her screaming the
place down.
He looked over at the bed. Didn’t intend to wake her, of
course, didn’t want her to be frightened. But he needed to
know, he had to know who she was.
James rose shakily to his feet, feeling as coordinated as a
newborn giraffe, and sat carefully on the edge of the bed. He
looked, really looked, at the woman for the very first time. She
lay on her back with an arm curled above her head, the other
arm outflung. She had a childlike appearance at first glance, her
pajamas covered with silly cartoon frogs, but the rumpled
material clung to soft curves, rounded breasts, things the wolf
wouldn’t notice but the man did. Her short blond hair was a
pleasing riot of cowlicks, but it looked wrong somehow. It
should be long. Somehow he remembered that her hair had
been long. But when? Where? James tried to will the memories
to return, frustrated that there were only baffling fragments that
meant little. He had been so certain that as soon as he resumed
human form, the hazy picture in his mind would clear and the
troubling puzzle would be solved. The disappointment was
almost tangible.
The woman beside him was breathing deep, still oblivious to
his presence. His human presence anyway. He turned his
attention to carefully studying her features. There were faint,
fine scars along the cheekbone, the underside of the jaw, tiny
irregularities that Changeling eyesight perceived, but ordinary
human eyes would never know. What had happened to her? He
felt he should know, that it was important. It meant something.
The woman—J-something, her name begins with J—certainly
meant something to the wolf. Did his wolf side know things that
his human side did not? J, Jane, Jennifer, Julia, Ji—Ji—Jill, Jill,
Jillian. It was a small triumph to remember her name, although
he suspected the wolf had supplied it. He whispered it softly,
conscious of how his human mouth formed each syllable. “Jil-lian.
Jilli-an.” Repeated it until it didn’t feel so damned awkward,
as if his lips were out of shape or something. He had a name
now but it didn’t prompt any further memories. He wondered if
she knew him, then realized it was far more likely that she knew
not the man but the wolf, had seen the animal somewhere. She
probably wouldn’t recognize James at all. Disappointment
poked again at his insides, and he swore softly, then got up and
paced silently about the room.
A hefty pile of mail and newspapers occupied a small table by
the door and he fanned out the top few envelopes. Dr. Jillian
Descharme, DVM. He was strangely relieved to have
remembered her first name before the address labels revealed it
to him—yet her last name was unfamiliar. It looked like it might
be French, maybe French-Canadian, but he had no idea how to
pronounce it. She was a veterinarian, and that struck no
particular chord either, except to explain why she was living at
the clinic. She obviously worked with his brother. For a fleeting
moment James considered asking Connor about the woman—
but dismissed it quickly. He didn’t want to involve his brother
unless he had to, would far rather figure things out for himself.
James replaced the mail, trying to arrange it the way it had
been, when he happened to glance up. A calendar was on the
wall, and he stared at the year in disbelief. It was a joke, had to
be. His attention snapped back to the mail and he pawed
through it now, seeking postmarks, rifling through the
newspapers for a date. Each time he found one, he’d toss it to
the floor and find another. And another. Jesus Murphy, that can’t
be right. There has to be a mistake. The year looked bizarre, like
science fiction. Could the century have turned without his
knowing?
When he got to the bottom of the pile, he leaned against the
wall and stood there for a very long time. His mind fought to
accept that he’d been running as a wolf for more than thirty
years. Dear God, it hadn’t felt like that long. A wolf’s concept of
time was limited. It was aware of the moon and the seasons—
but it didn’t count them. His human side had paid no attention at
all, preferring to give up all awareness in favor of the wolf.
Finally James blew out a breath and straightened. It didn’t
matter. It couldn’t matter. One year or thirty or a hundred, he
was damn well going to run as a wolf again, just as soon as he
solved this particular puzzle.
He sat on the bed and studied the woman, noticed things that
he hadn’t as a wolf. Her features combined to create a unique
beauty—the wild cap of hair, the fine sharp angles of her face,
the tiny frown between her brows. She looked like a badtempered
faerie. And she smelled good, a little different through
human nostrils, but the scent was still distinct, still tantalizing.
He knew the scent because the wolf knew her scent—but her
face, however appealing, told him nothing at all. His frustration
mounted. Why couldn’t he remember her? Why did he know her
name, her smell? She was completely human, but he had heard
her thoughts in his mind as clearly as if she was a Changeling
too.
James thought of the strange vision he’d had on the trail, the
momentary sight of a much younger Jillian, injured and
anticipating death. What had happened to her? She said the
wolf saved her life but how? When? The questions beat at his
brain as hopelessly as the moths against the bedroom window.
James glanced over at it, noted the graying of the night sky
along the eastern horizon. He almost sighed, although whether
it was in relief or resignation, he’d be hard-pressed to say.
He fully intended to leave. Was going to get up and walk out
the door. Instead his hand went to Jillian’s face, brushed the
wisps of hair away with a tenderness he didn’t know he was
capable of. Her fair skin was soft, so soft . . . and it hit him hard
that he hadn’t felt a woman’s skin, hadn’t wanted to feel a
woman’s skin, in fact, hadn’t so much as thought of it for a long,
long time. He brushed his fingertips lightly over her cheek, felt
something electric along his own skin. A connection pulsed
between them. . . .
“Who are you, Jillian?” he whispered. As if in response, she
sighed and turned a little toward him. It distracted him just long
enough for a snake-quick hand to seize his wrist in a
surprisingly strong grip.
James found himself staring into furious green eyes. Mentally,
he flailed for the appropriate words, realized there weren’t very
damn many for a situation like this. Shit. He cursed himself for
being a complete idiot even as he tried to paste on what he
hoped was a friendly expression—he’d had no time to practice.
“Don’t be afraid. It’s . . . it’s not what you think.”
Chapter Seven
Jillian had all kinds of things she intended to say to this nervy
intruder, right before she pounded the creep into next week. At
least that was her plan. The words stuck in her throat when she
opened her eyes and saw an enormous Viking looming over her
—or so her mind tried to tell her. The strong intelligent face, the
warrior build, the white-blond hair, those blue, blue eyes . . .
On some level she couldn’t help noticing the stranger had a
warrior’s voice too. Low and quiet, almost a growl with steel
underneath it. And familiar somehow.
She didn’t indulge the odd thoughts, just continued to glare
murderously at him while maintaining her grip on his wrist.
Tried to ignore the fact that her fingers couldn’t even reach
halfway around that powerful wrist. Tried to ignore the fear that
clawed at her throat, the terror of a nightmarish past repeating
itself. “What the hell am I supposed to think?”
“You were dreaming—” He caught the fist with his free hand,
stopping it just under his chin, held it. He frowned and shook
his head.
Jillian was certain that instead of stopping her attacker, she’d
just made him mad. That furrowed brow brought a frightening
ferocity to his features. And although he wasn’t exerting any
pressure on her fist, it was effectively caged in his iron hand. Oh
Jesus, what now? She tried to think. Could she bring a leg up,
kick him in the head? Let go of his wrist with her free hand and
arrow her fingers into his throat? All her martial arts training
seemed to desert her as she looked up into that harsh yet
handsome face.
“You should have done that first, you know,” he said,
surprising her. “Should have decked me just as you opened
your eyes, doc.” His words were slightly halting, as if unfamiliar
with the language. “It would have been a hell of a lot more
effective than grabbing my wrist, would have used the surprise
to better advantage.” He continued to hold her fist, held it close
enough to his chin that she could feel his close-cropped beard
against her knuckles. Never taking those blue, blue eyes from
hers, he quickly turned the wrist she held in her other hand,
neatly freeing it and seizing her wrist instead. “See? Bad choice
for you. Want to try it again?”
She goggled at him now. Was this some kind of a sick game?
“Try what?”
In answer he released both her hands and sat back. Jillian
didn’t hesitate. She snapped her body into a roll that took her
out of the opposite side of the bed. She landed on her feet,
sprinted for the corner of the small apartment that served as a
kitchen. Dove behind the tiny island, ripped out one drawer after
another in search of a knife. Found one at last—a pathetically
blunt paring knife, not the long-bladed one she’d hoped for—
and whirled to face her attacker.
Except she wasn’t being attacked. The stranger was gone.
The door was closed. On shaky legs Jillian came out from
behind the island, holding the knife in front of her, eyes flicking
everywhere. Cautiously she sidled along the wall until she
could slap on the light switch. There was no sign of the blond
man anywhere. She checked the door handle, found it locked.
She lowered the knife. Suddenly she sensed rather than heard
something and whipped around. Gaped. The white wolf was
sprawled on her couch. At least she thought her couch was
under it—the massive white creature dwarfed it. The wolf let out
a very puppy-like yip and wagged its great plume of a tail.
Reality tilted crazily as the floor came up and hit her.
Jillian’s hair had a mind of its own and shoving her hand
through it—as she did frequently—made it even more unruly.
She didn’t notice, wouldn’t have given a damn if she had. It was
the end of her second week in Dunvegan, her second week of
work at the North Star Animal Hospital. And every night since
her arrival, she had been awakened in the night by vivid dreams
of the wolf. They were good dreams, pleasant dreams to be
sure, but the constant interruptions to her sleep were sapping
her energy.
And what was she to think about Monday night’s dream, the
bizarre one about the big blond man? Waking up on the floor
the next morning had weirded her out. She didn’t have a habit of
sleepwalking, yet there were three kitchen drawers thrown on
the floor, the contents scattered across the linoleum. Just how
did she sleep through that? She’d had her hand on the phone to
call the cops and report an intruder—then realized that the
white wolf had been there too. Just as the creature had shown
up in her dreams every other night. Yes, officer, there was a man
in my room but the wolf on my couch must have chased him away.
Nope, not a good plan. Maybe she’d run into a real wolf on the
trail, but there was no way she was going to convince anyone,
even herself, that a wolf had actually been in her apartment.
Come to think of it, how about the guy’s clothes? They were
shredded as if he’d been in an explosion—there was barely
anything left of that shirt. But his body looked completely fine.
Way more than fine. She thought of his powerful chest, the
smooth muscled abs, all plainly visible through the gaping
holes in the material. She rubbed her hand over her face to rid
herself of the goofy smile that popped up. Okay, okay, so the
guy’s built. Really, really built. But those clothes just aren’t normal. In
fact, she was reminded of that old Marvel comic book, The
Incredible Hulk, that her cousin used to collect. Every time the
big green guy turned back into his alter ego, Bruce Banner, his
clothing hung in tatters. The comic had never mentioned how
Banner managed to afford a new outfit every day.
She yanked at her hair with one hand as if to jerk herself back
to reality. The whole thing was just silly, way too ridiculous for
words. Obviously no one would deliberately dress like that
unless they were on a movie set. She’d been having a stupid
dream, no doubt brought on by eating chocolate ice cream
before bed. Jillian supposed the dream should rightfully be
classed as a nightmare, but it was tough to do when the blond
man was just so damn sexy. Talk about something worth
dreaming about. Did that signify some kind of progress, that
she was now dreaming about good-looking guys as well as
wolves? There hadn’t been much time for dating in the past few
years, but she wasn’t dead. She wondered if she was lonely, if
that was why her mind had conjured the man. She certainly had
a much better imagination than she’d thought. It was annoying,
however, to find herself hoping to dream of the big Viking again.
So far, though, only the white wolf had appeared.
“I’ve got to get some real sleep. Now I’m missing a man who
doesn’t exist.”
It was just past five when Jillian stripped off her gloves and
gown and headed for the pot of coffee in the staff lunchroom.
She hadn’t had breakfast, missed lunch, prayed that maybe she
could get just a minute or two to eat something now. And rolled
her eyes when her mouth automatically started to water. The
Watson’s sublime food should carry warning labels, she
decided. Caution, tasting may lead to addiction. She selected a
plump little pie enticingly labeled “Rosemary Chicken” and
popped it into the microwave. Stood there with her hands on
the counter . . .
“That must be some daydream you’re having, hon.” Jillian
blinked to see Birkie waggling her perfectly shaped eyebrows at
her. The scent of rosemary filled the air, and the woman waved
her over to the table where the pie was waiting.
“You’d better get some food into you. I imagine it’s been a
long day in a long week for you.”
“Yes, yes it has, thanks.” Jillian bit into the pie gratefully. The
exquisite flavor was heightened by her hunger, and when the
pastry had disappeared completely, she closed her eyes in bliss
and sighed deeply.
“You’ll be glad to know the “Closed” sign is on the door, and
I’m about to take the really good coffee out of the vault to make
a fresh pot.”
“That’s a good thing on both counts.” Jillian noticed the older
woman’s clothes. She knew, knew, Birkie had just hosed blood
off the concrete floor in the large animal wing. A lot of blood,
due to a pair of steers being dehorned. Yet the older woman
looked as fresh and put together as she had at the beginning of
the day. The suit, a turquoise blue one today, was wrinkle-free,
spot free. It even looked hair-free, a near impossibility in this
business. Jillian had been forced to change her scrubs at noon,
but even the fresh ones were now wrinkled, blood-spattered,
covered with fur from three species, plus one knee was torn.
She restrained a sigh, not the satisfied one of a few moments
before but the sheer resignation of knowing she’d never be able
to match Birkie’s level of tidiness. Instead, she settled for
running both hands through her unruly hair.
“By the way, you’ll want to watch out for the dead parakeet
over by the cups. The bossman ran out to a farm call, left the
bird on the counter for Caroline to package up when she gets
back from the feed store.”
“Dina Monroe’s bird? The fat blue one?” Jillian walked over to
inspect the unfortunate creature in its clear plastic baggie. It
looked like a cartoon, the way it was sprawled on its back with
wings askew, legs in the air and feet curled tight. Classic heart
attack pose for budgerigars.
“Yup. Dina insists on having it sent out to the lab. She’s
certain the creature perished from some new and fascinating
disease instead of from eating too much buttered toast from her
husband’s fingers. If its poor heart had held out a few more
months, they could have eaten that bird for Thanksgiving.”
Jillian couldn’t help smiling at that. “What do you stuff a
parakeet with? A crouton? My God, it’s truly frightening how
people manage to give their pets the same health conditions
and bad habits they have. Both the Monroes are pretty
economy-sized themselves.”
“Wait till you meet Ed Barnes’s donkey. He likes cigars.”
Birkie finished filling the coffee machine and pressed the button
before turning to the young vet. “Look, honey, I’ve been
meaning to ask you, is something wrong? You look like you’ve
been dragged through a keyhole backward. There’re shadows
under your eyes, and I swear a zombie would have more color
in its cheeks.”
Jillian blinked at the blunt description, then laughed. “That
bad, huh? I’m just not sleeping well right now. It’s probably the
time difference, or maybe sleeping in a different bed. Lots of
changes, you know. I’m sure it’s just temporary.” To her
surprise, her friend simply took her arm and nudged her into a
chair. “What?”
“We need more than mere gourmet coffee here, if we’re going
to have serious gal talk.” Birkie nimbly climbed a chair to reach
an antique tin of horse liniment from a high shelf. The yellowed,
peeling label claimed the contents “excellent for all ailments.”
The fragrance was anything but medicinal as Birkie tugged off
the lid and offered it to Jillian. The young woman’s eyes
widened. A dozen bars of dark chocolate gleamed in gold foil
wrappers. “My emergency stash,” explained Birkie. “Go ahead,
pick one.”
Jillian didn’t hesitate. A moment later she was biting into an
almond-filled delight. She rolled her eyes in ecstasy as it melted
on her tongue. “Omigod, this is fantastic. You may have just
saved my life.”
“My Gram was a healer, almost what you might call a
naturopath today. She taught me everything she knew about
herbs and such. But I find that chocolate is pretty damn fine first
aid at times and it’s got nothing to do with antioxidants.” Birkie
broke off a square from her own bar and nibbled it delicately.
“Now, tell me what else is going on besides not getting enough
sleep. You’re not just tired, you’re worried. I hope it’s not about
your job, hon, because Connor and I both think you’re the best
thing since sliced bread.”
Jillian paused. She’d known Birkie only a short time, but she
instinctively counted her as a friend. Maybe it would be good to
tell someone about her dreams. If she collapsed in the middle of
a pet spay or something, at least someone would know what
was the matter with her. “No, nothing about the job. I love my
job. It’s just that I’ve been having these dreams . . .”
“Still? I know you said something about having an awful lot of
dreams earlier this week. Bad dreams, strange dreams,
nightmares?”
“I wouldn’t call them nightmares. They’re actually pretty good
dreams except that I wake up every time I have one and can’t
get back to sleep. And I’ve had one every night since I got here,
after not having them for years and years.”
“You’ve had these particular dreams before then. My Gram
was a great believer in dreams, and I have to say I pay attention
to them as well. We can learn a lot from what goes on in our
heads at night. How about you? Do you think the dreams mean
anything?”
Jillian had told very few people about her experiences.
Enough time had passed, however, that it wasn’t so much
difficult as awkward. “Well, I’m not sure I can explain it without
giving you some ancient history. Are you sure you have time for
this?”
Birkie just crossed her legs and settled more firmly into the
chair. “Honey, I have all the time in the world for you. You’ve
reminded me of one of my own daughters since you got off that
bus. And nothing you say is going to leave this room, so no
worries about that. I talk about people all the time, but I never
betray a confidence.”
“It started with something that happened a long time ago.
When I was seventeen, they opened a trail system along the
river valley that ran through our city. There were miles of
different trails winding through the thick cottonwood trees, and
I was trying to walk them all one day. By myself, but when
you’re seventeen, you think you’re invincible.”
“Turns out I wasn’t invincible.” Jillian measured out the
words. “Five guys attacked me, raped and beat me. They were
going to kill me. But this wolf—I know how crazy it sounds, but
a huge white wolf suddenly came out of nowhere and chased
them all away. And then it stayed with me, like it was guarding
me, like it cared about me. It stayed all night until someone
found me.” She waited for the older woman’s reaction, waited
for the look of shock and disbelief, the pulling back, the pulling
away—but Birkie, bless her, didn’t even blink. Instead she
reached forward across the table and grabbed Jillian’s hand,
held it firmly.
Warmed by the encouragement, Jillian continued. “The first
year or so, I’d dream every single night about the wolf. You can’t
imagine how much it helped me. I felt so much peace and
comfort, my dreams were almost like a sanctuary for me. But
then, with time and counseling, I learned to let myself feel the
emotional pain and the anger over the attack, acknowledge it
and let it go, in small increments. After a while, the dreams didn’t
come so often. And now it’s been years.”
“You’ve healed very well.” Birkie nodded approvingly. “That’s
a mighty terrible thing to go through, and an awful thing to have
to remember. Most people would have curled up in a ball, let it
cripple them. But you’ve shown real courage in going on with
your life. There you are with a veterinarian’s degree and the
guts to take a job, sight unseen, clear across the country. Well
done, girl.”
“Sometimes I wanted to curl up in a ball. A lot, at first. But
those men had taken so much from me, I didn’t want them to
steal the rest of my life too, didn’t want them to steal who I was. It
took a long time, though, just to make myself go outside, or go
to the store. Go to school. Took even longer to go back into the
woods, to hike the trails, be outdoors again. But I wanted the
things that I loved back. I wanted myself back. And I think the
wolf helped a lot. I didn’t see him again, but I thought about him
every time things were tough. Something wonderful had
stepped in and saved my life. So I had to try to save my life too.”
Birkie kept her hand where it was. Her expression showed
nothing but acceptance and support. “And you’ve done a damn
fine job of it. Did you ever tell anyone about the wolf? I’ll bet
some people tried to tell you he wasn’t real.”
“Of course no one believed me,” Jillian snorted. “And I can’t
blame them. A wolf in the middle of an eastern city? Sure, the
occasional deer ran through the river valley park area where I
was walking, but a wolf? The police said I’d probably seen a big
dog, perhaps a coyote—if anything. My counselor thought the
white wolf was something my mind made up to protect itself. I
went along with that, but I was never quite convinced, or maybe
I just liked the idea that somewhere out there was this
wonderful creature watching out for me. You know, the way
some people like to believe they have a guardian angel.
“But then, last weekend, I—” She glanced at Birkie. She
hadn’t planned to say a word about the encounter, but she
hadn’t realized how much she needed to tell someone. She was
tired of puzzling through this on her own. “Look, I’m taking a
chance that you’re really going to think I’m crazy, but I met the
wolf again. Here—well, actually I was hiking on the trail below
Elk Point. It sounds nuts but I know it wasn’t a dream. There
were white hairs all over my clothing when I woke up the next
morning.”
“Do you think it was the same animal, or could it be a different
one?” Birkie asked, as easily if they were discussing cows.
“No mistake. It was huge and it had the most amazing blue
eyes. I recognized it right—” Jillian gaped at her. “You believe
me. I’m telling you I not only had a close encounter but a fond
reunion with a real live wolf—which sounds ludicrous even to
me when I say it out loud—and you believe me.”
“Why shouldn’t I? As Shakespeare put it, there are more
things in heaven and earth, Horatio . . .” Birkie waved a square
of chocolate in the air. “My Gram saw a lot of things in her long
life, things that can’t be explained. I’ve lived long enough to see
a few things myself, to know for a fact that truth is often a lot
stranger than fiction, honey. So you saw this white wolf, and it
was the same wolf that helped you. Did the wolf recognize you
too?”
“Yes, yes it did.” Jillian had read somewhere that the greatest
luxury was to be understood, and as she grasped what that
really felt like, she found herself blinking tears away. “Look, I
just can’t tell you how much it means to be able to tell
somebody. I haven’t known what to think about the whole thing,
and it’s . . . it’s. . . .”
“It’s kind of lonely trying to figure out extraordinary
experiences on your own,” Birkie finished and smiled at her.
“And it gets mighty heavy carrying things like that around.
Maybe it will help you get some sleep tonight, now that you’ve
gotten it off your chest.”
“Maybe it will. Thank you so much for listening to me—and for
believing. I know this whole thing sounds so bizarre, and
especially meeting up with the wolf again, of all things.”
“I should think that it would be wonderfully affirming to
encounter the wolf a second time, to know that it’s real. You
won’t be questioning your sanity at least.”
“You’re right, I am glad it happened.” Jillian finished the
chocolate, then laughed a little. “The wolf dreams are okay too.
Like I said, they’re good dreams. It’s just that I can’t get back to
sleep after I have one.” She almost told Birkie about the blond
man who had visited her dreams too, but decided not to. There
was something more personal about that, maybe because she
often found herself fantasizing about him. Besides, she had
only dreamed about the man once. It didn’t mean anything.
The older woman finished her chocolate and tossed the
crumpled foil neatly into the wastebasket without looking. “Tell
you what, dear, I think you’d better come on over to my house
for supper. It’ll be late, but you definitely need a break from this
place, and besides, I have satellite TV with nineteen movie
channels. Zoey’s going to come over for a while too, and you
can get to know her a bit.”
“Oh that sounds great, but I’m on call—”
“The dispatch service can find you just as easily at my place
as yours. Take the clinic truck, and you’ll be equipped to
respond from wherever you are. You’ll find, though, that Friday
night seems to be the one time that no one calls you. Connor
and I figure it’s either because the farmers are out for a beer or
the cows are.”
Jillian chuckled at that. “Well, I’d love to come over then,
thanks.”
“Good. Seven-thirty’s when I usually eat. Hope you like pizza.
The address is in the book.”
Chapter Eight
The days were steadily lengthening toward full summer. The
sun took its time settling into the west, and for a while, day and
night held hands in an orange glow. Finally darkness fell over
the North Star Animal Hospital, but to James’s surprise, the
woman wasn’t there. The white wolf paced around the building,
casting for her scent. He placed his paws on the windowsill of
her apartment and pressed his nose to the screen. Probably got
called out; she’s a vet, she could be delivering a calf or something.
Still, he was disappointed—and angry with himself for feeling
that way. It shouldn’t matter. But it did. Especially when he hadn’t
intended to come here, wasn’t going to go anywhere near Jillian
Descharme ever again.
The wolf had other ideas, however, resisting that plan every
step of the way until James seriously feared for his sanity. He’d
tried to submerge himself beneath the animal persona soon
after leaving Jillian’s apartment, but it wouldn’t work. Days later
it still wouldn’t work. James was stuck with his human thoughts
and human feelings in a lupine body. And it was getting damned
uncomfortable. There was no respite from the tumult in his head
and the memories that sliced his heart and twisted his gut. Even
sleep didn’t bring him any peace. With human awareness came
human dreams. His dreams were filled with nightmare images of
Evelyn calling to him for help, of Evelyn dying, of Evelyn dead.
Then Evelyn’s face would be replaced with Jillian’s. Wounded
and dying because of him. His fault, all his fault.
In his waking hours, he was trying to figure out the peculiar
tie he had to Jillian. The only thing he was sure of was that
whatever connection she had with him was with the wolf, not
the man. That was made plain the night he was in her room. Had
some part of him wanted her to wake up, to see him, see his
human self? There’d been no recognition in her eyes, however.
It had disappointed him, when he didn’t want to care at all, and
later it had kindled a hot anger within, as if he was jealous of his
own wolf nature. Still, it looked like he wasn’t going to get an
ounce of peace until he resolved this issue. Was there
something he needed to know? Something he needed to do?
Something she could do for him? He had no inkling, none at all.
And so here he was, and here he would wait until the woman
came back. What then, he didn’t know—but he sure didn’t have
any other ideas.
The bales were still stacked in the side yard. The white wolf
had no trouble making his way up them and leaping into the loft.
He would wait here. It was quiet, and he would spend the time
thinking. Trying to remember something, anything. As if he
hadn’t already spent most of the entire week doing exactly that.
Hours passed. No memories came to him, no new information
sprang to mind, but one single thought did occur—when he
was in human form in Jillian’s apartment he had remembered
her name. Would he remember more, then, if he were human?
Would his wolfen side ration out a little more information to
him? Maybe that was the key.
James called the Change. Standing on two legs didn’t feel
quite so awkward this time—at least he didn’t fall on his ass—
but he sat quickly on a bale just in case. For a long while he
simply watched the moon climb across the sky, reach the
highest point of its arched path, then begin its downward slide.
His eyelids drooped. Human form brought human needs.
Changing used a great deal of energy, and James had had very
little sleep in days. It wouldn’t hurt to catch a quick nap. He was
confident that his lupine senses would wake him the moment
Jillian drove up. Wading through the sweet-smelling straw, he
found a particularly thick pile and stretched out on it. But he
didn’t glide into the light sleep of the wolf. Instead, James fell
headlong into slumber as only a human can, slept deep as a
man sleeps, and dreamed as a man dreams.
Century-old spruce trees rose black against a deep blue
velvet sky. Stars circled in a slow dance overhead. The white
wolf padded along a game trail, high along the ridge of dark hills
to the west. An old elk had been through here just an hour ago,
but the musky scent failed to hold the predator’s interest.
Something was wrong. Something. Suddenly the wolf stopped
and lifted his head, looked down over the sweep of land below,
where a silvered river wound its way to a distant cluster of lights
that looked like numberless stars piled on the ground. There. It
was there. Something wrong, close to the river. Something.
The wolf hesitated a moment. It went against every instinct.
He never wandered near human settlements, certainly never
close to a city. But there was a need, an urgency to head for the
river valley in the very heart of all those lights. Now. It was
important. Vital. Now, now, now. And so he ran. Built for speed,
the wolf’s body ate up the miles, yet it wasn’t fast enough, he
knew it wasn’t fast enough. He pushed himself to the limits
then, to speeds that only Changelings could attain.
The city rose glittering on either side of the river, the buildings
towering over the tallest trees of this forested valley. The white
wolf followed the riverbank into a maze of mulched walking
trails that wound through dense brush. The sharpness of fear
and the reek of violence were on the breeze. And the metallic
tang of blood, human blood. Without a pause, the wolf wheeled
onto one trail in particular and ran full out. And found a group of
men standing over the fallen figure of a small blond woman.
One was raising a metal pipe high over his head. . . .
Jillian fully expected to enjoy having supper with Birkie and
Zoey, and she wasn’t disappointed. Birkie’s bright and blunt
personality would add spice to any meal, and Zoey’s tales of
local news reporting gone awry had them in stitches frequently.
But it was a flat-out surprise to all of them when they stayed up
almost all night, talking and laughing like high school students,
making popcorn and watching the silliest movies they could
find.
There were other surprises too. After Zoey had finally pleaded
exhaustion and left, Birkie had led Jillian to the enclosed porch
off the kitchen to show off her hobby. There, rows upon rows of
pots under greenhouse lights held a myriad of plants and vines.
The air was thick with their fragrance. Bunches of herbs hung
upside-down, drying in the dining room. An entire wall boasted
shelves of carefully labeled jars, while another wall held a vast
collection of books on plants and herbs. Jillian was astounded.
“Learned this stuff from my grandmother,” said Birkie. “Been
studying everything and anything I could get my hands on ever
since. Gotten pretty damn good at it too.” The woman deftly put
together a selection of teas and capsules for the young vet. “All
natural, I promise. About as harmful as the basil on your pizza.
These are to help you relax, help you sleep, and help you stay
asleep. These ones here are to build up the blood—you’re
looking downright peaked, girl. I’ll jot it all down for you so you
remember what to take when. But this thing here is to keep
away bad dreams.”
Jillian glanced over at the carefully crafted circle of rawhide
and feathers on the seat of the truck next to her. Birkie seemed
to put as much stock in the dream catcher as in the
supplements, and instructed her to hang it over her bed. “I
know you can find these things at just about every craft sale in
the country these days. Even saw some Asian knockoffs at the
Bargain Mart the other day. But this one is different—been
working on it all week, ever since you first mentioned having
dreams and since I noticed you looking so tired. Made it out of
natural materials, added some particular crystals and stones so
it’s full of positive energies. It’s designed especially for you,
hon, that’s why it’s bound to work for you.” Jillian wasn’t sure
about that, but it was pretty to look at. She didn’t have any
decorations in her apartment yet, and she was touched that
Birkie would go to so much trouble for her. She accepted the
gift with a thankful hug.
Jillian yawned as she pressed the automatic door opener in
the truck and drove into the clinic’s back bay. She yawned
again as she parked and gathered up her treasures. She was
intent on heading to her apartment when a movement high
above her, a small flicker of something pale, caught her eye.
She stared up at the loft. Of course its door was open—the air
was welcome in the clinic at this time of year—but Jillian
couldn’t see a thing beyond the yawning doorframe. It was
‘black as the inside of a cow,’ an apt phrase she’d picked up
from the local farmers. She strained to listen but could detect no
sound.
An owl? Or maybe a bat. Whatever it was, she’d probably
disturbed it when the lights went on. She crossed the concrete
floor, slapped off the light switch, paused in the darkness, and
waited for her eyes to get used to it. She was tired but owls
were her favorite bird. Maybe she’d get a rare peek at one if she
could be quiet enough. It was too late in the season for a
Snowy, so perhaps it was a Great Gray. Or even a Horned.
Excited by the possibilities, Jillian set her things on the floor
and carefully climbed the ladder into the loft.
She had to stand still for a while until her eyes adjusted again.
There was light coming in the far end from the open window, a
mixed palette of cold white light from the waxing moon, warm
yellow light from the sodium lamps in the parking lot, and the
pale watery light of the eastern horizon. Shadows resolved
themselves into shapes, the sharp-edged blocks of neatly
stacked bales and vast heaps and hills of loose straw and hay.
Wisps were stirred by a warm breeze from the window, bringing
the scent of sun-dried fields to her senses.
A movement beside her caught her eye, and she jumped in
spite of herself. She realized it was just an old lab coat hung on
a nail, watched as the air billowed it slightly, and was
disappointed. Was that what she had spotted from downstairs?
She began wading carefully through the deep straw as she
searched the rafters above for any sign of life.
She was nearly to the window when she stumbled over
something solid. She flung her hands out to save herself and
came in contact with warm skin. There was no time to jump
back. A large man, powerfully muscled and bare-chested, burst
up from the straw and grabbed her. With a yell worthy of an
Amazon, Jillian Descharme fought like a woman possessed.
“Jesus! Hey!” James was trying not to hurt her, but he would
deflect one punch only to have her small fist drill him
somewhere else. One blow landed sharply between his ribs,
distracted him long enough for her to knee him solidly. His
breath exploded out of his lungs, but he wasn’t as disabled as a
human would have been. In one rapid movement, James
wrapped his arms around his assailant and rolled on top of her.
“Let me up, let me go!” Jillian found herself completely
pinned. His arms were like massive cables, and she couldn’t do
a damn thing against the combination of his weight and muscle.
Not from this position. She couldn’t even head-butt him.
Flashback images pounded in her head, terror that her worst
nightmare was happening all over again. Heart hammering, her
voice rose in pitch in spite of her efforts to sound authoritative.
“Let go of me this minute!”
He ignored her as he tried to orient himself, calm his animal
nature—and give his balls a chance to quit throbbing. “Be quiet
for a minute. Let me wake up.” He took a few breaths, then
rolled to one side to look at her.
As she felt his body weight shift, she gathered herself to fight
or flee—but froze instead when she saw the Viking eyes, vivid
blue even in the pale half light. “You! It’s you! You’re . . . but you
can’t be.” She fell silent, confused and scared. Really scared
now. Reality had just taken an abrupt holiday.
James had no trouble reading the expression on her face.
“Goddammit, quit looking at me like that. I’m not going to hurt
you. And you’re not crazy, so you can quit wondering about
that too.” It couldn’t possibly be a good idea, but he felt he had
to give her the truth, felt she deserved that. “Yeah, I was the guy
in your room that night. Easy, there. I said you’re safe.” Mostly
safe. She was struggling again and the feel of her lithe body
beneath his gave him ideas he’d rather not have right now. . . .
Jillian could neither free herself nor punch him again and was
forced to relent. It was too much like trying to budge a tree.
“Bastard!” she spat out at last, frustrated and furious in spite of
her terror. “You bastard! What do you want?”
“Not a damn thing. As soon as you quit trying to kill me, I’m
going to let go of you.”
“But . . . but you were in my room.”
“It seemed like a good idea at the time. You were having a bad
dream, and I came into your room to see if I could help.” Okay,
not exactly but close enough. And he’d just leave out that little
part about Changing from wolf to man. And the fact that he had
been in the clinic before. There were limits to the good that
honesty could do. “I probably ended up scaring you worse than
the nightmare you were having. If it’s any consolation, you
scared the hell out of me just now, so we’re even.”
Scared him? “You grabbed me.”
“Reflex. I was sound asleep and you fell on me.” He could
scarcely believe he’d been that deeply asleep, surprised that he
had slept at all. Why hadn’t his wolfen senses warned him of her
approach?
Indignation flashed like heat lightning across her features.
“Why the hell are you sleeping up here—what are you,
homeless or drunk or something? Does Connor know about
this? Are you on drugs? Just who the hell are you?”
He nearly winced at the onslaught of questions. “I don’t
happen to have a place of my own just now. And yes, Connor
knows I’m here.” Against his better judgment, he admitted, “I’m
his brother, James.”
Connor’s brother? She knew her mouth was open but
couldn’t seem to close it. She thought her boss had only two
brothers—Culley and Devlin. The twins stopped by the clinic
often. Like Connor, they were tall, wide-shouldered. All three
had thick wavy hair that was nearly black. Connor’s eyes were
pale gray. The twins’ hazel eyes wavered between gray, blue,
and green. She stared at the man who loomed over her. Studied
the angles of his face, the strong jaw that was accented rather
than hidden by the close beard, the line of his brow. Tried to
look at the shape of the eyes instead of their hue. And finally
saw through the warrior image and the fair coloring to the family
resemblance beneath. It was there, powerful and plain. He was a
Macleod.
And he was true to his word. James Macleod released her
carefully and sat back. She jumped to her feet, muscles
bunched to sprint to the door—but something about him made
her pause. Something in his eyes that she recognized, as like
recognizes like. This man knew a lot about pain. “So, are you
okay up here?” she heard herself say. “Do you need
anything?”
It was his turn to be surprised. “I’m fine.” He remembered his
human manners, dusted them off and added, “Thanks.”
“Well, I imagine you already know the staff kitchen’s pretty
well stocked. The Watsons just filled the fridge yesterday or the
day before.” She looked around, wondered if he needed a
blanket or something. Her eyes kept coming back to his broad
chest, his muscled arms. There was something wild about him,
primal. Adding to that impression was the fact that his ragged
shirt had taken the worst of the struggle and much of it was
hanging in tatters. So why the hell was she standing here
worrying about a weird stranger instead of running for her life?
“I guess Connor’s already told you he has spare clothes in his
office and probably anything else you need.”
He nodded as if that were true. Actually he didn’t have a clue
what was in Connor’s office and didn’t care, but he couldn’t say
that.
“I’ll see you around then.”
No, you won’t. “Sure, doc. See you.” He watched her leave and
was surprised that he didn’t really want her to go. He’d like to
hear her voice some more, watch her face, see the flashes in
those sea-green eyes. And he’d like to touch her again, hold her
again—not out of surprise or reflex this time, but deliberately.
Awake and aware, to just pull her body, warm and supple,
against his, to run his hands gently over those soft curves . . .
and maybe feel her arms slide around him, hold him. . . .
Great, just great. Jesus Murphy! He rubbed his hands over his
face and swore again. His human form had gained him no new
information at all. Instead it had brought him a brand new
problem. He was seriously attracted to Dr. Jillian Descharme.
Chapter Nine
Sleeping was hopeless. It was five in the morning when Jillian
entered her apartment, but her brain was racing like a hamster
in a wire wheel. She could still feel those iron muscles, hard and
tough under skin that was lightly dusted with crisp blond hair.
Those intense eyes, that strong face . . . it added up to quite a
delicious package, and it stirred her more than she cared to
admit. Still, she made a point of locking the door and angling a
chair under the handle. Stacked pots and pans on the seat of it.
Every dish she owned was plastic, so she gathered glass jars
until she had a double row of everything from cold cream to
peanut butter marching along the window ledge. James
Macleod wouldn’t be entering her apartment again without
giving her plenty of warning. She checked the phone beside her
bed, made sure she had 911 on speed dial. And tomorrow she
would have some words with Connor. He really should have
given her some sort of heads up that his brother might be
staying in the building. In fact, it would have been more polite to
introduce her to James, not to mention a whole lot less scary.
Satisfied, she looked at the clock. Six A.M. The clinic was open
every weekday but only every other Saturday—and this wasn’t
one of them. She didn’t have to get up unless someone called in
with a problem, so she should really try to get some sleep.
Sleep? Oh crap! She shoved the chair full of pots aside,
dashed out the door, and returned a moment later with the bag
of herbs and the dream catcher she’d forgotten by the loft
ladder. Jillian hunted through drawers until she found a large
pushpin and hung the dream catcher as her new friend had
instructed, on the wall above the head of the bed. She stood
back and admired it, enjoyed the way the feathers cascaded
down from it like a soft waterfall. The early morning sun caught
the tiny crystals in the webbing and along the quills of the
feathers, making them glint and gleam. Rose quartz, fluorite,
and citrine—she remembered those three. And there was some
turquoise and some amethyst too. The rest she’d have to ask
Birkie about again.
It was all of 6:20 A.M. and Jillian couldn’t think of anything else
to do. She’d barricaded the door again, lined up the bottles of
herbs on the kitchen counter. Her eyes kept returning to the
dream catcher, fascinated with it as the pale morning light
played across it. She decided to lie down for a while, but she
wanted to be able to see Birkie’s beautiful creation, so she
arranged her pillows at the foot of the bed instead.
She yawned hugely as she got into her favorite flannel
pajama pants and topped them with a soft cami. The mattress
yielded comfortably beneath her, the blankets were soft and
warm. The sun dappled the wall but wasn’t bright enough to
bother her. Instead it lent a pleasant golden haze to the room.
Slowly her eyelids fluttered down.
James’s lips descended over hers, barely making contact, but
she could feel the heat of them. He brushed the corners of her
mouth, then back over her lips, again and again. He touched
nothing else, yet every inch of her skin seemed electrified,
abuzz with sensation and want. Her fingers ached to knot
themselves in his hair, pull his mouth to hers, but her wrists
were willing prisoners in his grasp.
Slowly, lazily, James nuzzled her face and took possession of
her mouth, cradling her head in one of his large strong hands.
Heat. Much more heat. Jillian had kissed a date once right after
he’d taken a swallow of hot coffee. But this was far hotter, this
was living heat. Not the parched dryness of a fever, but the
radiant warmth of an inner fire. She melted into the kiss, felt her
own lips become pliant, supple. She feasted on each hot breath,
drawing it into her lungs as if from some sultry tropical night.
His tongue explored softly, lapped at her lips and slid gently
alongside hers . . . and she had a sudden mental image of
dolphins mating in a heated lagoon. Her own tongue dared to
skim his lips and dart swiftly just inside. She inhaled sharply as
he caught it in gentle teeth. Held it there until she let out her
breath in a long slow exhale. She could have pulled away but
instead permitted him to suckle her tongue softly, shivered as
he drew it carefully into his hot, wet mouth. Then realized she
couldn’t pull away, not with that strong hand cradling her head,
holding her in place. But the tiny quiver of fear only heightened
the delicious sensations.
James drew her tongue in and out of his mouth with
painstaking slowness, released it and lapped at her lips,
occasionally pressing the point of his tongue at each corner of
her mouth. She took his bottom lip in her teeth and tugged
softly. Wanted, wanted something, wanted anything. Accepted
his tongue eagerly when it plunged deep.
Jillian had never imagined a man making love with only his
mouth. Her hands were free, but she could think of nothing but
touching his face, cupping his powerful jaw beneath the closecropped
beard, and tracing his strong features as he kissed her
long and deep and slow and hot. Again and again. And as he
kissed her, James began to stroke her throat from chin to
collarbone with a heated hand.
Her body had relaxed, gone lithe and supple. She exulted as
her cami was skimmed away, leaving her naked to the waist,
and the warmth of his body blazed into her skin right through
his clothing as he lay beside her. Her heart skidded and skipped
as she realized she could feel his erection, hot and straining
within his jeans. Her hip was pressed tightly against the
thickness of it.
Suddenly he cupped her breast, engulfed it in heat. He broke
off kissing her and leaned over to taste her nipple, lapping at it
with a hot, wet tongue. Oh! Her breasts felt tight, the nipples
hard and seeming to strain toward him. Deep within her core
she could feel the sudden hard clenching of her womb, the
spread of warmth and moisture between her thighs. Dear God,
she wanted this man.
His eyes never left hers as he slowly opened his mouth and
drew her nipple into the moist warmth there. He suckled gently
at first, letting the reaction of her body guide him. Then James
paused for just a moment to breathe deeply, to inhale as if to
pull her scent into his lungs, as a lion or a wolf might savor the
subtleties of pheromones newly released. And to her chagrin,
Jillian whimpered a little, missing him already. He bent his head
to suckle once more at her breast, harder this time, faster, as if it
were the most delicious thing on earth.
Jillian held his head to her, almost shaking with the
excitement he was creating in her. His hand rubbed softly,
steadily over her pajamas, up and down, up and down the
thighs—then dipped insistently between her legs until she
parted them, moaning for more. He palmed her then, pressing
firmly against those sensitive parts until she arched and pushed
back, until the flannel was soaked through. And then the pajama
pants disappeared. One moment they were on and the next
there was only cool air against her quivering skin. She
supposed she should feel vulnerable, completely naked now
while he was still fully clothed. Instead, it simply added to her
arousal.
His hand slid down and rubbed her flat belly. She was
surprised at how exciting that felt, how intimate. She jumped a
little as his fingers moved further down to barely brush the soft
curling hair.
James! Her hands tightened their grip in his hair. She felt
nearly wild with wanting him to go on, to reach further, touch
her there. He lifted his head and sought her lips again, his
tongue darting in and out, in and out, wet and hot. Then without
warning he ran his fingers up the insides of her thighs and
stroked lightly across the soft moist folds that enclosed her
most sensitive places.
Jillian was certain her heart had stopped. James’s light touch
electrified her, fanned tiny embers into flame. In a split second
she had forgotten all, forgotten everything she had ever known
except that she wanted James’s touch, needed, craved his
hands, strong and gentle, hot and soothing, on every part of her
body.
His fingers brushed her downy folds a second time. A third.
He smiled against her breast—funny how those harsh warrior
features were lightened by that smile—and ran his tongue over
her other nipple, as his fingers parted her folds and dipped into
the moisture there. Her breath hitched as he began to stroke her
intimately.
James! Oh God, James! Don’t stop, please don’t stop. I’m—
There was a ringing in her ears, then a ringing in the room. A
doorbell. An alarm. No, a phone. A phone! The dream vanished
like a soap bubble. Jillian’s eyes shot open and she lay there
stunned. Awake. Wide, wide awake—and very unsatisfied.
“Jeez goddamn Louise!” She kicked the blankets off in a fury
and got to her feet, wanting to punch something. Cursed
herself, cursed whoever was on the phone (which was still
ringing and damned if she was going to answer it) and most of
all, cursed James Macleod. It was bad enough that the man had
occupied her waking thoughts far too often—and that was
before she knew he was real. It was downright unfair for him to
start taking over her dreams as well.
She glared at the dream catcher on the wall and pointed an
accusing finger at it. “You! Why did you let a dream like that in
here?”
Jillian plunked down on the edge of the bed, her body abuzz
with an unfamiliar pressure. Got up hurriedly when she realized
James had once sat on that very spot. “Good God, there’s no
hope for me. I need a cold shower. Something. Anything to stop
thinking about him.”
Coffee was a good antidote for almost anything. Making it in
such a distracted state proved difficult. She spilled the entire
package of coffee filters when she caught herself wishing
James had turned around just once so she could catch a
glimpse of his behind. It just proves I’m not dead, she reasoned.
That’s all. And that’s what she told herself again in the shower
when her skin felt over-sensitive to the water spray. “Hormones.
All hormones. And I’m dead tired. Don’t they use sleep
deprivation to brainwash people?” She leaned against the tiled
wall, was tempted to bang her head against it. “Look at me, I’m
drooling like a brainless idiot over some strange guy I just met.
Talk about mind control.”
Two cups of strong coffee later, her brain kicked in enough
that she wasn’t thinking about his body. Well, not constantly.
She was wondering about the look in his eyes. That haunted
expression, the one that had stopped her in her tracks when
she was about to run out of the loft screaming. What had
happened to James Macleod?
I should be asking what happened to his clothes. Maybe he’s not
quite right in the head or something. Although you’d think Connor
would have warned me. She shoved those thoughts away as she
poured coffee into a travel mug, checked her watch, and
headed out the door. If she hurried, she could still go yardsaling
with Birkie. Maybe she could even find something useful
for her apartment. Like a baseball bat to keep by the bed.
James badly wanted to Change. He had had his fill of being in
his human form, of feeling human emotions and thinking human
thoughts. But not a damn thing had been resolved. And now
there were even more things to think about. For instance, there
was that little detail about the date. He was still in shock from
that discovery. He knew instinctively that he had been a wolf for
a long time. Knew Evelyn had been gone for a long time—he
could feel a distance. But thirty years?
And the dream—he couldn’t even remember the last time he’d
dreamed like that. Like a human. When he was a wolf, there were
only brief pleasant dreams of the hunt, the chase, forgotten
within seconds of awakening. This dream was different. Not
only did he recall every detail, it felt more like a memory than a
dream. Had he been remembering something? James thought
carefully, recalled the sight of the blond woman on the ground.
The picture matched the odd vision he’d had when he left her
sleeping on the trail below Elk Point. It had to mean something.
And if it was a memory, then there was more to remember.
Would he dream again?
As he paced the loft, he caught sight of something from the
corner of his eye. The bit of fluttering plaid turned out to be a
hanging strip of his sleeve. Closer inspection of his clothes—or
what was left of them—revealed that he wasn’t as dressed as
he’d first thought. No wonder Jillian thought he was homeless.
Annoyed, he seized his shirt in both hands and yanked. It
came away with no resistance, and he held the shirt up to look
at it. The material was not just torn, but the edges looked
charred, and the entire left shoulder was missing. James stared,
then touched a tentative hand to his own shoulder.
Changelings didn’t scar, but there had been a wound there, no,
two of them. Shot. How had he forgotten that? There was no
blood on the shirt of course—the Change had taken care of
that, converted it into energy as it did with most organic
substances. But he had been shot. By whom he didn’t know,
only that it had happened as he knelt over Evelyn. Jesus. Jesus
Christ.
The urge to Change was strong. He didn’t want to think about
any of this stuff, didn’t want to think about anything at all for
that matter. Except now there were practical concerns to be
dealt with. Even if he was planning to be a wolf, there was
always the chance he’d have to switch to human form, even
briefly. Who knew what situation would come up? He’d certainly
never expected the situation he was in now. And Jillian’s
reaction to what he was wearing—which was little better than
nothing—proved that he didn’t have a hope of blending in with
other humans. Instead he would attract attention, something
that went against every natural instinct. Shit. He’d have to follow
her advice and raid Connor’s office, find something to wear,
something to last the next thirty frickin’ years. It was definitely
going to take him a while to adjust to that date.
In the end, he remained as a human and sat in the loft to wait.
He watched Jillian drive away in one of the clinic trucks, saw
traffic on the road beyond the clinic. One car turned in a little
later, with a young girl behind the wheel. James could hear the
keys in her hand as she unlocked the front door, heard excited
barks in the kennel room and sounds in the livestock areas that
told him she was looking after the animals. The girl left. The
traffic slowed to a trickle. Shadows grew smaller, then
nonexistent as the sun reached its midday peak. And still James
sat staring out the window.
As a man. A man who was highly attracted to Jillian
Descharme, whether he wanted to be or not. He still couldn’t
remember what the connection was between them—between
her and the wolf, he corrected—but he knew there was one. He
could feel it. More than that, to his surprise he wanted to feel the
connection, but James shoved that notion away every time it
surfaced. It was only attraction. Nothing more. If he hadn’t
Changed to human form, if he wasn’t in human form now, he
wouldn’t be having these feelings at all. He felt guilty for having
them, as if he was being disloyal, even unfaithful to Evelyn. It
added to the burden of guilt that he carried over her death. He
had brought that danger to her.
Just like he was putting Jillian Descharme in danger every
moment that he lingered. He should leave right now and never
go near her again. But what about the wolf? If he returned to
lupine form, submerged the human fully within the animal,
would Jillian be safe then or would his animal nature continue
to seek her out? Hell, the wolf seemed drawn to her as the tide
was drawn by the moon. What on earth was the attraction there?
Suddenly his heart stuttered as the animal within stirred.
Mate. Mine.
James clapped a hand to his chest. Fiery pain exploded there
as the wolf within tried to force the Change, tried to claw its way
out, snarling and snapping. Mate. Mine.
Long moments passed before James was able to regain the
reins of control. When it was over, he was kneeling in the straw,
sweating profusely. The blood was pounding loudly in his ears,
and his ribs felt like they’d been kicked repeatedly. “Jesus.
Jesus Murphy. What in the goddamn hell was that?” The wolf
was part of him, was him. It didn’t have a mind of its own. Did it?
Had he finally snapped? Had he been a wolf too long?
He drew a long shaky breath. Mate, the wolf had declared.
That was ridiculous. It couldn’t be that, it wasn’t possible. Some
Changelings were said to be able to recognize their future
mates, but he didn’t know any personally. There were stories in
Changeling history about it, but he had always figured they
were myths, the lupine equivalent of the human ‘love at first
sight’ theme. Hollywood had always made money with that
story line, probably still did. The uneasy thought that he had no
idea if Hollywood was still around crossed his mind.
Besides all that, he didn’t need a mate. He’d had a mate, had
chosen her and loved her with all his heart, and because she
had loved him back, she was dead. He wasn’t going to let that
happen again, had already resolved to live a solitary life. Yet the
wolf continued to be focused on Jillian. Even obsessed. Had he
slipped over the edge without knowing it, splintered into two
personalities, the man and the wolf?
A truck pulled into the laneway and around to the bay.
Connor. James had a momentary impulse to escape out the
window but was instantly ashamed. His younger brother was a
Changeling too, with all the senses and gifts that entailed. The
moment he opened the door, he would be all too aware that
James had been there. Undoubtedly Connor already knew that
James had been here before. Better to be up-front about it, let
Connor find me here. But he would find the wolf, not the man.
James didn’t plan on staying in human form one minute more
than he had to. He sure didn’t want his brother or anyone else
to get used to seeing him in two-legged form.
“Aha, just as I thought.” Birkie dug between layers of stained
melamine bowls and chipped glass ashtrays until she had a
small dish in her hand. “I think this little treasure should go
home with us.”
Jillian squinted at it in the dim light. The garage ceiling was
low, with only a single bulb hanging from it, giving the whole
place a cave-like atmosphere. The dish in her friend’s hand was
shaped like a scallop shell, but there were lots of shell-shaped
dishes in the world. Except for the fact that it was much dirtier
than anything else in the garage—earth was crusted inside as if
it had been used under a plant pot and there was even a dead
fly stuck rakishly on the rim—she could see nothing special
about it. “Um. It’s interesting. . . .”
“Much more than interesting, hon.” Birkie held it up and used
a manicured thumbnail to gently scratch away the grime that
obscured the mark on the bottom. Limoges, France.
Jillian’s jaw dropped. “Is that what I think it is? How on earth
did you know? You must have X-ray vision.” She gestured
helplessly at the cluttered stacks of mismatched dishes that
covered every square inch of an eight-foot table. She felt like an
archaeologist on a dig. No, more like the archaeologist’s
bumbling assistant who didn’t have a clue what to look for.
Birkie had already plucked an Austrian crystal candy dish from
under a stack of plastic fastfood cups. She’d mined similar
treasures from the other yard sales they’d visited that morning,
all of which were lined up like trophies on the backseat of the
truck. With them were Jillian’s spoils—a couple of paperback
books she knew she’d probably never get around to reading, a
set of four glasses with cows on them, some extra spoons, and
a TV table. She’d found a baseball bat at the last sale but
conceded it to a little boy and his mom.
The older woman smiled. “It just takes practice, hon, and the
love of a good bargain. So, back to your adventure with James.
You were saying you just left him in the loft?”
“What else was I supposed to do? He’s a grown-up. And if he
wants to sleep in the hay, I can understand how that might be
pleasant. Short-term, anyway. Although I don’t understand why
he’s not staying with one of his brothers. I wondered if maybe
he was a little, well, off or something, especially with the
condition of his clothes.”
“Were you afraid of him? You were eyeing that baseball bat.”
“Yes . . . no . . . well, when he surprised me, I was scared
shitless. But after that, no, I wasn’t afraid. There’s just
something about him.”
“Well, there’s the fact that he’s tall, blond, and handsome as
sin. Could sure help a gal to overlook a lot.” Birkie deliberately
fluttered her lashes as her friend rolled her eyes. “Those
Macleods always were a good-looking bunch.”
Jillian latched onto that. “So, you’ve lived in this area a long
time. You must have known James pretty much his whole life.”
There was a pause as Birkie circled a couple of ads. “Not his
whole life but quite a while, you could say. Say, aren’t those eyes
of his something else? You have to admit he has great eyes.
Just like a—”
“Like a Viking? That’s what I thought when I first saw him.”
“I like that. Yes, he certainly would make a great Viking. All
those muscles, and him so tall too. I can just picture him on the
deck of one of those dragon boats.”
Suddenly Jillian could picture that too. James dressed in
leather, his belted tunic open to the waist so his muscled chest
was clearly visible. His arms bare except for ornate bronze
bands circling his thick biceps. Below the tunic would be
powerful legs. She imagined they would have the same dusting
of blond hair as his chest. And as for what was under the tunic .
. . Jillian started and blinked to find her friend fanning her with
an old calendar.
“Takes a girl’s breath right away, doesn’t he?”
“Oh, all right. I admit it, he’s hot. Scorching, have-a-fireextinguisher-
with-you-at-all-times hot. Connor’s gorgeous too,
but for some reason it’s not the same. I don’t daydream about
him. And I did find myself wishing James would turn around for
just a moment.”
“What for?”
“So I could see if his butt matched the rest of him.”
They both burst into helpless giggles then, and when other
yard-sale enthusiasts turned to stare, giggled even harder. Still
laughing, they staggered out into the sunshine, clutching each
other’s arms for support. Jillian finally had put her hand over
her mouth to stifle herself while her friend counted out dollars to
an elderly man basking in a lawn chair.
Back in Birkie’s red pickup, Jillian asked, “So is something
wrong with him?”
“With who?” Her friend was scanning the classifieds for their
next yard sale.
“James. Is something wrong with him? Mentally, I mean.”
Birkie looked up quickly. “Good heavens, no. Not at all. In
fact, James Macleod is as smart as they come. Believe me, the
brains match the brawn in this case.”
“And?” Jillian pressed. “Oh, come on, you have to give me
some details. I’m the one who nearly had a heart attack over an
intruder in my apartment. I’m the one who had years taken off
her life when a man grabbed me in the loft. I deserve a little
description here. If you have any compassion at all, you’ll spill
whatever juicy information you know.”
“Well, I’m not sure that I remember very much. My memory—”
“Birkie!”
“Sorry dear, you’re just so much fun to tease. Let’s see now.
James is an independent soul, very hardworking. Talented too
—not many people have the knack for farming that he does.
Crops or animals, doesn’t matter. He’s amazing at both. My
Gram used to travel out to his ranch sometimes. They’d talk
plants and herbs for hours.”
“He has a ranch?”
“He and his wife did, on the other side of the valley. Near
Spirit River actually. But it was sold a few years back. He’s . . .
well, James has been away for some years now, hon.”
“His wife? He’s married?”
“Was.” Birkie pointed to the newspaper. “Look at that! Enid
Malkinson has herself a little sale going on. We’ve just got to
say hi to her and Poodle before we grab a late lunch.”
Jillian had to leave off fumbling with her seat belt and grab the
handle on the dash for balance as the red truck sped away from
the curb and headed down the street. She liked the elderly
Siamese cat and his owner, but right now they seemed to
provide Birkie with a convenient diversion from her questions.
So James was married once. Well, that happened to a lot of
people. Not everyone stayed together. But she couldn’t help
wondering why any woman would want to let him go. Did he
snore? Did he squeeze the toothpaste tube wrong? Gamble?
Drink? Womanize? James had seemed gruff, almost grouchy.
Had he always been like that?
Birkie was still talking a mile a minute about Enid Malkinson.
Jillian sighed inwardly and put her questions on a back burner.
For now.
Chapter Ten
Connor clung to the top of the ladder, staring into the loft.
Changelings had keen eyesight, but it was still a struggle to
adjust to the late afternoon sunlight glaring hotly in the far
window. He shaded his eyes, realized they still had that gritty
ache of not enough sleep, even though he’d slept like the dead
last night. It was sheer luxury having someone else on call
instead of him, but he had been up at dawn just the same,
tending to things on his own farm. Now he was in the middle of
a very long list of errands, and picking up some udder balm and
antibiotics from the clinic was one of them. Still, despite the
distractions, the moment he’d crossed the threshold of the
building, he had scented his brother.
James? James, what the hell are you doing up here? He spoke
by thought, even though there was no one to overhear him.
Good hiding place. No hunters. There was a movement to
Connor’s left, and a white wolf raised its massive head, shook
the straw from its face, and regarded Connor with its vivid blue
eyes.
Connor climbed the rest of the way into the loft and sat beside
the wolf, even as he frowned over James’s words. Wolves
weren’t a protected species here, but the forests surrounding
Dunvegan were more likely to be filled with berry pickers than
hunters at this time of year. Sounds like bullshit, James. Since
when do you give a rat’s ass about hunters? They’d never get close
to you and we both know it.
The white wolf turned its head to the window.
Look, bro, don’t get me wrong, you’re welcome here—but why are
you here? And for that matter, why did my brand new vet come in this
week smelling like you and covered in white wolf hair? She’s crazy
about wolves so I’m sure it gave her a thrill to see you up close and
personal, but it’s not like you to run around revealing yourself to
humans. What the hell’s going on with you?
Don’t know.
What do you mean, you don’t know? Connor stopped himself
then. Took a deep breath, then another. Sat down in the straw,
shoving the great wolf over a little to make room. Let me try that
again, James. It scared the living hell out of me to find out that a
human has not only seen you, but gotten close enough to touch you.
You’re usually so careful that even the Pack can’t find you unless you
want them to. I’m lucky to be able to find you—you’re like smoke. I
was thinking about trying it, though, because I wanted to make sure
you’re okay.
The creature unexpectedly laid its massive head on Connor’s
leg and gave a very human-like sigh. I don’t know what the hell’s
going on. The wolf knows her, remembers her from somewhere, but I
don’t. There’s this strange connection. The wolf knew when Jillian
came to town. It couldn’t know, but it did. It knew when she was here in
the clinic, and it knew the moment she set foot in the forest.
Connor sat very still, his hand frozen in the thick white ruff.
James was talking to him. Not in spare and stilted words but
really talking, like . . . like a human being, like James. It brought a
tidal wave of emotion rolling up into his throat, but he
swallowed it back hard, blinked away the moisture that sprang
to his eyes. He tried to focus on what his brother was saying,
but it was damn hard. The words didn’t quite make sense either.
The wolf? What wolf?
The wolf, my wolf, has a goddamn mind of its own. I know how
crazy that sounds but I swear it’s acting on its own.
“Your wolf—” Connor was stunned, forgetting all about mind
speech. For a Changeling, wolf and human were simply
different facets of the same being, the same personality. But
James had been a wolf for over three decades. Had that skewed
some internal balance, maybe made the animal side stronger
than the human? “I guess your wolf side is used to protecting
you, doing things for you. But taking over and making
decisions for you?” He suppressed a shiver. It was downright
creepy to discuss the lupine persona as if it was a separate
entity. “The wolf is still you, right? Deep down, it has to be.”
I’m not certain anymore. Everything changed when Jillian showed
up. The wolf is obsessed with her.
“I don’t like the sound of that. First you tell me you’re not in
control of your wolf side, and then you tell me it’s zeroed in on
my new vet. And you still didn’t explain how she got your hair all
over her. Tell me your alter ego didn’t attack her or some damn
thing.”
I followed her when she was hiking, just wanted to see who she was,
why the wolf was so aware of her. I hadn’t planned to approach her but
the wolf deliberately stepped out in front of her. It wanted to be seen.
By her.
“Good Christ, that must have scared her to death.”
No—that’s the weird part. Turns out that she recognizes the wolf,
she knows the wolf. She’s not afraid of it, thinks of it as a friend. Says
it helped her or something.
“And you don’t remember doing a thing like that?”
I got this strange flashback, just for a second, where she was a lot
younger and hurt somehow, hurt bad. But I can’t remember anything
else. And the wolf won’t tell me—
“What do you mean ‘it won’t tell you’? Look, bro, the way
you’re talking about your wolf side is really weirding me out.”
How do you think I feel? Like Dr. Jekyll and goddamn Hyde. Tell
me how the wolf knows things about her that I don’t. It even knew her
name, Connor. Damn wolf didn’t bother telling me until a few days
ago. And you know what else is strange? I can hear her. I can hear
her in my mind just like I can hear you.
Connor gave a low whistle. “Holy-o shit. That doesn’t happen
very often.”
I don’t know what it means.
“It means that in addition to being the best damn vet I’ve seen
in years, Jillian may have a few other talents too. Telepathy is
rare in humans but it’s not unheard of. Most of them don’t even
know they have it. It doesn’t necessarily mean anything.”
Connor didn’t quite believe that however. Not in light of
everything else he was hearing. He scrubbed a hand over his
face and pressed the heel of his palm to his forehead. What he
really wanted to do was to throw his arms around his brother,
punch him, wrestle with him, laugh, cry, and ask a million and
one questions. But it sure didn’t seem like the right time. The
situation his brother had described was too disturbing on a
number of levels. “So what are you doing here in the loft?”
Just trying to figure out why the wolf wants to be near Jillian. Guess
I’m hoping Jillian will say something, do something that will trigger
my memory.
“And when you remember, if you remember . . . do you think
that will fix things for your wolf?”
I don’t know. Maybe not. At least I’ll know what the wolf has in mind,
what it wants.
“And what if you don’t agree with the wolf? What if it can’t
have whatever the hell it wants? What if it just wants to follow
Jillian around like a big dog forever and a day? That could be
dangerous for both of you.”
No! No, I won’t do that. I won’t endanger her. The massive
creature stood and shook himself. I’ve already drawn that line, and
the wolf won’t cross it. I won’t let it.
Considering the strange conversation they’d just had,
Connor wasn’t convinced that his brother could effectively
leash his wolf nature, but resisted saying so.“Okay. For now,
we’ll play it your way. You know that my home is your home,
and Zoey feels the very same way. Likewise with the clinic. If it
helps you to come here, fine, great. But I’m trusting you to be
careful, damn careful, to stay out of sight. Understand?”
Connor glanced at his watch and swore under his breath.
“Look, I don’t want to go, but I gotta get back and treat one of
my cows. She’s been climbing through the neighbor’s wire
fence to get into his clover field and picked up some nasty
scratches on her belly and udders.”
Best get them before they’re infected. Is it one of your Angus cattle
or the little Jersey heifer?
Connor felt a lump the size of a basketball rise in his throat. Of
course his brother had seen his farm, observed his livestock
and made note of them, even if he was a wolf. Connor had
nearly forgotten how gifted James had been as a farmer and
rancher. Their father, Ronan, had often declared that his oldest
son talked to the earth and its creatures, charmed and
persuaded them to produce uncommon quality and yield for
him. Connor knew the gift lay in James’s ability to read the land
and work with it. Whether it was crops or livestock, he
understood the needs and strengths of both and wasn’t
satisfied until there was balance and harmony. James had loved
that life. Did he ever miss it? Did he ever even think about it?
Not trusting his voice, Connor switched back to mind speech.
Before I go, I’ll throw some bales so no one will have to climb up here
for a while, but for God’s sake, keep your head down, okay?
Head down. The wolf nosed his hand. Careful. Thanks, bro.
Connor didn’t feel as reassured as he would have liked, but
he tossed the bales down into the livestock area anyway.
Timothy and alfalfa hay for feed, oat straw for bedding. More
than the clinic could possibly use in a month. He climbed down
after them and stacked them against a wall. “Later, James,” he
called out and got an answering yip from the loft. He drove off to
attend to the rest of his errands with a lot more on his mind than
when he’d started. His brother had spoken, really talked to him,
and the years had simply fallen away. It was James and they
were close again, as they had always been. I should be ecstatic. I
should be doing cartwheels. Instead, he felt uneasy, as if he was
missing something.
It wasn’t until Connor was driving home that he identified the
real source of the niggling disquiet he felt—ozone.
His eyebrows shot up, and he had to pull the truck to the side
of the road for a few minutes to collect himself. Human to wolf
or wolf to human, there was always a gathering of static
electricity in the air during a Change, and with it came a faint
telltale trace of ozone. The same scent that heralded
thunderstorms, the same signature left behind by lightning. Had
the white wolf tried to Change? Succeeded? Failed? And what
did it mean? Connor didn’t know, couldn’t even guess. But he
knew what he wanted to believe, what he hoped for. If you’re
trying to be human, James, don’t stop. Don’t give up. Fight for it, fight
your way back to us.
“My father and I built this operation from nothing, did it all with
our bare hands.” Roderick Harrison never let anyone forget
that, least of all his son. It was the one thing he didn’t forget
even when the Alzheimer’s was especially bad. There were
times when the old man either talked to Douglas as if he were
five years old again or mistook him for a ranch hand. But he
always knew what the Pine Point Ranch was and that it was his.
Knowing the speech by heart, Douglas tuned his father out
and headed for the door. Old Varley, the ranch manager, had
called down from the horse barn to let him know the Dunvegan
vet was just finishing up. It was too damn bad that George was
away. Dr. George Taku of Spirit River had been looking after
their animals since Douglas was nine or ten. In fact the
Harrisons did all of their business in that community. It made
sense. Their ranch was several miles closer to the town of Spirit
River but Douglas knew full well he’d personally avoided
Dunvegan since hearing that one Connor Macleod had set up a
practice there. Admit it, Dougie. You’re afraid Macleod might
resemble the man your father killed. Afraid he’ll look at you and know
you were there, know you didn’t stop it. He slapped the thoughts
away. He didn’t know if this Macleod was even related to that
long-ago family, and even if it turned out he was, Douglas was
determined not to give in to his fears. So determined, in fact,
that he was the one who told the manager to call the North Star
Animal Hospital when one of the logging horses turned up
lame. Just being sensible, he told himself. There was no other
vet within two hundred miles, and the horse needed attention.
Just plain sensible. Although it had taken several shots of Jack
Daniels to help him make that sensible decision.
But it wasn’t Dr. Macleod kneeling beside the horse. Instead,
Douglas saw the strange woman from the river trail, and despite
his earlier determinations, an icy thread of fear coiled through
his belly. Sweat sprang at the base of his spine, fear-sweat,
although Dr. Jillian Descharme didn’t look particularly
frightening. In fact, she appeared rather childlike at the moment.
On her knees, her head barely reached the belly of the
Percheron mare whose leg she was wrapping. But she had
been searching for a white wolf when he saw her last. For a
moment he considered letting the ranch manager handle the
whole affair, but just then she turned her head and spotted him.
Was that embarrassment that made her cheeks redden?
“Afternoon, doctor.” Douglas composed himself and tried to
remember her name. It started with D, he thought. Something
French-sounding. Hell. “Good of you to come out on such short
notice, especially coming so far.”
“No problem. It’s my job. And I’ve got another farm call to go
to that I can catch on the way back to Dunvegan, so it all works
out.” She finished the bandage and gathered up her materials.
“Where’s Buster today?”
“In the house. We don’t let him around the horse barn yet.
He’s still a pup, doesn’t have the sense not to nip at their feet.”
“Probably a good thing. This gal’s foot certainly doesn’t need
any more irritation. I found a rusted piece of wire jammed into
the frog of the hoof.”
“Shit. We thought it looked infected, but we couldn’t see
anything in it.”
“The swelling was hiding it. I had to pour a stain over it to get
the puncture to show up. Took me a while to get the wire out,
and then a ton of pus drained out too.” Jillian turned to the
horse, talked to it as she patted its massive black shoulder.
“What a brave girl you were. I’ll bet that foot feels a whole lot
better already, doesn’t it?” The animal nosed her as if it agreed,
and the vet turned her attention back to Douglas. “The foot’s
still hot and swollen. It needs to be soaked twice a day, and
she’ll need a course of antibiotics. I gave the instructions to
your manager.”
“That’s just fine. We’ll make sure the instructions get
followed.” He nodded. “Sheila’s a good horse, so we sure
appreciate that you came out.”
“It’s a treat to get to work on a draft horse. There’s not many
around anymore. In fact, I’m surprised at how many horses you
have.”
“You’re not from Alberta, then, are you? There’s more horses
here than anywhere in the country. We use them.”
She looked surprised. “I thought farms and ranches used
ATVs and trucks.”
“We’ve got our share of ATVs all right, but a quarter horse is
still the best when it comes to working cattle.” He warmed to the
subject. “ATVs don’t have the maneuverability, and they don’t
have the natural cow sense, the ability to anticipate, that a good
working horse does.”
“Does Sheila work cattle too?”
“Nope, she has different talents. We do selective logging on
the hillsides and coulees, and we have horses like her to pull
the logs out of the brush. Heavy equipment would just mow
down half the forest.”
It was going well. They were actually having a conversation.
Maybe that whole wolf thing had been imagination—hers, his,
somebody’s. Douglas felt himself relax as he walked the vet to
her truck. She was actually kind of a pretty thing with those
green eyes. He wondered if she had a boyfriend.
“Get away from her! Jesus God, Dougie, you oughta know
better.” Roderick Harrison was standing at the top of the porch,
a plaid flannel work-shirt flapping open over pinstriped pajama
bottoms. His feet were bare. “Get the hell away from her. Can’t
you see she’s been near one of them?”
Dammit! Where the hell was that nurse? As his father made
his way down the stairs, Douglas turned quickly to the vet.
“Please excuse my dad. Alzheimer’s has him pretty confused
these days. Just mail me the bill, okay?”
“No problem. Birkie’ll send out an invoice on Monday.” Dr.
Descharme started the truck and leaned out the window. “Look,
let me know right away if you don’t think the horse is improving,
okay? Don’t let it go more than a day. There’s a lot of infection in
that foot.”
His reply was cut short as his father seized his arm with
unexpected strength. The old man’s voice was shrill in his ear,
reminding him anew that his father remained taller than he was.
Easy to forget that when the man was in bed half the time. “Get
back from there! Can’t you see it on her? That goddamn
werewolf has marked her as his own. It’s all over her, blue as its
demon eyes. I told you we had to kill that big white devil,
Dougie, I told you and you wouldn’t listen.”
Jesus H. Christ, not this stuff again, thought Douglas, frantic
to hush his father, to hustle him away from the truck. But
Roderick gripped Jillian’s arm as well and leaned into her face
with wild eyes. “You still got time, girl. You still got time to run
before they get you, make you into a wolf like them. Run, you
hear me? While you still got only two legs.”
No longer interested in being gentle, Douglas pried his
father’s fingers from the vet’s arm and forcibly wedged his body
between the old man and the truck. All he could manage was a
quick glance at Jillian and a jerk of his head, but thank God she
got the message and put the truck in gear. His father continued
to yell at the vet over Douglas’s shoulder even as she drove
away. “Run! Run while you can!”
Chapter Eleven
James sat in the loft for a long time after Connor left. As a man.
He couldn’t say what had prompted him to Change again.
Maybe it was the pique of having his younger brother tell him to
be careful. James snorted at that. Humans would never find him
unless he wanted them to. Years of life as a wolf had honed his
forest skills to an uncanny degree, even for a Changeling. He
moved as a ghost—unseen, unheard, and without trail. Then he
remembered with no small chagrin that Jillian had made it all the
way into the loft and actually tripped over him before he was
aware of her presence. What was hell was that, another
mysterious gift of hers? Suddenly something much more
ominous occurred to him. What if the wolf had been aware all
along that Jillian was there—and deliberately did not inform his
alter ego? Great. Now I get to be paranoid on top of having a
goddamn split personality.
James decided to risk venturing downstairs. He felt a little
clumsy on the ladder, but at least walking was coming easier.
And he had to walk through the whole building. The absence of
names on the doors forced him to look in almost every room.
Finally he spotted a door thickly papered with cartoons and
articles.
Bull’s-eye. There was no doubt it was Connor’s office. His
brother’s scent was concentrated here, almost tangible.
Connor’s jacket was hanging among a motley group of lab
coats and surgical scrubs. An oversize couch sagged along
one wall, with an accumulation of mail and newspapers
covering torn cushions. An enormous desk was groaning
under stacks of papers and books. In the far corner, an open
door revealed a bathroom with bedraggled towels hanging
everywhere and clothes on the floor. It looked just like Connor’s
half of the room they’d shared as kids. A sharp pang struck his
heart as James recalled living at home with his brothers and
sisters. He suddenly wondered how his mother and father were
and where they might be—and ruthlessly cut off that line of
thinking. It didn’t matter, it couldn’t matter. He wasn’t going to
be around. It wasn’t like he was going to go visit his folks for
Sunday dinner or some damn thing. He was going to get the
damn clothes, turn into a damn wolf, and hit the damn road.
James made his way through the clutter to where a dresser
was burping out socks. He was reaching for the top drawer
when he caught sight of the mirror above the dresser. Instantly
he froze in a confusion of instincts—then shook it off. He was
not a wolf, not in wolfen form. The human in the mirror was him.
James ran his hand over his beard, a little surprised that it
hadn’t grown out. It was as he had always worn it, just as his
hair was its usual length. He had often heard it said that a
Changeling’s human body didn’t age or alter while the wolf form
was being used. But had anyone ever tested it for this long? In
fact, he didn’t look any different than he remembered. Not
physically. Something in his eyes, however, had changed. They
seemed almost ancient compared to the rest of him.
He turned away, both from the mirror and that line of thought.
James shucked his tattered clothing and got stuck only once
when he had to fiddle with the button on the waistband of his
jeans. He might be walking just fine, but his fingers were
frustratingly out of practice. He yanked open the top drawer of
the dresser and ended up catching it just before it hit the floor.
Obviously he was out of practice with a lot of things. He’d have
to remember to temper his Changeling strength before he broke
something.
Why the hell were there so many socks? He wasn’t used to
making these kinds of decisions. Finally he pulled out a likelylooking
candidate, only to find it single. He pawed through the
drawer and discovered they were all singles. Most had holes,
big holes. James cursed his brother soundly as he dug around
for a mate to the one in his hand.
“James August Macleod!”
Both hands still full of socks, James whirled to find Birkie
Peterson grinning at him from the open doorway. Ah, damn. Out
of annoyance at being caught in human form, his voice was
rougher than he intended it to be. “I thought the place was
closed down. If you’re looking for Connor, he’s not here.”
“Nope, I was looking for you, James,” said Birkie. “Been
feeling your presence around here for days now, and Jillian
mentioned she’d run into you. So I stopped by in hopes of
seeing you too.” She waved a hand toward him. “And what I’m
seeing is that you’re in human skin.”
He scowled. “Well, keep it to yourself. I’m not planning to stay
in it.”
