CHAPTER ONE
JANUARY 2020
On this soft night I followed the Moren River valley, flying
back to the Castle, hearing the chimes of clock towers in
the Plainslands villages as I passed high above.
The night air was shapeless. I couldn’t sense any
current. I concentrated, flapping steadily on, marking
distance by time, marking time by going through all the
songs I know. I lay horizontally, looking down around me,
cruising with stiff, shallow beats. I felt the air rushing
between my feathers on the upstroke. Then I pulled my
wings down again, the feathers flattened, the tight muscles
moved around my waist.
Thermals were dissipating as the sun set. I was
dropping altitude to find them and the work was getting
harder. Fog was forming, low in the pasture and along the
river bank. The tops of the valley sides were dark shapes
rising from the mist like islands. Beyond, I could see
parallel hills all the way out to the beginning of Donaise.
Hedges and drystone walls looked like black seams
separating fields of clean, lapping white mist. There was no
sound, just the skeleton zip of my wings peeling back the
air.
I spotted a point of light in the distance, like a city, and
checked my compass—bearings dead on for the Castle
and hopefully there would be some supper left. The speck
resolved into a cluster of lights, then each cluster separated
again, and distances between them seemed to grow as I
got closer. Lights slipped from the horizon down toward
me, until I was over Demesne village. Street lights shone
up, picking the mist out in flat beams. Denser wisps blew
past, curling, and the fog began to take on a shape of its
own.
The fog changed everything. Fog covered the river’s
reflective surface, meandered to the water meadows. Fog
poured between the cultivar yew plantations and spiky
poplar coppices where tomorrow’s bows and arrows were
painstakingly being grown. Fog drifted over the roofs of the
village where most of the Castle’s staff live. It pooled on the
carp ponds, stole into the tax barns and settled on the
market’s thatched roof. It cloaked the watermill, the
aqueduct’s dark arches, Hobson’s stable and the
Blacksmith’s yard. Fog overran the Castle’s outermost
boundaries. It advanced through the archery fields, lay in
the tilting lists, rolled over the tennis courts. It muffled the
concert hall and the bathhouse complex.
One of the Castle’s spires was silhouetted against a
white light, which suffused into the mist in an immense
grisaille sphere. The floodlights were on in the
amphitheater. They only illuminated the sharp Northeast
Tower, its black sarsen stone striking in the whiteout.
Features became visible as I closed the distance. The
Castle’s vast bulk was obscured. Occasionally angular
roofs and the crenellated tops of walls appeared,
fragmentary, through the mist. The square base of the
round tower was submerged two meters deep into a sea of
fog. I flew through thicker patches—then it looked as if it
was receding on the plains. On a whim, three hundred
years ago, the Architect had encrusted her studio in the
turret with sculptures. Eagles, storks and eels loomed out of
the mist, with her company’s logo and the tools of her trade
in stonework blackened by kitchen smoke. The windows
bristled with deep, tangled marble ivy so realistic that birds
were nesting in it.
Fog cold in my eyes and throat like clouds. A smell from
the kitchens of wood smoke, roast beef and dishwater had
caught in it. A faint scent of lavender from the laundry house
tainted it. Burned whale oil from the floodlights saturated it,
turning the fog into smog.
Stories and gable roofs and towers rose behind towers.
The spaces under the buttresses were filled with tracery.
The Carillon Courtyard had a lawn mowed in wide stripes
and a roof that had been covered in scaffolding for eight
decades. On the steeplejack’s walkway was a wooden
treadmill twice as tall as a man, used to raise loads of
Ladygrace stone. Its basket hung from the rope wound on
its axle.
Two centuries ago, I thought the North Façade was a cliff
face formed by the power of nature. I had tilted my head
until I thought I would fall over backward, but I still couldn’t
see the top of its spire. I had crouched on the hard grass a
few hundred meters away, looked up and realized—all the
crevices are carvings. The cliff ledges are parapets.
Statues of idealized immortals, pinnaform spires
embroidered with vertical lace. The glory of the Emperor,
god’s governor of the Fourlands. It had made my neck
ache.
I flew an assured path around walls flaking masonry,
mottled with moss. I passed pinnacles decorated with ball
flowers. The Finials, a memorial sculpture, was a row of
scalloped arches resting on freestanding black marble
shafts. It carried the signatures of Eszai, people who
through their peerless talents have won immortality, a place
in the Circle, and reside here. Graffiti scarred the arches,
the names of immortals past and present; I had incised
CJS & TW 1892 in a love heart on the highest topstone.
Now invisible in the mist, the gravel courtyard at the foot
of the Finials encircled a statue of Dunlin, recently the King
of Awia. I had ordered it to be placed there with the statues
of other great warriors so that he would always be
remembered.
The tall Aigret Tower seemed to drift in the mist and I
sheared through it. It was the Slake Cross Battle cenotaph,
square openwork, completely hollowed out to a lantern of
air. At every level its pillars were thicker at the top than at
the bottom, so they looked like they were dripping down—
melting. It had no walls, its pillars were backed by those of
a second and third tower nested inside; through its worn
bird-boned latticework I flew without breaking pace.
Small, indistinct groups of people were heading along
the avenue in the direction of the dueling ground. Some
carried oil lamps; their golden light-points bounced away
into the distance. Next to the floodlights’ white glare, a
whole crowd of lanterns was gathering. I must take a look
and see what’s happening. Standing on one wing I bent my
knees and turned. The ground tilted sharply as I dropped
onto the Castle’s roof-forest, like a wasp into a very ornate
flower. I swept in so low over the barbican that my wingtips
touched, made a sharp right, narrowly missing the lightning
rod. Airstream roared in my ears as I dived toward the
dueling ground, wondering if I could see well enough to land
safely.
Fog drifted with me over the low roof of the adjoining
gymnasium, and a second later poured from the open
mouths of a dozen gargoyles carved in the shape of serene
kings like chess pieces, which leaned out, facedown, over
ornamental gardens. I flew through one of the streams,
taking a shower in the damp fog. As I glided in on fixed
wings, vortices curled off my wingtips so I left two spiral
trails.
The dueling ground is inside a large amphitheater with
high, half-timbered walls topped by flagpoles. The fog had
not yet smothered them but it rose up the outside like water
climbing around a sinking ship—the oval building looked as
if it was sliding down into the invisible earth.
Four floodlights stood at the edges of the amphitheater,
on ten-meter-high iron scaffolds. I circled the nearest
floodlight, feet dangling, and settled onto its metal housing. I
shook wisps of fog from my wings and pulled them around
me, stood cloaked in long feathers.
The shade was very hot. I shuffled to the front and
perched on the edge. The only noise was the oil lamps’
hissing. Above and around, all was dark—but the pitch
below was bathed in light. Two figures in the center were
swiping at each other with rapier and dagger.
There was Gio Serein, the Circle’s Swordsman. When I
was growing up in Hacilith, he was the immortal with the
biggest fan club. Every child who wielded a stick pretended
to be Serein and plenty of teenagers had aspirations to
fight him. This could only be a Challenge. I peered closer to
see who could possibly go a round with him. It was a young
Awian lad, who kept his stubby dark wings folded so as not
to present a target. His flight feathers were clipped in
zigzags, the current fashion, making them lighter. Short
brown hair was shaved at the sides and stuck up in sweaty
spikes on top. For agility, he wore only a shirt and
breeches. His sweat-patched shirt was fyrd-issue, dark
blue of the Tanager Select infantry. He wore a glove on his
left hand, grasping the rapier hilt. He moved as if he was
made of springs.
Serein had his knuckles upward and thumb on his rapier
blade to make strong wrist blows. The stranger caught one
on his dagger, thrust it wide, went in underneath with
dagger and rapier. Serein struck back, low, with a cry.
The newcomer swept it aside, made a feint to the face,
jabbing twice, and again Serein gave ground, keenly aware
of his body’s position. Then he ran in and scuffed up some
sawdust with his leather pump. The Awian was wise to that
trick; he parried the thrust. Metal slid over metal with a
grinding swish.
I glanced up and the size of the crowd held my attention.
The twenty-tier-high banked stands were crammed to
capacity and more people arrived every minute, blowing
out their lanterns, shoving a path down the walkways to sit
on the steps and lean against the posts. Gazing around, I
couldn’t see any space where I could join them.
Directly opposite was a canopied box with the best view
of the ground. The Emperor San was seated on a chair in
the center, watching the two fighters impassively and
completely without expression. One thin hand rested on his
knees, the other was curled on the arm-rest. His face was
shadowed by the gold awning, thin magisterial features
framed by white hair that hung loose to his shoulders. If San
was out of the Throne Room this must be really important. I
folded my wings neatly so the tips crossed at my back, and
bowed my head in case he was watching.
On the Emperor’s left, Tornado, the Castle’s Strongman,
was so big he filled that side of the box. He peered out from
under the awning that bulged over his head. On his right,
Mist, the Sailor, stood with a great big grin on her face, her
hands on wide hips under a white cashmere jumper.
Rayne, the Doctor, sat with her assistants on a bench at the
side of the ground, ready to intervene if anything went
wrong. I recognized many of my fellow immortals scattered
through the crowd, all intent on the duelists. Well, I thought, it
wouldn’t be a new year if Serein didn’t have another
Challenger, but usually his supporters in the crowd
bellowed and cheered and hissed. This time there was a
breathlessness in the air.
The duelists walked in a circle, marshaling their strength.
Watching tensely. Both had their sword tips horizontal in
third guard, daggers in their right hands held out straight to
the right side. Footprints turned the sand dark in a ring
where they trod. They must have been at it for ages; their
clothes were wet and the sand was damp with sweat.
Serein thrust, knees flexed. The Awian traversed
sideways and Serein’s swept hilt nearly caught on his tightly
taped sleeve. They never lost eye contact; I knew what that
was like. Head up and body in balance, keep all the moves
in your peripheral vision no matter how bright the steel is,
cutting around your head.
Serein made his slicing arc too wide. The Awian jabbed
at his stomach. Serein was forced back. The Awian jumped
forward, thrust sword arm and leg out, aimed for the
hamstring behind Serein’s knee. Serein parried but his
blade sloped. The Awian’s rapier glanced off, he directed it
to Serein’s calf. Serein moved away fast. Top move! Yes!
Eat your heart out, Serein! I bounced up and down on the
floodlight housing until the whole thing shuddered.
Sorry.
They set to circling again, obviously exhausted but trying
to see what chinks might open in each other’s guard. They
tried to spot any recurring foibles, to predict and use them.
They were perfectly synchronized, reading the timing from
each other’s eyes. Seeing through the feints. Every time
Serein sought a way to break out, the newcomer was with
him, close like a shadow through every strategy.
Serein shifted into second guard, spun the dagger so
the blade was below his hand, took a swipe across the
Awian’s face. Crash, crash! They moved apart. Serein has
spent his life studying the art of killing. Why hasn’t he won
yet? His footprints on the sand traced out one of his
geometrical charts. He was using every trick he knew and
he was getting nowhere.
Some people climbed up on the roof and lit the last
floodlight. If the duelists registered the white glare intensify,
they didn’t react. They concentrated on thrust and parry,
leaned in with both hands at once, dagger blocking rapier.
A spray of sweat drops flew from Serein’s fair hair as he
flicked it back.
My floodlight was a good vantage point. Moreover,
being half Rhydanne I could see movements faster than the
flatlanders can, so I saw Serein’s cuts; to the other
spectators they must be a blur. This was Serein slowed by
fatigue. I knew how impossibly fast he moves when fresh,
because he’s beaten me black and blue with a buttoned
rapier before now.
Serein was two meters tall, his substantial arms were
hard with tired muscle. He bared teeth in a snarl as he
screamed at himself inwardly: Concentrate! Even at this
distance I could read the frustration in his pale eyes: Why
won’t you yield? Why can’t I hit you? He kept turning hatred
into big, angry slashes that his opponent just leafed aside
with dagger, his rapier in front narrowing the angle of
attack. They were both as good as it was physically
possible to be. The outcome depended on who would slip
up first, or simply stop, ground down by exhaustion.
Perhaps Serein was slightly more cautious than the boy,
because he had more to lose.
Serein made two crown cuts to the boy’s head, lunged
for his feet. The boy tried to catch the blade in his dagger
quillions, missed.
This kid has been around, I decided. He fights like an
immortal. I had been flying on my own for days and my
whole body was alert to their moves. I had been in remote
Darkling, which made me conscious of the crowd.
There was the Archer. Lightning stood closest to the
duelists, leaning on the crush barrier staring raptly at them.
A wide Micawater-blue scarf was draped around his
shoulders and a quiver of white-flighted arrows at his hip.
He has the physique of a cast-bronze statue. The willpower
of one, too, and to be honest their sense of humor as well.
This century he is less glacial than usual, because he has
been enlivened by another hopeless love affair. It was easy
to see him; the surrounding crowd kept a respectful
distance. Though they all stood shoulder-to-shoulder,
Lightning was on his own.
I swept off my perch with my wings held right back, down
to the edge of the pitch and landed neatly next to him.
“Who’s the Challenger?”
Lightning smiled without turning. “Welcome back, Jant.
How was the road from Scree?”
“Very foggy. Who is he?”
“That young man is Wrenn, a career soldier from
Summerday. He left the Queen’s guard and made his
formal Challenge to Serein last week.”
“Is that why the Emperor called me back?”
Lightning looked at me for the first time. “No. Don’t
mention it in public—San has work for us. I was also
recalled, and I am not at all happy about it, since I had to
leave my betrothèd’s side.”
(Lightning is the only person I know who still puts the è in
betrothèd.)
“Wrenn looks like a fyrd captain.”
“He is. He made a name for himself in the town. He’s
working his way up through the ranks, and I think being such
a fantastic swordsman has made him quite unpopular.
Courtiers scent rumors and seek him out to prove
themselves, but Wrenn refuses to know when to lose. He
gave Veery Carniss more of a flaying than a dueling scar. If
he was nobility, he could have been promoted higher. It’s a
shame; I suppose he was frustrated by the cut-glass ceiling
which is why he’s trying a Challenge.”
“They both look tired.”
“Jant, they started at six o’clock.”
“Shit!”
Lightning gestured at the crowd, “Long enough for the
Eszai and the whole of Demesne village to join us. Hush
now. He’s such a short boy, I don’t know how he keeps
going.”
There was no blood on the sawdust. “Four hours and
they haven’t touched each other?”
“They’ve broken a sword each, though. Sh!”
Wrenn had obviously trained in broadsword techniques
as well as the ideal figures of fencing. An overhead blow
down to the face, a thrust to the belly, adapted to the rapier
—duelist’s weapons designed by humans for settling
disputes between themselves in their city.
Winning is all. The Castle’s constitution is simple: two
men on a field and by the end of the day one of them will be
immortal, and the other may as well be down among the
dead men.
They used identical rapiers, damask steel blades with
the same length and heft, issued by the Castle to ensure
the Challenge is fair. The Challenger is allowed to set the
time of the competition, but the Challenged immortal
decrees the type of contest. Serein was formerly a fencing
master; he had popularized the art across the Plainslands
and Morenzia. Three centuries ago, he won his place in the
Circle by broadsword combat but since then he has usually
stipulated that Challengers use his accustomed rapier and
poniard. Wrenn was so thickset that I could tell the long
blade hadn’t been chosen to favor him, but he had no
problems wielding it. He cut straight at Serein’s chest.
Serein flung both hands up and bounded back. He
landed in high guard, with both blades pointing at Wrenn’s
face. Wrenn ducked below them to attack—he flattened
himself to the floor, one leg out behind, lunged forward with
the rapier at arm’s length.
Serein got low to thrust, but Wrenn was quick to his feet.
Serein stood still, parried with dagger, thrust with sword.
Wrenn pulled his cut to keep out of distance. He thrust
under Serein’s arm.
“That’s three from the left,” muttered Lightning. “He’ll
change now.”
That’s what Wrenn wanted us to think. He attacked from
the left. He traversed to the opposite leg and changed
dagger grip, so the blade was down. He leaned in, back
straight, made a wide sweep, but too close and almost ran
onto Serein’s rapier. The crowd inhaled, expecting a
double kill, but Wrenn, off balance, gave ground and the two
began to circle again.
Wrenn launched a heavy cut to Serein’s shoulder.
If this was me, I would—
Serein jumped and stopped it with just his dagger
before it gained momentum.
Well, I wouldn’t do that.
Then he tried to kick Wrenn in the balls.
Wrenn leapt away, threw his weight back and returned a
reverse thrust at the same time.
I gasped. I’d never seen a fencer move that accurately
before.
Serein couldn’t turn inside the thrust, and retreated, face
sallow. He allowed his rapier point to drop from guard for
the first time. It gave Wrenn time to rally; he tried a cleaving
blow. Serein beat it aside, turned his sword and cut at
Wrenn’s exposed hand. Wrenn backed off just fast enough
to keep his hand. He parried, the dagger coming up
beneath his rapier for support. He lifted Serein’s blade, but
Serein snatched it free. Wrenn faced Serein squarely, his
whole body curved into a hollow, his middle held away and
his left foot down securely.
They found new strength, remembering that they’re
fighting for immortality. San forbids his immortals to kill their
Challengers, although genuine accidents happen now and
again. Serein looked furious at how long this was taking, he
was channeling all his brilliance at getting first blood from
the young man.
Of course, no money Serein’s novices could offer him
would lead him to reveal his finest moves. He never taught
his students enough for them to Challenge him. But it
seemed that Wrenn had reinvented all Serein’s techniques
from scratch, and added his own innovations.
Serein deliberately made an out-of-distance attack,
trying to draw Wrenn in. Wrenn was having none of it, he
kept his body well away. Serein tried a better angle, this
time Wrenn’s dagger parried low. Serein’s rapier drove
straight at it. The blades shunted together. Serein punched
his swept hilt at Wrenn’s fist. The dagger shot from Wrenn’s
stunned hand like a dart.
Wrenn did not look for it but changed his rapier to his
right hand, wringing his fingers. He was at a serious
disadvantage. Serein’s eyes tracked Wrenn’s expression
as he deigned a smile.
“It’s only a matter of time…” Lightning said.
Wrenn knocked Serein’s rapier up with his sword’s forte,
sliced across Serein’s stomach. Serein kept his arms out
of the way. His confidence peaked; he didn’t need to give
ground. He could just wait.
“Serein will stick him like a pig.”
Wrenn made a straight thrust in quarte, Serein turned it
easily. Everyone watched Serein beating Wrenn back
across the releager, step by step until they were right
underneath the Emperor’s box. Wrenn was beginning to
look from Serein’s rapier to dagger, and I could see his
mouth was open.
Serein was lining up a way to end this. He feinted with
the dagger, swung his rapier around in an outside moulinet
for force, straight down at Wrenn’s head.
And Wrenn stepped into the blow.
He caught the inside of Serein’s hand on the grip with
his own wrist, forced it aside. His rapier arrested Serein’s
dagger and he stretched that arm fully to the other side. He
tilted his blade; the tip lowered to Serein’s throat. Serein
struggled, stopped. Face-to-face they were so close their
chests nearly touched. Wrenn looked Serein straight in the
eyes, made an almost imperceptible movement of the point
and a red trickle ran down below the Swordsman’s larynx,
between his collar bones into the front of his shirt. First
blood.
Wrenn punched both arms into the air. “Yes!” he yelled. “I
did it! I really fucking did it!”
For a second there was silence, and I could tell the same
thought was running through every mind in the throng: how
brave have you got to be to step into a cut in prime? Wrenn
was prepared to die if his trick failed. Knowing he has to
die sometime, he risked it for the ultimate reward. Serein
had lost that mortal determination—well, all us Eszai are
living on borrowed time.
The crowd erupted. A lady next to me put her hands over
her ears, the cheering was so loud.
“What timing,” Lightning breathed. “What bloody timing.”
He vaulted the low wall and sprinted across the pitch. I got
to the duelists first, saw Lightning throw a brotherly arm
around Wrenn’s shoulders. Wrenn lowered his rapier,
swayed on his feet. He was about to faint.
I was suddenly at the focal point, and almost deafened
by the crowds. Outside the lit ground the stands were
invisible but the applause was like a wall of sound. A chant
caught like city-fire and spread through the stands: “Wrenn
for Serein! Wrenn for Serein!” Fyrd swordsmen stamped
their feet on the wooden benches; the thunder went on and
on. Soldiers in civvies began to spill out onto the pitch. I
clapped my hands until the palms stung.
“Yes!” yelled Tornado, with one fist in the air. He stuck
two fingers in his mouth and gave a long whistle.
“Well done!” Lightning exclaimed. “Well done, my
friend!” He turned Wrenn to the yelling crowd and raised
Wrenn’s shaking arm. “The victor!”
Serein, beaten, opened his hands and let his dagger
and rapier fall to the trodden sand. They smelled weakly of
disinfectant. He looked around for a place to lie, knelt
down, then curled up from humiliation and sheer exhaustion
with his hands over his head.
Wrenn seemed frightened. He looked more terrified the
more he realized how many people were out there. His face
had a luster from the grease smeared on his forehead to
stop sweat running into his eyes. He was beyond the limits
of mental and physical endurance; he stumbled. Lightning
walked him toward the Doctor’s bench, but the crowd
swallowed them in and then hoisted up Wrenn in the center,
hands on his legs and backside like a crowd-surfer. They
carried him high above their heads, into the square
passageway and rapidly out of the fencing ground. The
floodlights highlighted tousled wings and assorted backs
as they ebbed away from us. Serein and I were left alone.
The sea of fog breached the far wall and poured down,
slipping toward us at ground level.
“That’s it,” the Swordsman murmured. “Is that it? Am I
out?”
He gradually got to his feet, shoulders bowed, head
lowered.
“Serein,” I said. “It comes to us all in the end.”
He looked at me resentfully, but I couldn’t tell whether he
was sighing from overexertion or bitterness. “Once I’ve left
the Circle I won’t want to see you again,” he admitted.
“Don’t visit me, Jant—I don’t want you to see me grow old.”
He put a hand to his throat, rubbed it, and gazed at his red
palm. The blood flow had practically stopped, but he was
sticky with it chin to waist.
He looked up to the hulking empty stands. “It’s the fear
that takes it out of you.” He rested his hand on my shoulder
for a second. Then he picked up his rapier, broke it over his
knee, and walked off the field.

CHAPTER TWO
I climbed the spiral staircase to my tower room. The
murals on its walls became more lurid and grotesque
toward the top. I don’t remember painting them; I must have
been really stoned.
“Hello, lover,” I said, emerging from the doorway.
Tern was waiting in the lower part of the round split-level
room, her hands on her hips. Anger spiced her voice. “Look
at you! All windswept! God, you look like a juggler from the
Hacilith festival! Out of those flea-bitten mountain clothes
and into a suit…Here, wear this one; it’s elegant.” She gave
me a light and unusually demure kiss on the cheek. I looked
around our untidy apartment that my wife had colonized with
architectural drawings, cosmetics, rolls of fabric and an
enormous wardrobe inside which I am sure a Rhydanne
couple could live quite happily.
My carefully stacked letters slid into each other under
Tern’s discarded dresses. All my specific piles of
correspondence had formed one mass like the Paperlands
and reeked of her expensive perfume. She saw my look of
horror and said, “I tidied up your mess.”
“That was my filing system! The letters I’ve read go on
the table, noteworthy letters on the floor under the desk. The
ones I haven’t read are on the fireplace next to the pine
cones…Where have they gone?”
My alphabetized books were spattered with used
matches and sealing wax. Shed feathers littered my
collection of old broadsheets. Tern’s gowns covered the
chaise longue where I like to lounge; dress patterns were
taped on the posts of our bed. Her underclothes were
scattered in mounds. She had even disturbed the dusty
table on which stood my precious distilling apparatus,
although I had reassembled the glass retorts and
condenser solely for the production of barley sugars.
Tern wore a bustier of chartreuse-green satin; its
pleated sleeves wreathed her small black wings. At her
throat, her wide jet heirloom necklace looked like a collar.
“This is all the rage,” she purred. “Well, I say it is.”
“How do I unfasten it?” Her bare shoulders made her all
the more tempting. I tried to undo her hair but her usual
loose dark waves were pulled back into a complicated
chignon.
My wife’s town was reduced to brick shards and ashy
rubble by the Great Fire of 2015. Of her black stone manor
house only one single outside wall still stood. Slug-trail
slicks of molten glass hardened from its pointed arched
windows; lead roofs lay in solidified pools. The stumps of
scrubby trees in her woodland were burned flat to the
ground. Every building and foundry in Wrought was
destroyed, none of her possessions escaped the flames.
Wrought was her birthplace and the scene of our
honeymoon; Tern now aspired to rebuild it completely.
Luckily, her designer fashions sold well on the Hacilith catwalks
and as far as she was concerned Wrenn joining the
Circle was an opportunity for trendsetting. She caressed
my wings as I peeled off my tight trousers and changed
clothes. Long wings are considered the most attractive,
and as feathers need a lot of preening, Awians look after
their high-maintenance bodies with care.
“I didn’t see the duel,” Tern said. “I needed the time to
get ready. I heard from Rayne that the Challenger gave
Serein a good nick to remember him by.”
“It was a first-blood duel,” I said. “Those were the rules,
so Wrenn had to.”
“I hear that Wrenn is scrumptious,” she commented. I
shrugged. I seated myself in front of the mirror and let her
brush my black hair that reaches to my waist, removing all
the tangles caused by flying. It was agony. When she
finished I crossed feathers through it like windmill sails and
underlined my eyes.
“Listen.” Tern raised a finger at the clatter of coaches
vying for space in the courtyard far below. “I hear some
ladies inviting themselves to his reception. Those can’t be
reporters or they would never have managed to sneak past
Tawny at the gate.”
“We have an hour. I’ve been on my own in Scree for
weeks. I want you.”
Tern pulled away—so as not to ruin the painstaking work
of art she has made of herself. I gave her the full benefit of
my cat-eyed look that she found so exotic. “We should clear
a space to sit down…Perhaps lie down.”
“Come and join the clamor,” she said.
Tern, you and your diamond self-sufficiency.
Unlike the stately homes of Awia, the Castle’s sarsen
outer bastions were thick, sturdy and unassailable. The
Castle’s purpose was defense of the entire Fourlands; it
protected every manor, growing gatehouses and curtain
walls while they bloomed balconies and arched dance
halls, ornate turrets and painted bartizans.
The ground around the Castle was thrown into immense
earth-works to ward off Insects. A channel of the Moren
River was directed into a double moat around its manmade
hill. The twin exterior walls that ran around the
Castle’s eight sides were strengthened by huge cylindrical
smooth stone-faced towers decorated with crenellations
and with shallow pointed roofs. Along the walls flags rustled
and furled; the heraldry of the Fourlands’ current sixteen
manors and two townships. Fifty pennants flew under the
Castle’s sun, each with the sign that an Eszai had chosen
for his or her position.
The Emperor’s palace fitted inside the Castle like the
flesh in a nutshell. Its marble towers stretched up from
inside the impenetrable curtain wall. The Throne Room
spire was the tallest; farmers who worked the demesne
saw the sun glint on its pinnacle and they knew the Emperor
occupied his throne beneath.
As Tern and I walked from our austere tower we saw
only glimpses through the cold fog; its attendant hush muted
every sound, drawing all the luster from the palace. We saw
lights shining behind sash windows and the oculus ovals
made to look like portholes of the Mare’s Run wing where
Mist had her rooms. A stone-balustraded balcony ran along
the length of its top floor, like the gallery on a ship. The
Mare’s Run was built between the outer walls and the
palace five hundred years ago; it filled some of the space
where gardens used to be. Several other buildings were
shaped to fit into the western side of the gap: the dining hall
and a theater with its scalloped bronze dome topped by a
white wood lantern-turret.
I did not take the rooms owing to me as Messenger in
the palace’s Carillon Court when I joined the Circle. I
preferred to move into the unused apartment at the top of
the Northwest Tower on the outer wall because I found it
easy to launch myself from its height. My window gave a
view for a hundred kilometers of the river, the playing fields
and white goalposts; red dock stalks sticking up from the
green rough ground of Binnard meadow. Tern has never
persuaded me to move back into the palace.
Tern shivered and I reached out with a wing to give her a
pat on the shoulder. Tern’s wings are much smaller than
mine, as are those of all Awians, because although they are
the only winged people, they are flightless. I am the sole
person ever to be able to fly. As I am half Rhydanne my
light, long-limbed build and mountainlander’s fitness, when
added to Awian ancestry on my father’s side, gave me my
ability.
Hand in hand Tern and I walked down an enclosed
passage over a flying buttress that spanned from the
outside wall to the palace. It was a narrow, vertiginous
bridge that soared over the roof of the Great Hall, stretching
thin and tenuous in the air. Below us, we could only see the
glow of lamps in niches outside the hall and on four stone
steps that rose to double doors with opulent paneling. The
deeply carved decoration inside its triangular pediment
was even more ornate: two flamboyant white Awian eagles
flanked the Castle’s sun emblem.
Our buttress walkway crossed above the head of the
marble statue that topped the pediment, a slender woman
bearing a sword and shield, her luxuriously feathered wings
outstretched. Sometimes I land on the roof, providing a
sudden perspective—she is twice my size. The hall was
built by architects from Micawater, and Lightning is the only
Eszai who would remember what the statue actually
symbolizes. It could be anything: freedom, justice, the wet
dreams of a hundred generations of Awian adolescents.
As I walked with Tern I thought the whole building
seemed smug, as if it had soaked up the atmosphere of
too many whispered indiscretions at formal parties and
was simply waiting for the next.
We descended to a small cloister. A colonnaded
corridor ran around the misty lawn; we walked along two
sides. Outside the Throne Room its stone ceiling was
elaborately carved with fan vaulting; bosses hung down like
leafy stalactites. Instead of curtains the drapes that framed
the Throne Room portal were sculpted from amber.
The Throne Room seemed even more massive after the
narrow narthex. Tern and I walked in down the long aisle
past the screen and bowed to the Emperor. The Emperor
San was first to be present, according to his custom. This
was an important occasion, so he wore the tall spired
platinum crown that Awia presented to him when the First
Circle was formed. San normally wore no crown at all. We
settled on one of the front benches, because they were
closest to the sunburst throne and I wanted to hear what
Wrenn had to say.
On this side of the screen, the benches faced each other
and were gently stepped as in an auditorium. I watched in
silence as the other Eszai walked in and gradually filled the
seats. Most of the women gazed at Lightning, but some
looked at me. I doubt that I cut a fine figure at court, since
the fashion’s long gone for looking pale and disheveled, but
there’s no denying the effect I have on them. I may not
command the battlefield but I can put the best spin on the
outcome. I might not be a keen huntsman but I can gut a
weekend newspaper. At sparring, I prefer words to swords,
and I used to shoot drugs not arrows, but I’m free of all that
now. Wrenn entered the far end of the Throne Room, tiny
below the huge rose window. It was symbolically important
that he came in alone. He looked all around nervously and
jumped as the doors closed behind him with an enormous
crash. Then he began to walk, stiffly and obviously aching
all over, toward us down the length of the scarlet carpet that
was far more terrifying than any fencing piste. The Imperial
Fyrd archers on the gallery with their pulley compound bows
watched him carefully.
“That’s the new Swordsman,” I whispered to Tern. “This
ordeal will be worse for him than the duel.” My initiation was
an awful trial. “Before this is over, he may well wish he’d
died out there.”
She leaned forward to watch him. “It depends how much
he has to hide.”
Wrenn passed us slowly, giving the curious eyes of all
the Eszai time to take him in. His short hair was wet from
the bath or the steam room. His clothes were clean, but the
same dull blue with thread holes on his sleeve where his
fyrd patch used to be. He only looked straight ahead to the
Emperor’s dais—though not, of course, to the Emperor
himself. He reached the platform’s lowest step and knelt.
“My lord Emperor,” he announced. His voice gave way.
He tried again: “I humbly petition to join the Circle and I
claim the title Serein, having beaten Gio Ami Serein in a
fair Challenge.” He thought for a second, eyes aside like an
actor trying to remember his lines—but also because it
meant he didn’t look at San. “I intend to serve you and the
Fourlands every minute of my life.”
San regarded Wrenn and the members of the Circle in
silence. Even at this distance I felt the scrutiny of his
incredibly clear and intelligent gaze. San always wore white
—a tabard with panels of colorless jewels over a plain robe
that reached to the floor. The pointed toes of his flat white
shoes projected from under them. The style of San’s
clothes had remained the same since the year he created
the former Circle, four hundred years after god left. His
whole body was covered except for his thin and ringless
hands.
The sunburst throne also remained a symbol of
permanence. An ancient broadsword and circular shield
hung from its back. They were a keen reminder that if we
Eszai finally fail him in the Fourlands’ struggle against the
Insects, San will again direct the battle himself. In the
Castle’s stables a destrier is always reserved for him,
never ridden, never used.
San rose and approached the front of the dais. “You
have selected yourself for the Circle. You have humbly
placed your talents at the world’s disposal. I thank you.
Every successful Challenger must complete one last
observance to become immortal. You must tell me
everything about your life so far. Relate all that you think is
significant from your earliest memory to the events that
brought you here. You will not lie. My Circle will hear your
testimony but they will neither interrupt nor judge. Nothing
you reveal will ever be repeated. Only a refusal to speak will
jeopardize your entrance into the Circle, not what you say.
You have already won.
“The ceremony continues with your reception afterward:
for one hour the other members of my Circle may question
you as they wish. You will always reply with the truth; they
will neither criticize nor condemn. They are not permitted to
repeat your words at any time or place. If anyone ever
reveals what he or she learns, he or she will be rejected
from the Circle. During the following hour you can question
the other immortals about themselves. Likewise they are
obliged to tell the truth and you must never disclose what
they say.”
It’s the only chance you’ll ever have, I added to myself.
San looked expectant. Wrenn hesitated. He suffered in
the intense silence, and so began, “My name is Wrenn
Culmish. I’m…I am from Summerday bastide town. Insects
killed my mother when I was an infant and my father brought
me up. He was a fyrd soldier given land for his service, and
he taught me to fence…I surpassed him in skill when I was
fifteen…But he proudly organized bouts with the other
townsmen. I learned from them and soon I always won. So I
had a faint dream of trying for the Circle.
“The year after, a soldier turned highwayman picked a
duel with my father, who knew his identity. The robber
waited on the road for him on the way back from the pub.
My father did not return. I searched for him—I never
stopped—but three days later the river washed his
damaged and dirty body onto the sandy bank right in front
of the governor’s house. It was so badly beaten that we
could not tell how he died.
“I borrowed some rich clothes to disguise myself and I
went looking for the highwayman. I rode up and down the
Lowespass Road until he held me up. I disarmed the swine
in a minute and he knelt, begging for mercy. Before I
handed him over to the magistrate—he was hanged—I…I
cut him…I took him apart. Until he told what he had done to
my poor father.
“The first night he buried the body in the woods outside
town. He could only scrape a shallow hole because tree
roots blocked the soil. The following day he fretted that a
passerby might find the grave and unearth his crime. So the
second night, in raw weather, he dug it up, carried the body
to the Miroir moor and buried it in a deep hole. But then the
idea tormented him that the moorland peat would preserve
it forever and the disturbed grass would reveal the grave.
So the following night he dug it up again. He threw it into the
river from the top of a rocky outcrop. The river’s flow
brought the broken remains straight to Governor
Merganser’s door…I am sorry for what I did to the
highwayman…”
San made no comment, so Wrenn continued. “Anyway…
when I knew that I was alone, I decided to travel south. If I
had stayed in Summerday I would still be there now,
gradually forgetting everything I dreamed of. I went to
Tanager and joined the ranks of the Select Fyrd. I helped
clear Insects from Rachiswater and the land around the
River Oscen. I conducted myself well, I’m proud to say, and
when Skua was killed I was made division captain. Then I
saw the future stretching out, always the same. I was
thwarted. I sparred with all-comers. I gave the gentry
scratches but they came back wanting more, unable to
believe they had lost to a smallholder’s son. In the end I
beat them all. Well, yes, I resent them…But that doesn’t
matter now, does it? I’ve done something they could never
do.
“My dreams of the Circle returned. Thank god, my skill
rather than my background is what matters to the Castle, I
reckoned; there’s a way out of this circus. For five years
solid I spent all my off-duty time training. I was full of doubt
and hope. I thought I was a dupe and a wretch to consider
fighting the Swordsman. I nursed the idea for years and did
nothing about it, then one night on a mad impulse I sent a
letter to him. He chose to fight using rapier and dagger,
which is my forte…Um…” Wrenn’s speech filled the hall
and it seemed to him that his voice droned on. “I am twentyfive
years old,” he whispered, looking at the backs of his
hands. He stuttered and fell quiet. He realized that in a few
minutes he would be twenty-five forever and their
appearance would never change.
“Answer my questions,” said the Emperor. “Have you
ever fought Insects alone?”
“Yes, my lord. I’ve killed Insects one at a time in the
Rachiswater amphitheater and hunted a couple found
lurking by the town.”
“Have you ever felt fear?”
Wrenn hesitated, wondering what the best answer was. I
knew that doubt well; in my initiation I had to confess all
kinds of crimes to the whole Circle. I saw from his panicked
expression that we seemed more forbidding and the
Throne Room door looked tempting. I thought he was going
to make a dash for it.
“Yes…” he said eventually. “I have never been as
frightened as I am right now. But I master my fear.”
San asked, “Do you have a partner to bring into the
Circle?”
Wrenn shook his head. He tried to smooth over his
exhaustion with confidence but it could still be seen like the
shape of wings under velvet. “I’ve made no time in my life
for girlfriends.”
There is no way you can lie with the Emperor’s gaze on
you; it’s impossible to hide anything. Wrenn squirmed
uncertainly and stared at the floor. “You want me to tell? I
spent my nights in the brothels instead. Well, it’s easier. I’ve
been planning this Challenge for years; I couldn’t afford the
time to have relationships.”
We all privately remembered how terrible it is to speak
alone in that vast space and felt sympathetic. I had
witnessed the ceremony as an Eszai three times before,
firstly when Tern joined at my wedding, and most recently
when Ata Dei became Mist. I glanced at Mist; she looked
shifty, probably recalling how during her initiation she tried
to lie but instead found herself confessing that she
murdered her husband for his place in the Circle.
San stated, “You swear to serve me, in my service to the
Fourlands, in god’s name, for as long as I give you life.”
“I swear,” said Wrenn, forcefully.
The Emperor raised his right hand, bony fingers and
prominent joints. “Come forward.”
Wrenn climbed the dais steps, wondering at the great
transformation about to take place. I could practically hear
him thinking: this is it. He braced himself for immortality as
if it would burn through him. It’s nothing like that. It doesn’t
hurt, in fact when it happened to me I could feel no
sensation.
The Emperor extended his hand to Wrenn. Wrenn
grasped and pressed his lips to it for a second. The Circle
took him in.
Wrenn looked up finally to the Emperor’s eyes. San
announced, “Now you are the Swordsman. Your name is
Serein.”
A smile broke slowly over Serein’s face. He dropped to
his knees at San’s feet, in silence. Then as if he could not
bear such close proximity to the Emperor and aware that
the rite was over, Serein quietly backed down from the
dais, turned and passed the benches. We all stood as he
passed. Lightning and Rayne glanced at each other; they
had felt the ripple in the Circle as San made the exchange:
one out, one in. After the transfer they’d feel Wrenn’s
presence as slightly different from Gio’s, like a new person
joining an inhabited room. Serein walked down the aisle,
seeming to diminish in size, and left the Throne Room by
himself. Lightning would join him outside; he made it his
responsibility to greet new immortals and give them some
much-needed advice. One by one we bowed to the
Emperor, who was always last to leave the court, and
followed Serein. As I passed through the door I grabbed
two pocketfuls of confetti and glitter, swept up my hands
and threw it over our heads.
A babble of a hundred conversations hung in the air of the
Great Hall. I wanted to climb up to my rafter where I
customarily sit, legs dangling, to watch the party. But I
couldn’t do that with my arm around Tern. I led her through a
dozen conversations.
“Is he here yet? I want to meet the boy. I’ve questions to
ask him…”
“He’s twenty-five, bless. How rare it is to be so adept so
young.”
“Try the smoked venison, it’s excellent.”
“Eleonora? Busy revitalizing the kingdom. She’s good,
by god, I only hear praise.”
“But the court’s full of scandal. What she does with
chambermaids, I—”
“‘For an Eszai everything is easy.’ Ha! How can they
think that?”
“Look! There’s Comet. He’s back! Hais-gelet, Jant?”
The Emperor was seated at the high table on a raised
stage. He did not touch the feast before him. Tern swayed
her skirt a little to the music—a young lad slammed away at
the piano, lissome women in jasper red played fiddle reels.
Confetti on the carpet, candelabra; people leaned on the
oak paneling, kissed under the arches. Frost was building
a cantilevered bridge out of forks and salt cellars. Rayne
and Hayl played chess with marzipan pieces on an
enormous pink and yellow cake shaped like a chess board.
What platters and plates and bowls of food! There were
sugared almonds, edible stars, spiced wine, iced wine,
spring water, wheat beer and cream liqueur. There were
flambéed swordfish, sliced lengthways on silver trenchers.
There were packets of Cobalt cigarillos on the table for
those who wanted them. Boar pies—speciality of Cathee,
charcoal-roast mushrooms, fat onions, saffron rice from
Litanee, steak that juices up your mouth. There was
peppered asparagus and kale from the Fescue fields;
squash, tomatoes, baked potatoes cracked and oozing
butter, Shivel cheeses like crumbly drums with fat blue
veins. There was fruit: glazed, glacé, covered in cream.
There were warm loaves, soft inside and smelling
sensual, lobster claws pickled from the Peregrine coast,
poached pike from the river. Northern exotics like pinnacle
rabbits spirited in from Carniss, eels from Brandoch,
Awndyn salmon and sundry seafood.
East into Awia, the spices were wilder—fenugreek and
turmeric dhal, moist cake with nutmeg and cinnamon
sultanas. The best coffee from Micawater, prime grapes
plump with juice, olives like slick jewels, floury chorizo
sausages in net bags, artichokes you had to be Awian to
understand, pizza, prosciutto, ciabatta and more olives.
Tanager crispy duck, all kinds of little birds, larks in
pastry, magglepies, dumstruks and starlings caught on lime
and cooked on the branch because Awians consider
falconry insulting. There were peacocks couchant looking
haughty with their skin and fantails replaced. There were
crackling hogs with grafted wings and bemused
expressions. Bustards were stuffed with turkeys stuffed with
pheasant stuffed with partridge stuffed with quails stuffed
with chestnut—cutting into it revealed layers of meat like
tree rings and was more than I can face. A swan glided up
the high table, by gingerbread with silver metallic icing that
the Emperor quite ignored.
Eat, eat, eat. Immortality in gluttony. Watch out for
checkmate on the marzipan cake!
Lightning noticed us and remarked to Serein, who was
gorging on sliced beef and fruit sauce in a wood bowl. His
chest was broad and his arms well-defined muscle. He held
himself tensely, trying not to dissipate under the tide of
strange things, expressive people. Serein’s regime of
training had not prepared him for the duel’s aftermath—he
was the center of attention but he still felt alone. If he wished
himself back in Summerday now, he would feel much worse
when he bore the responsibility of command on the
battlefield.
Aside from his skill in archery Lightning has cultivated
many social talents. It was said of him that if he was in the
building no woman would ever have to open a door. He
was dapper in black tie and a raised-and-slashed celadon
silk shirt, his wings sticking out the back. Some people say
that wings have become smaller over millennia because
they can’t be used and as Awians, especially nonaristocratic
ones, intermarry with humans. Whatever the
truth, Lightning’s wings were distinctly larger than Wrenn’s.
“Serein Wrenn,” Lightning said, “may I introduce you to
our Messenger and Lady Tern? Comet can fly; I think that’s
because he takes things too lightly. He will carry your letters
anywhere in the Fourlands, and will help if you need
translations, so don’t hesitate to ask.”
The frontier boy bowed, steering back his sword hanger
with his left hand and staring at me. I tolerated the usual
scrutiny. People don’t notice the subtleties straight away
but they find my leggy proportions jarring. I shook his hand.
“I’m impressed—nobody can be taught to fight like that.”
“Comet Jant Shira. Lady Tern. It’s an honor to meet you,”
he said, looking as if he meant every word of it. His eyes
were so wide I could see all the whites around the blue
irises. He was wired on anxiety. He could not put a foot
outside the narrow sphere of etiquette for fear that he would
say or do something dreadful and be rejected from his
hard-won place in the Circle, without ever knowing why. His
fear was unfounded because only another Challenger could
replace him, but he was almost frozen by the manners he
imposed on himself.
A servant passed by, carrying a salver of champagne
flutes. I took the whole tray from her, balanced it on one
hand. I swept it low in front of Serein. “Take a drink.”
He declined, uncomfortably.
“Go on,” said Tern.
“I don’t drink,” he said, reddening.
“No, really? Tonight of all nights!” I pushed the tray
toward him. “One glass of champers to celebrate?”
“Sorry, no, Shira—I’m not used to it. If I took a drink now,
I could never rise at six to practice.”
After a duel like that, who would anyway? “Sleep till
midday,” I said. “Your first day as an Eszai. That’s what I
did. I sprayed champagne everywhere; I love being soaked
to the skin in it.”
Lightning was enjoying this. “The Swordsman doesn’t
drink alcohol, so leave him alone.”
“Shira, if I slip up and lose my edge a Challenger will get
the better of me.”
Every time he said “Shira” I bit my teeth together and
they were starting to hurt. I said, “Call me Jant. The name
Shira really signifies I belong in the lower caste among the
Rhydanne. It means ‘Born out of wedlock’—I can’t translate
it better than that.” Well actually I can, because it means
“bastard,” but I’m not putting ideas in his head.
Wrenn had caused offense already and he was
appalled. His face moved awkwardly; he was overaware of
its every feature. “I’m sorry.”
“Worry not.” I waved a hand. I make my body language
expressive to compensate for the difficulty most people
have in reading my cat eyes.
Wrenn shuffled his feet as if they took up too much
space on the carpet. I wanted to tell him, I understand how
daunting this is, but lighten up, you won’t be out on the
street tomorrow. You’ll still be here, immortal, staring at the
backs of your hands like a fool.
He was frantically searching for something to say. Every
word sounded loud and momentous to him; he picked them
carefully, knowing they would be permanently impressed on
his memory. I remember when I was in his position, in my
reception when I was surrounded by Eszai—I had heard of
every single one before through tales or monuments to their
work. They were all here, in one place, and they talked to
each other! I had been a novelty to them. I tried to get to
know them all in one night, but the Eszai I most wanted to
speak to was the Comet I had displaced. I practically
pinned Rayne against a column and gabbled to her
excitedly about chemistry and the latest research into Insect
behavior. I told her far too much about my past, without
realizing she understood, and that in describing the slums
of Hacilith I had reminded her too much of hers.
I could offer Wrenn advice and he might bring something
new and interesting to the Castle. I began to understand
why Lightning took newcomers rapidly under his wing. I
said, “Serein is your stage name; you’ll be grateful for it.
You can make Serein whoever you want and Wrenn, your
real self, will be safe.”
Serein glanced across the hall and suddenly gaped at a
gossipy cluster of extremely beautiful girls. They saw him
watching and wafted their plumed fans, parading
themselves. They were mortals—Zascai—only fleeting
names; they stood on the outside smiling, craving to be
chosen and drawn in. Tern eyed them stonily. “That’s just
the beginning. Next time, when word gets around, there’ll
be crowds.”
“Look,” said Lightning urgently. “Be careful of those
ladies. You need to learn how to discourage them.”
“Have fun,” I said vaguely. He could choose a different
gold digger every night; no need for whores.
Tern snorted. “Seduction’s their job, Wrenn,” she
warned. “They’ve studied it. If you give them an opportunity
they’ll eat you alive. They will try anything to marry into the
Circle.”
“They only want immortality,” Lightning added. “Don’t
wed the first one you meet just because she shows interest
in you. You should wait for one who loves you for yourself.”
The eldest girl was about twenty and she had a driven
look that no makeup could mask. She was hungry for the
chance to peel away from her rivals and address Wrenn
alone; a social climber eager to find footholds in the flaws
of his character. An expert seductress, Eszai-good, if there
had been a place in the Circle for seduction. She had
started young and become an expert in her teens. Well, that
kind of dedication was necessary to win the ultimate prize.
Tern wagged her finger at the Swordsman. “For god’s
sake don’t tell them anything. You’ll be reading it in the
gossip columns for the next six months.” She smiled and I
pulled her closer. She instinctively knows how to flirt with
anyone. The problem with having a trophy wife is that you
have to keep rewinning the trophy.
“There is Tornado,” Lightning said. “Wrenn, come and let
me introduce you to the Circle’s Strongman.” Wrenn found
himself shepherded expertly between the dancers, who
turned to glimpse him at every step, so he was always the
center of a space surrounded with people, all smiles and
for the most part slightly taller than him.
“That golden boy is going to get his orange juice spiked
if he’s not careful,” I muttered.
Tern giggled and curtsied. “May I have this dance?”
We danced. Her hand draped on my whipcord upper arm.
My hand clasped below her shoulder blade on the silk,
basquewired like a lampshade. My lace shirt cuffs hid my
fingerless gloves. She followed my steps in quick time like
a snappy reflection. We had practiced this; we felt good. I
felt great, only Tern can keep up with me when I go so
swiftly. And underneath all her clothes she’s naked. She
was giddy already from the room spinning about us. All
those faces. Our bodies together, shoulders apart; my hips
rubbed just above her waist. “I’ll lead, you can spin.”
“Easy!” Her skirt twirled; she was laughing.
The music ended; Tern leaned forward, hands on knees,
little cleavage in danger of escaping. “Oh, Jant,” she said
breathlessly in her carnal voice. I rubbed my cheek on her
cheek and kissed her eyelids. I kissed her lips, and deeply
her mouth.
We were still snogging when Mist Ata appeared and
nodded curtly. She carried a candle in a holder and her
forehead was creased with worry. “Jant, come with me.”
“Later, Mist,” I murmured.
“This can’t wait any longer.”
I disentangled myself from Tern and placed a finger on
her nose. “Soon,” I promised.
“Soon,” she repeated, as if from a distance.
I followed the Sailor. “You were brave to ask San for
leave,” she said. “Mind you, I could tell you needed a
holiday.”
“I was improving my flying. And besides, no one else
ever goes to Darkling so I bring back news for the
Emperor.”
“Yeah, right. Lucky, lucky; I haven’t had any leave for five
hundred years.”
At the quiet end of the hall Lightning waited by the
camera obscura, leaning against the door with his big arms
folded. Mist beckoned us inside.
“Oh, so you found a hiding place to avoid Wrenn’s
questions?” I said.
Mist replied, “Jant, you don’t even know the type of
reason why you’re here.”
The camera obscura was a tiny, black-painted room with
a pinhole in the door that shone a circular image of the hall
onto the far wall. The entire party was pictured inverted
there—minutely detailed figures crossing the lit screen. I
examined it. There was the tiny piano and musicians
upside down. Miniature people waltzed past a section of
the long trestle table. A blurred servant trudged behind
them with a leather blackjack jug. I squinted to see the
Emperor below the sun shield in the center. I spotted Tern;
she was talking animatedly to someone whose image
stepped forward onto the screen. I contorted trying to view
them the right way up. It was Tornado, an unmistakable
giant of a man. Tern put her hands up to his chest. He bent
down; she kissed him lightly on the cheek. His hands
embraced her hips, far too closely in my opinion, and
together they danced off the edge of the projection.
Oh, no. I wanted to run straight to Tern, but Mist blocked
the doorway, setting her candle on the floor. Her shadow
hid the screen.
“Can we get this over with?” I said, annoyed. I craned to
see the figures now dancing on Mist’s blouse and face. My
wife was out there, chasséing with a man who had enough
muscle in one bicep to make three warriors.
Lightning said, “At least choose a more comfortable lair
for your conspiracies.”
Mist said, “Jant, what would you say if a land existed far
out in the sea about which the Empire knows nothing?”
“I’d say that if you want philosophical debate in a stuffy
cupboard you can ask another Eszai. It’s not like me to
miss a party. Especially important parties.”
Mist delved in her shoulder bag and brought out a thick
book with crinkled pages. Her hands were pockmarked
from her pre-Castle life as a milkmaid and butcher’s
delivery girl on Grass Isle, rowing her skiff every day to
deliver cuts of beef to the islanders and cutting remarks to
the sailors who wolf-whistled.
She gave me the book. “This is the log of the Stormy
Petrel. I have discovered an island, named Tris, reached
three months out of Awndyn harbor on an east-southeast
bearing.”
I said, “Where? Three months? No, that’s not possible;
nothing’s that far away.” I glanced at Lightning. “You’re
being very quiet.”
“I’m not going with you, Ata,” he said.
“Going where?” I exclaimed.
Mist said, “The Emperor requests that you and Lightning
sail with me to the Island of Tris.”
“No!…Look, slow down, this is a lot to take in. San
knows of this island?”
“Yes. I returned from my voyage last month. I kept it very
confidential though I wanted to sail in triumph into port. I told
San everything and he has ordered a second expedition
San everything and he has ordered a second expedition
that you two must join.”
“But…I don’t believe you. My duty’s here; I have lots of
work to do in Wrought. You won’t need a messenger on a
caravel; yes, I could be of more use working for you here. I
—”
“You hate ships, we know. Tough.”
“Ships are fine as long as I don’t have to be aboard
them.” I caught a glimpse of the projection, on which
numerous Eszai by the long table were asking Wrenn
questions, but I couldn’t see Tern. I was sure that I was
being made the butt of a practical joke. I tried to give the
impression that I was amused but was willing to see how
far I could push Mist’s invention. “So what’s it like on this
island?”
Mist handed me the notebook. It began with the
coordinates of the Awndyn coastline, the edge of the chart
off which she had sailed. Her round feminine handwriting
encircled a sketch map: “The Island named Tris by its
inhabitants,” I read, and: “The town drawn from the harbor.
The natives say ‘Capharnaum,’ this must be the town’s
name? Another settlement due south, name unknown.
Triangulated height of mountain approx. 3000m.”
“Natives?” I said. “You mean the island is populated?”
“Aye.”
“Who by? Plainslanders?”
“Some are human, some are winged people, living
together in the town. As far as I could see there is no Insect
infestation whatsoever.”
The island was shaped roughly like the head of an
Insect, being rounded with short, spiny peninsulae. Mist had
recorded the inlets and promontories with customary
precision. The land rose up a gentle concave slope, poured
off a sizable river, and then soared into a massive peak. No
details were marked, and the east coast was just a dotted
line. “I didn’t sail that far, it’s only an estimate,” she
explained. “I was interested in the natives. I couldn’t
understand their language; that’s why I need you, Jant. I
wrote some of the words down, see?”
“Can I study this?” I said enthusiastically. I would soon
learn if it was a practical joke or not.
“That’s just what I want you to do! If the knowledge alone
doesn’t satisfy you, there’s more than enough rum to wash
it down with. Their accent gave me quite a shock. I think the
corsairs used some of those words, who infested the
Moren delta when I was a girl.”
I leafed through the logbook. Mist’s entries for each day
were brief: “June 5. Distance traveled, 240 kilometers, lat.
29°S long. 129°E. Fresh gales and cloudy, good visibility.
Sounding 100m, black sand with small shells. Ate a number
of flying fish.”
“Flying fish?”
“Yes. And I have seen a place where oysters grow on the
branches of trees.”
I shrugged. Well, why not? “You left Stormy Petrel stuck
in Oriole River.”
“Aye. Frost’s company raised her. I spent last year
refitting her for a deep-sea voyage.”
Lightning spoke: “There have been explorations before.
Lightning spoke: “There have been explorations before.
They found nothing.”
“Saker, the ocean is a big place.”
“It’s not possible,” I said finally. “I don’t believe it.”
“Where the fuck do you think I’ve been for the last six
months?”
“Keeping your head down and escaping
embarrassment!”
Mist gave me a candid look, which was a sure sign not
to trust her. “I have but recently rejoined the Circle, and this
venture will prove my worth to those who would Challenge
me or mutiny. This is not just another Grass Isle project
seeking Shearwater’s Treasure. I’m serious! There’s
nothing for me on the mainland, is there, since I lost
Peregrine?”
Lightning looked at her mildly without replying. He
opened the door a chink because we were all starting to
suffocate, and muted music seeped in from the party
outside. I lowered my voice. “How did you know which
direction to sail?”
Mist said, “By chance. Yes. Well, there might be many
—”
“No, there are not!” Lightning was quietly furious. “God
founded the Castle to protect the world. If the Castle
doesn’t know about this island then how could we fulfill our
purpose? Insects might run rampant over it and we’d be
none the wiser.”
“It might not fit with your ideology but all the same it’s
there.”
I thought, maybe the Fourlands isn’t the only land and
I thought, maybe the Fourlands isn’t the only land and
maybe we’re not the only guardians god left behind. I
examined the scale. It was big—four hundred kilometers in
circumference. “It isn’t an island like Grass Isle at all, more
like a chunk of Darkling out in the ocean. Tell us, what’s in
the town?”
“I don’t know. I didn’t leave Petrel.”
“Convenient.”
“I wanted more than anything to put ashore! We had
weathered storms with ten-meter-high waves. Petrel lost
half her caulking and cladding because Awndyn’s
shipbuilders are so shoddy. You would not believe the
trouble I’ve had with the unions. Her sails were torn, the
rudder splintered. Most of my men were sick, some with
scurvy, and we were desperate for fresh water. I took on
supplies from the natives’ canoes but I didn’t land because
the governors of the town didn’t permit me. They have many
governors.”
“What?”
“I’m telling you it’s true. People came out in big canoes
and surrounded us. I sketched them, there.” Stormy Petrel
dwarfed the canoes, looking like a goose with her goslings,
and none of the vessels had details since Mist was a poor
artist.
I crouched down in the cramped space on the parquet
floor by Mist’s feet. The sea was not my element; boats
bring on a phobia that I can never rid myself of completely.
My fear was reasonable because if I ever tried to swim, the
weight of waterlogged feathers would drown me. I also had
a sneaking idea that everybody was acting and deeper lies
were readily being believed. “I’m not going. I might be the
only Eszai who can crack this language but you can choose
mortals from the university who have just as good a
chance.”
“Don’t mistake me; I hardly want you there, Jant. The last
thing I need is dead weight and winged liabilities on my
ship. If I had my way, I’d be doing this on my own! But San
picked you two from the whole Circle to accompany me
and we’re obliged to obey. Here’s his written command.”
She passed Lightning and me small envelopes with the
familiar crimson insignia. “If you want to appeal, go ahead,”
she added.
“I will,” said Lightning grimly. “I would love to see the
result of my investment and your method of operation. I
would like to be the first from the Fourlands to trade with
Tris, but I am repairing Micawater and I should be there.”
“You knew? Damn,” I moaned, beginning to have the
feeling that the conspiracy was against me.
“Yes, although I wish otherwise. The Melowne, the supply
ship to be taken on this voyage, belongs to me. I have the
Queen’s permission to send it so that Stormy Petrel’s crew
will not suffer hunger again. And in return I have a quartershare
in whatever goods we bring back. But that doesn’t
mean I must accompany the expedition, Mist. I will be a
passenger on your ship if the Emperor decrees it. No more,
no less.”
Lightning was rebuilding Micawater to look exactly the
same as it did before the Insects damaged it five years
ago. He obsessed about every detail in the restoration of
his palace outside the town, believing it an inviolable duty to
his family. He wanted to fulfill the trust they had placed in
him to conserve the palace: he matched masonry, sourced
silks, kept both its wings as symmetrical as the day it was
first completed. I thought the fact he was tinkering with it
and not helping Tornado and Queen Eleonora clear the
remaining Paperlands that the Insects had built in northern
Awia showed he had time to spare.
Mist addressed him: “You can’t sulk for a whole
generation. Do you want your world view to become
obsolete and eccentric like the portraits that hang in your
house? Jant, listen to this: Lightning’s family portraits have
been repainted many times, about every two hundred years
once they start to fade. The artists try to be accurate but
scarcely perceptible changes creep in accidentally,
flattering trends to the ideal of the era. Next time, those
alterations are copied along with the rest and new ones are
made. His portraits are as idealized as his memories.
Saker, how can you tell what’s real and what isn’t when you
rely on the past? If you don’t want to know of new
discoveries, how long will you last as an Eszai? Suppose
the island has better bows than Awia? A better type of
wood?”
“Without Insects to inspire them, I doubt it. Let them
come with their Challenges.”
The camera obscura was growing even stuffier and I
was gasping for air. I nudged the door wide, looking for my
chance to escape. Serein Wrenn caught sight of us and
strolled over with a limber gait. I wondered what he thought,
seeing three Eszai in an alcove. When everything else at
his party was so perfect, we stood out as a great anomaly.
“What are you talking about?”
“We beg your pardon,” said Lightning. “This is a private
discussion.”
Wrenn bowed and was about to leave us to it, but Mist
sized him up. “No, wait…What time is it? We have to tell
the truth for an hour.” I could virtually hear her mind
calculating. She took in his shirt buttoned down the left side
showing his strong torso off to the best advantage, his
small round stand-up collar and sharp-styled hair, the worn
cherry-red leather thigh boots with the tops folded over his
knees.
Out came her travel-worn notebook again. “You need
experience. You’ll find this interesting,” she said, and set
her plans on him like wolves.
The others blocked my view of the party, so I turned
again to the pinhole image. The beam angled by the halfopen
door illuminated the wall next to me, unfocused and
with washed-out contrast. Fuzzy figures rippled over the
uneven surface, so small that their activities looked quaint
but nonetheless unsettling. I checked them one by one:
Gayle exchanging a few words with the Emperor, Frost
crammed into a ball gown and wearing steel-toed boots. I
couldn’t see Tern. Where was she? Why wouldn’t Mist let
me out? I tried to edge away from the stifling corner but
Mist stood firm, talking hotly into my face, toes pressing
against my toes, only the logbook between me and her
ample breasts. Tern’s figure must be in my shadow, but
though I inched forward I couldn’t see her waltzing on the
wall. The perfume on Mist’s long white hair tickled my
sinuses; there was also the pong of Wrenn’s gravy breath.
His shoulder was up against mine and the bright love of
adventure in his eyes would enthuse the entire fyrd. It was
even worse to think I would be on the ship with him.
“…so the Empire must explore Tris,” Mist concluded
eventually. Lightning glared; he rightly thought that we were
making unnecessary problems for ourselves.
“Are you worried?” she asked Wrenn.
“Nothing worries me,” he said.
“Nothing!” I said. “Poor lad, there’s quite a lot of it out
there.”
He stared at me. “I haven’t even unpacked my rucksack.
I’m ready to go.”
“Aye, thought so. Gentlemen, you will be discreet and
keep this a secret. You must go out into the party with
knowledge that no one else in the whole world has. Smile;
you’ll find it hard. I will see you at Awndyn by the end of the
week; the Stormy Petrel is ready to sail.”
Lightning beckoned a butler and said, “Go down to the
cellars and bring me a bottle of Micawater wine. The oldest
you can find.”
The party sashayed and shone around me. I walked
through it, dead to the heart and scarcely seeing Tern in a
clumsy two-step with the Strongman.
I ran out to the balcony and jumped to the balustrade,
threw myself off. Beating hard and yelling with fury I reached
eighty k.p.h. between two spires, just brushing stone with
my wingtips. I zigzagged close to tightly packed walls nearmissing
by a centimeter on every familiar turn. I exploded
out of the fog, still climbing to the clear starry sky. The tallest
towers poked though the mist’s cotton blanket like black
sea stacks; lights flickered deep among them. I reached
the top of my trajectory, for a second hung there.
Somersaulted. Fell, headfirst, masonry soaring past, the
mist’s surface undulating.
I splashed through it, silently.
I flew circuits of the Castle until I slowed down and my
anger wore off, turning into hopelessness. I landed on the
sill of the Northwest Tower, bounded down into my room,
sprang onto the four-poster bed and ripped its curtains
together. In its gloomy, ivy-entwined brocade cave I sat and
thought. Drugs, that’s what I need. Drugs.

CHAPTER THREE
Next morning I decided to seek an audience with the
Emperor and appeal against the terrible orders that he had
given me. I left Tern sleeping in the four-poster bed; I had
pretended to be asleep when she came in late. I dressed,
ate breakfast and shut the door as the Starglass struck ten.
I ran down the frescoed spiral steps three at a time, at a
speed that may well be the death of me one day. I ignored
the thick rope that serves as a handrail and opened my
wings for balance as far as was possible on the dizzying
staircase. I hurtled around the last corner and crashed into
Lightning, who was climbing up. “Huh? Get out of my way,
Micawater.”
“Jant! I have to talk to you. The Emperor’s just asked me
to put Gio out of the Castle!”
“Who?”
“Gio Ami. The Swordsman for four hundred years until
last night.”
Gio was from Ghallain, a bleak town on the tip of an
inhospitable cape. His wealth and acumen were entirely
self-made. Three-letter names were often used among the
coastal Plainslanders, a tradition dating back as far as the
Emperor’s birth. Like Awian names, they’re not genderspecific.
I thought, Gio really belongs in sixteen thirty-nine.
What the fuck is he going to do out there, in the twenty-first
century?
We walked toward the Simurgh Passage on the extreme
eastern side of the palace, and along past Lightning’s
rooms where pale watercolor paintings covered the walls
completely, their frames touching. The Archer said, “Gio
refuses to leave. I have sometimes seen defeated Eszai
act this way. He has lived a long time in the Castle; he may
fear the outside world although he’ll never admit it. It has
changed since he was last mortal.”
I remembered Gio’s arrogance and said, “More like he
can’t accept that anyone could beat him.”
“Yes, I agree.”
“Well, I hope he isn’t armed.”
“Oh, of course he is armed. That’s why I need your help
to evict him.”
We walked up a flight of steps to the attic of the passage
and the quarters traditionally appointed to Serein. Bucklers
were displayed on the walls outside his doorway, with dusty
bullfighting cloaks and wood-and-leather dusack swords for
practice. Broadswords and falchions were arranged in
circles and fans, next to sail-hilted daggers and Wrought
katanas with naked blued steel. There were ceremonial
two-handed swords with curlicued quillions and flamberge
blades inlaid with gold wire, and several portraits of Gio.
Servants passed us, carrying boxes and suitcases down to
the ground floor. One wore a sallet helmet and the others
had shirts wrapped around their heads.
Lightning and I peered into the awkwardly shaped room,
which had a sloping ceiling. It looked like the den of a
sports-obsessed teenager. It smelled of rubber-soled
shoes, canvas ingrained with sweat, the wooden grips of
polearms smoothed and varnish worn away with use.
Twinned rapiers in cases and practice foils in holdalls were
stacked along the wall, under a shabby dartboard with a
fistful of darts jammed into the bull’s-eye. A beautiful
schiavona cut-and-thrust sword with a basket hilt and a
sharkskin grip hung in pride of place on the opposite wall.
In a big glass tank at the far end of the room enormous
yellow koi carp cruised back and forth, their mirror scales
glinting like plate armor. Two servants were indiscriminately
stuffing the clutter into boxes and moving it out.
Gio Ami was sitting on the divan, slouched against the
wall with despair. A foil with a round guard lay across his
knees. His long, old-gold-colored hair hung in twists to his
shoulders, he had a single ring in one ear. His face was
somewhat lined and worn, hollow cheeks offset by a broad
chin, which now had fair stubble. His bare chest and taut
belly showed under his unfastened frock coat. It was of
Awian manufacture because it had wide slits up the back
that were empty and looked peculiar without wings. His
pale blue breeches matched, but laces trailed from his
open boots. A number of Diw Harbor Gin bottles lay
discarded on the floor.
Gio still had the quality of those who are great at what
they do, an intense concentration unknown to most people.
His coat’s rich embroidery was testament to his affluence,
gained through running his fencing salles d’armes since the
turn of the seventeenth century. Branches of the Ghallain
School had been opened in Hacilith and the majority of
Plainslands manorships.
Gio had taken the dressing off the wound at his throat,
which gaped a little, pink and clean. He must be trying to
make it scar. He noticed us standing in the doorway, “What
do we have here? A lonely aristo and a gangland killer.” He
looked from Lightning to me. “Neither high looks of authority
nor smart words will make me leave.”
Lightning sighed. “Gio, if you don’t go now, Jant and I will
put you out of the Castle bodily.”
Gio spun the hilt of the foil, making the sword roll up and
down his thigh. I watched it, well aware that he was still the
second-best fencer in the world. His voice slurred slightly.
“Don’t call me Gio. I am still Serein.”
“You were outmatched.”
“I have just said goodbye to the Sailor, the Cook and the
Master of Horse. All my former friends are abandoning me.”
He gestured at the servants. “And the new Serein will have
my rooms, as well as my title and my immortality.”
“We’re not deserting you,” I said.
“All immortality belongs to the Emperor,” said Lightning.
Gio gave him a dirty look. “Yes, you nobles are great at
knowing who owns what. None of you will stand by me now
I’ve fallen from grace. Why should I be cast out? It wasn’t a
fair fight!”
The oldest servant began to pack Gio’s combat
manuals. “Bugger off,” said Gio, and threw The Academy
of Defense accurately at his head. “The floodlights in the
amphitheater are useless. I demand a retrial.”
amphitheater are useless. I demand a retrial.”
I thought for a while. “You can Challenge him in a year’s
time, that’s a rule of the Castle.”
“Challenge him as a mortal? Try to regain my title from
him? Damn! I still don’t understand the move he made. He
tricked me with an unorthodox caper,” Gio spat
contemptuously. “No one will want to be instructed in my
method now, the techniques I spent my life recording. My
school will empty like the court of Rachiswater and then
what will I do for a living?”
“Having been in the Circle will bring you fame enough,” I
said in a conciliatory tone.
“Fame as a has-been.” Gio pointed the foil, working
himself up. “Why did I ever aspire to such a corrupt little
world? Wrenn killed me in that duel! All right—so I might die
forty years from now of old age, but he has killed me.
Ruined by a non-fraternity fighter, opportunist, someone
who never studied! A coarse recruit from a frontier town
who wasn’t even listed in the top five hundred swordsmen.
He never competed in the annual tournaments. I hadn’t
even heard of the insane kid before he turned up!”
Gio did not realize how hidebound he had become over
four centuries. He had systematized the art of fencing and
relied so much on his perfect knowledge that Wrenn’s
irrational move confused him completely. Immortals who
are afraid to risk their lives are as useless against the
Insects as those who become lazy or overconfident, solitary
or debauched. San’s rules for the Circle are wise; fresh
blood will take our place if long life causes us to lose our
edge.
“You’ve gained a year and you can try again.”
“A year for what? A year to practice?” He gestured at a
wall-chart of footprints coding positions for rapier
exercises. “To shape up, lose weight, gain stamina?” He
bent a sinewy arm until the long muscles knotted.
I took Gio’s point that clearly he was in the best fitness
and still got beaten, but none of us could know what effect
the following year of renown and a six-month sea voyage
might have on Wrenn’s condition. The Castle has lost all
Gio’s knowledge now, replacing him with someone who is
expert but inexperienced. It struck me as wasteful; I wished
they could all be saved. I wondered why the Emperor
refused to widen the Circle to accommodate more
warriors; we would never pose a threat to San because we
would never accumulate enough experience to be as wise
as him.
I said, “Gio, the Empire needs you too. We don’t want to
lose you.”
“The Castle’s already rejected me. Though I devoted my
entire life to its service…I defended Hacilith in the last
swarm.” His voice was drained of its usual energy. He
would take days to recover from such an intense fight. “I felt
the Circle dropping me. I knelt down and couldn’t get up.
You bastards. But now I don’t feel much different, I suppose
because I’m only twelve hours older. I think mortals feel like
they’re twenty-one years old all their life, though their body
gets slower and then they die. I’ll provoke a few duels
before I die, though. I’m going to send a few of them ahead
of me.”
Gio picked up his predecessor’s book, Treatise on the
Art of Fencing, and weighed it thoughtfully in his hand.
“What happened to the Serein before me? When I
displaced him from the Circle he went mad and hung
himself.” A downward twist of his lips showed what he
thought of a Swordsman committing suicide. He spun the
book through the air and swore when a servant ducked and
it hardly clipped him.
Lightning said, “We are nowhere near restoring Awia
and people already gripe about the necessary austerity.
We need your imagination, not to mention your leadership.”
“Saker Micawater, what the rich fuck do I care about
Awia now?”
Serein Wrenn, in his fyrd fatigues, hurried into view down
the corridor. He made as if to enter the room but Lightning
spread his blond wings across the doorway. The youth
blinked at him, bewildered.
At the sight of Wrenn, Gio leapt to his feet, the foil loose
in his right hand. Wrenn swept his rapier from its scabbard.
Great. Now I was trapped between the best and secondbest
swordsmen in the world.
“No!” said Lightning. “You may not fight.”
I took the knife from my boot and pressed the button for
the blade.
Gio eyed me. “Nice. A Rhydanne with a flick-knife.”
Lightning said, “Put it away, Jant.”
“If you think I’m afraid to keep dueling, you’re wrong,”
Wrenn called.
“Every single year until one of us is dead,” Gio spat.
“You were wide open with that moulinet. You bloody
deserved it!”
Lightning repeated, “You may meet in twelve months.
You may not fight now.”
“Step aside, Archer.”
Lightning stared at Gio, arms folded and wings spread.
Wrenn stretched out in a broad ward stance, an action
that seemed to say: come on, stab me in the chest.
Gio shook with fury. “I swear, Archer, get out of my way!
Or I’ll cut every tendon in your bow arm! I’ll have my title
back within an hour!”
“Honor demands a respite.”
“I’m mortal, I’m going to die anyway! Where’s the honor
in that? I’ve nothing to lose!”
Wrenn watched guardedly through the gap between
Lightning and myself. He was calm, in control, just as I am
aware of every centimeter of my body when I prepare to fly.
Gio flourished the foil. “I’ll die famous by running you both
through!”
“Jant,” Lightning said eventually. “It looks like we need
Tornado’s help to close this situation. Go to his room and
fetch him; quickly, please.”
I hesitated.
“I can skewer you all on one blade!”
I nodded, ducked past and sprinted away. Gio watched
until I reached the stairs and then he threw his foil aside. He
pushed past Lightning and Wrenn, head up and haughty
eyes averted. I stepped out of his way; he descended the
staircase and walked out swinging his arms, across the wet
grass of the quadrangle toward the Dace Gate and the
Castle’s stables.
Lightning exhaled and rubbed his forehead. “God,” he
said. “Such a worthy adversary.”
MEMO
To: Tern
From: Jant. You know, your husband. Tall, cheekbones,
black wings…Yes, that one.
Tern, darling
Where are you? I wanted to say goodbye. The Stormy
Petrel sails Friday—Mist has ordered us straight to
Awndyn and I doubt I will be coming back. It is bound to
sink, and I shall drown. Or be lost, becalmed, and starve.
Besides, the sea nourishes monsters far worse than
Insects. If you feel the Circle break, think of me, and
open the letter I left with Rayne.
NB I borrowed a thousand pounds from the Wrought
Restoration Fund. Hope you don’t mind. If we return in
six months’ time, I’ll make enough money to pay it back
with curios from “Ata’s Island.” Love you. Goodbye.
Jant.

CHAPTER FOUR
A shower of sleet fell at dawn, covering the stable
courtyard with lumpy, slushy ice. Shallow puddles in its
gutters looked gray as laundry water. Darker clouds
smeared in the overcast sky above the large square
forecourt. The sparrows that infested the eaves and stalls
shouted out a dawn chorus. Warm air steamed from three
pairs of thoroughbred horses harnessed to a gleaming
coach. Lightning’s carriage was waiting to carry him and
Wrenn to Awndyn. It would take them three days to reach
the coast, so they had planned to spend the first night at
Eske manor, enjoying the hospitality of Cariama Eske.
There was a clock tower on an arch above the main
gate. I landed in front of its peacock-blue dial, which
showed eight A.M., and watched Wrenn and Lightning
sheltering from the rain inside the nearest stable while their
belongings were loaded onto the coach. Mist had said we
could bring no more than one sea chest each, but my
rucksack and Wrenn’s small knapsack were so meager—
since I travel light and Wrenn was poor—that Lightning
allowed himself more luggage.
The coachman stooped to check the bits in the mouths
of the dapple gray mares and ran the reins through brass
rings on the center bar. His scarf and thick buttoned coat
made him look portly. He held the coach door open; Wrenn
jumped up and struggled inside. Wrenn obviously didn’t
know about the steps, which Lightning kicked out from
under the polished splashboard. Wrenn settled himself on
the seat and removed his woolly liripipe hat. He was
obviously feeling self-conscious; I doubted that he had ever
been in a coach before. He had changed his clothes—the
ones he wore in the ceremony were discarded to show his
entrance to a new life. The coachman slammed the door
and pulled a leather strap to lower the window. He leaned
in, exchanged some words with Lightning, then climbed up
to his bench, took the whip in his left hand and flicked the
reins. “Hoh!”
The whole heavy rig rolled forward with the clop of clean
hooves, a hiss of water from the wheels. The mares with
braided manes shook their heads trying to see around their
blinkers. They walked to the gates; I saw their six broad
backs, then the dark red shining lacquer of the coach’s roof
loaded with wooden chests pass beneath me under the
arch. The wheels sucked up sleet from the ground, spraying
it into the air above them, leaving two tracks of paving clear
from slush.
Wrenn twisted around to stare at me through the back
window, one elbow on the tan leather. I wished that I could
hear their conversation on the journey. Lightning paid
Wrenn more attention than he paid me, offering the same
time-refined advice. But I wanted to reach Awndyn before
the coach did. I jumped off the clock tower.
My wings’ muscular biceps, as thick as thighs bunched
together, creasing the middle of my back, then separated
as I pulled my wings down in the laborious effort of
sustained beating. My long wings are pointed and fairly
narrow, good for gliding but taking off is as hard as
sprinting. I can usually settle into a rhythm that uses less
energy but it’s still like running a marathon.
I love long-distance journeys; I can stretch out along the
route. I relaxed and leaned into the first of the long
kilometers. The coach-and-six sounded hollow over the
stable’s wide drawbridge across the second moat and out
of the Castle’s complex. They passed the paddocks with
steaming dung heaps and soggy plowed fields, joined the
Eske Road and entered the oak forest that comprised most
of that manor.
I flexed my wings in and rolled once, twice, risked a third
although I fell fifty meters each time. I opened my wings
hard against the rushing air. High above the coach I rolled
wing over wing, watching the even horizon turn a full three
hundred and sixty degrees.
Then I set out for the coast. Diagonal lines of sunlight
slanted down, patchily highlighting the level, loamy fields of
the plains around the Moren. When flying from manor to
manor I find it useful to follow one of the straight military
roads that the Castle commanded to be built between
towns for the movement of troops. But to fly cross-country I
pick a point on the horizon, a notch or a hummock, and
head directly toward it. The notches become vales, the
hummocks turn into hillsides. When I become tired I fly a
more convoluted route to find and climb onto thermals to
rest.At a height of two hundred meters I don’t see individual
tree tops, just a mass of twigs and pine needles. The slate
roofs of the towns are scaly patches that look flat among
the forest’s green-brown froth. The houses built from local
stone were camouflaged in the landscape, and I passed
over hunting lodges without seeing them. Towns all seemed
the same from the air; I hardly distinguished between them.
My travels have taught me that people everywhere are
intrinsically the same: well-disposed to me as Comet.
The same would not be true for Tris. I considered the
events of the last two days as I flew. No one could predict
what the Trisian people would make of us; I hoped that I
could communicate with them. I was terrified of the hated
uncharted ocean. The things that swam and slapped
suckers on ships’ sides beggared any description—
behemoth serpents and sentient giants amassed from the
rotting bodies of drowned sailors.
I wondered what to do about Tern. At this very moment
she could be stroking Tornado’s wingless back, hewn
muscles, shorn head, and I had to leave on some damn
godforgotten ship! I imagined her sitting on the palm of his
hand and he lifts her up to kiss her. Away at sea I was
powerless to stop this latest outbreak of her infidelity; it
might deepen and then what would I find on my return? Tern
married into the Circle through Tornado, myself divorced
and having to live next door to my beautiful ex-wife for all
eternity?
I knew every landmark—the white fences along the
“racehorse valley” racetracks that Eske is famous for, their
stables where destriers are bred. A line of tall poplars by
Dace River; farther on in the forest smoke straggled from a
charcoal burner’s shack. I concentrated on keeping the
horizon level to fly straight, but in the evening I was
grounded by a heavy hailstorm and, annoyingly, had to
spend the night in the Plover Inn on the Remige Road. If this
was a routine journey I would sleep in the woods because,
since I’m Rhydanne, temperatures have to be much below
freezing before I start to feel cold.
By the following afternoon I could see the faintly lilac-gray
Awndyn downs in the distance. Cobalt manor’s hops fields
and oast houses dotted the downs; a bowl-shaped pass
resolved into the coast road. Finally I crested the last hill—
and there was the sea. The gray strip of ocean looked as if
it was standing up above the land, ready to crash down
onto it.
Every window in Awndyn-on-the-Strand was brassy with
the setting sun. The town’s roofs slanted in every crazy
direction. The manor house stood on a grassed-over rockand-
sand spit jutting out into the sea. It had tiny clustered
windows and tall thin octagonal chimneys with diagonal and
cross-hatched red brickwork. I glided down through another
sleet shower so strong I had to close my eyes against it,
and landed on the roof of a fish-and-chip takeaway. I waited
till the squall stopped spitting wet snow, then climbed down
from the chip shop and walked into town, crossing the
shallow, pebbled stream on a mossy humpbacked bridge.
The Hacilith-Awndyn canal ran beside it into an enormous
system of locks and basins packed with barges.
A creative cosmopolitan atmosphere hung over Awndyn,
with a smell of cedarwood shavings and stale scrumpy. It
was the only Plainslands town to prosper after the last
Insect swarm, profiting from the merchant barges that paid
tolls to navigate the locks and carracks with full coffers
anchoring in the port. It was well positioned to make use of
all their raw materials. Swallow, the musician governor, had
encouraged a bohemian community; artists and craftsmen
were welcome in the tiny crumbling houses and ivy-shaded
galleries. Artisans’ slow and friendly workshops overhung
the shambling alleys; glass-blowing and marquetry,
cloisonné and ceramics, leather-work, woodturning and
lapidary, musical instruments and elegant furniture were
crafted there.
I was prospecting for drugs, just as a gold miner follows
rules to find deposits. Scolopendium is illegal everywhere
except the Plainslands—in Awia the laws have been tight
for fifty years and counting; in Hacilith’s deprived streets the
problem is at its most serious; and at the Lowespass
trenches its use is tackled very severely. But centipede fern
grows wild in Ladygrace, the sparsely populated foothills of
southern Darkling. The governor of Hacilith tried to pay the
Neithernor villagers to burn the moorland hillsides and
destroy the plants but thankfully they never succumbed to
the offer. Scolopendium extracted from the fern fronds flows
out of Ladygrace together with more well-known drugs, and
addicts’ money is sucked back in along the same routes.
The ban is almost impossible to enforce.
To find scolopendium in a town look for boundaries, for
example the edge between rich and poor districts, or
between streets of different trades—where houses begin at
the edge of the market or where at night people empty from
cafés into clubs. The prospector should investigate places
where newly arrived travelers are lingering. Longshoremen
with cargoes from Hacilith are the most promising,
because a handful of cat hidden in a cabin is worth twice as
much as a richly stocked hold. When I was a dealer I
witnessed even the most scrupulous merchants give in to
greed. I determined not to buy from the pushers at the
dockside, but they would only be a couple of links down the
chain from one of the more powerful traffickers I know.
Buildings give clues: dirty windows and peeling paint in
a rich district, or a tidy house in the middle of a slum. This is
because they are houses where business is done. When
I’m hooked, I read the signs subconsciously; a sixth sense
guides me to a fix.
I walked past clustered half-timbered buildings with
warm red brick in herringbone designs. Stonecrop grew out
of the walls that were topped with triangular cerulean-blue
tiles and bearded with long, gray lichen. The town looked
like a grounded sunset.
Following my rules brought me to the quayside. Awndyn
harbor was a mass of boats. At low tide they all beached,
propped up against each other, and fishermen walked
across their wooden decks from harbor wall to sand spit. At
full tide they all sailed together, a flotilla of bottle green and
white, Awndyn’s dolphin insignia leaping on prows and
mastheads. As dusk fell, I watched them unloading,
passing meters of loose netting in human chains to the jetty,
where boys rocked wooden carts on iron wheels back and
forth to get them moving on the rails. The boys were paid a
penny a half day to shunt the heavy carts to a warehouse
where fisherwives unloaded the catch into crates of salt and
sawdust.
After dark it began to drizzle sleet. The road was
plastered in a thin layer of wet brown mud. I walked along
the seafront and passed the Teredo Mill, a tall cider mill
with peeling rose-pink window frames, dove-holes in
diamond shapes in its ochre-colored walls. It was roofed
with white squares cut from sections of Insect paper. Last
harvest’s apples had been pressed so the intense sweet
smell that hung around the mill in autumn was replaced by
the heady reek of fermentation.
A group of young apprentice brewers were sheltering in
the underpass where a path ran under the waterwheel’s
cobbled sluice. The wheel was raised from its millstream
and clean water flowed along the conduit above their
heads. They were smoking cigarettes after a day’s work.
One of the promenade street lamps cast my shadow long
across the road. The brewers regarded me curiously. The
youngest had dyed purple hair, baggy checkered trousers
and a black coat that reached the floor. I checked him out
for the marks of an addict, drew a blank. Well, I haven’t hit
gold but I’m very close. We fell into the quiet of mutual
examination, until he nudged his friend and bowed. He
walked over the road to me. “Comet?”
“Yes?”
“It is…it is you?” He looked back to his friends, who all
made “Go on” motions.
I didn’t want their presence to scare away the sort of
character I was really looking for. I was about to tell him to
get lost but something of my Hacilith self was reflected in
him. He didn’t know what to say—there was awe in his
eyes like tears. His coworkers crowded around with eager
expressions. They were a little too well-heeled to be true
rebels. “So you’ve met the Emperor’s Messenger,” I said.
“How can I help you?”
“Did you see the duel between Gio and Wrenn?”
“What’s the new Serein like?”
“Tell us the tactic he used!”
“Tell us if he’s married,” a girl said. Her lanky body had a
passing resemblance to a Rhydanne woman and
momentarily I had to control myself.
“I just flew here…” I said.
“Is it true there’s never been a Swordsman as good as
Wrenn?”
I tried, “I’ve just returned from Darkling. Let me tell you—”
“I don’t believe Wrenn taught himself. He must be a
genius!”
“My name’s Dunnock,” said the boy with purple hair. “I
study music—in the governor’s arty set, but she demands a
lot of her circle.”
Wonderful, I thought; other Eszai have the Fourlands’
best vying to be trained by them in the Select Fyrd; I attract
gangs of disaffected youth. I tried a simple approach.
“Actually the Governor sent me to find a man called Cinna
Bawtere. I’ve been ordered to arrest him. Have you heard
of him?”
“What if we have?”
“Why do you want to arrest him?”
I rounded on Dunnock. “Show me where his lair is these
days.”
The brewers, now quiet, ushered me through the
underpass. My leather-soled boots squeaked on the tiling;
then we turned left on Seething Lane away from the sea,
past the puppet-maker’s shop and into the artists’ quarter.
Shop signs projected above doorways: CROSSBOW
CLOCKWORK LTD and FYRD RECRUITMENT
LOWESPASS VICTORY HOUSE. APPLEJACK AND
FINE TEREDO CALVADOS . Bleak graffiti sporadically
decorated the walls between them, declaring, “Ban the
Ballista” and “¡Featherbacks go home!”
The local resentment of Awian refugees was worse than
I thought. It made me angry—they weren’t to blame for
being made homeless by the Insect swarm. In fact, I thought
guiltily, the swarm had largely been my fault. I knew that
Tern was trying to persuade the Wrought armorers back to
continue their vital tradition in her manor. Her blacksmiths
worked extremely hard wherever they had been forced to
settle.
The Swindlestock Bar was dead center of the artists’
quarter. It was built inside the mouth of a gigantic Insect
tunnel, like a gray hood with a rough, deeply shadowed
papier-mâché texture. The tunnel had been cut from the
Paperlands and shipped south for building material; the
nightclub’s front projected from its opening, with two stories
of green-glazed bricks and black beams. Paper curved
down to the ground, looking like a huge worm cast.
Windows had been cut in it. Outside the door, a sloughed
Insect skin hung in an iron gibbet, its six spiked legs
sticking out. It was transparent brown and gnarled; it
revolved slowly, a dead weight in the sea breeze.
I know some clubs in Awndyn that could be described as
meat markets. This was more of a delicatessen. Green
light so pale it was almost gray reflected on the water
pooled between the cobbles. The vague and eerie light
came from cylindrical glass jars by the club’s open door—
larvae lamps—lanterns full of glow-worm larvae. The
doorman picked one up and shook it to make it brighter.
The brewers nodded at the doorman and walked
straight in. Inside, the floor was malachite-colored tiles, the
decor ebony with a matte shine. In a deep fireplace seadriftwood
burned with copper-green sparks. A lone
musician up on the stage was salivating into a saxophone.
He played exceptionally; he must have been one of
Swallow’s students. The larvae lamps emphasized his
sallow face as he leaned across their shifting light. He
paused, recognizing me, and his eyebrows sprang right
into his hairline, then he started up another low, sexy drone,
playing his very best as if I was a talent spotter.
The brewers vanished into the press of bodies around
the stage. Dunnock turned to me and pointed at the ceiling.
“Check upstairs. They ask to see track marks,” he added,
agitated. “You’re not wearing a sword.”
I raised a hand to calm him. “I don’t need a sword to
arrest the likes of Bawtere.”
“Wow. They’re never going to believe this back at the
vats.”
“Keep it a secret!” I said. I elbowed through the dancers’
slow jazz wave to the stairs. They creaked as I climbed
them. At the top, a bull’s-eye lantern swung in front of my
face, startling me, and a voice rasped, “Oo’s that? One for
Cinna?”
“Yes,” I said.
“Oo is it?”
“His boss.” I deliberately looked straight at the lantern
because I know that my Rhydanne eyes reflect. Cinna’s
flunky must have seen them shine as two flat gold discs. His
chuckle stopped abruptly.
“All right, Comet,” he whispered. “You want t’see
Cinna?”
“Of course,” I said.
“Just…wait a minute, please…Shit, a fucking immortal…
He’s a fucking immortal…” The voice trailed off, and then
returned. “Come through, Comet.”
He beckoned me along the dingy corridor, then through
a beautiful door inset with opal to a big black and white
room. In the middle of the square chamber stood a vast
carved table. Its rectilinear designs were echoed on printed
six-panel paper screens that folded like concertinas along
the dim walls.
Cinna Bawtere had no friends, only collaborators. He
was fat but suave, with a receding hairline and flabby,
incandescently red lips like a couple of cod fish lying in the
bottom of a boat. He had a dueling scar like a dimple by his
mouth, suggesting that long ago his skin hadn’t been pasty,
his belly protruding and his chin double. But these days
Cinna could get out of breath playing dominoes. People
worked for him now, and his big hands had lost all the cuts
and calluses they had when he was a sailor. He was a
tactless, feckless, reckless individual with an ego the size
of Awia and a conscience the size of a boiled sweet.
Cinna’s extras included a cutting-edge understanding of
chemistry as it applied to narcotics, and of the law and how
to break it. His wings were speckled; every fifth feather had
been bleached. He wore new blue jeans and a patterned
cherry silk dressing gown. Like so many ugly men, he was
fond of good clothes.
I sat in an engraved chair and hooked my wings over the
low back. “How great a sense of hearing do the walls
have?”
“It’s all right. We’re totally alone.” Cinna gave me a hard
stare from the other side of the table. Eventually he said,
“You haven’t visited for a long time, Comet.”
“Four years isn’t a long time to me.”
He creased into his chair. “By god, and you look Just
The Same as you did when I first saw you, twenty years
back.” He gave a little smile. “I thought you’d forgotten me,
because I hadn’t heard any word since the Battle Of
Awndyn.”
“So how is business?”
Cinna raised his hands to indicate the shadowy room.
“As good as you see it.”
“Cinna, I’m here to tell you that I won’t turn a blind eye to
your dealing any longer.”
His round shoulders sagged. He scooped a packet of
cigarettes from the table, poked one out and lit it. “I’d been
expecting this. So it’s finished? The game’s over?”
“If you continue and you’re caught, you can’t invoke my
name; I won’t help you. If you keep selling contraband to
Mist’s sailors and she complains to me, the next time you
see an Eszai he’ll be with a fyrd guard to seize you.”
“Now, Jant, how disappointing after all this time!”
I shrugged. “I want you to go back to legitimate trade.
Why not?”
Cinna placed both hands flat on his polished table.
“Because it’s Not That Easy! This latest ‘paper tax’ from the
Castle caused an uproar in Hacilith. You should hear the
merchants muttering. All the money’s sent to Awia.”
“You know there’s a worthwhile cause. We need to
break down the Insects’ Paperlands there.”
“Well, why can’t that kingdom look after itself?”
“For god’s sake, they’re doing all they can. Awia will
repay its debts in full; you mortals just can’t see the long
term.”
“Oh, I understand,” said Cinna. “But I hope Eszai realize
how quickly Plainslanders forget Insects once the
immediate threat cools off.”
“Look, you have to stop dealing. In Hacilith now, the
punishment for pushing cat is death. I’ve seen dealers
broken on the wheel. In Awia they just jail them for life.”
He nodded. “Well, ergot pastilles are all the kids want
these days. They have no taste.” He wallowed over to a
side table where there was a decanter of port and some
crystal glasses. He poured one for me.
“To the Emperor,” I said, and drank.
He topped up my glass. “And another toast. To all the
kids who ever sang protest songs against the old king’s
draft.”
I put the glass down. “It’s the Empire’s war,” I said
evenly. “Let’s talk business, not nostalgia. I know how you
feel about the past but I have to obey the Emperor’s
command.”
“You singled me out and saved me because I was an
Independent, Deregulated Pharmaceutical Retailer,” he
said. It was true; I wanted a dealer and I found Cinna
trustworthy, who owed me his life and his livelihood. Once I
got my fingers around the edges of his ego, he was a
business partner more loyal than a fyrd captain. “Do you
know it’s twenty years ago almost to the day, when you
appeared with a handful of draft notices,” he continued.
Worry lines on his forehead came and went as he talked.
“Nailed on the lifeboat house door—lists of families to
contribute to Tornado’s division. My mother wanted to hide
us but I knew how relentless you were. She showed us a
trapdoor to the coal cellar, but, god-who-left-us, what use is
that against someone who knows every Trick In The Book?”
I swirled beeswing in the glass, embarrassed on his
behalf that he would rather hide than fight.
“You took my brother. He was killed at Lowespass. All
they could find of him to bury was a handful of feathers; the
Insects cemented the rest into their Wall.”
“Many people die in Lowespass.”
Cinna grimaced and picked at one of the spots around
his mouth. “Jant, I remember we had to line up in the
courtyard—you were there checking names off on a list.
You looked younger than me and I hated you, the way
schoolkids hate swots. You looked as calm as a merchant
checking sacks of corn, a buyer at a livestock market—”
“As if I’d done it a thousand times before.”
“Yeah. It made me want to strangle you, and you looked
so frail I was sure I could. My brother knew what I was
thinking; he elbowed me in the ribs and said Comet’s Two
Hundred Years Old! Knowing that I wouldn’t stand a
chance. Then he climbed onto the cart bench with the rest
of the stevedores and that was the last I ever saw of him.
Taken away to the General Fyrd. Every one of the five
hundred men in his morai were slaughtered.
“Well now I’ve witnessed Insects flatten Awndyn I can
understand why we need to keep the Front—but back then
I’d never seen one and it took me fifteen years to recover.
Your frozen age is so misleading, it makes us mortals
underestimate you. You can run faster than a deer, but you
just looked like a Bloody College Kid.
“We know the effect scolopendium has on the people
who trade it, let alone the users. I haven’t sought friendship
or lovers—just money—thinking that at any second the
governor’s fyrd could snatch me away.”
I glanced up from the mediocre port. Cinna was not
known to be a man of great imagination. “What are your
plans?” I asked. I knew he would find it hard to relinquish his
beautiful suite. He had become too much of a bon viveur.
He was too fat to return to life as a sailor, honest or
otherwise. “Are you holding any now?”
“I’ve a quarter kilo of Galt White to sell, and that will be
The Last Deal. Maybe.”
“Let me take it off your hands.”
“Oh ho!” He pointed a finger over the top of his wine
glass. “I thought there was another reason for this visit!
Once an addict, always an addict!”
“That’s not true, Cinna. Besides, it’s not for my use.”
“Well, I don’t know anybody else who buys in quarter-k
quantities. Not even Lady Lanare when she’s poisoning her
whole family.”
“Are you selling or not?”
Cinna chortled.
“It’ll be the last time I ever buy cat.”
Cinna chortled with wicked glee.
He unlocked a panel in the wall and scooped out a large
white paper envelope. He gave it a shake to settle its
contents, then pushed it to me across the table.
I rubbed it, feeling the fine powder inside. “Go first,” I
said.
He held his palms up. “You know I don’t do that. I can’t
stand the hallucinations.”
“This time you do.”
He dipped his finger in it. “Damn you, Eszai.”
I knew that my tolerance would have decreased, so I
took just the edge of a fingernail full and licked it. It spread
on my tongue, tasted numb, slightly grassy with a crystalline
metal-salt edge. This was snap-condensed. Fuck, it was
good. I closed my eyes in shame as I realized what I’d
done. It was five long years since I last tasted
scolopendium.
“You look like the Archer tasting fine wines. It’s Pure As
Darkling Snow,” he assured me, hands wide in a ham
actor’s gesture. “We make it using your technique, no one
else can match the quality.”
“Yes, this will help. At least until we reach the island,” I
said. Cinna gave me an odd look. I explained rapidly, “No,
not Grass Isle, I mean Tris. Mist told us a strange tale of a
new island three months’ east of Awndyn. She tells of a
fascinating culture and mouth-watering fruit like, like apples
that look like pine cones. Six months’ leave from the
Castle! Unless it’s some kind of mirage caused by sailors
drinking their own piss. Think what it means, and not just for
bored Eszai, for everyone!…But, knowing Ata, we won’t
make it out of the bay before something awful happens.”
I huffed out a breath and stood up. The weight of the
envelope seemed correct. I had a feel for it, like a longtime
card sharp knows by touch how many cards are in a deck. I
dropped it into my satchel and reached for Cinna’s packet
of cigarettes, slid them toward me and pocketed them too.
“Thanks. Now may I have a lantern? I’m needed back at the
manor house.”
“Ah-ah. That’s a thousand pounds please, Comet. And
unfortunately checks drawn on the defunct Bank of Wrought
are not welcome at Bawtere Unlimited Imports.”
I haggled down this outrageous price, that would only be
right for Lowespass, to a more reasonable eight hundred
and eighty pounds. I counted out nine hundred from my
wallet and Cinna swept the money away.
I noticed that, out of the pound coins he gave me for
change, the majority were Awian, embossed with
Tanager’s swan. From the other three of the Fourlands’
mints, there was only one each with the Summerday scallop
shell and Hacilith fist, and a couple of the Eske mint’s
“daffodils.” Currency was supposed to be produced at the
same rate throughout the Fourlands, as advised by the
Castle. I hoped that Awia hadn’t responded to its adversity
by minting more money. It would be a typical Zascai way of
thinking, a short-term solution that would just drag Awia
further into the mire.
Cinna’s bristle-chinned henchman returned with the
bull’s-eye lantern, muttering, “Thought Rhydanne could see
in t’ dark.”
Cinna is one of the few dealers I know who has not
ended up using. They take to it because drug-dealing is so
wrong and they find that scolopendium is a very tempting,
potent salve for all misdemeanors and open emotional
wounds. However, Cinna had always stayed at the moneyworshiping
stage, a bit like myself when I lived in Hacilith.
He was from one of the Morenzian villages and had worked
hard to escape. I didn’t blame him; the Morenzian
industries, law courts and markets were all in the city. The
intellect of the country was leached by Hacilith’s University
and its Moren Grand Theater monopolized the fame,
leaving the surrounding villages lackluster and dull.
Cinna knew that everything he is or owns he has built
himself on a precarious base. He is always waiting for the
tiny push from an Eszai or governor that will send the whole
card tower tumbling back into the dirt. “Taking cat is a
waste of all-too-precious time,” he said. He held the door
open for me and added, “But I have thought what
immortality truly means, Jant. I’d do drugs too.”
I left the nightclub, crossed Seething Lane and went down
a couple of slippery steps onto the hard expanse of the
beach. The breeze blew stronger and colder here than in
the sheltered town. I left no prints on the rippled wet sand. I
won’t get addicted again, I told myself; this is just casual
use. The empty ocean was a sucking black space; there
were no lights out there. I swung my lantern but it only just
illuminated the lapping water’s edge.
Far beyond the harbor mouth an obscure profile merged
with the night, a motionless hulk like a premonition. It must
be the Stormy Petrel. By god it was a huge ship.
I passed the quay, the only part of town that the governor
bothered to maintain properly. Small vessels were roped
together across the harbor mouth, each one bore a
swinging lamp. Their yellow arc reflected in the gentle
ripples; they made a silent blockade. A succession of
boats was rowing out toward the Stormy Petrel from the
quay. I dimly saw a man in each, straining at the oars. Every
boat was stacked with barrels; the last stocks of fresh water
were being loaded. Mist’s night workers on the jetty
stooped and rolled kegs, muttering in a smuggler’s
undertone. The first rowing boat blurred into darkness but I
still heard with dread the rhythmic splashes of its oars
distorted by the breeze. The rower gave a shout; at his
familiar voice a passage opened through the blockade.
Mist had spread the word that this voyage of discovery
was no different from the others she had attempted, but if
you compared the current level of secrecy to the previous
expeditions you would draw a very different conclusion.

CHAPTER FIVE
The following day, the subculture of Awndyn was invisible
in the bright winter sunlight. The black and amber
crosstrees and crow’s nests of fishing cogs anchored in the
harbor protruded above the houses as if the rooftops had
masts. The harbor master’s office had sculptures of
caravels in shining bronze on its tower tops, complete with
wire rigging.
I met Lightning and Serein Wrenn at the quayside. They
were watching the procession of boats still plying out to a
deep channel called Carrack’s Reach where the tall ships
were anchored. A crowd had gathered on the promenade.
The air was cold but a glorious sun beat down, flattening
the waves to translucent ripples that lapped up inside the
harbor wall, hardly moving its heavy sheaves of greenbrown
bladderwrack.
Wrenn and the Archer descended to a rowing boat that
was stowed with our belongings. Wrenn sat upright on the
plank bench with his scabbarded rapier and sword belt
gripped between his knees. Lightning leaned on the
gunwale, trailing his fingers in the water, with a distant smile
on his woodcut face. He carried a bow and a quiver of
exquisite arrows, and the circlet around his short hair
glinted in a most annoying way.
I sprinted along the jetty, wings half open to build up
airspeed. I ran faster and faster still, toward the lighthouse
at the end. I passed it, reached top speed; the jetty ended, I
jumped off into the air. My wings met below me, I swept
them up till the primary feather tips touched.
I flew over the waterfront that was lined with several
hundred people. Some ducked, swearing. They had a
glimpse of my boot soles and ice axe buckled across my
waist. I heard their murmur of envy ripple like waves.
I leaned with my wings held up in a V-shape to circle
tightly, and began to rise on a weak thermal above the
chaotic roofs. I reached the height of the buff sandstone
cliffs and soared above, seeing their grassy tops. Then I
turned out toward the ships; the sea’s surface sped
beneath me. I would miss Awndyn’s homeliness. I had
taken a pinch of scolopendium with breakfast and as a
result I was less afraid of the ocean. When you’re
intoxicated, the balance changes between all the facets of
your personality, making a different character. I was eager
for Tris.
A group of people proceeded along the rough stone
jetty. From high above I mostly saw their heads. The woman
with a walking stick had long red hair over a green shawl
held tightly closed; it was Governor Swallow, surrounded by
her attendants. They stopped at the foot of the lighthouse
and looked out to sea. Swallow began to sing. She keened,
she swelled the dirge with all the force of her opera voice.
The wind gusted the melody up to me; clear and high, it slid
over eerie minor notes that prickled my skin. Her
melancholy lament rose past the crowded quay, past the
rowing boats to the caravels. The rowers heard it. Lightning
heard it and looked back. The breeze blew it to Tris. I didn’t
know why she sang a dirge, but it seemed apt.
Outside the harbor, the boats began to churn from side to
side. At least I don’t have to sit in one of those little tubs.
Colorful caravels lay at anchor, scattered some distance
apart. As I gained height and my viewpoint widened I saw
around thirty—like brightly painted models, some with
windmills on deck to wind winches, some drab and
barnacled, some with men sitting in the complicated cat’s
cradles of their rigging, all lashed to buoys with flags atop,
and streamed out in the same direction by the flowing tide.
The fleet was a sober reminder of Mist Ata’s talent. Her
patience and willpower could conquer the world. In the
fifteenth century, caravels were developed from ungainly
merchants’ carracks, although since that time they have
undergone many improvements. San recognized their use
for bringing supplies and troops to the Insect Front, so he
made a place in the Circle for a Sailor and held a
competition that Ata’s predecessor won. The first Sailor
immediately tried to deter Challenges by forbidding any
Zascai company to build caravels. It was a plan that the
Emperor certainly didn’t condone. Ata knew it, and ignored
the ban. For her first Challenge in fourteen-fifteen she made
caravels in sections, in Hacilith where the Sailor couldn’t
observe them. She had them dragged overland on a road
she commissioned to be built, to a secret assembly yard
made for the purpose at the coast. She sailed her new
ships cockily around Grass Isle—their sudden appearance
frightened her predecessor. That’s the kind of
determination Ata has, and joining the Circle had not
affected her admirable ambition. She planted vast forests
to grow elm and oak for future ships.
The Stormy Petrel was by far the largest caravel, sixty
meters in length. No surface was left undecorated. At her
rear was a high aft castle, painted red and spiraled with
gold curlicues. The forecastle at her bow was slightly
smaller, and between them was a low deck with the largest
of her four masts. The black hull was very rounded, its sides
slanted in steeply, giving her a teardrop shape when seen
end-on. Stormy Petrel’s figurehead was a muscular young
man with a folded breechclout. Above him projected a
square prow heavily decorated with scarlet zigzags and the
Castle’s sun. A varnished spar jutted from it like a tusk, and
at the waterline five meters below the prow a taut anchor
cable ran from its port. The foremost part of the deck was a
sort of promontory with cross-planking through which I saw
the waves.
The Sailor must seriously want to impress the islanders
with the Empire’s ingenuity and riches. Stormy Petrel
inspired confidence in me, too: Mist was pragmatic, so if
she had spent money on decoration, the rest of the ship
must be sound and formidable. She would be as
trustworthy as the best Sailor in the world could make her.
A narrow balcony ran the Petrel’s length on both sides,
three meters above the waterline. Baroque wood carving
clustered around the stern, picked out in the Castle’s
colors, red and yellow. The vertical dimensions of the fixed
lanterns were tilted to the rear, and the entire top of the aft
castle slanted backward, so the Petrel looked like she was
racing along even when she was sitting still. The diamondleaded
stern windows were adorned with ruby-stained
glass sunbursts. The sun-in-splendor formed a sumptuous
centerpiece below them, covered in dazzling gold foil. It
scintillated with sunlight reflected from the waves.
Banners twined from the masthead, spinning on their
cords like kites. Mist’s plain white pennant was the longest.
I also recognized the argent swan of Queen Tanager, and
Cyan Peregrine’s sleeping falcon. There was the black
plow insignia of Eske manor, Shivel’s silver star, and
Fescue manor’s crest of three sausages on a spike.
Carniss manor must have sent funding too, because its flag
was there, a black crescent pierced by an arrow. One
hundred years ago I told a Rhydanne girl called Shira Dellin
that she had just as much chance of driving the Awian
settlers from the lower slopes of Darkling as she had of
hitting the moon with an arrow. The settlers founded the
manor of Carniss and they immediately took that image for
their badge, which made it even more painful when they
proved me right.
I made a controlled descent between the first mast and
mainmast, and dropped with a hollow thud onto the deck. I
settled my wings and folded them. Cinna’s scolopendium
was so good I couldn’t feel them ache at all.
Lightning and Wrenn climbed aboard and joined Mist by
the wheel. Wrenn grinned uncontrollably. He was brimming
with excitement. Sailors began to stow the flags. Mist
called, “Make sail! Half-deck hands below for the capstan.
Brace full the foresails! Send order, if you please, to Master
Fulmer on the Melowne; we shall be under way…Welcome
to the ocean, Serein,” she added.
With the Melowne behind us, we slipped past the ships
in Carrack’s Reach, black barrel buoys on our left side. An
Awian racing yacht called the Swift Shag ran close to
escort us; her bell rang in salute. “They’re wishing us luck!” I
waved. I was completely high on the fact I wasn’t afraid.
Ata leaned on the wheel. “How are you, Jant?”
“Yeah. Uh-huh.” I was staring at the carved mascle
emblem on the bow of our sister ship. The Melowne was
painted in the colors of Micawater, dark blue and white
lozenges; she carried so much ornament she looked as if
she had been decorated with the fittings from a bankrupt
brothel.
“Tell me, what day is it today?” Ata asked.
“Mmm.”
“Let me see your eyes.”
I took off my sunglasses and looked at her. “Well, okay,”
she said eventually, but with some doubt.
The Melowne flew all the canvas she could, to match our
pace and kept behind us on the right. Lightning didn’t greet
me, being deep in conversation with the Swordsman. He
pointed to the great blue wedding cake of a caravel. “She’s
named after my sister. Little Melowne…”
“Yeah,” I said. I leaned over the railing and noticed that
no two wave peaks were ever the same shape.
“She was the youngest of my family,” Lightning began.
“The youngest of nine. She died when she was only six
years old.”
“That’s a great shame,” Wrenn said.
“Oh, I’m all right. I got over it around the turn of the first
millennium,” Lightning said staunchly. I heard that in the
year one thousand, through the use of many economic
pressures, he eventually managed to run the Avernwater
dynasty into the ground and turn their manor back into
parkland.
“It was a long time ago, you understand,” he said quietly.
“Melowne was the youngest of my family; she was full of life,
happy all the time. My second-eldest brother, Gyr, was
exceptionally fond of her. He tended to be morose and she
brought out the life in him.
They were playing, one morning in midsummer, while we
prepared to celebrate godsloss day. A flowery parade
headed by the July Queen came toward us down the
avenue and the young maiden playing queen was about to
pass in front of the palace. People lined the streets to cheer
her. Inside the palace we wanted a good view, so all us
children ran up to the top floor. I found a roof window.
Melowne and Gyr were just below me, out on the parapet.
Melowne had daisy chains around her head and in the
buckles of her shoes. She leaned right out over the
balustrade as the procession passed below and he held
the back of her dress. She was laughing with delight,
pointing at the chariots and kicking her feet. She kicked
Gyr under the chin accidentally and, in shock, he dropped
her. I just saw her vanish.” Lightning pointed down over the
railing.
“That’s terrible.”
He nodded slowly. “My little sister’s death caused an
uproar. Nothing was the same after that. My brothers hated
Gyr…and I did too. He became enraged and silent;
eventually he left us to found a new manor at Avern. I don’t
think I ever forgave him.”
I paced across to Mist in the hope of less sentimental talk.
She watched the supply ship carefully before relinquishing
the wheel to her second-in-command. I think she had
appointed her sons and daughters to all the officers’
positions. “Gentlemen,” she said, “let me show you your
cabins.”
Mist explained that the Stormy Petrel had five levels,
including the open-air decks and topcastle. The hold was
the largest, where pinnace boats for exploration were
carried in a dismantled state, and at the stern, an animal
pen full of ruddy, bright-eyed chickens. We climbed down
the hatch to the living deck, which was above the waterline
and had small, sunburst-painted shutters from bow to stern.
Every sailor had just forty centimeters by two meters’ length
to sling his or her hammock. I marveled that Awians could
force themselves into such a claustrophobic space. Rather
than their leafy towns that nestled in countryside, and their
small families in roomy houses, here featherback men were
crammed together without enough space to spread a wing.
Mist’s cabin cut into their quarters at the stern and
extended into the deck above; I could almost stand upright
in it. She had a bedroom and a study that doubled as a
dining room, with a polished mahogany table quite
incongruous on the ship. It seemed that she intended the
Petrel to be her manor house.
Back above, she said, “Jant, you have the cabin under
the poop deck.” She opened a door onto an empty
compartment with a sloping floor, one meter wide by two
long, and a meter high. One hinged shelf was folded back
against the wall above a hook for a hammock. Was I
expected to fit in there?
“It’s a fucking closet,” I said.
“I swear, it’s the most luxurious passenger
accommodation we have! Well, if you want to sleep
outside, feel free…Come on, Lightning, let me show you
the fo’c’sle.”
At least my cabin was farthest from the waves. I could
lean out of the porthole and judge the level of water against
the planks of the hull to determine how fast we were
sinking. It had the best view, fresh air, and I could fly from
the deck above. The motion of the waves swayed my cabin
the most but that didn’t bother me. I was anxious to be rid of
Mist’s smiling face so I folded myself into the tiny wooden
box. What the fuck was I doing here?
Once noticed, the ship’s movement was relentless. I
could still fly home, but then I would have to face the
Emperor. I was stranded between two terrible eventualities.
I sat cross-legged, elbows on knees, head in hands, fingers
through my black hair like a waterfall.
Footsteps boomed up and down the tilted ladders
between decks and above me. Timbers creaked. On
second thoughts, Petrel seemed extremely flimsy. The
sailors adjusted something, the floor righted and, evenkeel,
she began to gather speed.
I shuffled farther into the cabin, bolted the door and
opened my razor. I started to divide up my quarter-kilo
hoard of cat. I tipped out the powder on a book cover, cut it
and made paper wraps of roughly a gram apiece. Why did I
buy so much scolopendium? So that Cinna couldn’t sell it to
his victims? No, because I need enough to stay high for the
whole voyage. With an ex-addict’s ingenuity I hid the paper
wraps in every possible niche, wherever they were
concealed from view. I wedged them in the ceiling joists
and between the floorboards. I taped them to the underside
of the shelf, packed them into the lantern and the squat
candlestick. I concealed wraps between the pages of
books, in the whetstone pocket of my knife scabbard. I
even sewed them into my coat lining.
An hour later I still had two hundred grams left in the
envelope, enough to poison the entire crew of both
caravels. I tipped a fingernail-full of cat into a beaker of
white wine. It touched and dissolved like melting snow. I cut
a line on the book cover and snorted it. My jaw sparkled. I
threw the porthole open and threw up, monumentally, down
the Petrel’s side.
Then I returned to the poop deck, dazzled by brightness.
The fresh wind made me shudder. The mainland was
ridiculously small and featureless—I could see the entire
Cobalt coast, a pale green line edge-to-edge of the
horizon, already turning blue. The Awndyn cliffs were a faint
smudge less than half a centimeter high. In every other
direction spread the indistinguishable ocean. I didn’t want
to look at it. “It’s as if we can see the whole east coast,” I
said to Mist.
She laughed and shook her head. “Say goodbye to it,
Jant.”
I could fly back even now. I leaned over the stern and
stretched my wings to feel the wind under them.
“This is something you’ve never seen before?” the
Archer asked calmly.
“It’s horrible.” I hissed a breath. “It’s a travesty.” I always
have to work in their world. Lightning has visited the
mountains on adventurous expeditions and once when I
needed help; but I defy any of them to trek to the high
plateaus. I cross boundaries more vertiginous and worlds
far more precarious than this, I told myself, but I didn’t feel
at all reassured. “Are we in water deep enough to be
attacked by sea monsters?”
Mist tutted. “Jant, there is no such thing as a sea
monster. I have circumnavigated the Fourlands. I have
sailed past this longitude for six hundred years, so you can
sailed past this longitude for six hundred years, so you can
absolutely take my word for it. Monsters are just the tales of
drunk, braggart harpooners. You might see a whale
spouting in the distance, but that’s about all.”
I sipped my doctored wine and watched the Stormy
Petrel’s green wake curve out like lace from a loom. The
horizon receded; I expected a clap of thunder or something
when it merged with the haze and vanished. I stared in that
direction for long after, memorizing the position. In an
hour’s time Petrel would carry me too far to fly home.
I turned away from the railing. I had been looking out to
sea for so long the size and bustle of the ship surprised me.
My hands were weak, my glass was empty. I took a step
and the deck tilted. Shit, if the others see my condition they
are definitely going to know. I must reach my cabin, lock
door, sleep it off. I edged along the railing to the top of the
ladder, and felt about with one foot for the rungs. I can step
down, it isn’t so far.
I crashed heavily onto the half deck, shook my wings and
arms to locate them. Yes, of course the floor is bloody
tipping, I told myself; we’re on a sodding ship. I clawed the
cabin open, threw my coat down but it slid toward the door.
I have taken too much. But it feels so good, oh god it feels
good. The buzz and dislocation comes on slow when I drink
cat. So I forget to be careful and I always drink too fucking
much. It’ll peak soon, I hope. I was clever to return to the
cabin while I still could. Now there’s no coast only sea no
land to land on only sea. We must trust our memories that
the Empire still exists.
I’ve taken too much. I lay on my quilt, curled up, eyes
closed—can’t observe the outside world anymore, too
much going on out there. Thoughts rush around my mind
and cat begins to break them down to their constituent
cycles. Consciousness is circular. Thoughts come in
cycles. There are big, slow, infrequent cycles and fast rings
repeat inside them. Words are made when sound cycles
click the right combination. Consciousness is circular;
thoughts come in cycles. There are big—It’s happening to
me! I think I’m dying. Don’t worry, I won’t die; this has
happened before. I hate it when this happens. I’m probably
going to Shift. And I haven’t been to Epsilon for years.
Epsilon. Words are made when sound cycles click the right
combination. Oh, no, it’s starting to happen—am I dying?
Don’t worry, I won’t die; this has happened before. God, I
hate it when this happens. I’m probably going to Shift. And I
haven’t been to Epsilon for years. Probably going to Shift.
Last time, I almost died. Rayne said I was dying. Don’t
worry, I won’t die. This has happened before. I hate it when
this happens (it’s happening to me; it’s happening to me).
I’m going to Shift. And I haven’t been to Epsilon for years.
Consciousness is circular; thoughts come in cycles.
Haven’t I just thought this? Words are made when sound
cycles click the right combination (—to me, it’s happening
to me, it’s happening to—) What is? This feeling of dying.
Don’t worry, I won’t die, this has happened before. Words
are made when sound cycles. God, I hate it when this
happens. I’m probably going to Shift. And I haven’t been to
Epsilon for years (—me, it’s happening to me, it’s happ—) I
think I just thought that (—ening to me, it’s happening to me,
it’s happening to—) oo to me ahp ap hap happening oo fu
tu to me see words are made when words are made words
worr dd hut hur lur wur wor words are ay ma may dde words
are made words are made ugh dug dur wer wur words arr
are geh neh ney ay made words are made ur err are arr…
ar…r…
Shouts assailed from all sides and before me were market
stalls running into stalls out to where the horizon met the
orange sky. Constant Shoppers hustled and bustled, a little
boy selling postcards of Epsilon darted through the crowd. I
recognized the Squantum Plaza bazaar.
I sat on the pavement cross-legged and concentrated,
changing my appearance from just a pencil sketch of Jant
to something more solid that looked like me, with a few
improvements.
Having brightened myself up, I staggered to my feet. I
swore I would never come back here and now I’ve broken
my promise again. A small gray cloud appeared above my
head and began to rain on me. “All right,” I told it, waving my
hands. “All right! I’m not that depressed!” The cloud
showered a few more desultory drops and dissipated.
There were market stalls of mildewed books, cloth and
raffia, cakes and beer. Horse brasses, porcelain,
thousands of gemstones spilled on velvet. Flat green grief
toads sang mournfully in glass tanks. Stalls sold ancient
sea-krait scales, barometz root—looks like a sheep but
tastes like turnip—trained falcons apparently “the best
hunters in the Scarlet Steppe” and confused stacks of
bamboo crates full of finches that cheeped and fluttered.
There were bonsai ents—little gnarled trees with rootlegs
stumbling around on a polished tray. A marsh gibbon
capered on a stall’s canopy. It had pale green silky fur and
round intelligent eyes; its back legs ended in duck feet. I
couldn’t help laughing at it. The monkey pulled its top lip
back in a bubblegum-pink grimace.
Now that I was trapped here for an uncertain length of
time, I decided to enjoy myself. I went looking for the pair of
golden shears that was the sign of the Bullock’s Bollocks
bar. It was no easy task because Epsilon changes
constantly.
A crowd of nasnas with tour guides wended their way
between the tables. Nasnas are men with one arm and one
leg each. The two nearest me were heavyset columns of
flesh, and they supported each other, hopping along in a
pair. The arm of each man projected from the middle of his
chest, waving like a trunk. I studied their faces and caught
my breath. Each had a big, single eye directly above his
nose, all his features in a vertical line, a wide mouth and
rough skin. The men turned their great round eyes on me as
they passed. Their guide announced, “This is the edge of
the Tine’s Quarter. Take special care on the road please…
And if you see any Tine, run. Well, hop quickly.”
Behind the nearest stall sat a big, bearlike animal. Its fur
was pure black and white splodges. Backward-pointing
spines grew around its neck and down its back. The beast
shook itself and its quills clattered. Its head was bowed; it
looked so hunched and miserable that I stopped, intending
to buy it and set it free. The stall holder was a greasy man
with a glass eye. A parrodi perched on his shoulder, with
colorful ruffled feathers. It rolled its eyes and copied his
every gesture.
The stall holder saw that I was a tourist and delightedly
shook the bear’s chain. “A porcupanda, sir! A highly prized
delicacy. Not five hundred pounds, not four hundred
pounds. Three hundred pounds to you only, sir!”
“To you only, sir,” drawled the parrodi.
I concentrated and imagined the right amount of money
in the pocket of my suit. I paid the stall holder and freed the
porcupanda. When I patted its head, it licked my hand then
bounded away.
I walked on, to the central fountain built with stinguish
technology out of solidified water. White cement could be
seen between the transparent blocks. It made a wonderful
three-dimensional matrix with beams of sunlight dancing
through, cast by the liquid water lapping inside the fountain.
A couple of wet thylacines barked and played in the great
jets that fell like diamonds.
A bouquet of chloryll courtesans lounged beside the
pool. The chloryll co-cultivate this quarter of the city. Their
extreme beauty reminded me of Tern, slight and exquisite;
their skin was ebony black. One had tiny fruits growing in
her shining hair, piled on top of her head. Her floor-length
dress rustled, it was made of living foliage; here and there
tiny pink roses budded among the leaves. Vines wrapped
around her arms like long net gloves. Behind her hung a
trail of coiling tendrils, fronds and variegated ferns. These
fruiting bodies were great to sleep with, but instead I
wanted to have a good look around Epsilon after so long
away.
The market continued into the Tine’s Quarter, where a
wide road paved with eighteen-carat gold formed one side
of the market square. A shiny building with smooth pillars
housed four tall rectangular machines that emitted a low
vibration. The salt-copper, watery-rotten smell of the Tine’s
red liquid was thick in the air. A sign hung above the
machines read:
TINE AUTOMOBILES, THE HEART OF MOTORING
Driving the arteries of Epsilon, you can’t beat the
Carotid Café. All tastes catered for: blood, beer,
coffee. Next: ten miles.
A girl sat in a low carriage underneath the sign. It was
made of gold, so it must be of Tine manufacture. It was
molded in feminine curves, with bulging panels over its
small, spoked wheels, doors as in a roofless coach but an
upright glass window fixed at the front. It had no shaft for
horses.
I vaguely recognized the girl inside. She waved. “Hey,
winged boy! Jant! Remember me from court? I was the
Shark!”
“Tarragon!”
“Come over. Don’t worry about the Tine.” A Tine was
attending to her car. He was a carnivore like all his species,
three meters tall, bursting with muscle. He was naked
except for a loincloth, his sky-blue skin scarred and
tattooed. His blank eyes were pupil-less, uniform blue. His
eyebrows were two pierced rows of steel rings: the
Superciliary Sect. I thought that he could live for a week on
the meat stuck between his sail-needle teeth. His taloned
hands held a black rubber tube which snaked down and
disappeared under the ground. He was pumping the red
liquid into Tarragon’s gold automobile.
The whole floor hummed. I trod carefully, ready to sprint
at any time. I kept Tarragon between myself and the
growling attendant, but Tarragon was a Shark, or rather the
Shift projection of a Shark, and she was just as dangerous.
Tarragon grinned with sharp teeth. Fins emerged from
the middle of her back and the sides of her body. With a
look of concentration she mastered her shape
transformation so they retracted and her skin smoothed.
She briefly became a beautiful woman rather than a Shark.
“Do you like my shape?” she said. “I find that airbreathers
are nicer and more obliging to pretty girls.” Then,
lost in thought, the changes gradually reasserted
themselves, so that I was confronted with the difficult
challenge of talking to a frothy blond teenager in a strapless
dress and stiletto heels, with three rows of triangular teeth.
Parallel slashes appeared in her neck; deep gills like black
ribbons. They widened, inhaled, and vanished.
She concentrated on improving the shiny crimson dress
wrapped around her body. A furry phlogista stole draped
her shoulders. Phlogistas are rare and expensive; they’re
long, like mink, but dark red in color with deep, sumptuous
fur. It had a little lion’s head, but instead of a mane its face
was framed by a ring of fleshy petals. This feline flower-face
formed the clasp of her stole, and its yellow glass eyes
glittered. Phlogistas are resistant to fire; to clean a fur you
place it in flames.
I offered Tarragon my hand, but she looked at it as if it
was her favorite sandwich. “You can touch the car, you
know,” she said.
I surveyed the vehicle. “It’s not alive?”
“No, Jant. It’s not alive…Parts of it are alive.”
It was made of a thin sheet of pure gold, and the
complicated fittings inside were gold, too: a wheel where
Tarragon rested her delicate hands, and a dial that looked
like a clock face but wasn’t.
“The car won’t hurt you,” she said carefully. “But keep
clear of the Tine. They invented these sports cars to do
their hunting and to make religious sacrifices, injuring
victims in interesting ways for the purpose of their worship.
They’re keen on fast, fast cars, the faster the better, like this
rocket; the best that meat can buy. To build speedy cars
they need good athletes. You are an athlete, aren’t you?”
I nodded.
“Tine will do anything to lay their hands on a runner as
excellent as you. If they knew about Rhydanne you would
already be dead. They need athletes, that’s what makes
these babies go,” she said, tapping a flipper lovingly on the
steering wheel. “Take a look.”
She pressed a button and a trapdoor popped open at
the front of the vehicle. I sloped around and peered inside.
Lying under the bonnet, a mass of green-purple guts
quivered and heaved. Clear rubber tubes ran red liquid
around them. They stank of ripe meat. Diagonally across
the center were six big hearts, doubled up in a line. Solid
red-brown muscle pumped in unison. I had an impression
of the mighty strength they produced to drive the spoked
wheels.
At the top two pale pink lungs inflated and deflated of
their own accord like bellows. They were joined to the
depths of the engine by a windpipe ringed with cartilage.
Dark clots lay slickly around it. Nearest me was a bloodsmeared
glass tank of water; gleaming veins ducted it out
to cool the hearts. I saw about twenty red-brown kidneys
attached by a network of ligaments to a porous gold pipe
that led toward the rear of the car. As I watched, hot yellow
liquid spattered out of the pipe onto the forecourt making a
steaming puddle; the car relieved itself.
“Ugh.” I shrank back. “God, it’s disgusting!”
“I bought it to help me in my search,” Tarragon said. “I’m
looking for a way to save the sea kraits. That’s why I’m here
in Epsilon instead of at home studying, basking and eating
tuna.”
Sea kraits were the largest animal I had ever heard of,
but I had thought they’d all died out centuries earlier in the
worst disaster Insects ever caused. “I don’t understand.
Why are you bothered about sea snakes? And anyway,
aren’t you a bit late? Their ocean dried up a long time ago
—and good riddance.”
“Yes, but I have ways to talk to them. Sea kraits are
intelligent animals with a sophisticated knowledge all their
own. I think it’s a great pity they died out. All their learning
was lost, Jant; don’t you care? I saw you free the
porcupanda just now.”
“There’s a difference between a porcupanda and a
kilometer-long sea snake! The Shift’s better off without foul,
slimy sea creatures!”
“So says the Rhydanne. Take care you’re not threatened
with extinction yourself. The Tine will want to make sportscoupés
out of you. Wait! Don’t run away! Be a nice
Rhydanne and look after my car for a minute while I pay.”
Tarragon hefted a slab of succulent steak, which was lying
on the spare seat. She jumped down from the running
board and turned her shark’s waddle into a very sexy walk
as she strode into the kiosk.
I leaned on the car’s curved side, staring all around for
approaching Tine. If Tarragon was right they would be
waving cleavers and bent on my demise. She had called
this vehicle a sports car, but I have never seen one play
sports, and if you ask me it is quite unsporting, sitting in a
car when one is expected to run.
Tarragon reappeared, unwrapping a chunk of the Tine’s
red water frozen to a flat wooden stick. She gave it a big
lick, then offered it to me.
“No way!”
“Suit yourself. Weird air-breather. You shouldn’t visit
Epsilon, Jant; you don’t belong here. It makes me so sad to
see you poisoning yourself. I hoped you had given up
drugs.”
“Well, I’m having a bit of a relapse.” I explained the
island, my fear of the sea and my current predicament on
board Stormy Petrel.
Patches of gray sandpaper skin blotched her body and
faded. “A voyage of discovery!” she said enthusiastically.
“Well, in that case I’ll help. I fancy taking a look at your
vessels. I’ll follow them at depth for a while so you don’t
have to fear the sea. If anything untoward happens to your
ship while I’m in the vicinity you should be relatively safe.”
“Thank you. Thank you, Tarragon. What can I do in
return?”
“Learning motivates us Sharks. An edifying experience
is reward enough. And although I’m cruising distant waters
right now, it shouldn’t take me too long to swim to you…”
I frowned.
“All the seas are connected. Actually all the oceans in
every world are one ocean. The sea finds its own level
across the worlds; you can reach anywhere if you swim far
enough. As long as the water is to our taste, what matters it
what sea we breathe?” She continued, “I wish I could see
the ocean from the outside—an immense orb of water
hanging in vacuum, so my school tells me. That’s one Shift I
can’t make.”
I thought about this for a while. The same sea that is
surging into Capharnaum harbor laps on the beach at
Awndyn, backs up the sparkling Mica River at high tide—
brackishly flows into Epsilon market, glistens in Vista
Marchan two thousand years ago, and is swept the next
minute by Tarragon’s fins in the deep abyss. The land
changes, but the ocean is a still pool, a pool like a sphere,
hanging in the universe.
I decided that Tarragon was making fun of me so I
giggled and she gave me a contemptuous look. “It’s true.
You don’t think angler fish and manta rays originated in your
world?”
I shrugged, not knowing the animals to which she
referred.
The Shark sighed. “Jant, call yourself a scholar? No real
student would mess with their mind the way you do. Why
destroy yourself? Do you want to be found lying dead, a stiff
corpse with a needle in its arm? What’s cool about that? I
get here through study and you get here through pleasure. I
can smell it on you. Pleasure is actually bad where I come
from.”
“And what is good where you come from?”
“Little bits of fish.”
“I’m sorry, Tarragon. I Shifted by accident. I’m only here
because the ocean unnerves me and I OD’d.”
“There are other methods to achieve enough
disconnection to Shift.” She smiled triangularly. “By pain, or
the way us Sharks do it—by thought. Promise you won’t do
drugs again and I’ll teach you! You may eventually be able
to Shift at will, just as I can—but probably not as well,
because air-breathers aren’t very intelligent. For example
you would never be able to Shift as far as my world. The
degree of dislocation would certainly kill you. You must be
near death to get this far.”
“Shift at will? How?”
“You can will yourself to wake up from a nightmare,
right? This is no different. Your body’s not here; you’re a
tourist, a projection same as me. If you must travel to
Epsilon, do it by meditation—you need a relaxed state of
mind to project yourself. Of course, it’s easier to leave the
Shift than it is to arrive so you can either meditate or force
yourself back home. All I do is wake from my trance and I
return to my sea.”
It never occurred to me that I could find a different way to
Shift. I had thought traveling to Epsilon city was a side
effect of scolopendium, and that I could only wake when the
drug wore off. “I don’t think I can.”
“Oh yes. You can travel along what, let’s face it, is a welltrodden
path. It just takes patience—and concentration. I’ll
show you!”
She leaned over the car’s low door, grabbed my belt
and shirt front, and pulled me into the car. Her strength was
incredible. I sprawled onto the passenger seat, into the
footwell. My long legs waved in the air as I thrashed about
trying to find purchase to jump out.
Tarragon held me down effortlessly with one little hand
on my chest. She pressed a pedal to the floor, released a
lever. The car lunged forward with such power I was thrown
back against the seat. “Let me out! Let me out! Help!” I
struggled. “Tarragon, you bitch!”
“I’ll teach you a lesson, Shark-style!” Her pert breasts
heaved with laughter. She blew a wordless human scream
on the car’s larynx horn.
It moved faster than a racehorse, rushed at my flight
speed along the ground. Tarragon talked loudly as she
steered: “Let me tell you the safe method to Shift—you
should lie still and empty your mind, relax and think your
way here. It might take a few years to perfect but you
immortals have time to practice. Try now—think your way
back to the Fourlands.”
I refused. I wouldn’t risk returning to a drugged sleep. My
consciousness must be kicked out to the Shift for a reason;
perhaps to stop it being damaged by the scolopendium I
keep pumping into myself. What if I returned to a body lying
in a coma? I’d be rejected from the Circle, could age and
die without regaining awareness.
Tarragon saw me shudder and exclaimed, “You can do
it! Let me show you!” She spun the wheel, swung the car
around and accelerated down the Coeliac Trunk Road, into
the Tine’s Quarter.
The sky was dark, and lights on either side of the
Aureate’s road gave a golden glow; a chill mist made a
diffuse halo around them. Skin-worshiping Tine worked by
the roadside. Their arms were flayed to the elbows. Tattoos
covered their skin and the shells on their backs were
painted with spirals. Their muscular blue haunches were cut
with lettering like graffiti in old tree trunks. They had the
broken noses of heavyweight boxers and the thick arms of
fishermen. They carried other bits of victims’ bodies too
that I couldn’t identify.
An immense spoked wheel four meters in diameter
turned un-hurriedly and a needle rose and fell. Tine fed skin
backed with yellow fat under the needle; it hung over the
edge of the sewing machine’s serrated gold platform. “Is
that Tine skin?” I asked.
“Oh, they’re just embroidering it. They’ll put it back on
later.”
They snarled as we passed.
“Don’t look,” said Tarragon. “It gets worse from here on.”
But she knew I would look, because curiosity motivates not
only Sharks but me as well.
Shattered glass ground under our wheels. I turned my
head with a disconnected feeling. We passed burned-out
vehicles at the roadside, smashed and overturned.
Blackened Tine bodies lay between them, marking their
experiments with engines. Long lines of automobiles had
impacted so hard that they were all joined together. Metal
crumpled back on itself. Tine assembled around them,
carrying hoses, wielding axes. Water sprayed above them;
in a flashing yellow light the drops seemed to fall slowly.
Nightmare slow motion as water and blood pooled onto the
road. Curtains of bloodied skin hung out of broken
windows. One muscle tissue axle throbbed in pain.
We passed a gorgeous woman that the Tine had
welded into her car. Her body was set into the seat as
smoothly as a jewel in a bevel. Only the front could be seen;
her face and neck, breasts and belly. Wreaths of gold tubes
ran out of the seat into the sides of her body, completely
obscuring her ribs and the sides of her slender thighs. Her
hands had vanished; bulges at the ends of her arms were
seamlessly attached to the steering wheel. Her long hair
became a stylized immovable gold curve sweeping back to
form the headrest. Her feet merged with the floor; its solid
gold seemed to lap up her slender legs. She was part of
the car.
“If the Tine catch us, that’s what they’ll do,” said
Tarragon. “Make this car grow through us. Would you like to
be a passenger forever?”
“Let me go!”
“Think yourself home.”
Something terrible is happening down there. Something
vast in the heart of the Aureate is pumping viscous liquid
around the drains and dykes bridged with connective
tissue. “Let me go!” I shouted. “I want out!”
“Think yourself home, I’m not stopping you.”
“But I don’t know how!”
“If I call out that you’re a gymnast, Rhydanne, you’d be
spending the rest of your life as a car. Well, your guts will.
The rest of you will make a good roadsighn. Look, there’s
one.”
The roadsighn whispered, “i trespassed in the aureate,
look at me, save yourselves, go home, save yourself,
tarragon, where are you going, tarragon?”
His legs twined together were planted in the verge, and
a membrane road sign grew from between his outstretched
arms. In the mist he was just a spindly écorché silhouette
murmuring, “oh Tarragon, what have you brought us?”
As we passed I saw his sticky dark pink color, stripped
to pus and muscle, his face locked in a wide risus
sardonicus leer; “Tarragon, who is that? where are you
going?”
“We’re going deeper,” she said to me. “The Spleen is on
your right. On your left you will see—”
“Am I a sacrifice? Let me out!”
Gold buildings loomed smooth and rounded, lobed
against each other like internal organs. They were horribly
organic, studded with empty ulcerous portals—foramina
and fistulae. The Ribs were flying buttresses with nowhere
to land. We skirted the Labyrinths of the Ileum and in the
distance the Cult of the Oedemic Prepuce had erected a
tall gold wrinkled spire with an onion dome. We drove down
a rubber subway that stretched and sagged. We emerged
from beneath dripping red stalactites through a puckered
textured sphincter onto the shore of—
A lake. Against the black sky I could just make out its
dark red liquid and hear the lapping as rare ripples ran over
its stinking surface. Gold ducts of varying bores, hollow
femurs and arrays of tubules sucked liquid from it and ran
underground. Glomeruli like fleshy cups fountained in
occasional bursts so the automobile wheels sank in ground
made spongy by gastric juices. On the far side, spotlights
picked out and roved over the highly polished gold shell of
the Western Kidney. I tried all the time to wish myself back
to the Fourlands.
“Tine are a most religious and honest people…” said
“Tine are a most religious and honest people…” said
Tarragon. Tine crowded the shore. It must be a feast day
because hundreds had gathered. Most were Duodenal
Sect; their intestines had been pulled out of a hemmed hole
in their stomachs and wrapped around their waists, and I
could see waves of peristalsis going around them. One
was a Novice of the Flectere Doctrine, who snap all their
joints to bend the opposite way. His bare feet lifted in front
of him because his knees were bent backward like a bird’s.
His pale blue palms were on the backs of his hands, his
fingers curled outward. “You have to admire their devotion.”
A gold paddleboat that ran on striated muscle fibers and
catechism ferried between the Islets of Langerhans in the
distance. “We’re going deeper,” said Tarragon. “Soon we’ll
reach the Heart and Lungs, and we’ll drive the length of the
backbone processional. The Heart! I want to show you the
Heart of the Aureate.”
“No!”
“Then think yourself home!”
“I can’t!”
“Or the brain, deep beneath the Transgressor’s Forest.
In the brain there’s a temple where any creature drawn on
the wall comes to life. Don’t draw stick men, they have
enough of those. It’s sickening to see them, limping toward
you dragging their misshapen limbs and squeaking.”
I couldn’t feel the pull. It would be at least an hour before
my overdose wore off and woke me. I tried to be calm,
pictured my cabin on the Stormy Petrel and imagined
myself back there.
“That’s a good boy!” Tarragon exclaimed. “I know you
can do it!”
She gave me a Shark’s grin but I didn’t give it back. We
drove along the lakeside and I screamed when I realized
what was pinging out from under our wheels and rattling off
the chassis: a gravel beach of kidney stones.
Tarragon called to a whole congregation of Tine
kneeling on the shore, “Hey, see my passenger? He runs
marathons! He can sprint as fast as a car!”
The Tine paused and stared. They gestured to each
other, howled and ran directly at us. “Hurry!” I yelled. “Hurry
up!” Tarragon stopped the car. “Will yourself home.”
Through rising panic I forced myself to stay calm and
yearned, forced, demanded myself back to my body.
Tarragon tapped a finger on her forehead and repeated the
dictum, “Shift by meditation. Not sensation!”
The Tine were almost upon us.
As we walked through town, I noticed that the houses
really were similar; apart from superficial variations in paint
and plaster their furnishings were all equal. I wondered
aloud, “No one is poor.”
I elaborated for Vendace, who didn’t understand me. He
said, “Our currency is based on labor. Every trade is paid
the same, in days and hours. You can get more if you work
longer, but people tend to work the same length of time.
Time is the most valuable thing that exists, surely?” He
unfolded some banknotes from his purse and showed us.
“That one is five hours. This one’s the smallest—thirty
minutes. What do you have?”
“Coins. Notes are small change for us. See here?
Where we come from is similar because everyone in the
Castle’s given the same yearly handout—just a pittance.
We can only ask for more money for appropriate projects.” I
thought if we give the Capharnai steel, it would be worth
hundreds and hundreds of hours in their currency, as
precious as months of lifetime.
Mist pressed me with more questions to translate. I
waved my hands and glanced at the sky, trying to find
words quickly, but Vendace stopped me: “Please save your
queries for the Senate. Then we can all hear and you won’t
have to repeat yourself.”
In the center of town the road passed through a rotunda.
The surfaces of its columns were covered with gaudy
mosaics, squares of gold, blue sapphire and deep garnet;
illustrated panels decorated the edges of its conical roof.
We approached the crag, and the street began to
ascend a slope. The gradient became steeper with a
series of long steps. We were heading for the columned
halls high above. I pointed up to them. “Lightning, aren’t the
buildings beautiful? Your pad looks a bit like that.”
He scanned them eagerly. “The Tealean north front of my
house emulates the style. It was a fashionable revival in the
latter half of the sixth century.”
“A revival! Then how old could this be?”
“Sometime in the early four hundreds the Insects put an
end to the people who originally built like this. That was
before my time, but I’m sure I recollect my history lessons.”
Mist glanced at us. “Yes, but we don’t need one now!
We are making history, gentlemen. Will you pay attention,
please?”
Vendace led us along the magnificent boulevard,
between the shuttered dwellings. Suddenly we emerged
from the town, the red riot of roofs below us. The panorama
from the town, the red riot of roofs below us. The panorama
extended to the ocean beyond the massive harbor walls
which enclosed the lagoon and narrowed together either
side of the beacon islet. The Trisians’ canoes sheltered
within it, secure from the breaking surf. Here and there
between the sharp corners of the buildings I caught
glimpses of a clean narrow river glittering until it merged
with the ocean just south of the harbor.
“The Architect must see this,” I said.
Mist combed her pearly hair out with her fingers, pulled
at the front of her strappy T-shirt and stared at the
incredible view. “We could easily get trapped up here,” she
said. I was an unarmed emissary, but Lightning and Serein
carried their customary bow and broadsword as respective
signs of their status. Mist walked between them, knowing
that with Lightning’s lethality at a distance and Wrenn’s
invincibility at close quarters she was as safe as in a
fortress.
I was wilting badly; I wasn’t born for a temperature of
forty degrees. My clothes clung to the backs of my knees,
my armpits, chest. I was more uncomfortable even than
Fulmer in his designer suit; I was desperate to stretch my
wings. Mist had decreed that their strength would raise too
many questions among the Trisians. I had folded them
under my baggy shirt, which gave me an unattractive hump
running the length of my back. The wings’ elbows brushed
behind my thighs and the wrists hugged at the level of my
shoulders. My wings’ leading edges were damp; from the
wrist of each one to the small of my back the feathery
patagium webbing cleaved together with sweat. The flight
feathers stuck out from under my shirt.
“Don’t spread,” Mist muttered.
“You don’t know what this is like. I’m boiling!”
“Come now, it’s no hotter than a Micawater summer,”
Lightning said cheerfully.
The crowd of Trisians were not at all bothered by the
sun. They kept pace with our party at a respectful distance
and chattered together inquisitively, with curious and
affable expressions. Children ran among them, peering
from behind their parents’ legs. A flock of white doves burst
from a roof, wings whistling. I strained for refreshment from
the faintest breeze, and I envied them. They didn’t have to
hide their ability to fly.
The street started to zigzag up, its steps closer together;
it turned hairpin bends as the gradient steepened. It was
immaculate with low walls on either side beyond which was
open ground strewn with boulders under craggy outcrops.
Blooms of butterflies rose and fell on lavender, wavered
over planted hibiscus, lemon trees and bougainvillea,
honey-drunk.
Then we reached the flat hilltop and entered the open
courtyard of two dazzling white granite buildings. At the far
end was the massive columned square edifice we had
seen from the quayside, set edge-on to the sheer side of
the crag’s cliff. A second, longer hall of the same two-story
height adjoined it on our left. It had pilasters with scroll
capitals set flat against its walls, a roof made of red
pantiles. I was awestruck by the vibrant buildings; they were
only the size of the Throne Room but somehow as
impressive as the entire Castle.
The crowd trotted in behind us, and when we stopped
they gathered around, watching Fulmer exhale smoke and
stub out his cigarette in its amber holder.
“This is the Amarot,” Vendace proclaimed. “From here,
the Senate cares for Tris. Please follow me…”
“It’s the hall of the governors,” I said in Awian. “Come
on.” We crossed the courtyard that was one hundred meters
square, paved with mosaics in copper, blue glass and
black ceramic. Geometrical designs ran around its edge,
and in its four quarters there were pictures: galleys, a
weighing scale, a dolphin and Insects. Insects?
The mosaic showed a young woman with brown flowing
hair, standing in a swarm of Insect heads and huge antlike
bodies. She held a wine-colored pennant that streamed out
behind her and the folds of her dress molded closely
around her breasts and thighs. She had flowers in her hair
and an expression that looked more pained than noble.
Lightning recognized it at once; his eyes opened wide.
“I’m right,” he said. “It’s Alyss of the Pentadrica.”
“It must be a coincidence. How in the Empire could they
know that story?”
“I don’t know, Jant. I really don’t know.”
Vendace led us through an open door into the long
building. The air was cool and still, and we all stood blinking
for a second until our eyes adjusted.
for a second until our eyes adjusted.
“If this is a church,” said Wrenn, “then thank god’s coffee
break.”
Vendace said, “This connects with the Senate House. I
will show you the way. It is the library of Tris. A quarter of a
million books have been collected here. Danio is the
Senate member who takes special charge of it.”
“It’s a library,” I translated.
“Then thank the librarians!” Fulmer took a cambric
kerchief from his pocket and dabbed his forehead with it.
A library! I trailed my fingers along the cedar shelves as
we passed, and my heart beat faster than in the Moren
double marathon. A quarter of a million books! It may not
be as extensive as the royal collection in Rachiswater, or
the archives of Hacilith University, but I had been through
most of those.
Vendace saw my rapt expression and chuckled. Every
single book was unknown to the Empire and brimful with
new information I could spend the next century piecing
together. Some of the larger tomes were attached to their
shelves with brass chains. They were bound in leather and
their pages were paper or vellum. There were coffers full of
codices and square baskets packed with papers.
The lower stacks were divided into pigeonholes storing
scroll cylinders made of bronze. Some were green with
verdigris and others polished by use. There were ledgers of
loose leaves; slim volumes bound in boards, in violet and
dark red buckram. There were folded maps and plans of
every town on the island.
A few books lay open on a table where a reader had left
A few books lay open on a table where a reader had left
them. One was actually hand-copied and beautifully
illustrated with colored ink. The rest were woodcut-blockprinted,
which again showed how far behind the times Tris
was. We passed bay after bay; each shelf had yellowing
posters listing its contents but Vendace was leading too
quickly for me to translate. All the same, I was beside
myself with joy; I had found my treasure.
As we were led through the long room I began to grasp
the enormous extent of the repository—it was floor-toceiling
full of recorded knowledge. A few solitary scholars
occupied chairs and tables in the bays. Fluid music drifted
in from outside, a stringed instrument, but the windows
were too high for me to see who was playing.
I tried to glimpse words on the covers and I lingered until
I was trailing behind the group. Wrenn and Fulmer gave the
books not one glance. Fulmer swung his walking stick as if
he was taking a lunchtime stroll in Rachiswater Grand
Place. Wrenn’s astonished gaze scanned everything
without perceiving it. Mist was trying to communicate with
Vendace and took no notice of the books. Lightning,
however, had the gleam of fascination in his eye.
“It’s wonderful, isn’t it?” I said.
He nodded with the ardor of a collector. “What an
excellent discovery! I must have copies made and shipped
back to my library. Of course it won’t generate the profit
Awia so badly needs, but the knowledge might help us. I
think I can afford the payload room for one or two shelves.”
I wondered if Lightning could see any work of beauty
without wanting to own it. Sculptors and painters in the
Fourlands vied for his patronage, knowing he would
preserve their creations and provide the means to support
them for life. “We must curate this for the Empire,” he
continued.
“It looks like the Trisians have done a good job of that
already.”
“Jant,” Mist called back over her shoulder. “Stop
dawdling. Are you under the influence? Shall we maroon
you here and pick you up in a couple of hundred years?”
The books on the nearest shelf seemed to be works of
philosophy and natural science: The Germ Theory of
Medicine, Manifesto of Equality, Optics and the Behavior
of Light, The Atomic Nature of Matter and other Theories
by Pompano of Gallimaufry, Zander of Pasticcio’s “The
Explication of Dreams,” An Inquiry into the Uses of
Saltpeter, Worlds Beyond Worlds: Transformed
Consciousness, Some Descriptions of the Afterlife, Tris
Istorio—A History of Tris.
Superb. I whipped Tris Istorio from the shelf and behind
my back. I shoved the little book under my wings into my
waistband and pulled my shirt down over it. No one had
seen me. Vendace was still talking to Mist.
We went along an open corridor that joined the library to
the taller square building. Its entrance was an alabaster
arch with an inscription engraved above it. Mist stretched
up and swept her finger over the words. “What does this
say?”
I considered it. “You’re reading it the wrong way. They
write left to right. Um…It says, ‘All men are the same.’”
“You bet they are,” said Mist.
We found ourselves in a semicircular open area like a
floor-level stage. In front and stretching up above us were
rows of stepped seats on which around fifteen men and
women sat, watching us. Some were young, some elderly.
To our left, the columns were open to the air, the sheer side
of the crag. The hall seemed to extend into space. We
stood on the proscenium and felt the weight of the
audience’s scrutiny.
“What is this arrangement?” Lightning frowned.
I asked Vendace, who said, “This is the Senate. Elected
democratically—”
I waved a hand to slow him. “I don’t know that word.”
Vendace stopped and stared at me.
Mist said, “What did he say?”
I struggled: “There’s no Awian analogue. It’s—it’s like the
voting that takes place for mayors in Diw and Vertigo
townships in Morenzia, or to choose a governor for Hacilith.
But not just between influential families, for everybody.
Um…rule by the people…That’s what Vendace said.”
Lightning unslung his longbow and unstrung it. He bowed
and whispered to me, “This will do nothing but fray tempers
and affect our judgment. We’re depending on you to loose
words as swiftly as arrows. Who’s in charge of this court?”
“I think they all are,” I said.
Lightning concentrated on Vendace. For all the old
man’s gravity, he looked unsettled under Lightning’s gray
assured gaze. By now my throat was so dry it was sore.
“Can I have a drink?” I asked Vendace. After a while I was
handed a green glass of water, cool and so pure it tasted of
nothing.
A boy with a tray provided us all with glasses while
Vendace continued to tell the Senate about our ships. I
listened but was dimly aware of Wrenn sneaking out behind
me, the way we had come, toward the library. I didn’t know
where he was going; I was concentrating too hard to worry
about him. Our prestigious arrival was not proceeding the
way I had hoped.
Vendace said, “We are debating if we should let you
stay, and whether or not we assent to any contact with the
Fourlands. Our constitution advises against it, because we
do not want your culture to damage ours, of which we are
proud. Ours is a perfect society built on reason. There are
myths that tell of others, very undesirable in comparison.
“The Senate is obliged to discuss every issue for three
days before voting. So matters are considered thoroughly
and no spurious motions are ever raised. We will let you
know our decision in two days’ time.”
I translated word for word. Fulmer almost laughed.
“Really, three days, the sluggards,” he spluttered. “Imagine
if on the battlefield you had to wait that long!”
“It sounds inefficient,” Lightning agreed. “If we followed
such a tradition the Insects would overrun us all the way to
Cape Brattice before we made up our minds to fight.”
I grinned. “Look, you two, be quiet!”
The senators murmured with curiosity, trying to figure out
what we were saying. Mist hushed us, angered by her
dependence on me. I marshaled my scanty knowledge of
Trisian and introduced our company, ending with myself:
“Comet Jant Shira, the Emperor’s Messenger, and you can
call me Jant. We’ve come to tell you the fortunate news: you
all have the chance to join the Circle and have eternal life,
as we do. Time does not age us…Although I can’t really
prove it unless we sit here for ten years…Anyway, we want
to remind Tris of its place in the Empire; we’ve come at the
behest of the Emperor San, that your island and the
mainland may no longer be adrift but firm allies—” I halted
because at the mention of San the senators leaned to each
other and started talking.
Vendace turned to the fifteen men and women; they
conferred together, speaking in complicated terms at a
natural speed, much faster than I could hope to follow. They
came to a consensus and informed Vendace, who
motioned for me to continue.
“San makes us, and will make the best of you, immortal.
We fight the Insects, but—” Another buzz passed between
them, and I knew I had hit a chord. “Insects, yes, like the
picture in your courtyard.”
A young lady rose from the center of the audience. She
wore a short dress and a patterned stole wrapped around
her body. Her sandal thongs crisscrossed her slender legs
to the knee. Her features were light, her hair close-cropped.
Unlike Vendace, she had wings; they were small, brunette
and very pert. “Danio, Bibliophylax,” Vendace announced.
The library’s keeper, if I understood him correctly.
Danio said, “Insects are just a story; there’s no evidence
whatsoever. And how can people be eternal? You’ve taken
old tales and you expect us to believe them? The threat of
death defines humanity; nothing is as unnatural as an
immortal.”
I translated, saying, “Mist, they don’t believe in Insects. I
think it’s your turn now.”
Through me, Mist spoke to Vendace, but everyone in the
Senate assumed her words were also addressed to them.
“Sir, we brought an Insect to show you Capharnai—I mean
Trisians. It’s imprisoned on our ship, so if you come to the
harbor I’ll give you a tour of the caravels.”
Vendace said, “What do you think, Professor?”
Danio paused, reluctant, then answered smoothly, “Our
visitors’ colossal boats themselves suggest this isn’t a
hoax. Yes, this is truly a historic occasion. If they really have
an Insect and if the myths I’ve spent my life discrediting are
true, I want to see it.” She stepped down over the stone
benches to the stage, approached me closely and looked
at my face. A bitten-nailed finger brushed over my Wheel
scar and then down to rest on my feathers, questioningly.
We gazed at each other. She leaned forward; humor
danced in her strikingly intelligent hazel eyes.
Mist announced, “Jant, tell them that anyone who desires
can return with us to see the Castle. I’ll show them the glory
of the Fourlands; give them a great welcome and lavish
ambassadorial treatment.”
Danio roused herself and turned away from me. Damn.
I closely translated Mist’s offer but none of the Senate
seemed impressed. Much of the island’s adventurous spirit
must be lost, because the few individuals who possess it in
abundance could not be frozen forever at their optimum
age. I resumed my speech: “You don’t understand. The
Empire’s hundreds of times larger than Tris. Our city of
Hacilith could swallow Capharnaum ten times. Our fyrd’s
half a million men, our fleet of caravels like those two in the
harbor is—”
Vendace cut me short: “We are not interested. The
Senate must consider for no less than three days, and you
cannot influence our debate because you are not an
inhabitant of Tris.”
I ran a hand over my hair in exasperation.
From the corner of my eye I saw Wrenn scuttle out under
the archway, holding a shiny object in both hands. He
dashed rudely over to me and tapped me on the wing,
“Jant!”
I could stand no more. “That’s Comet to you! Can’t you
be quiet? This is a crucial moment, our first meeting with
the Senate and you interrupt me! What do you think
you’re…? Oh, what are you carrying?”
For a second I thought it was a Tine artifact and my
reality slipped; I felt dizzy and disconnected. Wrenn held a
chamber pot. It was identical to every other chamber pot in
the Fourlands, except that it was shining metal: gold. It must
have been very heavy.
Wrenn showed me. “All the fittings in their privies are
gold!”
“Bring it here,” I said. But the senators’ stunned silence
was breaking into embarrassed or inquisitive chuckles.
Wrenn looked around at them and pointed to it, “Have you
any idea what this is worth?” he said in Awian, loudly and
slowly.
The Senate may have worried that we were dangerous,
or that we expected to be treated with obeisance. Instead,
they saw we were amazed by a simple chamber pot
brought for some reason out of their bathroom. They
thought we looked ridiculous. All the senators started
laughing, and the tension in the air completely lifted. The
ladies in cotton smocks or robes put aside their paper fans.
The gentlemen unclasped their cloaks and craned forward
to see us. Genial hilarity echoed around the spacious
auditorium.
Wrenn thrust it at me, “I can’t believe it. Can you believe
it? It’s worth a caravel and it’s a piss-pot of all things!”
“Put it down!” I said. “Bringing the privy into the
governors’ hall! You’re making us look really stupid!”
“Why are you interested in that?” said Danio.
I said coolly, “Oh, it’s nothing. I’ve seen pots before. We
have them in our culture too. We are civilized, not simple…
Oh, god.” I tapped it, and wisely understated, “But we like
this metal; we can use it. We would quite like to buy more.”
“Well,” Danio said. “Jant, tell your delegation: if you love
this…object so much, if you want this base material, please
take it. It can be a gift from Tris, our first offering of
goodwill.” Applause broke out from the senators on the
stepped benches; appreciative exclamations supported
her words. Danio laughed and offered the chamber pot to
Wrenn.
“They’re giving it to you as a present,” I explained.
Wrenn took it gratefully and said in awe, “Shouldn’t I give
something in return? Oh, obviously.” He unbuckled the fyrdissue
broadsword and scabbard from his belt. He held it
flat in both hands and presented it to Danio.
“Thank you,” she said. She accepted the sword and
pulled the scabbard to bare a little of the blade, which she
examined closely.
“Please be careful,” I said. “It’s extremely sharp.”
She gazed minutely at me again and asked the
inevitable question, “What are you, anyway?”
I shuffled one wing out of my shirt and opened it. Duck
you suckers was painted in red on the inside but, shrewd
as she was, Danio couldn’t transliterate. “I’m winged, see,
just like you, well nearly.” I pointed to my face and took a
sheaf of thick hair in the other hand. “My mother was
Rhydanne; they’re a mountain people who look like this. I
know that’s new and strange but please don’t worry—I’m
not dangerous. My long limbs are from my Rhydanne side
too. My good looks, I get from both sides.”
All fifteen senators accompanied us to the harbor with a
surprising lack of pomp and ceremony. They walked
without any attendants and just chatted to each other,
waved at the townspeople with a familiarity that was nothing
like Fourlands governors. The senators were dressed as
plainly as the folk in the piazza and tea shops; they did not
seem to be very far removed from them.
The Sailor conducted the senators onto the Melowne. I
held the hatchway open and helped the ladies descend to
the hold. I didn’t see their expressions, but I heard their
shrieks, and from Danio I learned a whole ream of Trisian
words that I won’t be putting in any guidebook.
We tried to hide the state of the crews from the senators.
The sailors had clearly contravened Mist’s orders and
discipline on board Petrel and Melowne had started to
crumble. They had traded and squirreled away every
Trisian commodity they could lay their hands on, especially
agate statuettes and the gold beads, chaplets and tiaras
that the children wore. Only a few halberds were left unsold
and the men had broken open the caskets of broadswords
and started trading them. Every single man was completely
drunk, some so legless they lolled as they sat dribbling the
juice of exotic fruits, sloshing wine into cups or crunching on
overcooked sardines. The carpenter retched and farted as
Mist’s boatswain sons dragged him down to be locked in
the brig. He prattled, “Capharnai might not want us—but
their kids have made me rich!”
A bottle rolled around in the scuppers and bumped
against my foot. I picked it up and sniffed it. “Brandy, or
something similar. The merchants are selling spirits to our
men!”
“This is dangerous,” Fulmer confided. “I must keep
discipline. Lightning and Mist will stow a fortune in
Melowne, under the noses of all our deckhands. I doubt I’ll
reach home without a mutiny.”
Throughout the second day, Mist and Lightning employed
me to translate their deals with the merchants who waited in
long queues. Capharnai carried books in their pockets and
either read or stood in groups debating rarefied
philosophical points. I yearned to spend the rest of our
landfall in the library but the Sailor and Archer kept me hard
at work with filthy lucre. My fluency improved, and I made
friends with Danio, who taught me many new expressions
before she was called away to the Senate, where they
discussed us nonstop.
In return for the broadswords the Capharnai filled the
Melowne with bales of cloves, tea leaves, sacks of
peppercorns; we bought a cask of ambergris and one of
frankincense. Our sister ship became a spice ship—I could
smell it on the other side of town.
“Gold for steel, weight for weight,” Mist said smugly,
examining the pale metal chamber pot. “But that last
silversmith—manufacturer of children’s toys—kept the
location of the mines a secret.”
Lightning said, “No matter. I have gained a return of
seven hundred percent on the initial investment. This tea is
too watery for my taste but, seeing as it will inevitably come
to the Fourlands, it might as well come with me. And I’ve
also discovered some excellent brandy.”
Wrenn used me to question every islander he met about
sword fighting, and although I kept telling him it wasn’t a
Trisian tradition he was astounded to find that no one knew
anything about the art.
“It seems to me they fight by talking,” I said.
Wrenn huffed. “Yeah. But if Capharnaum becomes a
manor the Castle will ask for its quota of fyrd for the Front.
I’ll be given hundreds of people to train from bloody scratch
and I’ve a sneaking feeling they’re not going to like it.” He
disappeared into town with a party of midshipmen who
were searching for a wine shop. The Senate permitted our
men to leave the harbor only in small groups under the
charge of Eszai. They didn’t want the boulevard to be
swamped with hell-raising sailors.
By evening I was sick of translating; confused with words
swarming around my head until they lost their meanings. I
was exhausted, but all in all it had been a fantastic day. As
the sun set over the horizon where the Fourlands lay,
Trisian canoes paddled in through the strait. After dusk the
Capharnai entrepreneurs began to disperse and supper
was served on board. The Senate retired and Danio came
aboard to make notes and sketch the Insect. She was
hypnotized by it, loitering in the hold, flinching every time it
threw itself against the bars. When at ten P.M. Mist asked
her to leave the ship, she stood on the quayside and stared
as if insane at the exterior of the hull.
I told Mist that I intended to sleep on the mountainside. I
walked out of sight of dainty Danio, who insisted on
keeping vigil till tomorrow when Mist would let her back
aboard. I took off and flew up, nap-of-the-earth in the pitchblack
night, just a few meters above the mountain’s contour.
The lower slopes were olive groves, then dim rocky ground
streaked along beneath me. I found a low cliff with an
overhang and sheltered under it on the rough bare stone.
By lamplight, the Stormy Petrel’s crew lowered a spare
mainsail and lashed the edges to two poles projecting from
the portholes. The sail drooped into the warm water, which
filled it, and the men started swimming in it. Men stood on
the railing and dived in. I was too far to hear the splashes
but I saw spray fly up in the flickering light of the yellow
lanterns as Petrel rocked at her mooring.
Everything was delightful, and I lay alone. I have rarely
been so happy. The air was cooler than at sea level; the
rock conducted warmth away from my skin. It was a close
night, so hot and humid that your balls stick to the inside of
your thigh.
A light breeze cut through the cocoon of heat that
molded around me. It blew the smells of salt and
peppermint into the rock shelter and carried occasional
sounds from the town. Lamps were lit in the windows of
Capharnaum’s bizarre houses. I loved this scented island. I
smiled and snuggled against the stone. I could think clearly
now, for the first time in weeks. I no longer worried about
the caravels, or Mist who wanted a hold on Tris that she
could never be allowed to have.
I knew every road and air current of the Fourlands; now
Tris was mine to explore. I could learn to discover like a
mortal again and not a jaded Eszai. My sense of wonder
was as strong as the first time I saw Hacilith city, when I
was a foundling from Darkling with aching wings. In my first
decade of life I had seen a total of just ten people, all
Rhydanne. The city pulsed humans around its streets in a
stream that terrified me. I could fly no farther so I hid,
amazed, among the mayhem for a year.
I suddenly realized that I hadn’t been thinking about
scolopendium. If I was on the ship, my body would be crying
out for it by now. I laughed with surprise and relief. If I could
spend a few more nights alone on the mountain, in the
tranquil rock shelter, I could do withdrawal. If I could spend a
few more days in this serene and secure place, I
contemplated, my mind would never turn to scolopendium
again. No more sliding down the OD ravine. No more cat.
No need for coffee, ephedrine or myristica. Or whiskey,
papaver, harmine, veronal or datura. Thujone, digitalis or
psilocybin; not anymore.
I breathed the island deeply into myself. I wanted to take
it in, inhale it, drink it, the whole island, until it became part
of me. I felt organized and in control. Alone on the mountain
I lost all sense of self, and the troubles that drove me to use
cat went too. The Castle was an ocean away. How brilliant,
I was still immortal with none of the risks. I wanted to stay
alone on the mountainside forever, until eventually with no
self left and no thoughts at all I would merge with the
landscape. In my haven there was no need for language or
communication. For a few hours I was free from the sickly
need to identify, classify and name with words every single
thing.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
I returned to the Melowne very early next morning and had
a wash with sponge and pitcher. I decided to go back to
sleep until the call should come from Lightning or Mist to
engage me in another day’s frantic business with spice
merchants and jewelers, and with the host of fishermenturned-
salesmen. They seemed determined to swap
everything they owned for our damask steel or a handful of
arrows.
I was woken by loud yells and battering on the cabin
door. “Comet! Help! Quickly!”
