I ducked into Mist’s cabin and she immediately leapt up,
dashed across and flattened a piece of paper against my
chest. She yelled, “What is the meaning of this? What’s
going on?”
“Huh?” I tried to pick at the note but her palm pressed it
tightly to my shirt.
“What have you done, Jant?” she demanded, clapping
the paper to emphasize every word. I recognized it as the
Emperor’s letter that I had sent to Awndyn with a loyal rider
four days ago. My handwriting covered the back of the
envelope.
“Hey, hey…Don’t blame the Messenger. San sealed
this, not me. I haven’t read it.”
Mist threw up her hands in complete exasperation, “Then
read it!”
DELIVER TO THE HAND OF MIST ONLY
Gio Ami shows interest in Tris. Be informed that his
spies will try to discover the coordinates and the means
to reach the island. You will make it easy for them to
learn this information. With discretion, leave your charts
or records where they may be readily accessed. Comet
will tell you my further orders.
SAN, EMPEROR OF THE FOURLANDS, JULY 13,
2020
I threw a cushion to the floor and sat down. Through the
stern windows the panorama changed as Stormy Petrel
turned on her anchor. The lamps of homes and pubs on the
seafront, the lighthouse on the harbor wall, the notched tops
of yew trees in Awndyn cemetery protruded above the
land’s dark profile. The ship swung back: yew trees,
lighthouse, seafront.
“I don’t know what this means,” I said weakly.
Serein Wrenn had his feet crossed on the table, honing
his rapier’s edge with a tiny silver whetstone and watching
the barometer drop. He said, “We hoped you would
explain.”
I told him San’s edict on rapier fighting and Mist listened
intently as I described Gio’s rally. I folded the letter and held
it in a candle flame until it burned completely back to my
fingernails. I finished by saying, “So, Wrenn, you have to
relearn broadsword techniques quickly; and Mist, you gave
Gio’s spies that chamber pot and notebook.”
Mist tutted. “Never! As ordered, I neglected to lock them
in the safe, and they were stolen by a midshipman with
confused allegiance. He thought he had performed a
cunning heist…But it makes me scream with frustration;
after all last year’s secrecy.”
“Gio has a very strong force around the Pavonine,”
Wrenn added. “And he’s got three other carracks. It’s not
going to be easy to stop him leaving.”
“Damn. That explains the lights I saw on the quay.”
Wrenn threw me a packet of ginger biscuits and I started
munching them. I said to Mist, “San said you have to take
care of the rebels offshore. Can we follow him?”
Mist gave me an incredulous look. “You have no idea,
Rhydanne. Ninety percent of Awndyn supports him. He
recruited most of my old crews and he’s cleaning out the
harbor stores. Gio’s more ravening than Insects! May dogs
shit on his grave. I need to send to Grass Isle to hire sailors
loyal to me—mobilize some Awndyn Fyrd—call in old
favors. He’ll be long gone before we can raise the troops.
So I must find food and…blood and foam! That’s without
counting recaulking, fumigation, repairs! It’ll take at least a
fortnight! San knows that!
“Tell him I’ll certainly follow Gio— Petrel is faster than
those Plainslands crates. We have stun sails, bilge keel;
we’re stable while they corkscrew, pitch and roll. I have
tricks up my sleeve. If I catch them I’ll sink them all right, but I
might not gain more than a couple of days on their tail.”
She ruffled her hair vigorously. “This is not like the
Emperor. San knows very well it takes me two weeks to get
this ship prepared. He doesn’t make mistakes. Gio’s
Awndyn carracks are tough second-class merchantmen
designed to round the cape. Ships Taken Up From Trade.
designed to round the cape. Ships Taken Up From Trade.
In the right hands they could reach Tris. So now we’re all
STUFT.”
“I heard that Tornado already had the dissidents under
control,” Wrenn said. “San’s given Gio a means of escape.
Why in the Empire does he want to do that?”
Mist said, “He usually asks a lot of me, but this…”
Wrenn slid a scabbard over the rapier lying across his
knees. “Perhaps San thinks Gio will sink, then he’ll be rid of
the little plucker and two whole boatloads of bastards.”
Mist said, “No. He never leaves anything to chance.
Sometimes I think even god coming back is just a story he
invented to suckle us.”
Nausea rolled over low in my stomach. I wanted
scolopendium and my hands were beginning to shake.
“San can’t be allowing Gio to reach Tris. Tris is so
peaceful. Gio intends to ruin it.”
“True, but if we save the island from Gio, it’s more likely
to become part of the Empire,” said Mist. “What does Tris
mean to San?”
“I don’t know. It must be more important to him than
Gio’s rebellion is…” Then I figured it, and in a moment I saw
time as San sees it. Its profound length funneled out before
me. I stared into a black well, as linkages and patterns
suddenly lit up across centuries. Even Eszai can’t see
them; the Emperor plans them.
Of course I had no proof, but I was convinced that I was
right. It was a feeling of falling as terrible as when the Circle
breaks. One life was a second, a spark. No human can
think back and forth over such an immense span. “Oh, my
think back and forth over such an immense span. “Oh, my
god! I’m absolutely certain…Gio is acting as the Emperor’s
cat’s paw.”
Mist gave Wrenn a smile. “I know inspiration when I see
it. Jant, what’s the real meaning of San’s command?”
“He’s sending Gio to Tris!” I jumped to my feet and
pointed at her. “You didn’t discover Tris by chance, did
you?”
She blanched, but stood her ground. “Comet, let’s work
tog—”
“Did you? How stupid I am! One little island—the vast
ocean! What are the odds on that? Petrel should have
sailed straight past on either side! You weren’t just lucky;
San gave you the location, didn’t he? He sent you to find
Tris. San must have wanted to find the Trisians ever since
they left the Empire in the first place!”
“What?” said Wrenn.
Mist said, “I don’t understand. What do you mean, ‘in the
first place’?”
“Ata, what were your orders? Why did you do it—to
prove yourself? No wonder you even played the marriage
card. San wants Tris back in the Empire at any cost.”
Mist admitted, “Yes, Comet. All he gave me were the
rough coordinates and I tacked east until I came upon Tris.”
“The rough coordinates? You must have itched to ask
him how he knew!”
“Yes,” she said softly. “But I can’t question the Emperor,
and I practice self-control.” Her eyes were expressionless.
“Everybody knew, back then,” I said, awestruck. “Two
thousand years ago, the whole Four—Fivelands knew there
was an island in the eastern ocean. San wanted us to
rediscover Tris.”
“But why give it to Gio?”
“Because every new problem is a solution to an old
problem,” I ranted. “San has sent Gio to invade the island
instead of us!”
Mist said, “Oh. Because he can’t be seen to do it
himself?”
“Yes. Listen; San ordered me to tell the Senate, ‘Our
Emperor has sent us to protect you from Gio Ami.’ He
makes Gio sound like a formidable enemy, so that he has
an excuse to send us!”
“Gio is a formidable enemy,” Wrenn pointed out. “I’m
determined to prevent him and his scumbag highwaymen
from destroying Capharnaum.”
My hand on the door handle. “Well, at last San has the
means to reach the Trisians, to catch up. Tris is a loose
end that must have bothered him for two thousand years!
He gave you money to rebuild the fleet after the last Insect
swarm, didn’t he, Mist? How does it feel to be one of his
instruments? And Serein, what’s it like to be his
Swordsman executioner? No better than Gio, who thinks
he’s rebelling but he’s just San’s pawn. San wants the
descendants of the fifth-century rebels returned to the fold;
wouldn’t you? Oh, I really need a fix.”
“Come back!” said Mist. “Tell us how you know all this.
Where are you getting it from?”
“A History of Tris. It’s…” I faltered. “I could do with some
cat.” I ran to the hatch and down the ladder, heading for the
sickbay.
The book I stole from the library recorded that a group of
radicals left the Pentadrica to found Capharnaum. San
must have known. I was sure that he wanted their
reintroduction to the Empire, and Gio provided the means. I
knew that we had to stop Gio. I also knew that I had just
flown an awful, demanding itinerary all over the Plainslands
and that being back on a caravel was not helping the fact I
badly needed cat.
I ducked along under the low beams. Smells of gravy
and hot flour rose from below. The ship creaked; the deck
was gloomy. I paused and listened at the sickbay door lit by
a single swinging lanthorn because a compassionate voice
emanated from inside. It was the Doctor. I thought she was
addressing Lightning, but no other voice answered or
interrupted her. The old woman was talking to herself.
“Over time, Eszai are supposed t’ get worn out and
replaced. You’re no’ supposed t’ live forever, really.” I heard
her bustling about. “My dear, you like stories? Of course
you do, you’re a romantic. Hard t’ believe once I was a lit’le
girl with brown plaits and a patched skirt tha’ spun ou’ when
I twirled. I was walking down the cobbled back streets in a
Hacilith summer, and I heard music. That were before you
were born, Saker, a long time ago. Such music! It were a
shawm an’ sackbut, though there could’ve bin a hundred of
each, the way they wove t’ most tempting tunes. T’ music
were coming from behind a high wall, with an arched green
gate in it. I tried t’ gate but i’ were locked. I shouted to t’
musicians, but nobody answered. I sat down on t’ cobbles
and began to cry.
“Then along the road there came this crowd of people,
dressed in t’ most beau’iful costumes, with plum-colored
feathers and foil masks. They caugh’ me up in their
masquerade, an’ I slipped in behind them when the green
gate opened t’ le’ them through. From then on, I were lost
among t’ drunken guests of an outlandish party, and I, only a
lit’le girl with a calico skirt, became their amusement. They
whirled tall and grotesque around me, an’ I stared in fright.
When I tired of t’ constant noise and mysterious innuendo, I
tried t’ run away. I tried t’ ge’ out of t’ ornate garden, but t’
high wall trapped me in. Ladies and servants bat’ed me
away, their sharp heels ripped my skirt. Eventually I crawled
under a bush covered with these massive waxy flowers and
I fell asleep. When I woke up I found myself out in the stree’
again. I had been cleared up and put ou’ with all the refuse
from t’ party.
“Saker,” she said tiredly, “I heard how men break wild
horses; tie their back legs, and when they attemp’ t’ run,
they fall. That’s how i’ was for me before the Circle. You
saved me then and we’ve been friends since. I’m saving
you now. I can’t do withou’ you. Simply, if you leave me, I
shall be alone forever.”
The voice stopped and all was quiet behind the door. I
pushed it and slipped inside. The Doctor was sitting beside
Lightning, playing a game of solitaire with glass beads.
She put her wrinkled finger to her lips.
Lightning lay on his side on a cot that was attached head
and foot to the ceiling and swung slightly with the ship’s
motion. His wings were open, one thoroughly bandaged,
the other spread to stop him moving on the mattress. The
feathers had been cut down in accordance with Rayne’s
theory of cleanliness. He was asleep. The blanket rose and
fell with uneven breathing but in the indistinct light he looked
like a tombstone effigy.
Rayne followed my gaze to a half-empty brandy bottle on
the floor. “Tha’s the strongest narco’ic I can get him t’ drink,”
she said. “He’s feverish and t’ wound’s infec’ed bu’ he
refuses t’ take painkillers. He’s afraid of them, I think,
having seen what drugs have done t’ his friend.”
I hugged her; her face only came up to my chest.
Wrinkles beneath her eyes overlapped like an oyster shell.
Her plain cotton frock smelled of wintergreen oil and steam.
In the small cabin she stood tall whereas I had to stoop.
“How is he?”
“In a serious condition. T’ wound won’ close. I’ will take a
long time, stabs have t’ heal from t’ base up and this one’s
deep. He los’ a lo’ of blood. He’s weak, but a’ least he’s
eating. A blood transfusion is t’ las’ resor’. I told him, ‘Lie
still or i’ will trouble you for a century.’ I’m treating his
sprained arm as well. What about you? You look like you’re
dependen’ again.”
“Yes…I’m…I’m back on the needle. Is there any way I
can help Lightning?”
She seized my wrist firmly and pushed my loose sleeve
back. “Shi’, Jant. T’ pet cat you’re keeping has been
scratching your arms again. What a mess. Thought you’d
beaten i’ las’ time. More fool me.”
I crouched down against one of the ribs that supported
the deck above. If you use drugs, in time you grow unusually
familiar with the corners of rooms. My own predictability
sickened me: “Do you have any cat?”
“Yes. I had t’ bring new supplies ’cause someone made
off with t’ ship’s complement of skylarks. No pity this time,
Jant. You use your habi’ t’ bask in sympathy, soaking i’ up
like a sponge.” Rayne shuffled to prop her ample bottom on
the work surface, obscuring her medicine case. “T’ chest
stays locked. I can shou’ for Wrenn. He’s easy strong
enough t’ chuck you in t’ brig.”
“I’m not violent,” I said, aghast.
“I know. Bu’ in a few hours you’ll be desperate.”
I wanted to get away. “Look, I don’t want to take cat
anymore but I don’t have the willpower to stop. In the last
week I’ve had three nights without sleep and small shots
give me the energy to keep going. I am trying, Rayne.”
“You certainly are. Wha’s your dosage?”
“Five grains every two days.”
“Shi’. A Zascai wouldn’t live long a’ tha’ rate. I thought I
felt t’ Circle strain to hold you.”
Slumped against the hull and starting to shiver, I
wretchedly submitted to her examination. She cleaned
down my track marks and peered at my tongue and redrimmed
eyes. Macabre old woman. “If you don’t qui’ soon
ca’ will kill you. You have one bugger of a problem.”
“What problem—Gio determined to ravage the
Fourlands’ only idyll, or Tern’s adultery that I dwell on for
hours at a time?”
“Silly boy. Tern’s infideli’y is her way of coping with your
drug habi’.”
“It’s the other way around,” I said. “I use cat because I
can’t bear to think of her affairs.”
“Pull yourself together! You and Tern blackmail each
other…but she’s more likely t’ enjoy i’, whereas you hurt
yourself t’ ge’ her attention. You’re addic’ed t’ sympathy—
from Tern, from me and even Saker. Well, i’s run out bu’
you’re still dying. Stop get’ing guilt kicks from asking for
help and then rebuffing i’. Stop saving all your pain till later,
live in t’ real world. I know i’s harsh but i’s no’ as bad as t’
damage you wreak on yourself trying t’ escape. If you don’
break t’ vicious circle, you’ll wreck both your lives.”
“Tern left me first…She doesn’t care about me
anymore,” I complained.
“Don’ argue,” Rayne snapped.
“I’m not arguing. I agree with what I’m saying!”
Lightning stirred and Rayne continued quietly. She
turned her back on me and began to sort through vials. I
didn’t want to listen but I had no option. “I find tha’
selfishness is t’ worst chronic disease of Eszai. Tern also
suffers from t’ condition. She loves you as a daredevil, how
you used to be—flying t’ Ressond gale, climbing t’ cliffs a’
Vertigo. Admi’ that you’re a lo’ less beau’iful lying on t’ floor
staring a’ t’ ceiling. An’ after ninety years t’ res’ of t’ Circle’s
bored and sick of you collapsing all t’ time…. Sometimes I
think t’ greatest strain on San is restoring everyone’s livers.
Tornado challenges ten men to a drinking contes’, Frost
sups enough coffee for ten men, and you do both stimulants
and narco’ics.”
I wished that people could see and believe my exploits
in the Shift. I folded my arms tightly; my sharp fingernails
dug into my biceps. I rocked forward. “It hurts, it hurts. I don’t
want to do the fast cure…I can’t kick now. The Empire
needs me.”
“You mus’ have some now because you’re going into
shock. I don’ wan’ two Eszai in life-threa’ening states. Then
I ration you, one dose a day, oral no’ intravenous, until I
have chance to straigh’en you ou’. I can guess a’ t’ difficulty
of injec’ing on a moving ship in a tempes’.”
I nodded, relieved to submit to Rayne’s regime. She
would look after me. “It’s a deal.”
She held out a hand for my nearly empty hip flask. The
whorls on her fingertips were worn smooth through age and
she had cured the warts, leaving small brown circles. I
forced myself to open my fist a finger at a time and drop the
bottle.
“Well done, Jant,” she said approvingly.
Hopelessness washed through me; dread filled me. I
gave her a look that would have been puppy-dog if my eyes
hadn’t been so wildcat. A few minutes later I was rewarded
with Rayne’s confident grip on my bare arm, and a flick of
her finger as she pushed the needle into the crook of my
elbow. I felt no pain; Rayne was good. Unlike me she left no
time for a red wisp of blood to spring into the syringe and
dissipate, be sucked back with the drug. She just pushed
the plunger down efficiently. So I got half of the ritual that I
so badly craved. She shook her head, shaking her wattles
like a bantam. I lost focus of her concerned face. I may look
ill but it’s beautiful in here. I breathed a week of strife out in
one sigh; sleep at last.
I spent the next four days delivering communications.
Governor Swallow could only find fifty Select Fyrd whom
she could vouch had no sympathy with the rebels, and
double that number of reliable General Fyrd. Mist employed
a crew but could only find basic supplies, poor quality and
meager quantity: salt fish, three hundred barrels of flour
bulked out with ground peas.
Mist came to the deck where I was supervising the fyrd
carrying baskets of crossbow bolts up the gangplank. She
said, “Make them work faster. Gio’s ships left during the
night and they’re already out of sight.”
“How many ships?” I asked.
“Three. Well, he took four carracks. Three of them,
Pavonine, Cuculine and Stramash, sailed right out through
the overfalls at slack water. I don’t know the lead skipper,
but he’s a capable navigator. Gio’s braving heavy seas—
force-ten gales! But no one will follow him since the
Demoiselle Crane capsized. I altered the harbor
coordinates in the logbook before I so carelessly let a
deckhand steal it.” She laughed with asperity. “The
Demoiselle Crane hit the Corriwreckan overfalls at flood
tide, one A.M. exactly.”
Her thin-lipped expression was unsettling. I shuddered,
as an echo of my sea-fear returned.
The loading continued night and day under Mist’s
impatient gaze, but it took a week before the stevedores’
footsteps stopped resounding up and down Petrel’s
ladders and in the hold. The gale-force wind filled the sails
and hauled us forward, and we began to crash through the
storming seas outside the harbor. I retreated below to tell
Lightning the news.
I took the first turn to watch over Lightning. When awake,
he refused to allow the pain to affect him and was as
courteous lying in the sickbay as in his palace. I wished that
I had his self-assurance, but I don’t have the security that
comes from never questioning my place in the world.
Rhydanne always see my wings and flatlanders see my cat
eyes.
Because wolves track lonely boys, I was hunted out of
Darkling in the melt season of the year I later calculated to
be eighteen-ten. I was unaware that the high airstreams
would carry me to the biggest city of hungry rats,
bewildering to a mountain child, and proving nearly
impossible to escape. Until I joined the Circle I was always
pushed on, only ever seeking to get away from the places
in which I was trapped. I became so used to defending
myself that in the Hacilith chemist’s shop, when I began to
feel I belonged, my behavior left me ruined and homeless
again.
After the avalanche I ran down from the devastated
valley keeping Mhor Darkling’s colossal crags on my right,
onto the plateau and warily toward the pueblo. I sneaked
into the storeroom of the distillery, desperate to find food,
filthy and tottering from exhaustion. I had not run such a long
distance on my own before.
I descended a gravel and damp matting slope into the
dark cellar and splashed onto a stone floor. It was covered
with a good six centimeters of standing water. Drops ran
down the dank walls and fell from the ceiling, plinking
rhythmically. This was so wrong. Did anyone know the store
was flooded?
It was like creeping into a cave. The cellar was stifling
with the smell of pounded meat; the freeze-dried pemmican
had become a sodden, slimy mass. But I had grown up with
the smells of pelts drying and antler soaked in urine to
soften it for carving, brown fat spitting on a cooking fire of
burning bones, the reek of split long bones boiling to make
grease.
I reached up and pulled down one of the baskets of
dried berries that were stacked in piles of five. Rhydanne
count in base five because it is warmer to keep one hand in
a mitten. Besides, five of anything is a lot in the mountains. I
ate an entire basketful of bilberries and cloudberries. Then I
scooped water from the floor and lapped it out of my
cupped hands until I was satiated.
Throughout my childhood in Darkling, I mainly ate meat.
So when I reached the city I lived by stealing sizzling
burgers from market stalls, which was as near to meat as I
could find. When I figured out what fruit was, and how to
peel it, I changed to pilfering apples and oranges, loving the
intense sweetness, although to start with they gave me
indigestion. The first words of Morenzian I learned were the
tradesmen’s cries and curses.
I crept back to the distilling room and checked that it was
deserted. I dashed out of the stone doorway, left the pueblo
and jogged onto the plateau, while biting grit from under my
nails. The dull sun shone a white pathway in the overcast
sky. A skinning wind blew from the direction of Scree
gorge, carrying the roar of the meltwater torrent and
bobbing the sparse heather patches. Thick snow lay in
hummocks everywhere, receding from dashes of black
rock. Muddy blots in the distance were chamois, wandering
along the vast plateau. Above them ancient glacier
scratches scored the distant cliffs, as if in desperation.
Two Rhydanne sprang out in front of me. I dodged with a
cry but they blocked my path. They were adults, I was as tall
as them but not as strong. I didn’t know the man’s name but
I knew his reputation. Being the area’s fastest runner, he
had caught a lot of women and lorded it over the other men.
He had married and keenly defended a very desirable
fellow hunter, who stood beside him.
A handful of condor feathers quivered in her long matted
hair; it was dried back with ochre paste and red daubs
stained the hair roots on her forehead. She had a pierced
bear-canine necklace, and wolverine claws strung on the
babiche lacings of her tasseled puma-beige breeches. She
looked old, perhaps thirty-five. They both had knives on
their belts and armfuls of plain bangles, prized possessions
that confirmed their status. As the mountains grow,
earthquakes and erosion sometimes uncover veins of
Darkling silver that Rhydanne beat into jewelry.
These hunters were out of their territory, which I knew to
be on the other side of the aiguille-lined ridge called the
Raikes. They were not at all impressed by the farouche
shock-headed boy who, having summed them up, was
trying to flee. They strode around me. I couldn’t dash
between them; I was trapped.
“What is this?” she said with curiosity. Her eyes drilled
into me like pale shards of bone.
“He’s an Awian. Stocky as he is, he’s young.”
“Alone?”
They looked around. “If he is an Awian he’s not old
enough to be here by himself, I do declare. An orphan,
then.”
The woman spoke slowly, “Are you an orphan? Or
abandoned?”
I said nothing.
“What are you doing here?” the man asked.
With overwhelming isolation I thought, I do two things: I
can keep people company or I can leave them alone.
The woman shot out a wind-burned hand and started
pinching my feathers. Her husband gave a laugh and pick,
pick, picked at the other wing. I yelped and sprinted away.
Why were they doing this to me?
The cold wind lifted my dirty hair. My soaked feet were
freezing; my three layers of fur socks had been shredded
when I scrambled among the landslide rock shards.
I ran frantically over low outcrops, knocking stones from
their frost-shattered surface. The Rhydanne kept pace
without quickening their breath and all the time they laughed
and plucked my feathers, leaving a trail of the ones they
managed to detach. The woman poked me and I
staggered; the man shoved me back to ward her. I made a
break but she leapt and pushed me; I fell over and broke
the ice on a snow patch. I got to my feet whimpering with
frustration and the numb pain from last night. The woman
teasingly flicked my head and tore the hood from my alpaca
wool jacket. The man pulled all the horn buttons off and the
belt that kept it closed, since I had long out-grown it. They
packed snow down my back. If they stripped all my clothes
off, I would die of exposure. I thought that was their intent.
I wish I had realized then that my ability to fly would awe
all Rhydanne, because it was faster than they could ever
run. If I’d known that I would have armfuls of bangles; if I’d
known that I would own the Spider, and remind them of the
fact with free drinks every year, then I wouldn’t have sobbed
and darted about in vain attempts to escape, tears rolling
down my face.
I wrenched free and ran as fast as I could. The man gave
a double whistle. The woman whistled once to show she
understood and they spread out on either side of me.
They’re hunting me, I thought with horror.
I swerved away from her and ran straight. Her mate
narrowed the gap and forced me toward her with a laugh of
pure joy. The ice inside my collar rubbed my skin raw and
was seeping down my neck; the cold air seared my throat.
They easily followed their hunting system and
mercilessly passed me between them. For them it was a
leisurely pace but I was trembling and close to pissing
myself with fear.
The third time around a stack of antlers marking a meat
store scraped in the frozen ground I realized that they were
deliberately making me run in large circles. I yearned to
jump far away from Scree—to leave every one of the Daras
and hunters. Blind with tears I swerved abruptly and headed
straight for the gorge. They chased me, grinning. The lip of
the crevasse loomed far too close. They halted, called,
“Stop!” I heard concern in their voices but I wasn’t falling for
any tricks.
I spread my wings and glided over the gorge. The
ground fell away and I was suddenly one hundred meters in
the air above lashing milk-white water.
The Rhydanne clutched each other, their mouths agape.
Apart from Eilean, they were the first to see me fly. But I
remember terror rather than triumph as I watched their
figures shrink into dots. A powerful air current grabbed and
hurled me up. The Pentitentes Ridge of Chir Serac
lengthened, covered in cone-shaped ice formations. Mhor
Darkling’s highest white peak pulled down past my wings;
the entire mighty, beautiful massif spread out beneath me.
Above my world, a steady broad slipstream of wind blew
to the southeast. I fought for breath in the thinnest air and
talked myself calm. “Then that’s the way I’ll go. Wherever I
land has to be better than this.” I turned with the wind
stream and let it speed me away.
“Jant?” Lightning’s voice sounded amused. “Jant, wake
up! Are you all right?”
I sighed. “Yes. Don’t worry about me; how are you?”
“Bearing up. Burning, weak. Snatches of music keep
going around and around in my head. You look dazed too.”
“I was just thinking,” I said. “Reminiscing about my
childhood.”
The dingy cabin creaked and lurched. The Archer
nodded approvingly and said, “Please tell me about it. It
must have been wonderful, living in the mountains and
being free.”

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The ocean was a choppy swell laced with lines of foam, a
breathing shape over the back of which the Petrel rolled.
The mastheads were beginning to glow, freezing spray
cracked from taut sails, and she listed hard to starboard as
she slid rather than sailed down into another trough.
A passing squall blew the surface of the waves opaque
and slated rain horizontally onto the gleaming deck. Water
dripped off the strips of lead nailed over Mist’s cabin door.
White rain screamed down so strongly I couldn’t see
through it. It pounded the waves flat.
I slid the forecastle hatchway open on its runners and
peered down into the sickbay. Lightning’s figure was just
visible in the gloom. The bed had been hooked to the
padded leather wall and he sat propped up, a glass of
brandy cradled in his big hands. He pressed his back to the
wall in an attempt to relieve the pain that still immobilized
him. I teetered uncertainly on the creaking threshold until he
beckoned me down. “Come in. It’s so tedious lying here for
weeks. I’ve either been talking to Rayne or listening to my
own heartbeat in the pillow. Close the hatch, please; the
chill seems to nip into my wound.”
I dangled off the ladder as the ship lurched unexpectedly,
and dropped onto a spare sleeping bag by the opposite
bulkhead. “I was just on deck getting some fresh air—if you
can describe sea air as fresh. We keep sliding down the
waves sideways, they’re like black pyramids. Mist’s furious;
in the teeth of the storm we’re getting nowhere and Gio is
increasing his lead. Wrenn hasn’t stopped being sick yet.
Where’s the Doctor?”
“Collecting clean water from the stove. I am in good
hands.”
The ship rolled and molten wax poured off the candles in
the lantern. The flames jumped up high on their long wicks.
Lightning blinked. He winnowed out his uninjured wing to
scratch between the contour feathers, then folded it up by
hand and tucked it under his voluminous surtout coat. The
creamy candlelight cast his face into pallor. He was cleanshaven
and, through long practice, fastidiously neat. Living
on a ship for three months is like camping at the Front and
Lightning knew how boredom, bad conditions and long
waiting cause men’s discipline and ultimately their behavior
to degenerate. The bandages under his barn-owl-yellow
coat were fresh and crisp.
He said, “I worry about Cyan; I need to see her more. I
only have a short opportunity to raise her and I can’t depend
on Swallow to do it properly. This is such appalling timing;
last century the Emperor could have done without me for a
decade. Poor Cyan, she always looks delighted when I
visit, though she’s different every time, she grows so fast.
Jant, one day you might find that you rely on prominent
features to recognize people from one decade to the next.”
He veered from Low to High Awian, an outrageously
complicated language in which every noun has a case, a
tense, one of three genders and one of two social classes.
Most of the verbs are irregular, and the least slip in the
forms of address can cause offense. I am not sure whether
High Awian became so intense through its long evolution in
their aristocracy or deliberately to discourage aspiring
farmers, tenants and Morenzians.
“This is the longest time I have failed to practice. I’ll be in
a sadly Challengeable state when we reach Tris, but it is
my responsibility to catch Gio. This hurts, Jant; it certainly
hurts. I can still feel the steel piercing my side—cold and
inflexible. Have some brandy. I’m not drinking much, it
would be disastrous for my aim, but it really is better than
ours.”
“It’s the only decent drink on board,” I said. “Mist left in
such a hurry that we’ve taken Gio’s leftovers for rations. My
guts are shrinking; I’ve had nothing but soup and juice all
week. Can I bring you any?”
“No, stay awhile and talk. I have a Messenger’s errand
for you…”
“What is it?”
“It is somewhat unusual.” Lightning stared into the center
of the cabin. It was easy to underestimate how debilitated
he was, with those overdeveloped shoulders. I waited
patiently; perhaps he was rambling. The warm round smell
of wax pervaded the berth, making it rather cozy. The rain
smelled green; the ship’s oakum soaked it up and stank
like a wet dog. Thankfully it was difficult to envisage the
breakers tearing over the main deck; above us the
shredded topsail cracked and plaited. The driving waves
caught red dusk like smallpox as sunset flashed under a
suffocating sky, transforming the sailors’ frantic activity into
a series of stills.
Lightning breathed, “It is autumn again…her birthday. I
should be with Martyn. Since the Circle was founded I have
never missed the date, my long-kept secret. If I could order
Petrel around and sail for Awndyn, I would.”
“Count me in!”
He gave a bitter smile. “I knew that at some point I would
fail Martyn. It matters not, when Gio is persuading mortals
to massacre us. But although my tradition is just a whim, I
find breaking it makes me uncomfortable and I fancy she
will miss me.” He looked away. “I suppose you are eager to
know what has been eating me up for one and a half
thousand years…”
Lightning stared into space for a long while. He judged
the time was right and suddenly said, “Jant, I want you to
carry a message to a dead woman. If I am killed fighting the
rebels, you must visit the mausoleum and speak to her
about the circumstances of my end. Explain why I can no
longer come to see her.”
He feigned interest in his brandy. “My cousin’s body lies
in an aventurine casket near the tombs of generations of
my family, in a high-ceilinged sepulchre. You will find it
among the trees on the man-made island in Micawater
lake, in the palace grounds. I visit her once a year; I should
be there today. I always leave the door ajar so that a shaft
of light falls across Martyn’s tomb. She loved the lake, you
see. She used to trail her hand in the water, for the
suspended mineral flecks that reflect the sunlight.
“You will see one clear track that my steps have made
through the dust that lies thickly over every surface, from the
entrance to the head of her vault. I sit beside the inscription
that I keep free of dust. For the space of a few hours I tell
her all the events of the previous year. I say that I visit as
promised, because I still love her.
“I always bring balsam flowers. I store them in the
underground bow room, which you have not seen. It is near
the ice house, a beehive-shaped cellar, a cool,
homeostatic store where the bows hang horizontally on
stands. The flowers must be white because they set off her
magnificent deep red hair so well. They must be balsam, as
in the rhyme that no one even remembers anymore: balsam
for lovers, willows for brides, briar for maidens, lilies for
wives.
“When I have finished telling her the news I leave the
balsam, gather up the dried remains of last year’s bouquet
and row back across the lake.”
Lightning rubbed his forehead and sipped at the brandy.
In his mind’s eye he stroked the glistening green stone,
sitting on the plinth while maple leaves fell past the
mausoleum portal and doves cooed in the baroque cote.
“Martyn and I were struck with pure and sincere love,” he
said very sourly. I was startled, but I suppose nothing
causes bitterness so much as a downfall from ecstasy. “I
don’t know why. Maids of honor packed my mother’s
entourage. There were ballrooms full of girls, all very pretty
and accomplished, but not one of them was real.
“As a child Martyn was often at the palace. Then one
banquet night we noticed each other and everything
changed. We fell through into a panorama of hidden
possibilities. We stared at each other across the laden
table; nothing else existed. Without a word we rose
together and left the hall. She was nineteen years old, I was
twenty-nine. My conscience made me hesitate; she took my
wing and led me to the antechamber, where she pushed
me into the cloaks hanging on the wall and allowed me to
kiss her.
“We rushed to the stables at midnight. ‘Don’t you want to
escape?’ Martyn said. She was wild, she didn’t care. She
charged her white hunter at hedges and ditches, taking the
jumps at a mad speed and I galloped beside her.”
An unruly smirk that I had never seen before appeared
on Lightning’s face. He looked almost boyish. “‘Don’t you
want to escape?’ We escaped a lot after that—every
opportunity we had.” He held his index fingers ten
centimeters apart. “I was this far from quitting the court,
marrying her and exiling ourselves. We were this far, one
fistmele, from escaping properly. I wish I had had the
courage; she would still be alive today. She would be here
now.
“I sometimes fought Insects but my lineage shielded me.
Martyn and I spent most days in a world of our own. My
family never mentioned it but they knew. Oh yes, they knew.
The court thrived on Mother’s blissful love for Garganey, but
my love for her sister’s daughter was taboo.
“We talked for hours and rode great distances, far from
the palace to converse in the forest. All those long
conversations, words came so easily. At dinners we were
careful to sit apart. In dances she was serene and
unperturbed while I tried hard not to look.
“Martyn was a peerless rider. I remember her perfume,
her sepia and sage silk, her strong limbs, pale skin, and
her auburn wings that she would spread like an excitable
girl. She had seen so many forests the green of them
stayed in her eyes.”
I felt like a voyeur in the undergrowth next to Lightning’s
cousin as she pressed herself against him and lay between
the roots of an oak tree. She pulled up her tunic, her
necklace’s fine links pooled in the hollow of her throat. I
peered to see a young Saker kiss her neck and full breasts
and repeat her name tenderly and urgently. Her red curls
spread on the crisp leaves as Saker mumbled, “We mustn’t
do this,” desperately down the front of her blouse.
I felt uncomfortable because I had always considered
Lightning to be sexless and celibate; the thought of him
shagging Martyn was strange and a bit disgusting.
His hollow voice continued: “I see her again and again.
Sometimes a woman’s beauty reminds me of Martyn, but
she doesn’t act the same. Anyway, even the most
breathtaking beauty only approximates to Martyn’s. If I wait
long enough…well…the types of characters are not
endless, and with time they recur. She looked very much
like Swallow, but taller, and she resembled Savory too—
remember her?”
I nodded cagily. Lightning sent me to deliver his love
letters to a fyrd captain called Savory, and she let me fuck
her after she read them. I was single, individualistic and
hedonistic, so I took it as proof of how wrong Lightning was
about women. I now keep the burden of guilt to myself,
because for his peace of mind and my own safety he must
never know.
He continued without noticing. “Martyn was as close to
perfection as it’s possible to be. A happiness so intense
can’t last long; it’s always the case that the arrows we shoot
up to the stars fall back on our own heads. The Insects
swarmed ever closer, decimating the First Circle, and in
the year six-twenty San announced the Games. Martyn
watched me win through the hundred rounds in the archery
tournament but she did not travel with me to the Castle,
where he made us victors immortal. I whispered to her
afterward how nobody in the Circle felt immortal and we
hardly believed the Emperor. I established myself,
organized my lodging in the Castle, and next thing I knew,
San sent us to the Front. The Wall ran on the north bank of
Rachis River and we struggled very hard—they stretched
the Empire to breaking point. I had no sleep for a week, I
fought to the last of my strength. It took years to push the
vermin back into Lowespass. It was a harder struggle than
that of twenty-fifteen.
“Then San gave me leave. I visited my family, and
everything looked different. They were all older.”
Lightning pulled his knees up under the blanket and
wrapped his arms around them. The informal gesture made
him seem shockingly smaller; I suddenly saw the boy in a
man I had thought too old and awesome to contain one.
“The gentry and my brothers gave sidelong glances from
the periphery of the courtroom as I knelt before Teale. She
raised me to my feet, pinched my cheeks and turned my
head. ‘By god, it’s true,’ she said, with both pride and envy.
Their bodies changed with time, mine didn’t. The world had
seen nothing like Eszai before. I seemed to be a threat
although I had no power to intimidate them; I couldn’t even
age. The stilted politeness of the quality crowd barely
covered their distrust. I was keeping their wealthy world
safe from Insects but because the Circle was successful
the courtiers lost the concept of danger. They took my
sacrifice for granted. They drifted, I fought.
“I proposed to Martyn but she could not deny the will of
our Queen. She would not leave the court and the country.
Although it would have been easy, at the time we couldn’t
see how. What happened to the carefree rowdy girl in those
years I was away? Martyn didn’t…Now she was older I
don’t think she trusted what I’d become. I think I frightened
her. I wasn’t strong enough to take her from the court, and
she wasn’t as strong as I thought she was…or maybe I
appeared stranger to the world than I realized. In the blink of
an eye she was married, raised a family of beautiful
children, was an old woman; she died. She was always
very changeable. I admired her ability and loved her all the
more. I adored and guarded her until the end, but I never
spoke to her.
“Life seems to be more about the choices you don’t
make. San decreed that I could be Eszai or King of Awia,
not both. The throne passed to Avernwater. I threw myself
into my work again. Eventually I saw Martyn’s own line die
out. The bustle and crowds had gone from the palace and I
lived there on my own. Hardly anything happened for two
hundred years. I had a lot of Challenges because, after all,
archery is the national sport. Next time I looked up, I barely
recognized the kingdom.”
Lightning realized he was staring at nothing and seemed
surprised. He gave me a sharp look and said harshly,
“Never mind. I had expected to outlive you, Comet, but
these are not Insects we’re fighting now. Will you carry the
message to Martyn?”
His confidence overwhelmed me. “I’ll do better than that.
I’ll bring her balsam blooms and chat to her on your behalf
this day every year for the rest of my life, and then, if I can,
I’ll pass the duty on to another willing Eszai when I die.”
“God, Jant; so generous. I am indebted. Thank you very
much…” He sighed; he was too exhausted to continue. The
silence that followed purged the air. We both knew that we
would never mention Martyn again.
I looked at us there: a young and old immortal. The lanky
Rhydanne one curled up, safe in his own self-interest, had a
bright pride in his eyes because he had the chance to
watch over and listen to a prince aged fourteen hundred
and thirty-something, talking in a tired attempt to unpick his
past. You could peel away shell after shell and still never
understand Lightning, because you only get a little of him
with each shell. In response I told him everything about
Tern’s affair, and I asked for advice. “When Tern’s in
Tornado’s rooms I’m too scared to confront them, because
it’s his territory, you know.”
Lightning scowled, then surprised me by saying, “But
from the start she was so keen to marry you! I can have a
word with her if you like. I can explain how you feel, to show
my gratitude for the favor you have promised. I once told
Rayne about my cousin, but no one else. You will keep the
secret?”
“Yes, of course.”
“You are a good friend.” He lay down, propped on one
elbow, and said, “Leave me for the night. I have to sleep.”
Next morning I waited till the rain dwindled, then ran out of
my cabin along the slick bowed deck past the wheelhouse
that Mist had constructed around the helm. She had also
lashed a copper rod to the mainmast like a lance. Two
sailors clinging to the wheel muttered, envying my sense of
balance and the way I can relax into the cold.
Stormy Petrel barreled along furiously under full sail, an
arrow shot toward an as yet invisible target. The knife-sharp
waves scooped up water and rushed forward, all the water
slipped off, then up went the peak again, farther on.
Every time the Petrel bucked up she went “whoosh,”
then slammed down “splash.” This whoosh-splash wound
my muscles tight; I was sure it would tear the ship to pieces.
When she pitched forward the bowsprit dipped and
touched the waves. I waited for it to break off. Water
sprayed over the prow, rushed down the deck, sluiced off
between railings and down drain holes. I thought we were
going to do a headstand on the figurehead all the way to
the sea floor. Next second the bowsprit pointed straight at
the sky like a flagpole. It described an enormous curve as it
crunched down again. The masthead drew a wide circle in
the sky as Petrel rolled.
Worse, the five-meter waves pushed by the hurricane
started overtaking us, and pushed Petrel forward a little in
time with each tip-up. With each tip-down the bow slammed
in the waves and braked the ship, so a stop-start jolting
added to the vertical lift and fall.
In Mist’s cabin my entrance was met with a nod. She
was busy with her charts, while her navigational instruments
hurtled from one edge of the table to the other with every
whoosh-splash.
“It’s been one hundred days,” I said. I wedged myself in
the corner. “When will this stop? You said we should be
able to see Tris by now.”
“If there was no sea-fret we could,” Mist muttered.
“How’s the Archer?”
“Variable. He can walk but his wound keeps catching.”
Wrenn’s voice interrupted me: “Fret, she says! It’s not a
fret, it’s a hurricane.” He lay abjectly on the bench by the
stern windows. His angular Adam’s apple pointed at the
ceiling. His short chestnut-colored wings folded neatly to fit
under the curve of his spine, so he could lie flat on his back.
His face had a greenish pallor; sweat bristled his hair and
stubbly razor-cut sideburns. I noticed a tiny lip of fat over the
waistband where he used to be trim. The sea crossing was
taking its toll. Happily, I thought, I’m better company for
Lightning now he’s injured. Lightning wouldn’t have told
Wrenn his secret.
The whole room seesawed up and free-fell down. I
winced at the crash. The Swordsman moaned, “After I puke
I feel better until fifteen minutes later I have to puke again.
My nose is full of it. The teeth ache in my gums. When we lift
my stomach is left up there. I plunge with a hole in my
middle—on the next rise I meet it and god knows what
other internal organs.”
“Try flying,” I said merrily.
“Oh, god…”
The salt-smeared panes behind him gave onto the
pockmarked water. Stormy Petrel trailed a green wake. Air
bubbles deep inside the waves jiggled and struggled to
rise, broke as froth.
The violet rings under Mist’s eyes were the same color
as her irises; with her pale hair and fading bronze skin she
looked unearthly. She pushed a wooden rule back and forth
along the raised rim of the tabletop. “Patience,” she
snapped. “I can’t help that we’re hindered by dirty weather,
or that Pavonine missed it by days. I can’t control the
seasons! I need to know what Gio is doing. I hope to
predict him…Against this gale every maneuver I make is as
pointless as a Circle masquerade.” Her lips cracked as
she smiled. She bent over her chart again, preoccupied.
“It’s simply chance. I thought I’d find him! I can’t run him
down with the wind in my face no matter how much sail I fly.
The Pavonine’s skipper isn’t better than me. He’s just a
lucky fucker.”
Wrenn and I remained quiet. The thought that Mist was
failing filled the cabin with despondency. She stretched her
arm across the table and neatly caught a brass protractor
as it slid past. “Can Lightning draw a bow?”
“He says so.”
“Can you fly in this weather?”
“If I can get above the clouds. Otherwise the rain—”
“Good.” She beckoned me to the chart and stroked her
finger along some ruled pencil lines. “Here’s your direction
from our current position and we are making just over a
kilometer an hour so we’ll be at this point by the time you
return. If Gio reached Capharnaum at the rate I watched
him leave Awndyn, he’ll have been on Tris a fortnight. We’ll
have to catch him there.” She sighed and continued almost
in a daydream, “When Gio was Serein, I liked the man, I
can’t pretend otherwise. We were friends for three hundred
years of campaigning. He plays to his strengths so he’ll
stay ashore. Aye, I recognize that Zascai extreme
desperation; they drive themselves so far and so pitilessly
they can’t survive. There but for San’s favor go I. Right. I
admit I don’t want to deal with Gio on dry land, but I have no
choice. I’ll let Lightning and Serein take their turn.
“We’re coming up on Tris in the next day or so. See?
Scout around, Comet, and bring us some intelligence.”
I memorized the calculation and said to Wrenn, “Don’t
worry, there’s only one day left.”
“Aye, go back to training,” Mist gibed him. “I want you as
keen as a harpooner when I set you on Gio. This surf will
break straight onto the rocks. I’m lucky that the Capharnai
built such an imposing harbor wall for their piffling little
canoes.”
The sky and sea were so overcast that the very light was
gray. Cloud lowered to liquefy and make the ocean. The
Petrel was always the center of a dull opaque sphere, halffilled
with thrashing water. Great spirals of spitty white foam
went around and around on the sea’s surface.
Waves thumped on the bow and resonated through the
whole ship, playing her like a drum. She crashed down, the
displaced water spurted up over the figurehead and
pattered on the foredeck. Half a meter of white spray stood
solid on top of the waves, where raindrops were bouncing
back off. Their power smoothed the waves, filled the
troughs—the sea was white as a snow field. Spume blew
off the wave tops. I was inhaling it; the air was full of salt.
I shrugged my leather coat on over three layers of Tshirts,
and shoved my hair down the collar. I drank a mug of
hot reconstituted soup with stale biscuit broken into it. Then
I set off and climbed unevenly, beating painfully against
gusts that came from every direction. Behind me rain fell as
a slanting gray strip from a single patch of cloud onto the
heeling caravel.
Flickering lightning illuminated the clouds from within. I
zigzagged up, terrified of it. I beat a path with great difficulty
through the wind, already waterlogged by raindrops as big
as snowflakes.
I disappeared into the cloud base and continued
climbing calmly to avoid disorientation. Rain streamed
down my coat and cold wisps whipped past my face.
I emerged, pulling up shreds of cloud, into a most
perfect, tranquil world—with a population of one. The sky
above was a uniform winter blue, a bright sun shone on
complete cloud cover beneath me like a second,
motionless ocean. Its wan surface was hollowed and
carded into static points like a blanket of wool. The light
was so brilliant it reminded me of the glare on the Darkling
glaciers.
I breathed deeply in the thin air. Directly ahead cumulostratus
lapped around the summit of Tris’s mountain, its
charcoal and olive colors muted with distance. Farther
away the silhouette tip of the second island in the
archipelago poked through the cloud. They were like
islands in the sky.
I held my wings out in a long shallow glide. On the
ground I never had freedom from responsibility, from
people, freedom from drugs. This was the ultimate release.
Only the dull and earthbound sit in hulking carracks, the
humid forest. They will never understand my world because
I am the Messenger and I have all this air.
The clouds’ surface sped away under me. While Stormy
Petrel and Capharnaum town labored under the storm, the
setting sun cast the colors of northern lights over my private
sea. Meringue cloud turned opalescent blue, pale orange
and rose pink; the mountain’s shadow lengthened. I loved
the uninhabited mountain. The splendor of Tris from my
the uninhabited mountain. The splendor of Tris from my
unique perspective filled me with elation, but I wished that I
could show it to Tern. I would paint it in words for her if we
were ever snug in bed together again.
I reached the mountain’s slope after nightfall. The gale
concealed my wings’ noise, so I descended through the
clouds to Capharnaum and circled at height trying to
discern detail. It hadn’t rained on Tris; the main boulevard
and its rotunda were lit but the surrounding streets were
completely dark. A few people stood by the crossroads. A
group of men walked toward them, carrying lanterns and
some sort of polearm. The loiterers started up, slouched
downhill toward the harbor and filed into a wine shop,
leaving the paved street empty. From the foot of the Amarot
crag, a bell pealed ten strokes, and all was silent.
I sailed over the Amarot, seeing its walls lit flame yellow.
About a thousand men were bivouacking on the mosaic
between the Senate House and the library. They were Gio’s
rebels and they had lit a cooking fire right on Alyss’s face.
The aroma of goose fat rose up to me. Real food! God, I
wanted some of that meat.
Shadows ten times life-size reared and lunged on the
Senate House columns as they dipped tin mugs and tarred
horn cups into an enormous keg of rum and passed them
around. Dirty faces reddened by the firelight jeered and
laughed. Thousands of hours of effort had been poured into
constructing the mosaic, and now Gio’s thugs were trashing
it.
it.
The night seemed to jump darker by degrees, making
me blink; my eyes were adjusting all the time. I made out a
small building perched on the cliff edge behind the Senate
House. A shape as fat as Cinna waddled out of the dark
entrance, buttoning his fly. I bent back my wings to
descend. Yes, it was Cinna, appearing like a coagulation of
all the lard in the Fourlands.
He sauntered, his hands deep in his pockets. I swung
into a standing position and dropped to the ground behind
him. Cinna halted in his tracks and turned around very
slowly. He said, “I’m not wanking. I’m just keeping my hands
warm.”
“Huh? Shut up and follow me.”
I ran, hugging close against the library wall, to the unlit
colonnade that joined the library to the Senate House. I
slunk inside and beckoned to Cinna. He reeled; his
peacoat was spotted with rum. I grabbed his lapels and
positioned him squarely behind one of the columns where
he stood less chance of being seen, although he
overlapped it on both sides. His red nose was darker than
his shocked white expression. Drops of sweat detached
from his shiny forehead and rolled down puffed-out cheeks.
I drew the ice axe from the back of my belt and
whispered, “If you cry out I’ll kill you.” Cinna gave me a
beseeching look, wiped his palms on his knees and
pointed at the ground. I let him sit down and lean against
the column. I hunkered down too, in shadow and well out of
sight.
“What’s going on?” I asked. “Quickly. Why is
Capharnaum so dark? The streets are deserted and a bell
was tolling. I saw men loitering; there was nothing
threatening about Capharnaum before. What’s Gio done to
them?”
Cinna’s frightened whisper was so low I scarcely heard
it. “You saw that, Messenger? Yes, the patrol just called for
the next watch. They’re not fyrd—the Senate appointed
men to maintain the curfew and guard the houses.”
“Curfew? There’s a curfew? Why?”
“Because of an Insect that’s loose. It’s killed eighty
people so far. The Senate and Gio have divided the town
into sectors and they’re searching systematically, even
sewers and attics, but they can’t find it. One Insect is
causing more trouble than all the swarms of Lowespass.
See those posters over there? They warn people to stay
indoors.” He nodded toward some sheets of paper pasted
on a board at the end of the library. “They carry a picture of
the latest victim. But the fact that Capharnai have
discovered The Joy Of Insects isn’t the only reason for the
curfew. Thieves are roaming the streets. Gangs.”
“Gio’s men are desperadoes,” I agreed.
Cinna belched quietly and chuckled. “Not us. Them. The
citizens.”
“But Tris had no crime six months ago.”
Across the square the rabble’s voices rose in a raucous
cheer and Cinna took advantage of the noise to say, “It’s
your fault!”
“Sh!”
“Mist Ata bought up all the spices, didn’t she? Now
they’ve nothing to preserve food. So a lot of the
Capharnai’s stores have gone rotten, it’s winter soon and
some food supplies are running low. Prices are steep—
The Price Of Spice is like scolopendium, Messenger. The
Senate has unconditionally banned trade with the
Fourlands and they’re endeavoring to ration everything
except bread and fish. Well, all I know is they’re muttering
because Gio’s nine hundred men have to eat and they’ve
no choice but to feed us. Those drunks you saw Being
Moved On have made themselves a nuisance here all day.”
“I didn’t know Capharnaum had drunks.”
“It does now. Those men were the merchants Mist paid. I
know, because they hassled me for rum as we were rolling
the kegs up here. I don’t know how I’m supposed to look
like a pusher or a captain if I have to sleep in the
outdoors…”
“Keep to the point.”
“Well, Mist gave them so many riches they don’t have to
work anymore. Their money is time, and she gave them
years of time so now they’re idle. I hope she profited from
those peppercorns and pickles, the Entrepreneur Of
Misrule, like myself.” He rubbed his plump hands together.
“They’re not used to rum but they’ve found a taste for it.
They drink it like wine. Because they’re armed, they’re
Creating Trouble. It just goes to show that the only Truly
International Language is drugs.”
I began to understand. I prompted, “They’re armed?
They’ll be armed with the swords and halberds we sold
them?”
Cinna nodded. “Yes, I think so. I was told that the Senate
tried to buy up all the weapons from the townspeople to
give to their patrols but they clearly didn’t get them all
because I hear there were armed robberies—at
storehouses and the market. Also, young men keep
soliciting to buy swords from us. It seems they’ve become
quite a status symbol. Capharnai have never seen quality
steel before; it’s worth its weight in gold. And of course men
have to protect themselves from the Insect.”
“Shit.”
“The Senate is discussing imposing taxes to pay the
patrols.” Cinna appraised the Wheel brooch on my patched
coat. “Gio is waiting for you and Serein. Gio wondered if
Stormy Petrel had gone down in the storm. Of course, he
reckoned without Mist’s marvelous seamanship. He was
thinking about his next move. He told Senator Vendace that
we would leave Capharnaum, but he doesn’t really mean to.
He’s safe here; the Senate is In His Pocket.”
Cinna put a special emphasis on Gio’s name. He was
obviously firmly under the fencing master’s influence. Nine
hundred men following Gio, I thought. They outnumber us
more than three to one. Still, that’s better odds than against
the Insects. “If I have to stain my hands with blood, I must
admit this rabble is less daunting than the swarms.”
Cinna gaped. “You think it’s just Gio? No, Comet. God,
sometimes I believe all you have to do to be immortal is
out-arrogance each other.”
“Spit it out.”
“Gio has won over the Senate and he’s prepared to lead
“Gio has won over the Senate and he’s prepared to lead
all Capharnaum against you when you land.” He went on,
“Everyone here hates you, and Gio has been planning.
When Petrel sails into harbor she’ll be surrounded, you’ll be
seized. There are twenty thousand people in this town.
“Vendace was wary because of the disastrous effects of
your visit. But Gio’s rhetoric quite convinced him. You
should’ve tried making long speeches in the Senate.”
Cinna smirked. “Gio’s here for the same reasons and on
the same terms as the original settlers—to leave the
Empire and San. Vendace thought he had found a Kindred
Spirit. Gio offered to help hunt the Insect and being
desperate they welcomed him with open arms. His
interpreters are at home with their old lingo. The Senate
didn’t like the look of us tars as much. They’ve been
discussing it for three days but they haven’t made a
decision yet.”
I wished for another stint in the Senate. If Gio can sway
their opinion simply by talking to them, I thought how much
better I could be when it was my turn. Gio may have had two
weeks to work on their hearts and minds, but I’d love a
verbal battle with him.
Cinna sniggered. “They are so naïve. Myself and three
colleagues could control this town in a year without drawing
a sword or promising immortality—Ulp!” I pressed my ice
pick to his throat. He gulped: I expected his eyes to pop in
like a frog’s. I couldn’t bear the thought that he could turn
Capharnaum into a slum worse than East Bank Hacilith. I
hissed, “You bastard, if you ever bring drugs to Tris, if you
even think of peddling here, I swear I’ll kill you. If you hide
your tracks I’ll trace them, because I know every link in a
larger world than you could ever comprehend. You’ll beg to
be sent to the Front. You will beg for the wheel. I will have
you keelhauled from bow to stern of the Petrel—”
“No!”
“You could do with losing some weight. The same goes
for if you tell Gio I’ve been here.”
Cinna wiggled his shoulders, trying to pull away from the
pick dimpling his neck. “Please, Comet. I’m a businessman
and San’s humble servant. I shall always give a truthful
account and say nothing to Gio. In the meantime I’ve
arranged to stay on board Pavonine…It’s the safest place
to be.”
“Coward,” I mouthed. I licked salt off my lips.
“Look at you grin. You’re enjoying this! Mad Eszai. If
Petrel lands, Gio will kill you. If you turn tail and run home,
you’ll starve on the journey. I wonder what San will think
when his Circle breaks for Four Immortals At Once? Bet
that’d give him a headache.”
I prodded him with the axe. “Where’s Gio now? Does he
stay on Pavonine?”
Cinna shook his head; the blond hairs on his chin
wagged. He pointed up, across the mosaic, to a
concertina-shuttered lit window above the Senate House.
“See the end room? Right on the corner past the last
column? That’s the bedroom of the apartment that Vendace
gave him. All the senators have rooms up there. It’s very
plush,” he added, with a quiet admiration of Gio’s
achievement. “Now tell me, Messenger, isn’t that a useful
piece of information?”
“It certainly is.”
Cinna glanced at the firelight and the rebels singing
drunkenly. He pressed a note into my hand. “Please let me
go. I respect Mist. I’d like to help her, the little I can. It’s
tough to find a way through the surf. I wrote down the details
of our approach to the beacon and the position and
condition of Pavonine. Please give it to her.”

CHAPTER NINETEEN
Midnight on the open sea. The attendant hush of an
imminent downpour. I flew circuits over the correct position
but couldn’t sight Stormy Petrel through the rain clouds. A
weak glow backlit them; I homed in on it and descended.
Mist had festooned every surface, cable and yard with
lanterns showing me where to land. Petrel’s lights blazed
on a yellow ring of water in the impenetrable night. She
looked like a party yacht, but she yawed and rolled madly.
Lights attached to the main deck railings marked two
parallel lines. I had touched down safely between them.
Now, sitting at the table in Mist’s quiet cabin, Lightning and
I watched her sailors disassembling the lanthorns and
hurricane lamps. They were extinguished one by one, until
the office and wheelhouse were the only cabins lit.
“Take a good look,” said Mist. “Tomorrow night we burn
no lantern. The wind is dropping and our approach is good,
thanks to Jant’s spy. You will have the pleasure of sneaking
to Capharnaum in complete darkness, through the narrow
strait by their beacon islet. You must trust me.”
“Yes, but for god’s sake don’t trust Cinna. He’s a craven
liar, he only worships money. Thankfully Gio doesn’t know
what to ask, or Cinna would tell him everything.”
“Just how did you come to know Cinna, anyway?” Mist
asked.
“Let’s not go into that,” I said dismissively. I poured
myself a quantity of Lightning’s brandy and rested my head
on my arms.
“Why is Wrenn not present?” Lightning demanded.
“He is too young,” said Mist demurely.
Lightning raised his eyebrows. “Why isn’t Rayne here?”
“She is too old.”
“Simply that they would disagree with your methods,”
Lightning said.
“Wrenn is impetuous and idealistic. The Doctor’s not a
warrior and can bring little to the table. Please let me
outline my plans for you clearheaded gentlemen first.”
Lightning said, “It is the same as when I tried to
eradicate Insects from the streets of Micawater. How do we
get rid of Gio and his vicious followers without damaging
the town?”
“Or making the Senate detest us more than they already
do?” I added.
Mist said, “San gave me the task; I will fulfill it. The way
ahead is clear. Listen! Lightning, if you were to remove the
leader, the rebellion would collapse. Your skill with the
longbow makes you best suited to try.”
In the short silence Lightning gazed at his rummer glass.
He said amiably, “You’re asking me to capture Gio? Or
assassinate him?”
“Saker, think—”
“No.” He looked at her directly. “No, Ata; I won’t do that.”
Mist folded her arms. “Saker, I’m surprised that you don’t
want to regain your honor and take revenge on Gio for
stabbing you in the back.”
“It would be less worthy still to become an assassin,”
Lightning explained. “I have never killed a man, and if I were
simply to hide and shoot him, I don’t know if I could live with
myself afterward. I do not want to spend the next few
centuries troubled by guilt and introspection. In addition to
the fact that it would lose me my esteem.”
“No one on the mainland will ever know. None of your
sentiments apply to us in this plight. We’re far from home.
There are no ingrained traditions, carved beasts carrying
pennants, heraldic old charters to say who we are. We’re
understocked and badly prepared. The Capharnai don’t
know us and Gio has stacked the odds against us.
Eliminating him is the only way.”
“Why?”
“Because it’ll save Trisian lives! They’re innocent; I don’t
want to harm them. If we remove Gio, the Capharnai will be
peaceable without him. If we set foot in Capharnaum while
Gio controls it, we’re dead. I think that Gio’s lust to rejoin
the Circle is driving him insane. You know the saying: Pure
ambition seeks one goal only. Don’t you think Gio’s deeds
are a mad panic, rather than a Challenge?”
“I think mad people want to see the madness in
everyone,” I commented.
The Sailor ignored me. “Saker, you must stop him. Can
you think of a better idea?”
Lightning slowly replied, “No. Nonetheless, you have my
answer. I will not shoot Gio. I do not want it on my
conscience for the rest of my life.” He undid the buttons at
his collar and pulled the silk down so that we could see a
small circular scar pierced front and back through his
shoulder. “See this? An arrow shaft. Eight hundred years
ago I beat a Challenger and he turned around and shot me.
Fortunately he had a terrible aim and failed to take my life.
He spent the rest of his days in the Sturge Prison on Teron
Island. There is nothing honorable about assassins; I don’t
want to be one…Anyway, it would look pretty obvious if Gio
is found with an arrow in his chest. It is not for me…” He
trailed off, thoughtfully, and stroked the scar on his right
hand.
“Jant—” Mist began.
“Ha! Just because I’m not Lord Micawater you think I
have no morals! Besides, Gio’s the most dangerous man in
the world. Lightning is more capable of dealing with him
than I am.”
“But the bastard wounded him. Lightning, your good
friend…”
“Yes, and the bastard would run me through if he had the
chance.”
“Remember all the awful slander you said Gio
lambasted us with in his rally? You said you were ready to
shoot him.”
I thought privately of how he slurred Tern’s reputation
and my manhood and dependability. Yes, I had been
prepared to kill him.
Mist smiled eerily and prompted, “Gio attacked the
Castle, Jant. There’s no doubt but he deserves what he
gets. A few drops of the drug you keep injecting yourself
with should do the trick.”
I looked at Lightning, who shrugged. I said reluctantly,
“All right, I’ll do it.”
“Good!” said Mist. Her leather trousers creaked as she
stood up. She turned to her cot and began to delve around
energetically inside it. “If you make it look like he was
addicted and took an overdose, we can discredit him in the
Fourlands.”
I gave her a flat stare. “And make the climate dangerous
for other people who happen to be users? Thank you, but
no. Besides, I need all my supply.”
If an Eszai commits a crime and is caught, the Castle
has no power to try him, nor may the Emperor intercede on
his behalf. Instead, he is handed over to the court of the
country in which the crime took place, to be tried and
sentenced there. I couldn’t guess how a Trisian court might
work, or how severe the penalty might be. Or if I could
successfully talk myself out of it.
Likewise, there is only one circumstance in which the
Castle may interfere in a country’s business—if an Eszai
has been attacked or murdered, the assailant must be
handed over to the Castle to be tried according to the law
of his homeland, as happened with Lightning’s erstwhile
assassin eight centuries ago. If the murderer is protected
by his country, San would forbid entrance to the Circle for
anyone from that land, undeniably a terrible threat.
Mist’s cot was a boxlike bed with a drape of thick ivory
lace. It swung as she pulled up the meager mattress and
extracted a bulky white packet—the envelope of
scolopendium that Cinna had originally sold me. She
tossed it onto the table. “An additional supply. Use a pinch
of powder.”
“But, Ata,” I said, startled, “you said you’d thrown it in the
sea! Wrenn told me you had. You led him to believe…”
“I never discard useful assets.”
I stared at her wondering if she had wanted me to
become addicted. My stash in the coat hem she had
overlooked, all the needles and vials on the Melowne—I
had been surprised there were so many—had she intended
me to find them and get hooked so that I would be helpless
and corruptible, under her control? And now she bribed me
with the drugs I bought myself!
I knew how crazy that sounded, so I said nothing. Without
proof, I did not dare to accuse her. I was as lost and
confused as in an Awian maze. “Oh, in San’s name, what
choice do I have?”
I pulled the envelope toward me gingerly, aware of
Lightning’s disapproval. The last thing I wanted was Gio
materializing in Epsilon. I needed a poison that would kill
him outright and quickly, so as not to give him a chance to
reach a Shift world. I said, “Gio might detect scolopendium;
it has a distinctive taste. If you’re devoted to this course, I
can propose a less risky, more efficient substance.” I
slipped my wedding band off my fourth finger, and the
broader ring that I wore below it—a black star sapphire set
in silver. I pushed the stone with my thumbnail; it depressed
then popped open. Inside were two very small white tablets.
I passed the ring to Ata.
I passed the ring to Ata.
“What are they?”
“Atropine. Extracted from belladonna root.”
“Deadly nightshade! For god’s sake—what are you
carrying that for?” She returned them carefully.
“I always keep them there. Atropine is effective in
treating scolopendium overdose. One tablet would
counteract the toxin, although I’ve rarely been able to take it.
Two tablets are lethal. They’re soluble and tasteless.”
Lightning made a decision. “I think I should accompany
you, unless you fear I will slow you down. I’ll never murder
but I will shoot to defend us.”
“Please,” I said gratefully. With Lightning to back me up, I
felt I could do anything. Archer and Messenger, we’d share
Gio between us. I picked his bottle from its holder clipped
to the table. “I’ll decant for Gio a full-bodied draft. Unlike you
I don’t care enough for it to leave a bitter aftertaste. I know
that he won’t savor a lingering finish, because atropine will
rapidly cause fever, a dry thirst balanced with the aroma of
delirium, a sparkling racing pulse, a blend of spicy burning
sensations, confusion, convulsions, coma and death. That’s
what I call a rich vintage.” I swirled the bottle and took a long
pull.
“You are a sick man, Jant Shira.”
Mist shrugged. “So we are decided. We approach
tomorrow night at this time. Petrel will stay out of sight and
I’ll row you two to the harbor. I’ll wait at the end of the quay.
Petrel is safe under Viridian’s command. I will arrange for
her to bring the ship in to retrieve us two hours before
dawn. Our hundred sailors and our hundred and fifty fyrd led
by Serein will be ready on board if we need them.
Lightning, what arms do you advise?”
The Archer pondered. “Crossbows are better than
longbows for fighting in a town, much as I don’t like them. I
don’t want to cause casualties among the Capharnai, and
you can take crossbows anywhere, even down tunnels.”
“Good. When Gio’s body is discovered, the Senate will
have little choice but to talk with us.”
“I hope it works.” Lightning sighed. “Goodnight,
coconspirators.”
I was about to follow him out of the cabin when the ship
slewed. Canvas flapped wildly as the wind changed
direction, whistling around the mainmast. Ata shoved past
me, stuck her head out of the door and yelled, “Bring her
about! She luffs, you lazy sods! Are you asleep in there?
Make use of this wind!”
Cinna’s envelope lay forgotten on the table. My mouth
dried up. I never have enough cat, I always want more. I
couldn’t stop myself. I sneaked the envelope inside my coat
and slipped out past Ata. “’Bye, Jant…” she muttered.
“Faster, Petrel. Faster, my love. Gio has nowhere left to
flee.”

CHAPTER TWENTY
I let Mist and Lightning descend the rope ladder first into
the tiny rowing boat. It needed testing. I waited till they were
settled before climbing down and gingerly feeling with my
feet for the planks. The boat bucked. It was ready to roll
right over, giving me no chance to fly off. I shuffled as
quickly as possible to the middle of the bench-plank at the
stern. Ata hefted her oars into the rowlocks.
I advised her, “Sit still. You’re rocking it!”
“Move your legs,” she said. “You’re in the way.”
“I’d rather not.”
“I’ll climb over, then.”
“No!” I did not like being so near the water. My feet were
actually under the level of the scooping waves, which was
obviously wrong and shouldn’t be allowed. Ata pulled the
oars and the dangerous vessel leapt prow to stern. I
concentrated on the floor.
“Are you all right?” Lightning asked.
“Of course. But this craft is clearly unstable. A single
wave could swamp it.”
“He hates them,” Ata said.
“I’m just being careful.”
She dipped oars, pulled on, leaned from side to side
and the boat swayed alarmingly. “You’re tipping it
deliberately!”
Ata said dryly, “As if I would. She’s hugely overloaded
anyway.”
“Stop fooling about. It’s not funny.” The rowing boat was
completely different from the high-sided caravels to which I
had become reconciled. They were designed not to turn
turtle but this boat wallowed as Ata rowed. I felt the weight
of my two centuries ever more clearly as I searched the
extremely close water for Tarragon’s fin, but all the wavelets
looked like fins. “Why can’t I just fly there?”
“Act your age. Now the storm has died down, the rebels
will hear your wing beats,” Ata breathed between strokes.
“I’ll glide.”
“And see your silhouette…Oh, in San’s name!” she
exclaimed in terror.
“What?”
“Jant, I forgot the rope. Can you help me? Lend a hand!”
She passed me the end of a cable that ran over the side
into the water and had been catching on the waves. “Pull on
this line. It’s vital! The way she’s built, the planks aren’t safe
unless you keep it taut.”
“Really?”
“Yes—if you let it slack for a minute she’ll split into more
segments than an orange!”
“I knew this was a death trap! How can you go to sea in
a flimsy half-built boat? Shit!” I snatched up the damp rope
and hauled on it until drops pinged off.
Ata nodded. “Good. Now keep it tight or we’ll all be in
the drink.” Water ran from the blades as she feathered the
oars. Stormy Petrel’s copper-clad hulk was a vague black
shape in the distance. Lights on the three levels of decks
were snuffed by the crew, and she vanished.
Lightning talked to the Sailor quietly. “Eszai are not
supposed to sneak around like this. Gio’s forcing us to be
murderers. I wish I was at the Front fighting Insects.” He had
refused to blacken his sword blade even though I offered to
do it for him. His concession to stealth had been to remove
his signet ring and wrap a black mantle over his dark blue
shirt. He held one arm around his new recurve longbow as
if it was a lover.
“When the job’s done return directly to the quay,” said
Ata.
“I’m concerned about Cyan. I hope none of this dishonor
rubs off on her.”
“Oh, don’t worry. I find that daughters look after
themselves.”
“And we have no backup plot,” he said. “None of us
knows enough to predict the Capharnai.”
“We have our talents. Gio must be frightened of you,
Archer. When his followers show their true colors, his lies
will become manifest. The Senate will realize we’re doing
the best for Tris.”
Lightning and Ata fell silent as we came up to the
beacon. Its uneven light did not illuminate the whole wide
harbor mouth—the farthest point of the marina wall was in
shadow. Ata rowed close to it, as quietly as possible. Slimy
basalt blocks dwarfed us; thick kelp fronds stirred deep
beneath us. I had been straining at the rope for thirty
minutes, preoccupied with images of drowning, but I saw
the rafts of empty Trisian canoes tied to their floating
pontoons, undulating on the waves. In the distance they
looked like needles on pine branches. Pavonine, Cuculine
a n d Stramash were monstrous in comparison. At the
waterfront, their unembellished sterns faced us, sails furled
on skeletal spars, no flags flying. Lights flickered on
Pavonine’s living deck. Their three tall masts, thinned by
the darkness, were only occasionally visible against the
night sky. Still, I sensed their bulk and heard the wavelets
that slipped in and splashed back between the carracks
and the harbor wall. They were rising on their moorings on
an incoming tide.
Behind the harbor, Capharnaum’s streets interlaced up
the dark mountainside. Tris seemed far from fragile but,
now we had touched it, it was starting to destruct. What if
across the immense sea is an even stronger Empire, more
pervasive still, that will do the same to us? San would be
furious if he knew that thought. God has not left anything
other than us on this world and, since it nominated San to
protect the world, San and his orders are right. I will one
day announce contests for Capharnai to join the Circle. I will
fly over the town carrying their pennant, letting it stream out
behind me, and Ata will ride her white horse up the
boulevard. Trisian travelers would eventually visit the
Fourlands; I could hardly wait to show them the sights.
The harbor lamps reflected in the water. The end of the
wall was in shadow, with some canoes upside down
outside a small square building. Ata maneuvered us toward
it past the last pontoon. Lightning whispered, “I see no
guards, but have a care. The wall’s very near.”
She braked the oars. Lightning reached both arms over
the side and fended us off. He pulled the boat around, long
side to the wall. We all looked up to the top, two meters
above. “I don’t see anyone.” He stood on the gunwale,
palms on the flagstones, and pulled himself up. The boat
bobbed and scraped the wall. His face appeared over the
edge. “Pass me my bow.”
“Sh! You should let me go first,” I said, nettled.
“Stop hanging on to the painter, please.” Ata took the
rope from me, and gave me a leg up. I scrabbled to the
promenade, lay flat on my stomach and peered over. Ata
picked the rope from the water, running it the boat’s length,
then unwound it from the bow post. She threw it up to
Lightning, who coiled it on the ground.
I gaped. “Oh. It wasn’t attached to anything?”
She sniggered. “No. I just needed some way of shutting
you up.”
“You—”
“Hush!” said Lightning.
Ata arranged knotted-cord fenders around the boat’s
hull, then she raised her hands to us. I turned my back, but
Lightning took her hands and heaved her up, with a rasp of
metal on stone. Her hair showed in a white flash under the
hood of her black shawl—so different from the dazzling
armor she wore in battle. She whispered, “I’ll hide by this
depot. Lightning, follow Jant; he’s done this kind of thing
before. Jant, for god’s sake stop sulking. Remember; return
at five A.M., Starglass time. Good luck.”
I set off a few paces, found myself alone, turned to see
Ata and Lightning still looking at each other. She gazed at
him straight, and a whole spectrum of unsaid things passed
between them. Then Lightning gave a little shake of his
head, and stepped away to join me.
The façade of houses along the harbor was dangerously
exposed because lamps on posts every fifty or so meters
cast light on the paving. They were so bright I couldn’t see
the stars. We had to dash across the yellow pools and
pause in the very narrow slices of shadow.
I reached one of the puzzling black and white posts that
had a wooden cross-arm and dangling wires. I crouched
behind it. “Saker, we must keep silence from now on. I
know you don’t like this and I don’t blame you. But, just
once, please follow my lead.”
The Archer nodded. He carried his strung bow over his
right shoulder, leaving his arms free. His mantle covered
the quiver on his back, giving his shoulders a spiky crest,
and was pleated into his belt. Nocks and fletchings of fifty
arrows projected from the quiver on his left hip, crammed in
so tightly they hardly rustled. He hunched awkwardly, trying
to hide his broad frame. With an Eszai’s determination, he
was trying to be a sneak. I said, “Let’s go.”
Oil lamps on the shopfronts lit the entire boulevard. But
the grid-streets of Capharnaum were perfect for us
assassins; we stole down the adjacent parallel street. I kept
near the wall and walked rapidly, ducked into a doorway,
waited for Lightning to catch up. The main street glowed on
our left every side alley we passed. A statue on a plinth.
Sculpin’s wine shop; Opah’s seafood; Ling and Zingel,
grocers, the shutters closed. I ran across the road and
continued up on the other side. Lightning piled into the shop
doorway behind me. He was favoring his wound. I waved
him back into shadow while I took a look around.
Time to change streets. I sped right across an
intersection, away from the boulevard and left uphill again.
The junctions were sharp right angles, since Trisians don’t
have coaches. We heard a bell chime, the Senate’s patrol
calling for the next watch. This street was darker—the
buildings were all homes. We dashed past open
colonnades and hugged house corners.
If Capharnaum was scruffier and a lot more
disorganized, then slinking through it in the early hours
would be just like Hacilith: hiding at a corner, giving the
constables the slip. Doubling back to be rid of the rival
Bowyers gang.
I beckoned the Archer close as we approached a lighted
house and together we strode confidently past their front
door. When people are at rest in their homes, a furtive
movement can alert them, but they don’t look twice if they
think you’re a watchman.
The houses were all of equal size and gave no cover; we
walked swiftly. The boulevard’s light shone out of the side
streets; we sneaked along close to the muraled walls.
Behind me, Lightning trailed my movements soundlessly. I
value faithfulness among friends. If you have not honored
every childhood oath of allegiance to the gangs that
changed every minute; adventuring among the rambling
rose, the margins of ponds and darkened streets, you have
not been true to yourself. I still have the Wheel scar on my
shoulder. I have honored those intense oaths of friendship,
and as a result I am still a child.
The streets came to an end in darkness at the foot of the
Amarot crag. Only the lit boulevard continued, climbing it in
a zigzag path. A group of Trisians was descending the tenmeter-
wide pavement from the Amarot into town. They
wore cloaks over loose white shirts and wide trousers; they
carried lamps and weapons. If they saw us they would
recognize our outlandish Fourlands clothes immediately.
We would have to pretend to be two of Gio’s brigands,
which would be the worst way to meet him. I urged
Lightning back with a wave, and we lurked behind the
corner of the last house.
The curfew meant that Gio’s men were not wandering in
the town. Unfortunately they were all corralled on the mosaic
at the top of the crag—nothing between us and them but the
Senate House itself. We watched the patrol pass by two
streets away and descend into Capharnaum.
Lightning said, “They’re going the other way.” I seized
his cloak and pulled him back as the previous patrol
emerged. They exchanged a few words in a low tone with
their colleagues and proceeded up the boulevard. We
waited for what seemed like hours until they were
thumbnail-sized at the top of the outcrop.
I mouthed, “Our turn. Ready? Keep a good look around,
your eyesight’s keener than mine. Remember that bloody
Insect. We can’t see as well as it can scent us. It can
certainly outpace you; it’s very well fed.”
For the first few hundred meters, the crag’s white
boulders were conspicuous. Then we found ourselves
stumbling up the escarpments, over the scrubland. I feared
there was a scorpion under every rock. A woody smell rose
from the damp thyme shrubs, and spiny bushes scraped my
shins. Lightning struggled behind me kicking them.
At the lip of the crag there was no cover at all. The stony
soil crunched under our boots and a gentle wind gusted
down from the mountain above us. I lay flat on the hillside
and after a dignified pause Lightning copied me. We
listened. Gio’s men were obviously on the rum again. They
all seemed to be gathered around the roasting fire,
lounging and enjoying themselves. Good.
Lightning touched my arm and pointed behind us.
Capharnaum was spread out below; the boulevard
gleamed like an amber river. Lights shone in the
quadrangles of villas, picking out tiny green gardens, lit redtiled
roofs that were otherwise gray, highlighted smudges of
color on the frescoes. The harbor beacon blazed continually
in a black strip, a single star under the lowest
constellations. I found it hard to believe that, far beyond it,
Stormy Petrel skulked up and down. Capharnaum was
beautiful, but the curfew did not explain a sense of
foreboding, an expectant hush. The town waited, but I
doubted if any citizen knew why.
The tall outline of the Senate House blotted out the stars.
Lightning and I glanced at each other. I tucked my coat
back over my sword hilt; he nocked an arrow to string. We
climbed as quietly as possible over the edge of the crag
and onto its flat summit, into the Senate House’s shade,
beside the first of twelve columns with square podia that
were arrayed along its length. Wind blew the rebels’
cooking smoke over the roof ridge. Gio’s room was above
and around the other side.
Lightning steadied himself with a hand against the stone
and looked up. The building towered over us; its columns
were fifteen meters high, their edges wavered in the gloom.
Lightning patted a smooth corner block, whispered, “Can
you climb it?”
“You do say some bloody ridiculous things sometimes.
Look at it.”
“Damn. I hoped our scheme—”
“Well, of course I can.” I grinned. “This reminds me of
when, before I left Hacilith to come to the Castle, I climbed
the governor’s palace and left a blackmail note on Aver-
Falconet’s own pillow. It was easy.”
Lightning’s volatile sense of morality flared. “What? I
don’t remember you divulging that to the Circle!”
“Sh! It’s a long story; forget it.”
I had asked for a whole one thousand pounds and I was
amazed when Aver-Falconet paid up. I thought it was a
fortune; how little I knew. Still, I bought horses and new kit,
and kept enough change to make it worth the
highwaymen’s while when they robbed me of everything not
ten hours later on the Camber Road.
“Stand here in the shadow until I return. Don’t move.
Apart from if the shadow moves, of course.” I took a firm
grasp of the stonework with both hands, found a toehold
with my leg fully bent and kicked off with the other. Hugging
my body close to the stone, my rangy reach gained another
handhold and toe. I was fully above Lightning. He kept his
arrow nocked and waited flanked by a column. The
darkness gave grainy texture to his severe face.
I strained to make out cracks in the mortar. Tiny white
pinpoints prickled in my night vision. I folded my wings tight
because their weight pulled me away from the wall. I
stabbed my strong, pointed nails into the gaps, my fingers
clawed. I jammed my boot in, straightened my leg. I raised
my weight and stretched out for the next hold. I undercut the
grip, cheek to the chill stone, stepped up.
The wind was stronger here. It blew around the exposed
corner and cooled off my sweat. I hung on with one hand
and both feet, stood up straight and took a break. I exhaled
a long breath of admiration at the view: hundreds of houses
and twenty thousand lives that Gio had snatched as a stake
in his game. Well, now he is dealing with Comet who
learned to climb in the precipitous ice-split chimneys of
Darkling’s cliffs.
Above me was a narrow ledge. I reached up and felt
about in the seagull shit. I secured a good foothold, bent my
knees, sprang gracefully onto the cornice. I ran lightly along
it, rounded the corner to the side of the building facing the
mosaic. I flattened myself against the architrave of Gio’s
window. The brigands’ camp was below, at the other side
of the square. If any of them glanced up, they would see me
plainly against this white stone. I quickly pushed the shutter
open and peered into the room. No one inside, so I hopped
over the sill and landed in a crouch, silently on the mintgreen
tiled floor.
Gio’s apartment was enormous. A square bed stood in
the center, no curtains as in the Fourlands, just a taupe silk
coverlet. The walls were covered in a trompe l’oeil scene of
a sumptuous feast. Elegant diners in Trisian robes poised
with grapes halfway to their mouths or in the act of raising
goblets. Their eyes seemed to follow me across the room
as I skirted a wooden screen and approached an alabaster
side table on which burned one of the open-flame lamps.
Beside it was a glass half-full of clear liquid and a bottle
with a familiar label: Diw Harbor Gin, Gio’s tipple of choice.
I released the lid of my ring and dropped both aconitum
tablets into the glass. They dissolved instantly. I swirled the
glass and set it down beside the lamp. The oil lamp was
pure gold, in the shape of a breaching dolphin. Irregular
coral in claw fittings and priceless pearl clusters encrusted
its base. It entranced me—
“Yeah, right…” a voice came from just outside the door,
“which I need like Mica Town needs more coffee shops!
Goodnight, Tirrick.”
“Goodnight, Gio.”
Gio! I sprinted back across the room. Gio’s foot
appeared at the door. I couldn’t reach the window. I jumped
behind the screen. I was five clear meters from the window.
Shit.
Poised to move, I peered carefully through the fine
fretwork at the top of the folding partition. Gio slipped his
coat off and threw it on the bed. He was wearing the same
clothes as when he left the Castle, and though washed they
smelled of ingrained mud and brine. He had still not
bothered to find a shirt and wore the 1969 Sword slung on
a double red belt across the waistband of his blue
breeches. His bare ribs and hips were sinewy furrows.
Gio’s obsession for revenge might be just another form
of despair, but it had kept him disciplined if not hygienic.
The scar Wrenn had given him showed as a pale pink
incision at the base of his throat.
I wondered feverishly what to do. I was fast enough to
escape but Gio would certainly see me and he wouldn’t
drink the gin; he would send his swordsmen against
Stormy Petrel and Ata’s plan would fail. I kept still. I could
stay here until Gio was either asleep or dead.
Beside the bed and ranged against the wall I saw six
steel coffers. If they were full, Gio was undoubtedly a
millionaire. Stacked on top of the strong boxes were three
ormolu jewelry caskets with more primitive locks, because
like many Awian mechanisms form is valued over function.
In front of my eyes, the paintings on the screen panels
depicted domed buildings, nothing like those of the island.
That they were ancient Awian palaces could not have
escaped Gio’s notice.
He drew his rapier and practiced two or three
sequences back and forth. He didn’t seem satisfied. I
watched, excruciating pins and needles prickling my legs.
My tight grip on my sword hilt was embossing an image of
twisted metal wire into my palm.
Gio held his rapier over his shoulder, pounced to the
side table and gulped down his glass of gin. Nothing
happened. Gio returned to a cool first guard, began to spar
with his shadow, leaving white dints in the plaster. I quietly
stretched to see. He should be writhing in paroxysms by
now, on the floor, in agony. He should be quickly
asphyxiating, tongue too swollen to scream.
I could not for the eternal life of me think what had gone
wrong. The poison was having no effect at all. In a few
minutes Gio finished his exercises and, looking perfectly
healthy, strode toward me. He was coming to close the
shutters; I would be trapped inside. As soon as he passes
the screen he’ll see me. He was just one step away.
I sprang out and made a dive for the window but it was
too far. I landed in front of it, facing Gio.
His face was grotesque with astonishment. “Jant?” He
snatched himself into guard, with me at sword point. His
rapier’s bright tip hovered a centimeter away from my
chest. I shuffled back until my calves pressed the window
ledge, the night air behind me. I kept my hands down, in
surrender. Gio’s crazed eyes were wide, amazement
stayed his hand. He checked the doorway—if I was here,
the other Eszai might be closing in. “Where’s Wrenn? What
were you doing?”
He saw my glance flick to the empty gin glass. I was so
confused, I couldn’t help but look. No man should stand
confused, I couldn’t help but look. No man should stand
upright after imbibing that much belladonna. “Poison?” he
whispered; he knew my history. His face went white with
fury. “You cowardly bastard! I’ll pour it down your throat!
How long before it takes effect? Answer, damn you!” Fear
high-pitched his voice. “What have I drunk? What is it?”
I said nothing out of sheer bewilderment; Gio should be
very dead by now. My coat leather split at the breast under
the pressure of his rapier point. He shouted, “Tirrick! Help!
I’ve been poisoned! Assassin! Quickly!”
Voices on the mezzanine took up the shout: “Gio’s been
poisoned!” “I knew the Trisians would try something!”
Gio leaned forward with a deep, earnest look. “Comet,
do you blame me? Rejected from the Circle, you’d do the
same.” He urged me to answer with a manic little nod. I
made no move. He suddenly growled with hatred and drew
his arm back for the thrust.
I dived backward out of the window. I fell, backflipped,
spun into a full somersault, fighting to free my wings.
Firelight stretched into a blur. Stars below me, white granite
above. I forced my wings open. The left one bruised hard
against a column. I flapped frantically to get air under them
and banked breathlessly over the square. The rebels were
all yelling but I couldn’t see them. I tried to get my bearings.
I fought desperately upward to the level of the Senate
House ledge. Gio leaned out of the window, staring in mute
horror. I pedaled my legs, pumped my wings and skimmed
the roof above him, kicked off the ridge and glided out over
the cliff.
I yelled to Lightning, “Run!”
Lightning said, “Oh, no. Hush.”
“Run! We must! Follow me.”
He had no choice; the rebels were staggering to their
feet and reaching for weapons. They looked at each other,
finding the nerve to cross the mosaic and attack. Lightning
dashed around the corner, straight in front of them to the
only conspicuous door—the library.
Below me I heard Gio swearing. “Get me water! Get me
the ship’s surgeon!”
Was the aconitum belatedly taking effect? I called to
Lightning, “The second floor is defensible. I’ll meet you up
there!”
Lightning rammed the door open with his shoulder and
turned in the entrance to face the men. “I am”—he loosed
an arrow and the nearest one dropped his rapier and
grabbed his hand, turned and fled trailing drops of blood
—“Lightning. The immortal Archer.” He let another arrow fly
at the largest man in the middle. It went straight through his
hand that held an axe shaft. He jumped up with a howl and
shook the arrowhead from the skin between his fingers.
They all backed off. “You will find the stairs hazardous.”
Lightning nocked another arrow to string. “I recommend
caution, mob. Stay out.” He disappeared into the dark
library.
I think he just made it worse. Five uninjured men
clustered in. One kicked the door jamb. “Fuck him!”
He looked up at me; a birthmark half-covered his baggy
face, gray in the dim light. Another was ex-fyrd, with
Brandoch’s white trident badge on his tatty jacket. He
called to bring more people around—a big hispid man
whose jumper hood hung over his greatcoat; a burly
woman, although in the darkness I couldn’t be sure.
I went over them low and swept up to the window to
bleed off speed. I flared my wings, braked hard, bending
my flight feathers right back. My air speed dropped to
nothing; I fell. I hit the window’s louvre shutters with the soles
of both boots. The shutters flew apart. I dropped through
and landed squarely on my backside on the floor with my
wings jammed in the window.
This story was pitch-black but I smelled the serious scent
of paper and venerable patinated wood. I scraped a match
and held it up, seeing that the well-stacked shelves lined a
single central aisle obstructed with crates of papers.
Lightning ascended the railed stairwell, whirled around with
his back to me. “Comet? Where are you?”
By striking matches and peering through their weak light,
I made my way along the aisle. He took deep breaths like a
baited bear, stood statue-still, listening to the voices rising
from the stairs.
“They’re both trapped. You go first.”
“Are you kidding? That’s Lord Micawater. The Archer.
He’ll shoot me in the eye as soon as—”
“Lord la-di-da. Rush them.”
“Both eyes, probably…”
Lightning snorted.
“They’re immortals.”
“Then they can wait,” came the woman’s voice.
Lightning lowered his bow slightly and sat on a table. I
said, “We’re safe here for the moment.”
“Oh, we’re safe, are we? Splendid. Shall I just make you
a cup of coffee, then? This is your fault, Jant! We could
have stayed unobserved. I was hidden. I was prepared to
steal back to Stormy Petrel, while you could fly. But no; you
cry out ‘Run!’ Now the mob knows we’re here—and I’m
cornered!” He shook a fist under my nose. His face was
indistinct in the darkness but I could see he was poucheyed
from lack of sleep. “You irresponsible, foundling,
Rhydanne—”
“Please don’t use ‘Rhydanne’ as an insult.”
“Drug addict. Well!”
“Well what? If you’d stayed by the columns they would
have caught you. Gio saw me, then everything happened
too fast to think.”
“Thinking is supposed to be your strong point. So, has
he perished?”
Gio was far from dead. I protested, “I don’t understand it.
Tolerance to that amount of belladonna isn’t possible; there
are no recorded cases of recovery.”
Lightning drummed his powerful fingers on the table,
sounding like a small horse race. He held his great
longbow in the other hand, finger over the arrow shaft
across its grip. I lit an almond-shaped lamp and paced to
the window. The outlaws milled about below.
I felt queasy knowing that the aconitum was useless. I
might have needed it myself at any time. I have never
actually used it because scolopendium is such a fast-acting
drug that on the rare occasions I overdose I am not in a
condition to remember it or operate the ring. I have carried
aconitum since I first learned of its effects, fifty years ago.
Ah, damn. I haven’t replaced the tablets for—how long?
Twenty years? And how many rainstorms have I flown
through since then; how many long soaks in the bathhouse
hot tub? It was a mistake that only an immortal could make.
I said, “The tablets have been in my ring too long. The
potency must have degraded. Gio isn’t suffering the full
effect, if any at all.”
“You have never learned to be an Eszai,” Lightning said
quietly, which was worse than his shouting. “Let me take
stock. Item: Gio will be determined to repay our attempt on
his life. Item: it is four A.M., so we have a full hour before
Petrel arrives. Item: I only have one hundred arrows. Item: I
am in considerable pain, and I will not be able to run for a
sustained time.”
“What?”
For answer Lightning wormed his hand under the
bandages around his waist. He held it up, red with blood,
and wiped his fingers over the old scar on his palm. I hadn’t
seen the stain on his shirt. “The exercise agitated my
wound; it has not closed completely. I didn’t want to mention
it, but it’ll hinder me so you must know. Damn it, don’t look
so taken aback; just go and watch the mob.”
Shrunken by guilt, I turned to the nearest window, swung
one shutter open. Lightning said, “Do you see any of my
fyrd?”
“No. There aren’t many Lakeland or coast Awians
rebelling; they know they need the Castle.”
“Good. I’m grateful for that at least.”
A mass of people filled the plaza between us and the
Senate House, red-lit by the bonfire. Their noise was
incredible: a tumult of gossip, jabbering fragments of
conversation and false rumors—I could use those. I looked
down on their heads; hoods, caps and woolly hats. I spotted
the mesomorphic woman elbowing her way to the top of the
boulevard. There was a general slow flow in that direction,
like the start of a landslide. The air thrived with anxiety and
excitement. I listened carefully, trying to separate phrases
from the chaos: “Let’s go. No point in staying now Gio’s
snuffed it, is there? You heard what that prat Tirrick said.”
“I would if I could see a bloody thing. If there’s two Eszai
there’ll be more, see? The whole Circle might be here.”
“Gio’s not dead! His orders are to stay put.”
“I gave up all that order crap last year. Come on, think
what we can pick up on our way to the ship.”
Gio Ami emerged from the Senate House hefting a
large rectangular shield which had a metal bracket to hold
and a big padded hook for his upper arm to bear the
weight while carrying it. He immediately sheltered behind a
pillar, sword drawn. He seemed dazed and was hangoverpale;
I could not decide whether the poison was working on
him with reduced efficacy, or whether he was sick with
tension. He bent nearly double to yell, “I’m here! I’m well.
Look!”
“Shoot him,” I told Lightning.
Lightning dipped his head, trying to see Gio. I leaned out
and shouted at the crowd, “Tornado’s coming. Mist is
sailing half the Castle’s fleet into harbor! Thirty caravels full
of fyrd and an Eszai on each ship!”
Gio’s adherents drew toward him but the woman
beckoned people to join her. “Come on, we must reach the
boats before Tornado arrives.” They surged toward the
boulevard.
Gio tried again: “Come back! Listen, they’ll hang you as
pirates! I’ll pay you an equal share of everything in this
town! There are no more ships! Alone, you’ve no chance
against Mist!”
I stuck my head out. “Tornado’s fyrd will arrest anyone
who stays with Gio! He’ll be brought to justice!” I withdrew
rapidly as an axe smashed into the window frame and fell
onto the people beneath. I remarked to Lightning, “Gio can’t
stop them leaving. I’ve managed to split them up.”
“Good.” He sighed.
A young swordsman gestured up at my window and
babbled something vehemently. Gio shook his head but his
friend continued to remonstrate. Gio pointed his rapier.
“No, Tirrick!”
Tirrick looked at Gio, seeing a dirty and disheveled
figure, and he must have realized at the same time as I did
that Gio was not poisoned; it was his paranoia making him
act as cautiously as if he was really feeling symptoms. I
said, “I think Ata’s right—Gio is mad.”
Lightning said, “Maybe, but fortunately Wrenn is even
madder.”
Tirrick glanced at the guards standing by the library
entrance, and then ran past Gio into the Senate House.
“Now the fencing masters are arguing between
themselves.”
Lightning bit his lips together. “I have always disliked Gio
Ami because he professes to be a man of honor but he
only lives by the codes that suit him—like his damn Ghallain
traditions. He was married once, you know; if he still was
then perhaps we would be spared this. But he feigned
respect for the peninsula custom. They receive a candle as
a gift on their wedding day. If they argue in the following
years, they must light the candle and leave it burning for a
time corresponding to the length of the argument. So, when
it is burned down completely, the couple are automatically
considered divorced. It happened to Gio. He called his wife
a troublemaker, separated her from the Circle, and home
she rode to find her friends aged and infirm, or dead and
buried. Poor lady.”
I strained to see farther down the boulevard. White puffs
of smoke like cotton bolls were rising from the base of the
hill, where the harbor wall was hidden behind lines of
houses. “I think Mist’s signaling. She must have figured that
it’s all gone wrong. I bet she’s burning canoes…I just don’t
know if the signal is for me or the Petrel.”
Lightning watched the stairwell sourly. He said, “Like
amateurs we chose a stronger bow than we could manage
and missed the mark. If I don’t survive, Jant, will you
remember to take my message?”
I nodded, dumbstruck. I had never heard a fatalistic word
from Lightning before.
The sky above the Senate was pale gray now; I was able
to distinguish the features of the people below. A dark coat
became burgundy red, drab showed as light blue, a boy’s
hair was highlighted with henna. Dawn permeated a pallid,
cloudless winter day.
I looked to the sea again and gave a yelp. The beacon
islet was now dimly discernible, the surf breaking on its
seaward shore. Heeling around it with four masts in full sail
was a ship tiny with distance. She headed into harbor at a
great rate of knots, her long pennants snaking. “The Petrel!
See, the Petrel’s coming in!”
Lightning sighed with relief. A few minutes later, some
lads in padded jackets hurtled up the boulevard, pushed
eagerly to Gio. Gio listened, then waved them aside and
called out, “This is it! We must meet the Castle’s flagship. I
tell you, there’s only one caravel. There are two Eszai
aboard and we’ll overwhelm them. Let me have the
satisfaction of dealing with Wrenn—and your prize is the
Stormy Petrel!”
The crowd yelled. Gio lifted his shield and hastened
across the square, shouting his rabble into a formation akin
to a fyrd division. The Ghallain swordsmen he arranged at
the front, then the biggest, roughest men, the Hacilith boys
and a couple of harridan girls at the rear.
But the swordsmen at the library door refused to move
and glowered when Gio beckoned to them. His authority
had gone but he pretended that it didn’t matter, gave up
and returned to the thick column.
Lightning thought aloud: “I can improve the odds for
Wrenn and Ata.” He instantly flexed his bow and loosed. A
man at the head of the column reeled with a scream and
fell, the arrow through his thigh. Lightning selected another
shaft from the quiver at his hip, let fly and the astonished lad
behind the first man yowled and squatted to the ground. I
could barely see the arrow projecting from his leg above
the knee. Lightning started counting backward from thirty,
“Twenty-eight, twenty-seven…” as he lamed each of the
men along the nearest edge of the formation, who were
arranged like targets in a gallery.
Hearing their screams, the column flashed shields along
its length. It surged away from us, bending and abandoning
the wounded men, leaving around twenty sprawling and
crawling on the mosaic. One man cried loudly as he
snapped the fletchings off the arrow and pulled the shaft out
through his thigh.
Gio, invisible behind his shield, led his file to the
boulevard. They emptied very quickly out of the square,
hurried between the slender stone walls and snaked around
the hairpin bends. They left the battered mosaic empty;
Alyss and the Insects were carious with missing tesserae.
Litter was stacked up in the corners against the library and
ash blew out of the cooling bonfire into the colonnade.
Lightning cleanly and methodically shot down the rearmost
rebels in the column, hitting the left thigh of each man. “You,
four; and you, three…two…one. There. That’s all the arrows
I dare to spend. Is this not disagreeable work?”
Some footsteps scuttled on the floor below us. Lightning
called, “Join our gathering, by all means. But please
introduce yourselves so I know who I’m shooting.”
A movement at the Senate House caught our attention.
A swordsman began to back out, lugging one of Gio’s
heavy coffers between himself and his friend. Another
followed, and a fourth, until all the chests and ornate boxes
containing Gio’s fortune were lined up on the mosaic.
Lightning asked, “What are those?” but I hardly heard
him because I was seething with anger. Tirrick, the goateed
little creep, was stealing the treasure and I could do nothing
about it.
The senators were next to stumble out of the door at the
foot of the pillars. A frightened youth in a pale tunic, then a
dumpy old man were corralled by the swordsmen. Vendace
came out last, reluctantly, being goaded by Tirrick behind
him. The tall, wiry Trisian leaned his head at a strange
angle because Tirrick held a dagger across his throat.
Tirrick shoved him out onto the mosaic, and looked straight
up at our window with a bold smile.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
They’re parading the senators where we can see them,” I
said.
“Tirrick,” said Lightning. “I know the type. Privileged but
strident and embittered, the youngest son of a minor noble.”
He licked his fingers and held them out of the window to
judge the breeze. Then his fingertips rasped over the arrow
fletchings and settled on the string. Tirrick angled his
dagger across Vendace’s scrawny neck and called, “We’ll
kill one of these for every shot you loose!”
Vendace rolled his eyes and stamped his foot. His
brown arms were rigid by his sides.
I said, “The boxes are full of money. I think the
swordsmen will take it to the ship, with the senators as
hostages to shield themselves. It’s our chance to escape.
Oh fuck, no it isn’t…”
Around twenty swordsmen ran out of the colonnade,
carrying lamps and oil jugs with spouts. Lightning drew on
them but saw Tirrick’s blade bite against Vendace’s skin,
and didn’t loose. The guards around the library door let
them speed through. Crashes came up from below,
smashing pottery, rustling and tearing.
A heavy thump shook the floor as the men pulled a
bookshelf over. I heard them kicking the scrolls into heaps.
“They’re going to burn the library!” I darted to the stairs and
called down, “Stop! In the name of San and the will of god.
How dare you?”
A voice shrugged, “Come out and be executed or stay
there and char.”
But these are books—all the books of Tris. “You must
not,” I yelled desperately.
A blue-gray twist rose from the stairwell like cigarette
smoke. Within seconds it widened to fill the whole well.
From the window I saw the swordsmen pouring out onto the
mosaic, shoving the guards back in their haste to escape.
“The fire’s caught! Ready yourselves, they have to
surrender. It’s going up!”
Smoke billowed past me in a thick stream and drifted
along the ceiling. Lightning released the tension on his
bowstring. “We have to break out. There are a dozen
fencing masters. We can deal with them, but the senators
will die.”
“The books!” I wailed. “I can’t leave—”
“Don’t be stupid!”
“Maybe there’s another way down.” Gray wreaths
shrouded the rafters completely and were descending
extremely quickly to fill the room. I fumbled through a stack
of leather-bound books on the table and slipped them into
my coat pockets. I picked up the lantern. “Wait here. I’ll
check the far end.”
Lightning began coughing loudly. I called, “Stoop low.
Slouch down under it.” I had been in a burning building
before and, as far as I knew, he had not. But my lungs hurt
as I sucked smoke and I started choking more than him.
I had to save the books, as many as I could carry. I
strode down the aisle snatching them from the shelves. I
stuffed one in my waistband, another in my belt. I had no
time to translate the titles; I couldn’t see with the smoke
stinging my eyes. I didn’t know what I was snatching. I piled
them frantically in the crook of my left arm, discarded a
heavy tome, selected two more haphazardly. I thought, I’m
rescuing a handful of volumes at random to represent the
total knowledge of an entire culture. Which were most
worthwhile? Were these engineering, cookery or poetry?
Or even bloody fiction? I had no way of judging. I spat out
the cloying smoke and the stack buckled in my arms. I
reached the end of the library—which was just a blank wall
—and I dropped all the books with a series of thuds.
Recognizable but horribly out of place, gray mottled,
fibrous drapes strung between the last two bookcases:
Insect paper. They looked folded but were as hard as
concrete. They curved up from the shelves and blurred into
the smoke creeping down from the beams.
Two long, brown forelegs emerged from the nest. The
Insect’s black spiny foot clicked down onto the floor
between my boots, and its three claws articulated shut. I
backed into the opposite bay.
The Insect ducked its triangular head and slipped out
from between the bookcases. Its eyes’ tessellations
reflected the lamp-lit swirling smoke. It brushed a fringe on
its front right leg over them. It must have pulled out Wrenn’s
rapier, because the hole through its thorax was now a deep
concavity filled with smooth new shell. It had sloughed its
skin and was even bigger than I remembered. The high
joints of its back legs loomed out of the smoke.
Two club-shaped black palps shuffled like a pair of
hands rubbing together. They retracted and the scissor
jaws opened and shut. It lifted a foreleg and cleaned its
single crooked antenna through filaments inside its knee.
Lightning flexed his bow and spoke with his lips to the
string, “Step aside.” Through the smoke he was just a
silhouette blurred by the tears streaming from my eyes. I
pressed my coat cuff to my nose and mouth. In another
thirty seconds the room would be full and I could hear
crackling from below.
“Wait!” The Insect stood still, close enough for me to see
the scars and impressions I had made with my axe. A row
of black spines four-wide supported the upper surface of its
striped abdomen. The pale underside pulsed as it curled its
abdomen under itself, pumping air through its spiracles
which were wide open.
“Wait. It doesn’t like the smoke.”
Its antenna flicked forward, sensing for the clean air. It
jolted into an involuntary crouch. “It’s going to run—let it
pass!”
The Insect leapt. It hurtled past Lightning, stretched its full
length and reached over the handrail, down into the
stairwell. Its back sword-shaped femurs kicked and claws
scrabbled on the blistering varnish, then it disappeared into
the gusting smoke. I ran after it instantly; Lightning seemed
bewildered so I grasped his arm and urged him to the
steps.
We took deep breaths and plunged down. I patted my
hair—it felt so hot I thought it was alight. Lightning held his
hand over his mouth and the tip of his bow rattled off the
ceiling. The steep steps were opaque with smoke.
Perspiration and tears trickled down my face.
We stumbled to the ground floor, onto ten centimeters of
fallen books. They slid over each other, making the floor
slippery. I led Lightning around the tall shapes of leaning
shelves. We crushed scorching scrolls underfoot with a
sound like old Insect shell. Even now I was torn with the
desire to rake them up. The fire’s crackling built into a
steady sibilance and its raw orange light leapt behind the
smoke, illuminating the surfaces of the billowing wreaths.
Lines of yellow flame spread between the parquet
blocks. By the windows, flames began to lengthen and
bend as air flow sucked them out of the shutters.
“Can’t breathe,” I said weakly. “Where’s…the fucking
door?” The unbearable heat singed my feathers, my
reddened skin stung. The pages of open books on the floor
around us were curling and turning brown spontaneously. I
saw one burst into flame.
I pointed to the rectangle of pale morning light; we
rushed through without readying our weapons. Getting out
of the smoke was all that mattered.
The men who had been guarding the door were spilt on
the mosaic in a fan of visceral blood. We crossed the
threshold with smoke pouring out above us. One had died
quickly, eyes open, from a horrible gash that opened his
belly to the sternum. Another crumpled in a red pool so
thick the Insect must have severed an artery, though I
couldn’t see the wound. The arm of a third man lay beside a
rapier some way off.
The Insect did not pause to clean its mandibles. It was
confused by the scents and invigorated by the fresh air. Its
six feet left prints, its knee joints bunched and separated as
it dashed toward the senators and swordsmen. Their white
clothes reflected in its directionless eyes. Their mouths
were round in astonishment. Every one of the swordsmen
bolted, including Tirrick, leaving the senators in the Insect’s
path.
Lightning leaned into his bow and bent it fully with the
strength of his shoulders. The broadhead point drew back
to the grip. Across the square the Insect reared up before
Vendace. Lightning straightened his fingers, released the
string with a crack and the arrow whistled past me.
The Insect’s foreclaws lashed the air in front of Vendace,
then it fell sideways. It curled on its right side, the arched
plates of its abdomen sliding over each other as it coiled
and throbbed. A spasm went through it that flexed all its
joints and pulled its limbs in, like the legs of a dead crab.
They steepled angularly together, its feet drawn up to the
six semi-translucent ball joints under its thorax. By the
sunken ring at the base of its feeler, Lightning’s arrow shaft
made a second antenna. The shell gaped around it, an
open crack showing an organ of dark brown gel deep
inside.
The senators gazed at it, and at the library. All the
erudition of Tris was rising with the fire. I faced the
intolerable furnace as if it was a punishment and spread my
wings to accept and be consumed by it. Rolls of heat
belched out, shelves split with creaks and thuds.
Tremendous flames raged through the library I respected
so much; I felt sick in the pit of my stomach.
“Shira!” Lightning called. “Come here, why are you
standing so close? It’s falling apart!”
“No. The books are burning…What has Gio done?”
“Get a grip! Speak to the senators.”
I was numbly aware of Lightning ushering the Trisian
leaders to the boulevard. Behind us, the coffers lay
forgotten. I thought, if I live through this I’ll claim them. The
Trisians would disregard the treasure as dross, so I
relinquished it for the time being, avoided the dead Insect
and stepped over three or four agonized rebels with arrows
in their thighs, and ran to catch up with them. They were
hurrying down the path with appalled backward glances.
Vendace was holding one of the senators tightly, a
young lady. She was kicking and biting, frenziedly
struggling and pulling in the direction of the library. I ran to
help but Vendace snapped at me, “She’s Danio’s
successor. Don’t let her go; she’ll run in to the fire. Every
time you come here, you put an end to our librarians!”
We tried to calm the hysterical girl. I explained to
Lightning, who said candidly, “I know how she feels. People
pass away, there are always more, but the books are
irreplaceable. They’re the immortal part of Zascai—how
many lifetimes are burning to cinders in there?”
I said to Vendace, “You saw how Gio’s men treated you.
They’re causing this catastrophe, not us. We’ll deliver you
from them before they destroy the rest of town. Lightning
shot the Insect dead. We were sent to protect you from it
and from Gio; he’s a wanted criminal in the Fourlands.”
Vendace, mystified, turned his pinched, resilient face
from myself to the Archer. The Senate had prized Gio’s
rhetoric so highly that they found it hard to trust our actions.
As I walked quickly they pressed close, trying to hear over
the sound of the blaze. With an earsplitting screech and
crash, the library roof caved in at its midpoint. Timbers
dangled like fingers from both sides. Glowing tiles slid into
the fissure, adding to the noise; the rumble grew to a roar.
Sparks whirled up and fell on the roof of the Senate House.
It was hypnotic.
Lightning said, “Jant, tell them that I’ll see them to a safe
place, then I’ll clear looters from the avenue as far as the
rear of Gio’s column.”
I asked, “Are you well enough?”
“I believe so.”
“Then I’ll fly over Mist and Serein, and join you on the
main road.”
An elderly senator with a rookery voice coughed. “What
is going on? Where’s Gio?”
I changed language and said, “He’s causing the
mayhem—I’m going to find out. Lightning will help you, if
you please lead him to a place of refuge. I’m sorry, I am
really sorry.”
Vendace pointed a shaking finger at the Amarot.
Flames were now lapping on the Senate House roof.
Flames were now lapping on the Senate House roof.
Driven to incandescence by the wind, the fire spread to the
apartments on its upper story and began to engulf them.
“No amount of apologizing will ever repair that sacrilege!”
When we reached the base of the crag, Vendace
directed Lightning toward a road called First Street. I left
them, and as soon as I carved into the air I found myself
battling against the wind being sucked into the inferno. It
whipped around the crag in one-hundred-kilometer-perhour
gusts, causing a swirling column of vertical flame to
rise eighty meters above the devastated library.
Smoke layered and drifted out at the height of the Amarot.
It completely blocked the sunrise and shadowed the town.
Burning embers were falling into the gardens of the villas
below. The whitewashed walls looked gray and the
boulevard was littered with spoil and broken furniture
dragged out by the rebels; here and there lay the bodies of
the Trisians who had tried to stop them.
Sleepy residents stumbled into the street, looking up at
the crag and trying to understand. At the edge of town,
people panicked and began moving toward the harbor. I
saw Capharnai of all ages responding to a call to make a
bucket chain. About two hundred people filled pails, pans
and bowls from cisterns and carried them up the winding
road to the Amarot, but the air was unbreathable; the rising
heat and wind stopped them before they reached the
mosaic. A few of the lamed rebels who were still lying
among the boxes of money, writhed as they inhaled smoke.
Their clothes and hair caught fire spontaneously.
I soared higher, because I was alarming the Capharnai
and they were wasting their time watching me. I lost sight of
the peach-colored sky beyond the edges of the smoke pall.
Flocks of pigeons sped around the tiny rooftops, grouping
to roost, confused by the eerie eclipse light. Dawn would
not end; the light was dim, as if it was still seven A.M.
The looters were fanning out through the top of town,
kicking in doors and pulling shutters off their hinges, leaving
a wake of debris, barking dogs and half-eaten food.
Pages and whole blackened pamphlets, scroll
fragments burned thin, jostled up in the smoke then fell on
the town as hot ash. The residue of hundreds of thousands
of books was raining over Capharnaum. The gloaming light
and the roar of the library added to the rebels’ edginess. It
was much louder than the sound of the wind on my wings.
Gio’s rabble now packed the lower half of the main
street, blocking the wide road as they progressed down the
slope toward the harbor. Gio walked ahead of them with his
rapier drawn. His column was twice the size of Mist’s tight
ranks.
Mist’s fyrd was marching up the street from the Stormy
Petrel. The boatswains were drumming; their beats got
louder as I dropped height and passed over them. I spotted
Mist leading by Wrenn’s side; she looked up and raised her
hand. She had tied her shawl a round her waist, revealing a
cuirass and backplate. Wrenn wasn’t wearing armor; he
was in his fyrd fatigues. He was looking for Gio,
dissatisfied with their disputable duel in the forest. He was
determined to beat Gio on equal terms and leave no doubt
that he deserved to be immortal.
Mist was surrounded on all sides by crossbowmen and
a bodyguard of her strongest sailors, all in half-armor. After
that came one hundred and fifty Awndyn men carrying
halberds and spears; no space to wield pikes. They wore
dark green brigandines; their helmets shone like globular
mirrors.
As I watched, the rear of Ata’s column stopped at the
quay and the rest separated and continued up the street.
She had left about fifty men, a fyrd lamai unit, to protect
Stormy Petrel, moored a hundred meters behind Gio’s
ships. From Petrel’s forecastle and poop deck, archers
looked out. Both her gangplanks were down but colored
shields lined her railings. The longbowmen were tense,
watching the rebel defectors who ran, laden with loot, out of
the ends of the parallel streets. They raced up the
Pavonine’s gangway to a deck that seethed with drawn
weapons; white faces ugly with fear stared up at me. They
had turned pirate; they were prepared to defend their
carrack to the death.
When Gio’s rabble caught sight of Mist’s vanguard,
rebels in ones and twos began to melt away from his
column, down the alleys and into the streets of the grid.
They turned left and right along the intersecting roads like
counters in a board game. I decided that their movements
counters in a board game. I decided that their movements
were too random to be tactical, even before I saw them
start smashing shop shutters and grabbing whatever was
inside.
Mist’s fyrd and Gio’s horde stopped with twenty meters
between them. There was a second’s silence in which Gio,
shield on his arm, walked forward of his line and scanned
the people opposing him, looking for Wrenn.
The Awndyn Fyrd captain called, “Crossbowmen! Span.
Latch. Loose!” They shot straight into the rebel front at short
range, aiming at the fencing masters, knowing they were
the most dangerous. The metal Insect-killing bolts cut past
shop canopies and statues, burying themselves in men’s
faces, chests and bellies. I saw black bolt points project
from their backs.
The crossbowmen’s partners stepped forward with a
shout, raised and slammed their green and white shields
into a wall, hustling into position across the road. Behind
the shields, the crossbowmen began to reload.
Gio’s men waited in horror for the next barrage. Heads
bobbed up and down as some men split off down the side
streets but most were trapped in the center.
The shields were lowered, crossbows leveled. “Latch!
Loose!” Another barrage flew at Gio’s front line. The last of
the fencing masters fell, lifeless or mortally wounded. Gio
peered from behind his shield; swung his arm. “Forward!
Break the wall! Bear down the shields!”
A wave of three hundred men together started running.
The front of the column seemed to flake off, as faster and
faster they closed the gap. They jumped high, crashed into
faster they closed the gap. They jumped high, crashed into
the shields at full tilt, hitting them with their shoulders and
forcing them down. Their swords thrust over the tops, into
the necks and faces of the bearers.
The crossbowmen slung their bows into holsters on their
backs, drew their swords and surged forward against the
rebels. The confused mass began to shove up and down
the street.
I saw that Ata’s spearmen were trapped toward the rear
of her host. Surely that was a mistake—wouldn’t they be
better than the crossbows? Crossbowmen had served Ata
well five years ago; now she was relying on them too much.
The shield wall was perfect but it should be backed by
spears. The fyrd are simply following their usual procedure:
Insect-fighting tactics. They’re wrong but even Ata hasn’t
noticed the discrepancy.
Both the fyrd and the insurgents tried to outflank each
other. From above I watched the side streets filling. As the
melee widened, the columns in the boulevard shortened,
with Wrenn and Gio in the exact center.
I called to the fyrd who were exploring the alleys, and led
them down the right routes to ambush the rebels, who were
more used to fighting in side streets. I landed and directed
a group; we surprised five of Gio’s men before they could
rejoin the main column, and killed them all.
I returned to the air, where I could easily distinguish
Mist’s bodyguards. I occasionally glimpsed her face but
she no longer had time to look up at me. The press was so
intense, she held her curved Wrought sword with the convex
arc uppermost to thrust rather than slice. Her voice carried
arc uppermost to thrust rather than slice. Her voice carried
—she screamed commands to surround Gio and disarm
him. Whenever he could, Gio yelled at his rebels to close in
on Mist.
In Lowespass, women soldiers have always successfully
fought Insects. The culls follow procedures; the women help
each other and men sometimes back them up. The
difference in strength was not important when six or seven
infantry recruits can tackle an Insect together, or women
can join the cavalry and ride destriers. But in this crush they
were fighting one-on-one against men, and I gravely feared
for them.
Capharnai families peeked from the windows of their
houses above the shops all along the street. They were
stranded in their homes, witnessing a scene they couldn’t
hope to understand. They saw the heads of men wrestling
and stabbing along the center line, and behind them, filling
the street above and below, a pack of foreigners in strange
clothes facing each other, putting pressure on the
breathless crush. The strangers were so eager to push
forward to the fight that they trampled dead bodies. At the
end of the street, flames piled up from the civic center and
smoke boiled like spit in lamp oil. The Capharnai
neighbors looked helpless, not knowing what to do. I
shouted, “Stay inside! Don’t get involved—they fight each
other, not Trisians!”
They saw their own shops vandalized below them. Their
faces disappeared from the windows as they began
barricading themselves into their upper rooms.
I glanced back; the library was now a roofless shell, the
floors were falling through and just the façade was left.
Flames leapt in the windows surrounded by blackened
stonework—it looked like an animated skeleton.
Coruscating sparks and dull fragile ash dropped on us. I
beat my wings to dislodge flakes from the feathers,
thinking: the town is being covered in burned knowledge.
Gio was looking for Wrenn, carving his own men aside. I
landed on the nearest roof to watch, searching the alleys
below for a crossbow to pick up. Gio, wild-eyed, saw Mist’s
bodyguards and Wrenn beside them in an area of calm
because no fighter would engage with him.
Gio raised his rapier and saluted. “Well, look if it isn’t the
novice.”
“Good morning,” smiled Wrenn.
Gio snarled, “You could have chosen better last words.”
First-blood fencing in the amphitheater was just an
entertainment; no rules apply in a duel to the death. They
watched each other with cool anticipation; Capharnaum
didn’t exist for them. They were in a world of two people,
challenger and challenged.
There are no words in that world. I know, because I have
been there.
Gio swept his rapier down in the rage cut. “You stole my
Gio swept his rapier down in the rage cut. “You stole my
name,” he said. “I’ll be Serein again. I am good enough. I
Challenge you, Serein Wrenn.”
Wrenn leveled his blade. “Just run onto this and save me
the effort.”
I took off and climbed above them through the deafening
battle’s noise.
They dropped the pretense of faking other styles to
conceal their own. They flew at each other eager for blood.
Gio rushed to chop at Wrenn; at the same time a bystander
tried to catch him but Wrenn smashed his teeth with the
rapier pommel.
Wrenn lunged at Gio, reprised. Gio swiped it aside with
a blow that would have shattered a lesser blade than the
1969 Sword. I thought: How long can they keep this up? But
I knew the answer—at least four hours.
Gio pointed his rapier, its lanyard loose around his wrist.
He lunged to Wrenn’s dagger side. Wrenn swept his rapier
across—clash!—disengaged and cut down aiming for the
sensitive bone of Gio’s shin.
Gio jumped on the spot then attacked. Wrenn parried,
riposted, enveloped Gio’s blade in quatre, made as if to
beat him on the arm and tried to stab him in the forehead.
Gio spun away in a move that took me two years to learn.
His thigh boots slipped on the pavement. He was trying to
predict Wrenn’s actions four or five moves in advance.
In a split second Wrenn slid his rapier tip through Gio’s
swept hilt, sliced the skin off his knuckles, withdrew the
blade. Gio’s grip became slippery on the freely running
blood. He hid his sword hand with his dagger, so Wrenn
blood. He hid his sword hand with his dagger, so Wrenn
couldn’t see to predict the direction of the next blow.
Their motions were wide; their heads ducked to avoid
being cut in the eyes, watching with the faster speed of their
peripheral vision. Their flexed sword arms were close to the
body for strength. They hacked at the nearest enemies
whenever they had a chance and the melee backed away
from them, leaving them in a clear space. The fighting was
spreading up and down the street and fragmenting.
Tussling groups of men dispersed down the side alleys.
The densest part of the fighting eddied around Ata’s
bodyguard; spearmen behind, rebels ahead. Five sailors
linked arms, trying to preserve a space around her so she
could breathe.
I’m doing no good here, entranced by the duel. I need a
firebrand to drop on Gio.
I flew back to find Lightning. It was easy, because he
was the only person in Fourlands clothes walking down the
middle of the broad street. Behind him, the road rose up
the hillside backed by the incredible blaze. He was
oblivious to the Capharnai around him, with their crying
children, bucket chains and packs of belongings. He
sniped unerringly at the small groups of rebels-turnedpirates
who were all busy with different intents. Some
scavenged like wolves; a man pulled down a gold streetlamp
bracket; two lechers were held at bay by a Trisian
man defending his daughter.
Lightning limped on his left side, moving slowly.
Conserving his energy, he held his mighty bow horizontally
with the arrow on top, drawing back the heel of his hand to
with the arrow on top, drawing back the heel of his hand to
fit in the hollow of his cheek. He used short-distance
arrows, color-coded with white flights, and let fly at the
looters. Anyone who touched a shop shutter or ran from a
house with an armful of gold was sent reeling with an arrow
through bicep or thigh.
I glided over and called. I landed and ran to a halt beside
him. “Gio and Wrenn are dueling! Ata’s caught in the crush
—we have to help her.”
I drew my sword and we continued downhill toward the
rotunda at the road’s midpoint. Lightning never missed a
shot, counting under his breath, “Fifty-five. Fifty-four.
Three…Two…”
I scanned the windows for any movement that might end
with a knife in my back. Beyond the forum we passed a
precinct of narrow streets. We looked down the nearest
and saw a gang of rebels heaving at a solid door. The first
was a weasly man with baggy, low-crotched jeans. He had
his shoulder to the cracking panels and the others all added
their weight. They noticed Lightning and me but renewed
their assault on the building. Inside, women were
screaming in Trisian so rapid and full of dialect I couldn’t
understand. From the first-floor window an elegant lady with
ringleted hair, a white chiton dress and red nails hurled
terracotta dishes down on the besiegers. They angled their
arms over their heads and kept pushing.
“Hey!” yelled Lightning. “Away from that door! Jant, what
are they shouting? What is this place?”
I read a tiny inscription on a stone block set into the wall:
Salema’s Imbroglio.
“It’s an imbroglio; in Trisian, I mean. A brothel.”
The Archer raised his eyebrows. “I see. Then we must
save the honor of these ladies—regardless of whether they
have any honor or no.” He loosed at the thin-faced Awian.
The arrow rammed straight through the man’s leg and into
the wood. Its shaft made a high-pitched crunch of gristle,
dimpling his jeans’ fabric into his knee, locking it out
straight. He tried to step forward but was fastened to the
door. He screamed and hammered his fists and free leg
against it.
“Are you all right?” said his friend, being slow on the
uptake.
He screamed, “Pull it out!”
“You can’t, it’s barbed.” Lightning spanned his bow. “And
if you try, I’ll kill you both.”
The gang sloped off, then broke up and ran toward the
forum. Lightning called to the whores, “I promise you’ll
come to no harm.”
“I’m sorry,” the would-be rapist pleaded, leaning forward
with both hands over his knee.
“You will be,” Lightning commented, without moving the
arrow trained on him.
“Saker, what are you doing?” I said, disturbed by this
change.
The rapist’s eyes bulged. His left leg kicked, shoe sole
scraping the step. He stuttered, “No, no! I’ll—”
“You’ll do what, exactly?” Lightning said, driven to fury by
the man’s Donaise accent. He loosed the arrow; it pinned
the rapist’s left leg to a panel. It met some resistance at the
kneecap but drove easily between the articulated surfaces
of the joint behind and split the wood. Its arrowhead was a
shiny stud in his flattened and mushy knee.
Lightning selected another arrow. “My card. Seeing as
you need reminding who we are.” He shot again, pinning
the man’s right elbow to the door. A wedge of broken bone
clicked away from the metal point pushing past it.
The rapist howled and sobbed, “Why? Oh god, help…
WhataveIdone?” He turned his head and vomited onto the
top step.
“You know who we are!” Lightning shouted. “But still you
have to plead, you have to ask! You think Tris is beyond the
reach of the Castle! You take advantage of this gentle
town!”
Before I could stop Lightning he whipped out a fourth
arrow. He couldn’t be enjoying this. I dashed in front of him.
“Stop! Are you mad?”
Stony-faced, he aimed over my shoulder. “The lout has
an elbow left…”
“Leave him!” I shouted.
“Rape is the worst of crimes,” Lightning muttered. He
shook himself and looked up to where the beautiful whores
were leaning out watching, some timidly, some brazenly.
“Interpret for me, Jant,” he said, and called, “All right, girls.
Do with him what you will.”
We walked away from the man’s beast noise. With his
whole shocking strength he made every breath a scream.
The Capharnai watched in horror from their doorways.
They couldn’t distinguish Lightning and me from the rebels.
A young lad, his trousers spattered with somebody else’s
blood, ran from the piazza and confronted us. He glared
and brandished one of our broadswords, holding it like a
tennis racquet. Lightning hesitated. I flicked my dreadlocks
back, spread my double-jointed hands and wings and
roared, “Raaaah!”
The boy yelled and fled. Lightning looked impressed.
At the next intersection stood one of the unidentifiable
poles topped by a right-angled black and white bar. A man
stood beside it, manipulating levers that pulled wires to
make the plank swing in well-defined motions, somewhat
like a flag. He looked up the street to another pole at the
foot of the smoke-obscured Amarot and operated the
levers to follow its movements. A third device distant at the
edge of the town replicated his signals a second later. I
realized these were not standards at all; it was a system of
communication, and quicker than anything I could provide.
Even in the midst of the chaos I thought, I’ll make this
innovation my own. I’ll put this system on the Lowespass
peel towers instead of the beacons to monitor Insect
advances lest someone else beats me to it.
We reached the rotunda that stood over the main
crossroads, a domed folly no bigger than a room. It had
round columns supporting arches taking in the boulevard
and the north-south road. Someone had hacked great
chunks of plaster off the interior walls surfaced with blue
gems.
A woman wearing a fyrd greatcoat with the collar up was
energetically prizing squares of sapphire out of the mosaic.
Seeing Lightning’s arrowhead leveled at her, she shrank
back, tossed up her knife and caught it by the point, made
as if to throw it at him.
Lightning swung slightly left and shot at the edge of the
nearest pillar. The arrow hit it obliquely, glanced off into the
shade inside and she felt the breeze as it zipped past her
face. She burst from the northern arch, away between the
empty pavement tea shops, her coat streaming behind her.
Lightning bowed—he could even bow sarcastically.
The rear of Gio’s column was two hundred meters below
us on the road. We could see the backs of heads, sallet
points or bandanna knots at the napes of their necks. Two
men in the last line noticed us, nudged their friends and the
motion rippled out until everyone at the rear turned around.
They were only inclined to watch us until one man, with a
look of hatred, pulled a bolt from his bandolier, cocked his
crossbow and raised it to his shoulder. Nine or ten others
followed suit; I dodged inside the rotunda but Lightning
stood still, in disbelief. I urged, “Come on!”
Lightning shook his head as the men pulled their triggers
and a barrage of bolts flew at us. Out of range, they
dropped and struck the pavement, and the broken pieces
skidded, stopping two meters from Lightning’s feet. He
stepped forward and kicked them, as if to check they were
real and he wasn’t imagining it. He sounded aggrieved.
“What have I done to warrant all this? They think they can
outshoot me. I’ll attempt to confer with them.”
“Talk to them?” I stopped because Lightning took a
handful of distance arrows, long thin shafts with stiff
triangular red and yellow fletchings. He held them together