He shot with unflagging speed but dimples appeared
around his pursed lips. “Five, four. Jant, brace yourself; the
Circle’s going to break.”
Zascai are slaughtering Mist. And there’s nothing I can
do. I tried to feel it starting—couldn’t—and it hit me. Time
rushed past us; I felt torn across the middle. My awareness
raced out, expanding in all directions. It stretched, flattened,
raced out, expanding in all directions. It stretched, flattened,
spread thinner and infinitely thinner until my own identity and
individuality vanished. I lost consciousness of my
surroundings. I ceased to exist. The Circle reformed with a
snap. I woke and blinked around at the battered shopfronts
and blue domed ceiling overhead.
It happened so quickly I was still on my feet but I had
dropped my sword. I felt cold, very aware of my body and
the battle’s noise.
“Three, two…” Lightning stopped with an arrow at string.
“I…I am still here,” he said deliriously. We looked at each
other.
“Killed by Zascai,” he whispered.
At the battlefront crush, Serein Wrenn staggered. New to
the Circle, he didn’t understand what had happened. Gio,
on the other hand, had known it well. He took advantage
and cut at Wrenn’s forehead, drawing a red line across his
temple to blind him with blood.
Wrenn came to and tried to defend himself but,
concentration lost, all he could do was retreat. Gio pushed
him back, slashing at his face to further unnerve him.
“Serein!” Lightning raised his bow again, arced an arrow
up high over the entire rebels’ column.
I just had time to see that someone had grabbed Wrenn
from behind. Wrenn, still confused, struggled to free
himself. The arrow came straight down into the top of the
assailant’s head; he crumpled up.
“One.” Lightning fitted his penultimate arrow to the
“One.” Lightning fitted his penultimate arrow to the
binding on his bowstring. Behind Wrenn a man in a painted
leather jacket brandishing a curved falchion leapt at him.
Lightning drew and loosed; the arrow pierced the man’s
forehead and his body fell, knocking Wrenn. The crowd
realized that anyone who closed with Wrenn received an
arrow between the eyes. They left the duelists alone.
The Archer gasped, “Serein is an Eszai and must win
his own duel. But I made it an even fight; there won’t be two
Eszai murdered today.”
His shirt hem was soaked with blood; it was spreading
to the tops of his trousers.
At the place where Mist’s dismembered body was being
trodden underfoot, someone raised a halberd, her head on
the spike. I could only tell by the short white hair, because it
was crushed and gashed. The pole turned and the head
jigged around to face us. Its indigo eyes were turned up, its
mouth open, its nose flattened and bloody.
Lightning’s legs buckled. He staggered back to the
rotunda wall, sat down against it, then collapsed sideways
leaving a smear of blood. I helped him sit upright with the
bow across his knees. He pulled the leather tab off his right
hand with his teeth and dropped it. His face was ashen.
“The animals. How could they do that—tear her apart? An
Eszai, and Cyan’s mother…Immortality’s pointless in the
crush. We’re too used to Insects. They don’t throw spears.
Damn, don’t you feel like you’ve died? I hate feeling
someone else’s death and the years I’ve cheated catching
up with me. You know…we all become a second older
before San mends the Circle.” He bowed his head. “You
know that with me it adds up to minutes…”
Lightning hugged arms around his waist and squeezed
his eyes shut in agony. I crouched and laid a hand on his
shoulder, trying to bring him around because he was
drifting and talking to himself. “They killed her. Her schemes
were useless…I don’t know what they’ll do next.”
He could not fight in this condition, and the rotunda gave
sparse cover. Lightning knew this and made a tremendous
effort. He nocked his last arrow and eased his short sword
loose in its scabbard though it took all his mettle to lift it.
“Wait and gather your strength,” I said.
He nodded. “Yes. I’ll try to make my way back to
Rayne…I’ll meet you at the Petrel.” He sighed, chin on his
chest. He was thinking about Mist; the reality hitting him
was as incapacitating as the wound. “You and Serein must
persevere. Kill Gio, for Ata…for me. You are Eszai and that
is your purpose.”
He looked so ill that I didn’t want him to tangle with any
more rebels. “Don’t stay here, those bastards will come up.
Go all the way to the end of Fifth Street before you turn
down to the harbor. The roads are quieter at the edge of
town. Saker, I really think—”
He spoke through gritted teeth. “‘Saker, I really think’
nothing. Into the air and stop this fight!”
He watched me pick up two jewel-encrusted pieces of
plaster, one in each hand. I ran to take off.
I dived at Gio and dumped both bricks on him. They hit
him, one on his towhead, one on his forearm, and he
reeled. Wrenn jumped forward and thrust.
Gio’s neat last-minute parry saved him—the rapiers
clanged hilt to hilt. Their blades bound, they wrestled. Gio
kicked Wrenn’s shin. The muscle fluttered in Wrenn’s calf
but he threw the taller man back and wiped blood from his
eyes.
“Shoot him!” Gio bellowed at a crossbowman. “Shoot
him, someone, why don’t you?”
In return Wrenn spat at Gio and swiped low behind his
knees to sever the hamstring. Gio pivoted on the ball of his
foot and let the soft thrust go past.
A bruiser of a man offered his rapier to Gio. Gio fluidly
slipped his dagger into his belt and snatched the sword
from the man’s fist. He leveled both rapiers at Wrenn. They
must have had different hefts but I couldn’t tell from the way
he handled them.
Instantly at a disadvantage, Wrenn hit at the new rapier’s
side. Gio parried and at the same time attacked. Wrenn
stood his ground. A sailor tried to pass his sword to Wrenn,
but Gio severed his hand still clutching the hilt. Numbly, the
sailor bent to retrieve his sword but he had no hand to pick
it up with.
I circled above Wrenn, calling encouragement. He
looked desperate; blood flowed down his face. He
searched out the last of his strength and stood tall as if he
had found hope, but I thought he was acting because Gio
didn’t respond. Wrenn feinted. Gio attacked with a move
like a sneer. Wrenn evaded, left his dagger arm exposed,
too low. Gio’s rapier penetrated between his fingers, slid
through his hand and up his arm under the skin. The point
issued from his elbow in a patter of blood. Wrenn’s hand
opened, his dagger fell.
It’s over, I thought; but Wrenn had trapped Gio’s sword.
Wrenn’s rapier forced Gio’s other blade far to the left,
disengaged and thrust. His hilt slammed into Gio’s chest.
Gio hunched; about a meter of bright steel projected
from his back. A red patch darkened his coat around it.
Wrenn pulled the hilt down, tearing his lungs. Gio
staggered, blood spitting from his mouth. Wrenn couldn’t
hold Gio’s weight on the blade and dropped it, leaving him
sprawling transfixed by the rapier. Gio’s blade snagged in
Wrenn’s arm tore out through the muscle making a gaping
wound.
Gio lay curled up. He coughed around the blade. Blood
sprang from his mouth onto the pavement, dribbled from his
lips. He didn’t breathe in again. Died.
Awndyn soldiers rushed to Wrenn and supported him. His
fingers scrabbled, trying to stick the edges of the gash
back together. Blood ran down into his mouth and he
smiled. He had deliberately caught Gio’s blade in his arm,
in a furious variation of the same attack that had won him
immortality a year ago.
Wrenn struck out with his fists at the soldiers trying to
calm him. He fainted, so they picked him up and I led them
to the Stormy Petrel.
I picked up a sheaf of arrows and a bottle of water, and my
horn that I sound to give commands on the battlefield. I flew
back to Fifth Street and landed near Lightning. He looked
exhausted but grateful as I sprinted past, called, “Gio’s
dead!” dumped the ammunition and bottle while still
running, took off.
I swept low over the rebels and shouted, “Gio has fallen;
give yourselves up!”
The whole front of the column who had seen the duel,
and several more, especially the girls, surrendered to the
Awndyn Fyrd. The rear dissolved, rebels becoming looters
or fugitives. Many became disoriented and I saw them
running farther into the meshed streets. But the leaderless
center of the column and the men who had killed Mist knew
they were doomed. A new sort of aggression flared among
them, affected by desperation, the strangeness of
Capharnaum and the rum they had drunk.
There was a tangible atmosphere of possibility and
menace. Instantly the five hundred rebels in the main street
acted as if they were a single being, powerful, euphoric with
it, and mad. I sensed their vigor and my pulse raced.
Anything could happen; everything was happening—the riot
obeyed no laws at all. The youths were at home with it; it
was their atmosphere. They ran in large ragged groups.
They all thought: why not take the wealth that surrounds us,
in an abundance we’ve never been allowed before? The
strength of individuals was nothing compared with the
violence of the crowd—they tore the shopfronts apart. They
were bent on spending everything in the town in one
hysterical surge. They brought out bakers’ trolleys and
smashed them into caryatid statues. They infected each
other to screaming pitch rejoicing at their own bodies’
force, their freedom and their sudden riches. No future
prospects Capharnaum could offer them were as good as
the fun they could have trashing it. From the air I saw a
mass of people sweeping away from the boulevard. They
spiraled around ransacked shops like the eye of a storm.
The burning crag’s jumping unnatural light lit the quay.
Gio’s men were now just pirates, plundering the
surrounding houses. They dragged out tables, threw lamps
into sheets and bundled them up. Fights broke out between
them: men stabbed and punched each other over any
precious-looking metal. They broke furniture and hefted the
pieces as clubs.
Bricks were hurled against the houses’ upper windows,
and when a Capharnai man leaned out and shouted, they
threw bricks at his face. The pirates gathered cutlery and
amphorae but discarded them when gold gleamed. So
much gold, it was like the Castle’s treasury. They hastily
lashed together enormous packs of objects with their belts.
When each had plundered all he could carry, he set off to
t h e Pavonine leaving wailing and raging Capharnai
families behind them.
Some Capharnai defended themselves. A group of
fishermen threw a huge weighted net over thieves escaping
from a house. As they struggled under it, the fishermen
stabbed them with marlin-spikes and tridents that sloughed
dried white scales.
A group of Trisian lads came out of one house carrying
sacks to loot food, kicking the door of a restaurant. Thick
olive-oil smoke ribboned from its cellar grating. Little fires
had been kindled at irregular intervals on the boulevard.
The rioters set alight waste bins and chairs; I could see no
reason why, apart from the lust to cause as much havoc as
possible. I yelled, “Stop destroying this wonderful town!”
The ones that heard me started laughing.
There was no hope of catching the rioters without
abandoning our own wounded men. I ordered the fyrd to
pull back to the Petrel. At the foot of the gangplank the
Awndyn unit had formed a barricade. They leveled pikes
above a shield wall. Some fyrd regrouped there, but in
equal numbers those who spied the gold were unlinking
their shields and deserting to join the looters. Archers on
t he Petrel’s fore-and rear-castles sent sporadic volleys
down at the pirates crossing the quay, who had no choice
but to run through the hail of arrows to the Pavonine.
Thieves poured up the Pavonine’s gangways carrying
their prizes or dragging their wounded friends. I flew over
the Stramash and Cuculine, puzzled; their decks were on
the same level as the water. They had been scuttled; they
sat empty and perfectly upright, their keels on the sea bed.
Their main decks were swamped with lapping waves, from
which their castles projected like four square islands.
The crews of all three ships were at work unfurling and
setting the Pavonine’s sails. Others, yelling, waved their
friends aboard. Poleaxes and spears looked like metal
hackles standing up on the ship’s back.
I glided above Pavonine’s deck and saw Tirrick, and
Cinna. Tirrick had Cinna Bawtere at rapier point, forcing
him to steer the ship. Cinna clung to the wheel, shaking
visibly, his porcine face set in a grimace. Tirrick, however,
smiled rapaciously. He shouted, “Climb aboard! We’ll sink
the Petrel, then pack provisions and sail for Awndyn! I’ll be
the next Serein and fatty will be the next Mist!”
Cinna glanced up at me and scowled. He had a length of
chain around his middle, worn by fearful sailors so if they
fell overboard their suffering would have a quick end.
I shouted, “Cinna, don’t you dare leave!”
He told me to go and do something unspeakable with a
goat.
Sailors on the harbor cast Pavonine’s mooring ropes
loose and swarmed up. The ship grated along the quayside
with looters still chucking bags onto the deck and catching
lines to haul themselves up.
Those left behind turned their attention to the Petrel.
Small groups of rebels gathered out of range on the villa
verandas; they began to coalesce, ready to attack the
Petrel’s gangway in a desperate bid to hijack her. I thought
of Rayne; I would not let anyone hurt the Doctor. She was
my adviser, Lightning’s confidante and devoted friend.
Lightning would be even more shattered than he already is,
if anything happened to Rayne.
I have seen Mist die and Serein badly wounded. I have
left Lightning faltering his way through the outskirts of town.
The only books to escape the firestorm are in my pocket. I
don’t know how many Trisians have succumbed but their
houses, their shops and the harbor are despoiled. Cinna
was sailing off with their belongings, surrounded by pirates
and protected by Tirrick. The remnants of Gio’s men were
completely beyond control. Our forces were disheartened
and either retreating or deserting.
I needed everyone in the riot to listen to me, to stop and
look up so I could shatter the hysteria that gripped them. I
must attract their attention with a gesture more powerful
than Gio’s last stand. But how? None of my battlefield horn
signals mean anything now. I couldn’t drop rocks accurately
onto Pavonine from above the archers’ range.
I shouted, swooped acrobatically and landed on the
main street, but although the rebels heard me they paid no
attention and simply ran away. What was I to do—pursue
them one by one? Infuriated by our failure, realizing that we
were stranded, I felt my scolopendium clock running down.
A cold shiver washed over me; the long muscles twitched in
my arms. Oh god, not now. If Tarragon surfaced she could
my arms. Oh god, not now. If Tarragon surfaced she could
soon put an end to the Pavonine, but that wouldn’t stop the
fighting on land that second by second was becoming
bloodier. I needed Tarragon, her car or a congregation of
Tine, a sea krait…A sea krait! Did I dare speak to the
kraits? I thought: I can use the Shift to stop the sacking of
Capharnaum!
I flew to Petrel and landed on the half-deck. Rayne had
transformed the main area below me into a field hospital,
and she was extremely busy. Wounded men were being
brought in and laid on camp beds between the masts and
hatchways. Rayne bent over one, whose blood pooled in
the brown stretcher. Her assistant struggled with the
breastplate strap, having to pull tighter in order to release it
through the buckle. Rayne said, “No! Tha’ sucking wound—
ignore the res’.” She slipped a gauze pad under the edge
of his armor and pressed on a jagged gash in his ribs. The
soldier struggled. Rayne grasped his hand firmly and he lay
still. Then his hand relaxed out of hers.
I watched as I retrieved my envelope of cat from my
cabin, and I saw it all. Rayne looked into his eyes as he
died. She often did that with the mortals for whom, no
matter how hard she tried, she could not prevent death. She
wants to glimpse the change as their eyes set. I once
thought her obsession was compassion, now I think it’s just
her insatiable curiosity. She wants to see what they’re
seeing, she wants to know all that they suddenly know. It’s
understandable because people are always inquisitive
about what they can’t do. Or maybe, and although it’s
morbid I wouldn’t rule it out, Rayne is fond of being the last
thing a man sees as he quits the world. One day her
curious face might fill my field of vision, through a bloodred
filter.
I ducked into Ata’s office; the bottle of brandy stood on
her table. Through the stern windows I saw the Pavonine,
nearly stationary against an onshore breeze. Her sailors
swarmed on the high aft castle, adjusting some timbers—
the long beam of a trebuchet. I said aloud, “Bloody fuck, not
another catapult.” It could even be the one we saw being
dragged along the Remige Road. It had two large wooden
treadmills set upright on either side. A sailor crawled into
each wheel and walked them around; others on the outside
pushed to winch the arm back. It was so long it overhung
the poop deck steps. Another pair of men lowered a ball
into the sling. Tirrick gave a shout, the arm kicked up to one
side of the mizzenmast, and the stone flew through the air.
It overshot Petrel and crashed into the roof of one of the
harbor villas. Cinna’s sailors busily set about winding a
windlass to decrease the trebuchet’s throw. Shit, if we ever
needed Lightning’s professional opinion it was now.
I dashed out of the cabin and called to Rayne, “They’re
taking potshots at us! Move down below—and stay there till
I bring reinforcements. Don’t abandon ship unless they hole
the hull. If you must go to land, ask the officer of the Awndyn
Fyrd lamai to give you some cover.”
I heard Rayne ordering that her patients be taken to the
living deck; I did not have much time. I tipped a fistful of cat
out of the envelope. It ran like fine sugar between my
fingers as I sifted it into the brandy glass. I tapped my hand
on top to knock the powder out of the damp lines on my
palm. Then I uncorked the brandy and sloshed it in. The
crystals eddied and spun. I drank it down right to the dregs
of undissolved powder where the brandy had not
penetrated between the dry grains. I put the glass down
with a click.
That was a massive overdose. Through the windows
broadsword fighters battled at the junction of the boulevard.
Pikes held the gangplank secure but only one line of fyrd
remained behind them.
The metal clashes muted suddenly, as if at a distance;
the bustle of the surgery shrank to background. My own
breaths boomed loud and blood pressure rumbled in my
ears. It is coming on.
Pavonine turned her slender stern to me and the flat
towers of her soot-spotted sails. Her reflection vanished.
The image of the quay wall and houses ripped away. The
sea moved, silver but featureless. It wasn’t reflecting; it
should be mirroring the sky.
The waves slowed to the consistency of treacle.
Pavonine lifted and fell again hours later. Another round
shot slowed until it was almost floating; it tracked a
lingering trajectory through the air and disappeared at the
water’s surface in front of the window.
I’m going under. I slipped to my knees, trailing my fingers
down the dirty panes. If I concentrate on breathing I’ll never
remember how to. I could no longer kneel. I lay down, one
arm extended. The bracelets on the other wrist pressed into
my cheek, my sword belt dug into my hips.
Black haze filled my vision from the edges to the center. I
thought with a sudden flush of panic: I haven’t taken
anywhere near enough. This will never work. I need more—

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
I set off flying over Epsilon’s savanna toward Vista
Marchan and the old Insect bridge. Hundreds of meters
below, Tarragon’s gold car left the edge of the market and
followed, accelerating until it was directly below me. The
car kept pace, a tiny shining rectangle on the immense
plains, leaving a straight dark green track as it flattened the
grass. I could see Tarragon in her short red dress glancing
up at me.
I slowed, let the car race ahead and then swooped
down, speeding faster as I lost height, and catching up with
it from behind. I swept over it, lifting my legs so my dangling
feet didn’t hit the headrest, and then lowered my pointed
boot toes onto the front seat next to Tarragon. She looked
ahead, keeping the car speeding straight. I crouched and
pulled my wings in unevenly, wiggled to sit down. I pointed
at the gray Insect bridge. “Go!”
Tarragon clenched the wheel, rocked her body forward
and slammed her foot to the floor.
The towers of Vista Marchan shimmered and cohabited
the space where only the flourishing grassland was
supposed to be. A warm wind blew directly from them,
drying my eyes. Nowhere in the Fourlands has such a
parched, relentless wind. Tarragon glanced at me,
complaining, “I’ve been looking everywhere. What’s
happening, Jant? I swam into harbor and saw stones falling
through the water around the hull of your boat.”
“We’re under attack. The other ship’s throwing them.
Rayne’s on the Petrel—and so am I.”
Tarragon gnashed her Shark’s teeth angrily. Her shape
flickered violently between being a prissy lady and a vicious
fish. “What a waste of scholarship! I will flip their boat into
flotsam!”
“It’s even worse: the library’s on fire—one thousand
years of wisdom lost forever. We’ll never know what
essential works are gone for good. Mist Ata’s dead. Oh—
was that gargantuan shark you?”
“Yes. I followed a schooner that I sent to sail alongside
your ship on a Shift sea. You asked me for help so I
chartered it as a guard.”
“God, Tarragon; you’re big.”
“Big-ish. Do you want me to bite your enemies’ keel out
from under them?”
“Even if you do, the pirates ashore will keep fighting and
they’re killing the islanders. The Trisians will still resist the
Castle after this. No amount of talking will bring them
around because after Gio’s lies they’re never going to
believe any Fourlander again. We can’t win. The only way I
can think to take control of this riot is to stage a spectacle
so incredible that both sides forget their differences. Sea
kraits live far from land, don’t they?”
Tarragon said, “Yes. They wouldn’t eat humans, not
worth the energy. They live in the deep ocean; when they
slough their skins they scratch themselves on the
continent’s roots shelving up from the abyss.”
“Well, I want a sea krait.”
“You want to save them! Are you sure?”
“Only if they agree to the deal. The stinguish told me their
ocean dried up, and you said they needed a safe haven.
Kraits can come to live in the Fourlands’ sea on the
condition that they obey me.”
I braced myself as we rushed onto the wide bridge. Our
wheels hummed as they sped over the irregular surface. I
could see the striations where individual Insects had added
their masticated wood pulp. The bridge’s stringy supports
of hardened spit whooshed by on both sides. Looking
between them I saw the savanna drop below us as we
labored up to the apex.
We crested the summit buffeted by Vista’s breeze that
blows across worlds, and for one glorious moment I could
see the whole of the sprawling market.
Then it had gone; we were in the world of Vista. The
wind howled through the top of the bridge. Below us, it blew
the top layer of flaking sand across the wasteland as fine
crystal dust, drifting onto high dunes against the base of the
sea wall.
Many white tracks converged on Vista Marchan city;
from up here they resembled the rays of a star. Its cluster of
pale blocky towers appeared suspended in mirages and
pooled in bent light across the entire wasteland.
I had not seen any place like this before. We descended
past the towers that I realized were higher than the Throne
Room spire. I was overawed and shaking as we rolled to a
halt on top of Vista’s great sea wall. On either side of us
were empty, sand-choked dockyards and piers with long,
dry barnacled ladders that stopped short of the ground.
I looked out over the salt flats, to see Epsilon as a
translucent illusion, a lush plain and thriving market lying at
forty-five degrees through the white wasteland.
Tarragon said, “Aren’t Insects fascinating creatures?
That’s the Vista desert. It used to be the ocean floor.” Her
car’s wheels pulled the grit into tracks as we drove along
the top of the immense wall. The salt-bleached streets were
devoid of movement. The only living things in Vista were
myself and Tarragon; her fin annoyingly brushed my thigh
as she operated the controls. Paper Insect cells meshed
between and hung like gray lace around the worn concrete
buildings.
“I’m sorry to bring you so far,” she added. “Your trip
home will cause you substantial distress.”
Rust stains ran down the dock wall from flaking iron rings
bolted into the top. Sea-level markers and fading numerals
were stenciled in a script twice my height. We stopped and
stared out at the vanished ocean. The white sky and sand
stretched away as far as I could see: two parallel planes
meeting at the horizon. Occasional patches discolored the
dunes’ glaring surface, chemicals and oil seeping up from
below. A stagecoach that must have belonged to a recent
tourist lay derelict and half-full of sand. The tops of its
spoked wheels showed through the surface of a hardpacked
ridge.
Behind us was the city, faceless towers and blanched
walls abraded with centuries of windblown sand. Spiral
steps emerged like spinal columns from their broken shells.
Rusted girders jutted out of the fortieth floors—metal
thinned to perforated wafers. There was no sound but the
breeze skipping salt crystals over the dry ocean floor and
concrete promenade. It was completely outside my
experience. I said, “It’s not beautiful. It’s…”
“A desert, Jant. Lots of sand.”
“Tarragon,” I said impatiently. “Capharnaum is burning!”
She tutted but moved quickly, taking a gold pocket
watch from a box that was part of the car’s fascia. She
clicked its glass case open and I saw that it wasn’t a watch
at all. Inside was a gold mechanism and a wire gauze that
securely held down a fat black fly, twice the size of a
bluebottle. It buzzed energetically, sounding as if it was
trying to drill through its gold cage. Tarragon said, “It’s
amazing what you can purchase from the Tine in Epsilon
market if you have enough meat.”
“What is it?”
“It’s a Time Fly. They have a way of avoiding being
squashed or eaten. They can jump a split second back in
time, up to the point at which they emerged from the pupa.
This Time Fly hatched in Vista Marchan and has been
imprisoned here ever since. I’m taking you back there; we
will turn back time until the tide comes in. Wind it for me, will
you?”
I turned the contraption’s little gold key, just like a watch,
and the gauze began to put pressure on the trapped insect.
It felt threatened and tried its method of escape, but
because the mechanism snared it, it carried its threat
along. It took us, too, and it went fast. Really fast.
For a few minutes, nothing changed. I twisted around
and looked behind at the town. The buildings could be a
little less gray, less dilapidated.
There was a blurring at street level around the car, as if I
could see colored air swirling. Tarragon said, “They’re city
people, in their everyday lives or fighting Insects, moving
back in time too fast to see.”
She patted my arm and pointed to the horizon.
Prodigious steel ships began to rise from the areas of oily
discolored sands. Sand dusted away from them, revealing
masts and wheelhouses then unearthed long hulls lying on
their sides. The sand’s surface darkened to pale gray and
began to glisten. Then shallow blue pools appeared in the
lowest linear sand ripples, where I had not noticed hollows
before. The long pools swelled and coalesced, turning the
summits of the sand ripples into islands and building up
around the dunes. Water ran together around them, darker
blue as it deepened.
The ripples were all covered, the sea level climbed, the
dunes were dispersed islands. Just a few islands left; then
the sea covered the final dune. The ocean kept rising,
closer to the bottom rungs of the ladders, bearing upright
the drab metal ships.
Color poured into the sky. From monochrome it became
pale, then bright blue. The automobile’s highly polished
gold chassis reflected it. The Time Fly in the watch whined
with effort. It was now a young imago, its wings crumpled
and damp, as it had been when someone imprisoned it. Its
six thin legs scraped against the watch’s shiny inside
surface.
Suddenly the Insect bridge vanished. Fresh paper, it
disappeared in jerky stages from the foot of the arch to its
zenith. Waves hit the harbor wall and climbed its sea-level
gauge, higher and higher. The steel ships disappeared
instantly; instead the ocean spat out white boats that
bobbed at anchor. The rings in the dock wall were glossy;
Vista Marchan’s towers were complete and spotless, glass
walls reflecting the sun. The buzzing in the watch stopped
abruptly, and everything was clear and still. It was a
beautiful day. Men and women in orange tabards and
yellow helmets went about their business at the docks,
blissfully unaware of the annihilation that will happen when
the Insects’ bridge crashes through.
Tarragon showed me the watch; it was empty. She said,
“In a factory in Vista, the Time Fly’s just been hatched.”
An almighty wave reared from the middle of the ocean and
cascaded into harbor, diminishing every second, until it
lapped at the wall as a gentle ripple. A vast green-and-bluestriped
snake’s head and upper body erupted from the
ocean, spattering us with spray and blotting out the sun. Its
head was four times bigger than a caravel, the solid muscle
trunk of its monstrous body as thick as one of the towers
behind me.
The glossy snake lowered its flat, pointed head onto the
promenade. The harbor workers seemed annoyed but
were too polite to say anything. Tarragon and I climbed out
of her car. “God-who-left-us,” I gasped.
“No, it’s just a snake.”
“Shit…How many are there?”
“Sh!” Tarragon chided. “Their population numbers less
than a thousand.”
The sea krait’s bulk stretched into the distance. It
meandered in colossal hundred-meter curves like the
Moren River. A ship steered away from its side, panicking
and belching smoke. Around half a kilometer from shore,
the krait dipped underwater and the same distance farther
away a striped conical island trailed back and forth in the
frothing sea—the flattened tip of its tail.
We stood in front of the snake’s slightly domed yellow
eye. Its vertical slit pupil was the height and width of my
body. Its head was covered in bright scales the size of a
table top. Black skin showed between them, looking like
stitching around the square scales on its closed lips. A
deeply forked black tongue darted out of the tip of its snout
and flickered around us. It didn’t touch me but I sensed the
motion of the air a centimeter away from my face and I felt
its moistness. The snake darted its tongue back into the
hole in its top lip, which was big enough for me to have
crawled through.
Tarragon said, “Jant, may I introduce you to the king of
the sea kraits?” She addressed the beast: “Your Heinouss,
this is a messenger from the Emperor of the Fourlands who
could soon be your Emperor too, if you agree to his
terms…Jant, talk to him; he can hear you with his tongue.”
The snake turned its enormous head on one side like a
keeling carrack, and rubbed its closed mouth on the
promenade. With the grating of a thousand millstones, it
scraped great grooves into the cement and uprooted the
iron mooring posts on either side. Its eye moved back and
forth, appraising me.
I declared, “Tarragon will show you the direction to the
Fourlands’ ocean. You and your people can live there if you
promise me three things. First, destroy the ship called
Pavonine afloat in the center of the harbor, that Tarragon
will show you. Second, after that don’t damage any other
vessels or harm any people. Live in the depths and stay
away from the shoreline, so you’ll be less likely to cause
accidents. Third, our world is threatened by the Insects too;
that makes us allies and in the future I might call on you for
help again, via Tarragon.”
All the time, the krait’s pennant-tongue flicked in and out
of its long colubrine smile, picking up vibrations in the air. It
was tasting my words. It twisted its head looking for
Tarragon and slithered dangerously close to crushing her
car before she ran around in front of its eye. It hissed, and I
felt its hot, fishy, miasmic breath blow from the arched hole
in its lip.
“What is it saying?” I asked.
Tarragon said, “He wants to know if your sea is of
sufficient size. I don’t think the Fourlands’ ocean is roomy
enough to hold every one of the sea kraits. I will tell him that
there’s only space to allow a few of them through. That way
at least some will escape the disaster and their species will
survive.”
The snake’s glistening body writhed along its whole
visible length. Tarragon gave me an encouraging look. “The
King accepts. He is convinced of your honesty; he says he
can taste it.”
“How do I know whether to trust a sea snake?”
Tarragon laughed. “You have a Shark’s word that you
can.”
The meanders of the krait’s kilometer-long body drew
tighter and closer together as it pulled its head back and
smoothly submerged under the water. I stared at it,
openmouthed.
“You will see him once more,” said the Shark. “Goodbye,
Jant. I have to act as their guide and we have rather a long
way to swim in this delicious water. Still, we’ve plenty of
time.” Her red dress turned gray, and stippled to continuous
sharkskin all over her body. She walked to the very edge of
the massive wall, hooked her bare toes over and raised her
shagreen hands above her head.
“Don’t leave me here!” I cried. I was not only in a
completely unknown, alien world, but somewhere in its past.
She turned a shark’s cold eye on me. “Have you not
been practicing? You should be able to will your way back
by now! I advised you to study and I expected you to learn.
Well, this is an excellent opportunity to try.” She leaned
forward, gave a little jump, and fell through the air in a
perfect dive. She splashed into the crystal-clear water and
did not rise again.
I might have to stay here forever, I thought in panic. I
might have to live here. Berating myself, I examined the
stinking abandoned car but it was already beginning to rot. I
kicked it. The dock workers had left when we were talking
to the King krait, and I was alone. I sat down and for about
an hour, though I had no way of measuring time, I tried to
copy the feeling of my return Shifts. I imagined the pull—a
plausible path to the Fourlands—growing stronger,
solidifying. I grasped it, and dragged myself through.
I lay somewhere that smelled of feathers. Darkness
surrounded me. I felt nothing. My body was paralyzed; I
couldn’t move. “Because you’re dead,” a heavy voice
pronounced in my ear. I screamed with no sound. This is
the wrong world; I’ve no body to return to. I struggled and
thrashed and forced myself awake.
I came to lying on the worn carpet in Ata’s cabin, by the
linenfold paneled walls and brocade bench on which Rayne
sat in front of the stern windows. “Well done,” she enthused.
“You saved us!” The windows behind her were completely
black. “Shame i’ killed you, though.” She smiled and her
mouth widened on both sides. She smiled and smiled and
smiled. I’m still not home. I’m still not awake!
I squeezed my eyes shut and fought desperately. I then
saw a lowering landscape with ruined bridges, fortresses,
windmills all benighted backlit with raging fire, vast
buildings with stone stairways running in every direction. I
did not set down there. Someone’s fingers were on my
face, probing like worms in my mouth; they forced my jaw
open and rammed down my throat. I simultaneously woke
up and vomited helplessly.
I opened my eyelids to two slivers of glazed-green iris but
lay otherwise inert. Rayne’s pair of bloodstained pumps
and Lightning’s thick-soled buckled boots stood in front of
my face. God, I hate it when I wake up lying in the recovery
position.
“He’s no’ responding,” said Rayne. I felt her thumb my
eyelid.
“I am,” I said, but it came out as a breath.
Lightning’s voice sounded very weak. “Well, bloody
make him respond.”
Rayne made a sound like a shrug and slapped my face.
“His pupils are so thin they’re like threads. Can you feel t’
Circle working t’ hold him?”
“Yes, damn him.”
Rayne slapped my face again and I gasped and spat.
Lightning said, “Ah, Jant. Everyone fights to survive but
you wipe yourself out! You couldn’t poison Gio but you do a
bloody good job of poisoning yourself! We need you to fly
above and drop missiles on the trebuchet team. I know you
prefer to be comatose under heavy bombardment; are you
hoping to be revived by the cold water when we sink?”
I rolled into a kneeling position and blinked at him. He
I rolled into a kneeling position and blinked at him. He
half-lay on a chair, still shaking with pain. Instead of his
longbow he held a smaller bow with pulleys that could be
kept drawn effortlessly.
Rayne said, “Lightning, don’ make him feel bad or you’ll
give him an excuse t’ take another dose.”
“The gamin wretch! I’ll—”
I whispered, “You’re wrong. You told me to stop the riot
and that’s exactly what I am doing.”
A ripple jolted Petrel hard against the harbor wall,
throwing Rayne off balance. The snakes have arrived. I
swallowed dryly, then I stumbled to my feet and out of the
cabin. Rayne hurried and Lightning struggled after me, up
the ladder to the poop deck where I gazed from the rail. The
quayside was littered with bodies; its pavement was
cracked and the walls of houses demolished where
Pavonine’s shot had struck. Our figurehead and forecastle
had been smashed into a mass of splintered wood. I took it
all in with one glance, not knowing if I had really woken. The
sky was dark—was this Fourlands or still Shift?
Looking down to the lower level through an open hatch I
saw Wrenn sitting on a rope coil, drinking a canteen of
water voraciously. Rayne’s assistant was sewing the gash
that was open to the bone in his arm. The sight brought me
back to earth. He knew that Eszai can take wounds—
although not wounds as serious as that. He must have
badly misunderstood what I told him about the Circle.
The Pavonine continued her bombardment. Cinna spun
the wheel, keeping the ship’s stern toward us, rudder at full
lock. Tirrick commanded the sweating pirates scurrying
inside the treadwheels to ratchet the catapult back. They
stacked its sling with slimy rocks from the ship’s own
ballast.
The Pavonine jolted. An unnatural ripple circled her. The
water on either side of her hull began to churn and bubble;
waves lapped in every direction. Behind her, between her
and the beacon island, a long black ridge surfaced. It was
domed like a whale’s back but it rose higher and higher out
of the water, passing the height of the Pavonine’s rail. It
was the King krait’s top lip.
Lightning and Rayne stared, stunned. The men on the
Pavonine ran about in confused terror as the ridge
continued to rise. Two curved sharp fangs emerged parallel
with the waves. Longer than pikes they projected from the
black arch on the far left and right. The sea krait’s jaw
showed its green and blue stripes and the water seething
as it emerged glowed with phosphorescence.
A hundred meters away from the top lip, in the water
between us and the Pavonine, the slick lower lip crested
up. Men by the catapult shrieked and pointed; on the main
deck they ran from one side to the other, unable to fathom
what the arches on either side of them could be. The krait’s
open mouth ascended, its teeth curved toward the
Pavonine. The ridged black skin of its upper palate faced
us, twice the size of the mainsail and glistening like tar.
Water sluiced off its smooth bony head.
The smoke-filled sky resonated with the pirates’
screams as far as the town. I had the impression that the
whole sea bed was ascending. Water thundered out of both
sides of the krait’s open mouth; in the rocketing froth
between its upper and lower jaws the Pavonine danced
and spun like an eggshell in boiling brine. The cocked
catapult went off, hurling shot vertically into the air.
I heard Cinna screeching. The snake’s lance-long teeth
reached the height of Pavonine’s foremast, curving above
the ship and caging it in. Pavonine canted over so far the
crow’s nest on its mainmast slapped the water, now on the
port side, now the starboard, throwing off men. The krait’s
bottom jaw obscured the ship. Its yellow eye emerged,
surrounded with wet black skin, waves battering against it.
For an instant the water inside its mouth was carried
higher than the harbor water. The snake reared out of the
sea, bearing the Pavonine up. Sailors clung onto the
ropes, dropped off with raucous screams.
Foaming brine spurted out both sides. The sea krait
closed its mouth, with one sickening crunch.
In the sudden silence, the bitten-off masthead of the
Pavonine tumbled to the surf. It floated, no bigger than a
matchstick, beside the diamond-shaped snake’s head
projecting straight up from the waves. Its body rose to the
surface, blocking the harbor entrance, and the length of it
extended to the horizon. The King krait lowered its head
and turned to look at us.
Lightning scrabbled for an arrow, stammering, “What is
that…?” He flexed his bow, aiming directly for its yellow
eye.
“No!” I put my jittery hand over the arrowhead and forced
it down. “Don’t shoot!”
Lightning gaped at me, striving to understand. “Why not?
Its carcass won’t block us in. The sun will rot it. It will rot
away.” He yelled at the sea krait, “What are you?”
The snake’s long mouth stayed closed but the black
tongue whipped out like a pennant at the summit of its
snout, curling down to our railings, licking slickly in front of
me. I assumed the krait was tasting the air for my scent. I
actually admired its beauty and overwhelming incalculable
strength. I waved my arms to it, grinning madly with
gratitude. “Thank you! Thank you in the name of the
Emperor—now go find a home!”
It tilted its head to the side, but as it sank it scanned the
Stormy Petrel’s deck with its great amber eye. The sea
rushed back with a noise like rolling boulders, closing over
the snake’s eye, upturned mouth, pointed nose; the nostrils
last to submerge. An enormous V-shaped ripple formed
where, underwater, it began to haul its massive body and
retract its head from the harbor.
I swear there was a gust of wind as everybody on the
Stormy Petrel exhaled. The quay was silent for a second—
it was silent, the fighting had stopped. I heard weapons fall
and clanking as bags of loot dropped to the ground.
Pandemonium broke out as, shoulder to shoulder, some
soldiers and pirates moved closer to the waterfront to stare
at the floating top-mast, the broken pieces of canoes and
pontoons where the krait had been. The rest, especially the
Trisians, tried to run as far from the sea as possible, back
into town. The rioting on the quayside and all the way up the
boulevard had completely ceased; everybody was watching
the ocean.
“Did…?” Lightning stammered. “In the name of…god’s
arse…I can’t believe I just saw that.” He turned on me. “Why
do you keep stopping me from shooting monsters?”
“It saved us, Saker; it’s a friend.”
On my other side Rayne spoke calmly. “You were in too
deep, Jant, if you reached Vista Marchan.”
I goggled at her, but she simply smiled.
“How did you know that thing was going to appear?”
Lightning demanded.
I seated myself on the deck; I was too nauseous to
question Rayne. I moaned, “Oh, please let me lie down.
They’ve stopped fighting. I halted the riot; we’ve won.”
“We los’ so much, Jant, tha’ I doubt you could call i’
winning.”
Lightning nudged me with his boot. “I see Vendace and
the senators approaching the gangway. At the moment I
don’t think relations between Capharnaum and the Castle
could be any worse. Can you address them?”
Rayne said, “Jant is very disorien’ed; I don’—”
I nodded. “Yes. I will speak for the Castle.”
Scavenger smoke rifled across the sky. The moisture of
the sea breeze condensed on the library’s fumes to form a
thick cloud descending over the crag; we gradually lost
sight of the blackened, burned-out Amarot. The air was
filthy and muggy, unfamiliar to the senators. They stood
huddled together, coughing. The sea krait had rendered
them speechless and their eyes were downcast; they were
in mortal fear. Lightning and I walked unsteadily down the
gangplank to the corniche which was littered with debris.
Vendace’s tunic and unruly gray hair were soot-stained. He
looked at the blood on Lightning’s shirt, the puke on mine
and the ash on us both. He faltered, “We saw the serpent.
Can you communicate with it?”
“I just did,” I said.
They conferred between themselves; they all had a tone
of defeat. Vendace said, “This is so much worse than
legendary Insects coming to life. We had no idea that such
a serpent existed. How did you summon it?”
“What are they asking—?” Lightning began.
“One minute!” I said to him. I gathered my thoughts and
addressed the senators. “Yes, I summoned the snake to
stop the battle and save your homes. I don’t want to call up
any more but the Archer is furious and unmerciful. You
heard us arguing on the ship; he wants to show you what
we can do. I’m trying to make him agree not to encircle the
island with giant snakes.” I turned to Lightning and
addressed him gravely in high Awian. “We must look like
we’re conferring. I’m bluffing, but the senators will
appreciate the Empire after this. Pretend to be angry and
speak to me; quote theater or something.”
Lightning was quick to understand. He shook his head
and said in a stern tone, “Well, in that case—balsam for
lovers.”
I inquired, “Willows for brides?”
“Briars for the maidens,” Lightning retorted. “Look, you
will explain this afterward, please?”
I patted his shoulder as if in agreement, “Oh yes, but I’m
positive you won’t like it. And to wives we give lilies. Right.”
I switched back to Trisian and said, “My friend and I have
decided not to summon the snakes, and to let them abide
in the deepest ocean where they will be no threat to your
country again.” I extended my hand to Vendace. “There are
many more wonderful things in the Fourlands. We’re your
allies; please join us.”
Vendace and the others seemed doubtful. His lean
shoulders were sagging. “If all the trials to face Tris from
now on will be this arduous, then we cannot resist them
alone. We’ll give you a message for”—he paused and
blanched—“for San, now he has done to us what he did to
the Pentadrica.”
“What?” I said.
Vendace looked at his associates for support,
shrugged. “Everybody knows that centuries ago San let the
Pentadrica be destroyed so he could seize power. He
deliberately contrived that unfortunate Alyss be slain, and
now he’s done the same to us.”
I shook my head. “No, no. San was only an adviser. He
would have told Alyss not to visit the Insects’ enclave and
she must have ignored him.”
Vendace glanced at the murk covering the Amarot,
through which glimpses of the blackened library walls came
and went. “That is not what Capelin wrote. I have read the
manuscript, many of us have, but now…how do we prove
it? It is ash with the rest.”
I didn’t know what to say or who to believe. I searched
around for more evidence of our goodwill, took the books
from my pockets and gave them to Danio’s successor, who
was still choking back sobs. “Here…”
“Oh, thanks,” she said sarcastically, looking at the titles.
“The Castle’s Doctor is here; she’ll help your doctors
with the wounded Capharnai. Her knowledge and supplies
will be useful. We’ll repair the damage that has been done,
as far as we can. If you need grain ships I shall send them.
The Circle is at your command; whatever you think about
the Emperor’s history and motives, I promise you we will
work day and night.”
I thought, we have brought them misrule. Our presence
has made Tris grow out of childhood to delinquent
adolescence. But scolopendium was still hitting me in
waves of sickness and bliss. I was simply glad to be alive,
one of the lives remaining.
Our soldiers, seeing Lightning on the quayside,
approached him. But he was feverish, so he simply sat
down and left me to give the commands while Rayne
tended to him. I told the Awndyn Fyrd captain to round up
the rebels and put them in the hold. Then came Viridian,
Ata’s daughter, who had collected the gory pieces of her
mother’s body. She insisted that Mist Ata Dei be buried at
sea, with the respect that was due to a famous explorer and
the Circle’s Sailor.
I said, “It’s terrible that Mist can never know how Tris
turns out.”
Lightning glanced over the broken paving stones, the
trebuchet shot and abandoned gold loot on the harbor
pavement. His gaze loitered on the sea that splintered the
dawn light. He was now as suspicious of the ocean as I
used to be, and I loved it because it was not the same sea
now the kraits swam in its depths. “Yes, it is, Comet. And I
wonder if the Empire will ever regain a vestige of
normality.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
THE CASTLE, JANUARY 2021
The paths under the Finial’s arches were slippery with
snow that had partially melted and then frozen again. The
translucent footprints preserved the detailed marks of boot
treads and hobnails. Frost rime edged the stone leaves on
the Architect’s Tower, and icicles so long you could spit
Insects with them hung from the Bridge of Size, which took
the cobbled Eske Road across the Moren River. On the
lawns between the Simurgh Wing and outer wall, two
centimeters of snow were sealed beneath a centimeter of
sparkling ice, blue in the early morning light.
I waited outside the Throne Room in the small cloister,
staring out of one of its pointed glassless windows. I was
contemplating the fact that if you put the world’s finest—
athletically or intellectually—into one Castle and let it stew
for a thousand years, the results will not always be
palatable.
Looking south between the outer wall and palace, the
roof had been rebuilt on the Harcourt Barracks, where the
Imperial Fyrd are based. Men were repairing the Dace
Gate barbican, and all along the curtain wall flags flew at
half-mast.
Next to me, on the spandrels between the little arched
windows, were green-men carvings, dead faces with
branches growing out of their loose decaying mouths. Their
sole purpose was to remind us that one day we will die and
be nothing but plant food. It is a thought that spurs Eszai to
keep their places in the Circle and mortals to do great
deeds and join them, or be remembered for their great
deeds alone.
Tris would take years to recover from the damage Gio
caused. Lightning, Wrenn, Rayne, Viridian and I had left the
island one month after the riot. I last saw it diminishing in
the distance under a sunset pink from the amount of soot
and burned book dust high in the air. “Ata’s sunsets,” the
Capharnai have come to call them.
Lightning was staying at Awndyn convalescing, and with
Wrenn’s help he was arranging for a monument to be built
on Grass Isle in honor of Ata. Thousands of her extended
family had gathered there; I found the way her whole
network had clung together rather alarming. But most of all I
felt sympathy for Lightning because he also had to find
some way of explaining it to Cyan.
I had spent yesterday relating the battle to San, the
ensuing riot and the debt we owe to the fifth land: Tris,
manorship of Capharnaum. I was now to answer for giving
the sea kraits a lodging in our world.
I looked up as Rayne emerged from the Throne Room.
“Now i’s your turn,” she said. “I told San everything I
witnessed.”
“You told him about Vista Marchan?”
“Yes, but I couldn’ tell if he was surprised.”
I said, “It’s hard to believe I’m not the only Eszai who
knows about the Shift. And to find out that you have taken
cat.” Rayne grinned like a crack in a walnut, showing mottled
gums. “When I were a girl. I was a lass once, Jant; isn’t tha’
amazing? Rumors were rife a’ t’ university about i’s effects.
I only experimen’ed once, in a spiri’ of scientific inquiry; I
didn’ like t’ hallucinations because they were extremely
intense. When I saw t’ snake I though’ i’ were like t’ krai’ I
saw when I dreamed I was walking in Vista. Then I though’:
hmm, that was under the influence of t’ fern scolopendium
too. Jant, I wanted t’ go t’ Tris. I wanted t’ keep abreas’ of
new discoveries. But t’ mos’ interes’ing thing I learned
wasn’ Trisian; I have reconsidered my hypothesis.”
I sighed. “People can learn to meditate their way through
the Shift worlds. I doubt I’ll ever be successful at it, but you
might be able to—you’re good enough to feel the Circle.”
We looked at each other, wondering if the Emperor
himself might have visited the Shift. For all we knew, he
might walk there nightly, observing the Insect hordes
preparing to burst through into different parts of the
Fourlands.
“I have no desire to go back to the Shift, Rayne. Ever
since seeing the King krait, how powerful he was, the
beauty of his striking colors, and how content and happy the
stinguish are, I feel freed from my craving. I’m ready to
straighten out. When I’m through withdrawal and recovered
from the trauma, I’m going to spend Gio’s treasure on
Wrought.”
“For t’ stability of Awia.”
“To win Tern back.”
“You know, Tern felt t’ Circle break. She said tha’ she
worried herself sick with t’ though’ tha’ i’ was you. She
asked t’ Emperor if you had died and if she was aging, bu’
he wouldn’ tell her.”
I was aware that San was waiting. I pointed to the
Throne Room door. “Come with me. I don’t want to walk in
there by myself.”
We progressed down the scarlet carpet and through the
portal in the screen like a couple about to be married:
Rayne in her shawl that had seen better days at the turn of
the millennium and me in a new shirt and waistcoat, with a
long velvet scarf, fine black eyeliner and my hair cut so
short it was cruel to my sharp-boned face.
Rayne curtsied and seated herself on the bench and I
knelt before the dais. The shining sunburst behind the
Emperor’s throne reflected light in all the zestful colors of
the stained glass windows.
“Comet,” San said. “You brought serpents from the Shift
to infest our ocean. I cannot think of anything more
dangerous and irresponsible than your playing with the
boundaries and indigenes of worlds.”
I bowed my head. “Tris is part of the Fourlands; the
Fourlands is part of the Shift. They’ve always affected each
other. As far as Insects, maritime creatures and…and
myself are concerned, it’s a continuum.”
“The snakes will pose as big a problem in the sea as
Insects do on land!”
“My lord, I assure you they won’t attack us. They only eat
the huge whales that never come near land.”
“And do we not need the whales and shoals?
Furthermore the sudden appearance of a sea serpent will
threaten people’s very perception of reality.”
I was still desolated that Capharnaum library and its
precious manuscripts had been lost. I looked up to let the
Emperor perceive my anger. He couldn’t expel me from the
Circle so soon after Gio’s rebellion. Although there was
much less unrest in the Fourlands now, a bibliophile
Messenger can be just as dangerous as a vengeful
Swordsman. The Emperor needed me, a Trisian scholar
known to the Senate and the sea beasts, and, though
unwilling, his loyal servant all year. He sent us out to deal
with battles and infernos and he offered no reward, just the
measly Castle grant and yet more lifetime. I wondered
again about his motivations, but no matter how much I
cared I could do nothing. If I angered San he would make
me mortal, and without him the Fourlands would be
swamped by Insects.
I thought of the picture in the history book, showing San
as an unassuming sage-turned-soldier. I spoke with
determination: “I know that my decision was best. It saved
us and Capharnaum. We stopped Gio, and the Senate will
be governors of Tris. You gave me to understand that we
should use whatever means necessary, and calling the
kraits was the right thing to do…” My voice crawled slower
and slower and dried up like a snail on a dirt track.
“You sound unrepentant, Comet.”
“My lord.” I fixed my gaze on the apse where the fifth
land’s column should be.
The Emperor understood and regarded me for a long
time. “Whatever happens, we can do little about sea kraits
at the moment. If mariners and whalers sight them, hopefully
they will believe that kraits have continually inhabited our
sea. There have always been legends of monsters.” He
paused. “Comet, you will not tell anyone of the Shift.”
“I promise.”
“I doubt a debauchee such as yourself can keep his
word! How many times has the Circle brought you back
from the Shift when you would otherwise have died?
Immortality was not meant for that purpose, Comet. Next
time I am afraid the Circle will not be able to hold you. One
more fatal overdose will indeed be fatal.”
The rest of the world would believe that scolopendium
had at last killed me. I fiddled with my earring, thinking that
anyway my private playground was somehow spoiled, now
that I knew other Eszai had visited it. The meaning of
Epsilon had changed and I no longer had a yearning to go
there, especially after my experience trying to Shift home. I
didn’t think I was going to miss it.
I said, “I can do without it. I don’t want to be addicted
anymore; I want to be cured. The last thing Mist said to me
was, ‘Stop sulking, Jant.’”
Rayne stepped in on my behalf: “I’ll look after him and
treat t’ condition. I don’ think he will go back to
scolopendium again. T’ prognosis is excellen’.”
The Emperor said with a warm tone, “Well, I thank you,
Comet. Despite your injudicious decision with the sea
kraits, your service to the Fourlands has been invaluable.
Now go with Rayne, and in the fullness of time you will invite
the Trisians to compete in a games for the Sailor’s
position. You will send mortal emissaries who weren’t
involved to talk at length with the Senate, to invite them here
and reduce tensions in Capharnaum.”
I bowed and took my leave. I paced past the screen and
the first of the Zascai benches. San’s voice called from
behind me, “What of Gio Ami’s fortune?”
I stopped dead. Damn. I turned around slowly and slunk
back, as the Emperor continued, “That which you salvaged
from the Senate House square? Rayne told me that she
saw you leading a retinue of servants dragging metal
coffers up to your apartments.”
Was there nothing San didn’t know? I imagined my hardwon
plunder disappearing into the Castle’s vaults, or being
divided up into projects that I would never see. I sighed,
resigned. “My lord, what do you want me to do with Gio’s
treasure? I intended it for Wrought.”
“In that case, Messenger, I believe it would be best if you
keep it.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Tern walked through the ruined square, the walls of which
are now just shapes of drifts. Snow piled up ever higher by
the Northwest Tower. She climbed its staircase, cased in
ice. The door of my apartment closed and she let her long
coat fall to the floor. I lay naked in bed and watched her. I
have plenty still to fight for but also plenty to celebrate.
I had arranged Gio’s treasure around the room. Gold
chains hung from the mirror, silver plates gleamed on the
mantelpiece. Stacks of bar silver armored the fireplace,
constellations of coins glittered on the rug. I had draped the
four-poster bed entirely in jewelry. Tern came to examine
the riches; she stroked them and she began to smile.
Her fingers on my skin left delicious tracks of sensation,
like sparks. I told her she was beautiful. She ducked under
the sheet, tented it over her shapely shoulders. I threw my
head back and howled.
A little while later, someone rattled the door handle, but it
was locked.
with his bow grip, and shot rapidly along the line. “Twenty,
nineteen, eighteen.” Another handful. “Seventeen, sixteen,
fifteen.” The rebels ran like their arses were on fire, but they
all ended up lying on the ground moaning or yelling. People
in the next line pointed us out then made a break for it,
forced to run toward us to reach the side streets’ empty
entrances.
The horn tips of Lightning’s longbow shook. He lowered
it, breathing deeply, gazing downhill to the churning front of
the fray where Gio and Wrenn appeared and disappeared.
His legs were trembling and he was pale with pain.
I watched the Sailor’s bodyguards, in dark blue and
steel, hacking at the rebels with Ata close behind. From the
midst of Gio’s rabble a spear looped up, fell steeply onto
them. It hit Ata, impacting on her breastplate. She
staggered, unhurt but knocked off balance. The mob
surged forward and she fell under their feet, out of view. Her
bodyguards lurched back, tried to stay upright by grabbing
each other and the soldiers around, but simply pulled
people down together, opening a hole in the crowd.
“Get up,” I said. “Quick, Saker; shoot!”
Lightning now shot to kill, aiming at the rebels standing
over Ata, in the most accurate volley I had ever seen: an
arrow every two seconds.
“Get up! Get up!” he muttered.
The rebels fell around the place where Ata had gone
down. He picked them off in the solid crush, no space
between them. They couldn’t even raise their shields. The
arrows started to hit the same men again and again; dead
bodies kept upright in the crush were filling with them, their
heads and shoulders pinned with the bicolor flights, but Ata
and the men stabbing her were underneath. We couldn’t
see her.
The bodyguards tried to shove forward, stabbing the
rebels facing them in chests and stomachs. They shouted
and tugged at the clothes of the men to either side, urging
them to push ahead.
Lightning hissed in exasperation. “I can’t get a clear line
of sight. Nine. Eight. Seven. Move out the way!”
His quiver was nearly empty. The ends of his bow
vibrated; rapidly his right hand reached down for the short
nocks, pulled one up and fitted it to string. Hooked the
string with three bent fingers. Drew it past his ear to the
side of his head, swinging his shoulder back for a couple of
extra centimeters.
From the tone of Fulmer’s snappy voice, I knew
something terrible had happened. “What? If it’s a mutiny I’m
on your side!” I stooped and wound a sheet around my
waist like a sarong, then opened the door.
Fulmer stood on the half-deck, wearing only his trousers.
Over his shoulder I saw the cloudless sky, the façade of
Capharnaum’s white villas, green shutters and balconies,
the merchants waiting on the quay in a stunned silence, the
lower deck. It appeared to be covered in tar.
Fulmer pointed. The Insect was poised on the
gangplank. Between it and the quayside stood Wrenn. The
Insect reared and struck, antennae whirling. Wrenn raised
his rapier and dagger.
I dived back into the cabin and picked up my ice axe.
Then I shoved past Fulmer to the rack of equipment beside
my door. I snatched a long boathook and hefted it, at the
same time yelling to Fulmer, “Run down the other walkway!
Go to Petrel. Wake Lightning and tell him to shoot it! You
must knock very loudly. Quick!”
Fulmer slid down the ladder and slipped across the
main deck. I saw bodies lying at unnatural angles and
tightened my grip on the boathook as I realized the thick,
dully reflective slick was congealing blood.
With a cold self-awareness I spread my wings, wiggled
my ice axe into the folded top of my impromptu sarong, and
found the right words to shout at the thirty or forty
Capharnai: “Run away! Go home! It will bite you!”
Holding the boathook shaft across my body like a
weightlifter, I vaulted the railings. I plummeted straight down
past the blue porthole shutters, reached flying speed and
hurtled once around the ship’s hull to build up momentum. I
skimmed the figurehead and up over the forecastle deck
for a straight run at the Insect. I jinked to miss the foremast,
by pulling in my right wing and spinning right.
I swept over the Insect. I reached out with the boathook
and put my full strength behind it as I swung.
The Insect’s gold-brown compound eyes wrapped
around its head and joined at the top with bristly margins. It
could see in all directions. It saw me passing above and
bent its six knees to squat down. It flattened its body flush
against the gangplank, beaded antennae wavering and
brushing the wood.
I missed and struggled to lift the hook as it glided toward
Wrenn’s head. I snarled, “Fuck!” I turned downwind,
dropping height and holding the pole out to the side, not
upward to tangle with my feathers. I flew over the
merchants’ heads so low my downdraft ruffled their hair.
They all dropped to the ground in a wide swath along my
path. A few quick beats, and I veered around the stern of
the Petrel, intending to circle the two ships and come in
over Melowne for another swoop. There was no sign of
Lightning in the frantic commotion on Petrel’s deck.
Wrenn had bare feet. He was naked but for shorts, the
drawstring hanging down. The Insect stood higher on the
gangplank, claws tightly gripping the edges. Wrenn
stopped the route to the land, to its food. It struck at him. He
blocked its mandible with his rapier and deflected its head
aside. It swept its antennae back into their gutters, bore its
weight on its hind limbs and slashed with its front legs.
Its hooked claws stabbed at Wrenn, who batted them
aside. Its jaws closed on, then slid off, the rapier blade.
Wrenn parried the tarsi feet in a sequence so rapid it was a
blur. He had lost none of his skill—he was too focused to
feel fear. But he couldn’t predict the Insect’s actions.
He followed the moves of its four claws and mandibles
all at once, every cut the Insect scrabbled at him. But his
totally inadequate rapier clicked and slid over its cuticle—it
wasn’t heavy enough to bite into the shell.
He thrust his blade past the base of one antenna, then
drew it back, slicing through the feeler. It severed and fell
between the Insect’s feet. A drop of yellow liquid like pus
oozed from the hollow cut end and dropped on its eye,
running over the curved surface. The Insect recoiled. Wrenn
feinted, and its left claw swept the air trying to catch his
blade. Wrenn lunged explosively and hit its thorax squarely,
under its mandibles. His rapier tip pierced the chitin.
The Insect took a step toward him and the blade slid into
its body. Fluid the color and consistency of cream welled up
around the blade and trickled down its shell but the Insect
did not react. It crawled toward Wrenn, spitting itself on his
rapier.
The sword point burst from its back, pushing out a length
of cream-streaked steel. It forced itself down the blade until
the hilt was flush against its thorax. It stooped to bite
Wrenn’s arm. Wrenn shook his hand free of the swept
guards and jumped backward, leaving his thin sword
embedded through the Insect.
I cleared the height of the foredeck, came in fast.
Wrenn’s face set in a grim expression. He cut with his
dagger left to right, scratching the Insect’s eye, but the
blade skittered off, only etching a thin line over one
hexagonal lens. It struck; he slammed the dagger into its
mandible. The dagger blade shattered from tip to ricasso
so violently that two long glittering steel splinters spun away
from the gangplank in different directions. Wrenn was left
holding the grip.
My wings shadowed his head. “Here!” I dangled the pole
from its very end. He had enough sense to drop his hilt and
jump for the brass hook speeding toward him. I let go and
passed it to him.
Our contact caused a drag that slowed me down too
much and slewed me to the left. The quayside rushed up; I
saw the pavement cracks. Too big, too close! I was going
to crash! I leaned right and beat down—my wingtips
smacked a crate of oranges. The shock transmitted
through my feather shafts and hurt my fingers. I pulled out of
my dive; the crate tops scraped my knees and feet. I
flapped, stubbing my wings. I banked up steeply, groaning
with effort, my feathers rasping the air.
I glanced at Wrenn and saw him teetering, the pole held
out for balance. He recovered, pointed the boathook at the
Insect. It crouched, lowered its head and pounced at
Wrenn, forcing him sideways. He swung the boathook and
clubbed it weakly as it pushed past him. The spines fringing
its legs lacerated his skin.
Its barreling bulk threw Wrenn off balance. His boathook
flourished in the air; he toppled off the gangplank and fell
headfirst, spread-eagled. The soles of his feet vanished
below the level of the harbor wall, into the strip of deep
water. A second later I heard the splash.
I glanced at the crowd; their faces were full of doubt and
disbelief. The Insect was real; this was no drama laid on for
entertainment. It was coming down the gangplank. About
half of them trotted backward, still staring, then turned and
fled for the streets. The rest seemed frozen. Those not
gaping at the Insect were gawking at me.
“Go!” I yelled. A couple more people responded to the
urgency in my voice.
The Insect landed on all six legs on the harbor pavement.
At first it moved unevenly, angularly; it leapt and hobbled. It
quickly became accustomed to freedom and the sailors’
blood it had lapped up helped the hydraulics of its legs
function properly. It ran as smoothly as it had done in the
Paperlands and the people scattered before it.
They fled with screams, leaving one woman sitting
alone. I recognized Danio instantly; at the water’s edge
near Melowne’s hull, in exactly the same place as I had left
her last night, her bare legs dangling over the harbor wall.
She remained transfixed a second too long, not knowing
what to do. She pulled her self to kneel, then sprang up, all
the while watching the Insect with a mixture of fascination
and fear. She sprinted, arms out stretched, very fleet of
foot. But she was too slow.
The Insect bounded after her. Its claws in the small of her
back brought her down, face to the paving. She started
screaming, high-pitched, struggling to turn around and beat
it off.
The Insect dipped, sheared Danio’s leg off at the knee
and picked it up with its middle pair of arms. Its external
mouthparts stripped the calf muscle from the severed limb.
It held the dripping muscle with two sets of palps, which
hung down like black sticky fingers. The maxillae behind its
jaws guillotined up and down as well as left and right,
masticating it into paste. Danio kept screeching until the
Insect grabbed her around the hips, mandibles sinking
deep, and tossed her into the air. She crashed full-length on
the paving. The Insect jumped on her body and decapitated
her with one powerful bite.
I flew low over them, frantically looking for a space to
land. The Insect paused as my movement caught its
attention. Its single elbowed antenna waved; the stub of the
other one was covered with a yellow crust. Now all the
Capharnai had gone from the harbor but a merchant in a
tunic had stopped at a distance to look back at the
abandoned goods, his chubby face white and eyes bulging.
Danio! I thought. It’s killed Danio; what have we done? I
found a clear gap between the baskets and boxes, but I
was moving so fast I was in danger of breaking my legs. I
stretched my wings back fully and flared off some speed.
Gasping at the strain in my stomach muscles I swung my
legs ahead and hit the ground braced, knees bent. I put my
hands down and somersaulted over and over, till I crashed
into a crate of cinnamon bark.
Winded, I picked my axe from the ground and crawled to
my feet. The Insect had reached the entrance to the
boulevard. It had slaughtered the corpulent man and was
standing on his body with front and middle legs. It ducked
its head, its lamellar segmented abdomen high in the air. It
closed its jaws until they clicked, cutting across the fat
man’s belly. It backed, claws skidding on the blood. It pulled
taut a length of blue-green intestine, then ate it all the way
back down into the man’s body cavity. His sightless eyes
and pale mouth were stretched open, rigid; I could see the
inside wall of his ribs.
I thought, I must distract it till Lightning shoots it.
Breathing painfully, I dashed across. As I ran, avoiding the
discarded cloaks and piles of produce, I curved to
approach from behind, thinking that the Insect would take a
second to turn around and I could chop at its rear. But the
Insect did not wait to be attacked. I don’t know whether it
recognized me or understood I was armed, but it crawled
swiftly from the fat man’s cadaver and leapt toward the
boulevard. I swerved between it and the town and headed it
off. I chased it. I lengthened my stride to sprint with
Rhydanne instinct as if it was a stag. I closed in on the
darting legs and aimed a blow at a hind femur, driving it to
change direction.
The Insect slowed as it sensed a group of boatmen who,
trapped against a villa’s portico, prepared to use their
paddles as maces. I made it switch toward the ships where
Lightning should be, but it slashed a mandible at the last
man, a thin teenager who fell clutching his thigh.
The Insect still carried Wrenn’s sword through its thorax,
the hilt like a silver badge. It had stopped bleeding. Its legs
swept repeatedly fore to rear along its body. I aimed
between them at a suture line that crossed its back like a
joint in armor. I tore the glassy tips of its immovable little
wings that projected from the middle segment, pressed
close to its glossy shell. I tilted over and hit, but the blow
nearly ripped the shaft from my hand, wrecked my running
rhythm. I pushed hard at the ground to accelerate, change
direction; to control the Insect.
My resounding strikes had more effect than Wrenn’s
clearly articulated technique. The Insect limped, but still ran
rapidly on the bristly black pads under its slightly raised
claws. I swung at the three small round eyes that formed a
triangle between its compound eyes. But at this angle the
plate of its forehead was too thick to crack.
The slabs cool beneath my bare feet, my ankles ached
from the pounding. I panted the air. The Insect put on a
burst and reached racehorse speed trying to escape. I
sprang forward and kept pace with it although my leg
muscles burned. I was exhilarated, keyed up with my own
vigor. I sped my swiftest, desperate to snatch one more
chance—I’ll hook my ice pick into the copper-striped
abdomen and I’ll bring it down.
I forced the Insect’s route nearer to the glittering sea as
we raced the length of Capharnaum’s harbor. The last
building had a blank stone wall. At its base was a
semicircular drain opening as tall as my shoulder, edged
with blocks. A shallow stream of dirty water flowed out of it
into a channel, then over the side of the harbor wall. It was
stained dark green and fuscous with flaking algae. The
Insect sheered, rattled down into the sloping conduit and
splashed straight into the black archway. I lost sight of it
instantly in the darkness. I scrambled to a halt, scraping my
heels on the verge.
The Insect had gone; no way was I going to follow it into
the drain. In the confined space it would rip my throat out
before I could even see it. I waited, on guard, feeling my
pulse pounding in my neck. It quickly returned to normal but
my temples hurt. I coughed a mouthful of frothy spit into the
gray water and watched it flow into the sea.
Insects are at home underground and are not
disadvantaged by the dark. When culling them in the
Paperlands, the least popular operation is the task of
channeling river water into their tunnels in order to collapse
the deep, honeycombed structures. Fires are also lit on
platforms at the tunnel mouths to draw air out and suffocate
them, but Insects between the sizes of men and carthorses
still burst forth to attack at full speed. I hated natural caves
let alone Insect burrows and slimy sewers. If I went in there I
would never come out. With terrible images playing in my
mind, I loped back to the Stormy Petrel, past the
merchant’s bloated, half-eaten body with its ripped-open
smock and Danio, headless, lying in a congealed red
spray.
Lightning looked down from the Petrel’s highest deck,
the back of the stern castle, an arrow at string, and wearing
only trousers. Fulmer clutched the rope rail beside him.
Mist’s face peered out of an open window in the array
directly beneath his feet.
The surviving sailors on the Melowne clung to her
rigging. Wrenn was a tiny figure down at the waterline,
steadily climbing a ladder of metal brackets up the rounded
hull. His short hair was flattened; water dripped from his
bedraggled wings. His feathers were completely tattered,
split and peeled back to the shaft. His arse crack and leg
hairs showed through his soaked white shorts.
“What happened?” Lightning shouted at me. He leaned
over so far that I thought the arrows would slip out of the
quiver on his back. “Was that our Insect? Where’s Serein?
Damn him, damn you! What were you bloody doing,
perforating it?”
perforating it?”
Mist yelled, “Did it just get those three Trisians? How
many of mine?”
Fulmer gabbled, “Serein woke me up. I saw it massacre
the sailors on the orlop. Master Mariner, I’m sorry. Serein
said he would hold it off and took his rapier but it’s no good
against shell.”
Mist turned away abruptly and hurried out of view. A
moment later she strode onto the main deck, staring
around at the devastation on the quay. The wounded
teenager had stopped crawling; I hoped he was just
unconscious, rather than slain. The traders’ goods were
abandoned. The quayside was deserted by the living, but
three or four faces crowded every open window and behind
the bronze palings of all the waterfront houses, watching us
with shock and outright terror.
“You didn’t kill it!” Lightning raved.
I retied my sarong. “I should have caught it, but it plunged
down a drain. I wounded it and so did Serein, with his
rapier. Stupid town swords. Fucking constables’ swords.
The idiot didn’t have the right gear. It carried his rapier
away! You—We must get archers to the tunnel as soon as
possible. I need to know if it’s trapped, so you can shoot it.”
“And if it’s escaped to the town?” Fulmer whispered.
Mist shouted, “Captain, to your ship! Why were all the
grids open? I’ll want to know! We can’t discuss this
outside,” she added sotto voce to me. “Jant, speak to the
Capharnai. Don’t let them carry off their dead without an
explanation. As soon as you can, meet us in the Melowne’s
hold.”
Typically, I had the most difficult job. While I waited on the
corniche to be confronted by furious islanders, the other
Eszai disappeared into the hold, and from their
exclamations I learned that it was also strewn with carnage.
I was very aware how alien I looked, wearing a sheet and
with my long wings uncovered.
On the Melowne’s main deck the dismembered remains
of six or seven men lay scattered, their limbs snipped at the
joints and bodies gutted. The quartermaster’s body
drooped through the hatchway. Following Mist’s orders, the
sailors carried them to the land and lined them up by the
anchor ready for burial because in a few hours’ time the
morning heat would be appalling.
Step by step, a group of Capharnai merchants
approached me, finding courage in numbers. I spread my
hands down in the peace gesture and they seemed to
understand. The first one, with an expression of awe and
distrust, opened his arms like wings. I explained why I was
the only man ever to fly, and told them it was nothing to be
superstitious about. I repeated apologies as best I could
and instructed them to wait in their homes and keep their
children inside. Over the hiss of indrawn breath I continued
—they should wait for word from the Senate that the Insect
was dead. I asked them to bring down one or two goats for
me to tether outside the sewer entrance and tempt the
Insect out, but I suspected it was too replete for the trick to
work.
I found myself talking over the wails and reproaches of
families who had come to claim the Trisian merchant, the
fainting teenager and Danio. I repeated that it was an
accident and I clasped my hands and knelt, begging them
to treat us kindly. When they saw that I couldn’t meet their
eyes, they understood my sincerity but they were chary.
News spread up the town, causing a commotion and
banging on doors, until it reached the Amarot and a
deliberative silence descended.
Frightened, I retreated to the Melowne’s hold. “I did my
best,” I said.
“We believe you,” said Lightning. “This disaster makes
us all feel inadequate; it’s far from the work we’re
accustomed to. Please attend to Serein and we’ll consider
what to do.”
Lightning had found a young Trisian man lying halfway
down the ship, his lower face torn off. He returned to
inspecting the victim. Behind us the buckled door of the
empty Insect cage creaked as Mist opened and shut it
again and again.
Wrenn sat on a packing case that now held cardamom
seeds instead of arrows. I cleaned his grazes. I slapped on
some comfrey ointment and tied gauze around his
shoulder. His crenated wings slipped open like damp fans;
his adrenaline high was fading. His shorts stuck to his
stocky thighs and blood had dried on his bicep; he was
peeling it off in tiny flakes. Grim determination was vicious
in his face. “Is this mine?” he said muzzily. “It’s all right. I
don’t think it’s mine.”
I said, “Yes, it is, but your scratches are superficial.
Keep them clean and go easy for a few days. We can
succumb to infection and serious disease as readily as
mortals. In fact I can tell you quite a few examples of Eszai
who’ve died from dusty wounds.”
“No, thanks.”
“Unfortunately it won’t heal any faster, but the Circle will
catch you and stop you being killed outright by little lesions
and contusions.”
“Hey—what an advantage for fencing.”
I looked at him sternly. “The only Eszai who survive
centuries are those who know they’re not indestructible.
Zascai are relying on you not to get cut up.”
Wrenn lowered his gaze. “I know; I was just keeping it at
bay.”
“No one can slay Insects with a rapier,” I admonished.
“How many years has the Castle spent trying to develop the
perfect weapon and now you try to use a dueling foil?”
Wrenn winced. “I managed it once in the amphitheater.
My rapier was all I had to hand—Mist’s sold every single
broadsword on the ship and I gave mine to Danio. But you
didn’t do any better with your skier’s axe. Ouch! Jant, have
a care! I know I need experience. It was the biggest,
toughest fucking Insect I’ve ever faced. And I failed; I’m
sorry.”
“I’m sorry I didn’t catch it,” I said.
Mist slammed the cage door. “Jant, you showed the
whole town that you can fly. We agreed to keep it a secret.”
“Did you expect me to let your pet devour Serein?”
“I can defend myself,” said Wrenn sulkily.
Lightning picked up a bronze Trisian trident that was
lying next to the youth’s body, and a purse made of soft
leather. He approached us gravely. “It seems as if our
midshipmen were accepting bribes from curious
Capharnai to look at the Insect. See?” He tipped the purse
and a knot of fine gold chains snaked out into his palm.
“It must have broken out of its own accord,” Mist
concluded. “In response to them goading it. I wish I had
commissioned a tougher cage.”
Lightning and I looked at her. She was well aware that
we no longer believed a word she said. Lightning gestured
at the cage. “The Capharnai just regarded this as a freak
show.”
“That’s how they thought of us all,” I said.
Mist snapped at Wrenn suspiciously, “Why were you up
at five A.M.?”
He glanced around, admitted, “I’d just got back. I spent
the night in town with a local girl.”
“Oh, really?”
“I think she was called Pollan. At any rate, she kept
saying ‘Pollan.’ She had world-class tits, I mean; you could
get lost in there. Given last night’s performance she could
be selected for the national team, but any more mushy stuff
and I’ll relegate her to the second division—” Mist cuffed
the back of his head. “Ow!”
Wrenn ran a hand over his feathers, knitting their barbs
together. Missing vanes spoiled his zigzag style. He was
quite hirsute with feathers; a couple were growing on his
back between his wings, since he had not been near a
barber’s in months. The pinfeathers were still wrapped in
their transparent covering, like paintbrushes. Where the
sheath peeled back and crumbled, the brown brush tip
emerged.