 being wiped out by
the Insects, we know better than to harm our own
people. But Fulmer says that ruthlessness is needed at
sea to stop mutinies happening.
This ship in Fulmer’s charge is worth a dynasty’s
fortune. It’s so crammed that I have to sleep sitting
upright between sacks of all-spice. Fulmer said that if
the men before the mast can thieve as they wish there’ll
be nothing left by the time he reaches Tanager.
Mist Ata yelled, “I forbid you! After all the losses to
the Insect I’m not losing another crewman. Just put him
in the hold and lock the hatch. Take your ‘I must make
an example’ and stuff it!”
Fulmer yelled, “I’m sick of interfering Eszai! You’re
no better than anyone else just because you can
handle a tiller or sword!”
I learned that at sea a captain is like a governor; on
a matter of law Eszai can only advise him, not overrule.
Fulmer was adamant and he had the law on his side.
Mist piled extra sail on the Petrel and swept ahead
as if she was abandoning us. Fulmer said, “Never trust
a woman who has a point to prove. Yes? All hands to
witness punishment!”
Jant refused to attend; he said it was stupid and
brutal. He said that only Zascai exercise power so
crudely and severely, but then only Zascai need to.
He’s been acting even more weirdly than usual, he
keeps saying how vulnerable our cobbled-together
hollow ships would be, should any sea monsters
actually exist.
The thief was bound, wrists and ankles. He begged
and struggled all the time. He was thin as a lath, a
weather-beaten man from Addald Island off the
Ghallain Cape. I was sorry his life had to end this way
when he had seen so much, navigated the storms of
Cape Brattice on the southern tip of Morenzia,
Tombolo and Teron Islands off Awia, the reef of Grass
Isle, and the wild seas around the empty coast of the
Neither Bight. He was brave enough even to have
anchored in the rending whirlpools of the Awndyn
Corriwreckan.
Two of Fulmer’s sailors passed a rope across the
bow and paid out line until the loop dragged in the
water. They each held it at their waists and walked the
loop down under the ship to the main deck.
One end was made into a noose and the man’s
ankles fitted through it. He kicked, both legs together,
and screamed for mercy so horribly every man on the
Melowne was chilled to the bone.
They picked him up and threw him over the side like
a parcel. He splashed in, curled fetally, the loose rope
snaked about him in the water. He bobbed to the
surface, waggling his head and gasped, screamed.
Fulmer gave the order and a team pulled the other
end of the rope that ran under the hull. The
Plainslander’s yells cut short as it tightened and he
sank under. His body was drawn down a long way, still
thrashing and bubbles rising all around. He
disappeared from view.
I heard knocks as his body scraped over the rough,
barnacled hull. Blood swirled up, it looked black. I
hoped that he had exhaled the air from his lungs and
breathed brine in before the scraping started.
The wet rope coiled onto the deck, water ran from the
hands of the men pulling it in. Behind them a team of
men paid the dry rope out. Halfway through, Fulmer
wanted to stop the teams and offer each man a tot of
rum, leaving the body under the boat while they drank
Queen Eleonora’s health. But the rope snapped. It went
slack. Fulmer said, “Lads, reel him in, yes?”
The men pulled the rope up fast, hand over hand.
They dragged a pale pink and shredded mass to the
surface. The cable hadn’t broken, his body had. His
arms were worn through, nothing was left of them. The
noose had protected his ankles and feet but his legs
were bare to the bone. Tiny waterlogged pieces of
muscle tissue floated off, into the depths as fish food.
I saw his face had gone, just eyeballs in a fleshy
cranium. His back teeth showed in the gums. Tufts of
wet gray hair still stuck to the skull. His back was flayed.
This wet skull on a spinal column dropped to the
deck. Fulmer made sure every man of his crew saw it
before they washed it overboard.
Mist is still furious, and rightly so. I hope I live till
god-comes-back, but if I die, I swear it will be by steel or
chitin, and not by Morenzian law.
I was in my cabin, putting the finishing touches to A
History of Tris, when the Petrel raised a series of flags.
Mist was asking Wrenn and me to come across for a
meeting. I found Wrenn talking uneasily to Fulmer. We were
all three thinking of the mess she had made of diplomacy
with Tris, although only I had witnessed the worst of it.
Fulmer said, subdued, “She’s making preparations for
landing. We want to avoid pirate vessels as we cross the
trade routes, yes?”
I flew and reached the Petrel long before Wrenn’s boat
rowed over the gently purling water. “It’s July the tenth,” Mist
said. “I’m confident that sometime today we’ll have sight of
the Fourlands. Watch for the coast, it’s heartwarming to see
it appearing. It feels like the first time a newborn babe is
placed in your arms.”
I sipped water that was faintly brackish, owing to the
habit of refilling seawater ballast casks with drinking water.
Mist watched the big, gimballed compass in the binnacle
dipping as if it was dowsing for land. The morning sky was
a slightly powdery pale blue that meant it was going to be a
hot day. The haze had burned off by mid-morning and the
temperature was so intolerable that I climbed the rigging
and clung there, a black-clad starfish in a giant net, with my
wings spread as a shade. When I opened my eyes the
bright world was tainted blue.
Thick white salt dried on the stern carvings, encrusting
them like the lumps of salt that fyrd throw into trapping
ponds to immobilize Insects. It smelled as dirty as flotsam; I
could practically hear it crystalizing.
Whale fins gnomoned all over the ocean. Seagulls
trapezed in the sky. We came in slow. The lookout in the
Petrel’s crow’s nest used his own feather as a plectrum to
strum his guitar. He gave a false shout of “Land!” twice and
Mist snarled that if he did it again she would slice his
tongue out and fly it as a pennant. It must be her time of the
month. There were tiny glossy plaques of severe suntan on
her shoulders. A sweat sheen covered the golden-brown
skin above her breasts, startling with her cream clothes.
She had cut her platinum hair short and ruffled like
dandelion fluff. She squinted at the sun glare and when she
relaxed the folds at the edges of her eyes showed white.
Evening set in, and dry, porous ship’s biscuits were
dealt out among the crew. Heat was radiating back out of
my sunburned skin to fill the cool air. A thin black line began
to rise on the horizon, becoming a part of the night sky
where there were no stars, but nobody dared say anything
until Wrenn strolled over and said, “I might have heatstroke,
or is that land?”
“Aye, that is land,” Mist admitted, tiredly. She raised her
voice. “Land, ho! We’re home, boys! Send a signal to
Master Fulmer.”
The Melowne’s sailors read the series of flags. They
took up the shout and jubilation broke out all over the ship,
in the topgallants and below in the galley. From the Petrel’s
half-deck I heard them shouting and cheering Mist. We had
been on our own so far from anywhere that sighting the
Cobalt coast was like seeing an old friend. We surveyed it
with unbridled joy but, because we had been self-sufficient
for three months, with slight trepidation.
“Drinks all around,” I said.
“Order!” Mist snapped. “We return as we left. Clear the
decks shipshape and Sute fashion. Wait till you have your
feet on dry land before howling with your hounds’ tongues,
or by god I’ll separate them from you now.”
I was obsessively trying to judge the distance to the
coast—the moment that I could safely fly back. I wanted to
travel under my own power, at last! More important, I had to
catch up on six months’ worth of news. I was desperate to
know the latest, and even more keen—as a Messenger
should be—to give San my report of Tris. I was also
determined to face Tern and demand the truth from her
about Tornado.
Mist observed me hopping from foot to foot at the prow.
She collapsed her telescope back into its casing with a
snap. “You want to fly?” she asked.
“I need to know the news.”
“Please don’t leave us. I need you to deliver my account
of Tris to San. I’ve just finished writing it.”
of Tris to San. I’ve just finished writing it.”
“I intend to give my own; it’s Comet’s duty.”
Mist scratched her fluffy head. “Since when were you
objective, Shira? You and your stupid eyeshadow.”
“It’s not eyeshadow it’s late nights. Look, Ata, I’ll come
straight back. I only want to buy a newspaper.”
She looked at me closely. “If you go to land, promise not
to breathe a word about what happened on Tris. Aye, god
knows I can’t stop you, but I’m trying to contain this
discovery and you can see how important it is not to blab.”
“I’ll just bring you the news, I promise.”
“Then off you go. And buy me a couple of bars of
chocolate, as well.”
I landed on the dark strand, and jogged up the beach from
the hard wet sand to the dry sand, then climbed some steps
to the promenade. I looked back and laughed to see my
footprints appear from nowhere at the point where I touched
down. The days were already getting shorter; I somehow
felt cheated. It was ten P.M. and the Artists’ Quarter, that
reputedly never sleeps, was just beginning to wake up. One
seafront kiosk was open. A gray, hircine old man chortled
when he saw me. I asked why, and he pointed to the
headlines.
I said, “Oh, fuck,” and bought a copy of every newspaper
he had. I jammed them into my satchel. I gave the man a
handful of pound coins and for my fifty-pence change he
used a pair of clippers to cut the last one along the line
stamped on it. He returned half the coin.
stamped on it. He returned half the coin.
As instructed, I also picked up some chocolate but I had
eaten most of it by the time I reached the Petrel. I called
Mist, Lightning and Serein to Mist’s office and spread the
newspapers on her table:
REBELLION POISED TO STRIKE THE CASTLE
Troops raised by Gio Ami are proceeding toward the
Castle itself. Lady Governor Eske has, of her own
accord, given over the first four divisions of General
infantry and more than thirty Select Fyrd to his cause.
Gio Ami has also commandeered Insect-wallbreaking
machines from Eske. They include two
battering rams and seven catapults, probably midsized
trebuchets although it is difficult to specify the exact type.
At the time of going to press, the engines are en route
along the Eske Road.
Gio Ami’s volunteer force and noncombatant
supporters are extremely varied in background and
opinion but are strongly united by their discontent at the
Castle’s role in the slow recovery of the Empire from
Insect damage. Gio Ami will address them in his second
meeting, to be held at midnight on Thursday at the
Ghallain Fencing Academy in Eske.
In response, the Castle has received command of
four thousand General, one thousand Select Fyrd from
Fescue and Shivel, placed under the control of Tornado
and Hayl. The internal guard of the Castle, the Imperial
Select, are on alert.
Sporadic clashes occurred today on the Dogvane
Road from Ghallain between demobilized soldiers loyal
to the Castle and rebels attempting to join Gio.
Kestrel Altergate
7/10/20
“How can Gio dare?” Wrenn said. “This is all on its
head! We’re their guardians!”
“Many things are happening recently that have never
occurred before,” Lightning said quietly, as if adrift.
“There’s an embargo on ships,” I read.
Mist pressed her hand on her belly, growled, “What kind
of stupidity? Where does it say that?”
“Look, here. It says Gio’s men have occupied Awndyn
and nothing can enter or leave the harbor, including your
caravels.”
“Oh, for god’s sake. If I’d been here things would never
have gone this far.”
I translated the Plainslands article aloud to make it
easier for Lightning, and then I picked up the broadsheet he
had been reading. He pointed out an editorial at the bottom
of the page. “The Grand Tour just got longer,” he said.
RACE IS ON TO THE ISLAND OF DELIGHT
As Gio Ami’s uprising confounds the Plainslands, news
spreads about the Island of Tris. It has caused a stir in
Lakeland Awia. Our correspondent at the court writes
that Queen Eleonora Tanager yesterday summoned to
Rachiswater Palace one of the mariners of the 2019
expedition. The Court was entertained to hear, at first
hand, the bizarre travelers’ tales currently filling the
penny dreadfuls.
T h e Wrought Standard remains skeptical of the
details, yet accepts that an island has been discovered
since the flagship Stormy Petrel departed on another
journey not one month after returning from the first. Mist’s
statement that she returned empty-handed is now
regarded as a half-truth at best. The Castle must have
planned her venture because Stormy Petrel was
careened and resupplied within a month; the Castle is
invited to reply to allegations that it has been economical
with the truth.
No place is perfect, but Tris comes close. The
islanders are both winged and wingless people. The
climate is good, and the soil on the slopes of the central
mountain is as fertile as Plow’s black earth wheat fields.
The sailor said their food was succulent fruit he had
never seen before, and fish with sweet, rich flesh. The
culture seems sophisticated, but sailors’ tales are not
wholly to be trusted. They also tell of having seen men
with paddles for hands and mountains that emit smoke
like chimneys.
The island is mostly in a wild and natural state. There
are no settlements in the interior; the natives travel
around their rocky coast by canoe.
Queen Eleonora has expressed interest in mounting
her own expedition, as has Lord Governor Brandoch.
Tris offers opportunities to trade, and a place of
settlement that can be offered to our displaced
countrymen sadly suffering the lot of refugees. The race
is on to construct or engage craft worthy of making this
long sea voyage.
I was interrupted by a cry from Wrenn, who had turned
straight to the sports pages. He pointed out a paragraph:
Gio Ami’s admirable life’s work was shattered in one
flukish move by Wrenn, all reporters present at that
immortal duel agreed. Wrenn proved that there are no
universal laws in the Art; now, characteristically, the
master of the Ghallain School seems determined to take
unpredictability to extremes. His rebellion could not be
foreseen by those of us who knew his cool fencing style.
His aggression in the game used to be well controlled,
he always kept some tricks back. Now he gains
followers like swarms of Insects, determined to deal the
Circle a mortal blow.
As Gio Ami told us, “Serein Wrenn is away, maybe
lost at sea. If Eszai can’t give one hundred percent for
the Empire, they should not be Eszai at all.”
D. Tir, Editor, Secret Cut Fencing Times
“So,” said Mist. “Gio Ami doesn’t know when to leave.”
We were all silent, thinking of the man’s gall.
Lightning said, “There must be some mistake. It’s
unthinkable! What does he imagine he can achieve?”
Wrenn tore the paper up and cast the shreds on the
floor. “I’ll meet him for you.” He glared around at us. “I’ll take
him back to the amphitheater and run him through!”
“It’s his followers I worry about,” said Lightning.
“They won’t stay with him,” I conjectured.
Mist slammed her hand on the table. “Gentlemen, a
council to decide our course because we don’t know what
we’ll find.”
“We should hasten to the Castle as quickly as possible,”
Lightning said simply.
“Aye, but I won’t put in to Awndyn and risk a clash with
any of Gio’s followers.”
Lightning said, “I will answer for Swallow Awndyn.”
“No, no, don’t be so unwise. We can’t trust any Zascai.
Especially the allegiance of Swallow, whom San won’t
allow into the Circle. I will not chance the safety of my ships.
I’ll hide Stormy Petrel and leave an armed guard on her.
You know in the past the most precarious times for the
Castle are those when we’ve managed to beat back the
Insects.”
Lightning nodded and said, “Well, Serein wanted a
chance to prove himself.”
The next day the mainland was nearer. At first it was a
pale gray silhouette, and at ten kilometers out I saw the
exact instant when it became green. Colors on the
coastline differentiated as we sailed nearer. The water had
a blindingly bright mirror glare, as moving ripples reflected
the sun. It was so calm it looked solid, almost as if I could
walk on it.
At five kilometers out the sea was busy with traffic of
various vessels coming and going, small sails in the
distance. Ships turned left on sight, out of each other’s way;
they hailed each other when gathering to approach the port.
We were at the depth and bearings of the main north–south
route along the coast, which the sailors called Carrack
Roads. We anchored and all the Petrel’s crates of precious
cargo were transported to the Melowne.
T h e Melowne sat lower in the water, a target for
corsairs, so Mist ordered all her Castle pennants to be
furled one by one until she only flew Tanager’s ensign. The
Melowne then parted from us and Fulmer steered her
northward, heading for Tanager harbor, where he and Mist
had decided that the precious cargo would be most secure.
Gray dolphins packed our bow wave, jumping and
snorting; their hard bodies slicked through the water. They
rolled, breaking the surface and half-somersaulting as if
they were spinning on a wheel. I wondered what Tarragon
thought of them—snack food, probably.
“We’ll anchor in a sheltered bay I know well,” Mist said.
But we headed for a blank chalk cliff with none of the
cleavages where harbors lie. I didn’t much like it, so I
climbed on the back railing, spread my wings and let the
ship slip out from under me. I sailed up on a current, seeing
the white chalk and lines of black flint speed past, till I was
above the cliff. I looked down on the grassy top and
realized that what I had thought was a continuous wall was
an enormous flat, rugged stack hiding the narrow mouth of
a cove. I soared along the cliff edge, hanging suspended in
the wind which blew in from the sea and was driven
vertically up its face.
Stormy Petrel tacked once, so close to the rock that the
gallery at her waist scraped it. Mist and her bosun spun the
wheel between them, and Petrel slipped through the
passage behind the stack with only a couple of meters on
either side. I turned again into the wind and glided back
along the cliff top toward the inlet.
Stormy Petrel anchored herself fore and aft. She was
hidden, but only from the sea. Anyone on the grass could
look down two hundred meters to see the ship calmly
bobbing in the dark quiet water crosshatched with ripples.
Every wavelet made her dance; there was nothing in her
hold but ballast and bilge water. The walls of the deep
circular pool were sheer but there was a floating jetty
constructed from barrels. From this landing stage a series
of uneven steps hacked into the chalk led up to a cave
entrance above the high-water line—a smugglers’ hideout.
Though since Mist knew about it their contraband would be
long gone.
Petrel lowered her landing craft and spewed out a
procession of tattered sailors who climbed the steps into
the cave, where they vanished, and more men behind them
tramped into the grotto that surely couldn’t hold such
numbers. It was like a conjuring trick. Half an hour later, the
first man emerged onto the cliff top through a pothole I had
not previously noticed. Another head-torso-legs followed,
until all the sailors were sitting on the grass, scraping chalk
sludge off their boots. Lightning and Wrenn climbed out
last, absorbed in an intense conversation, but I couldn’t
hear what they were talking about. I was having too much
trouble defending myself from fluttering little song-birds. My
big cross-shaped silhouette pinned in the sky on
motionless wings reminded them of an eagle. They could
out-fly me; they orbited and dived on my head. I tried batting
them away, but their tiny beaks were very sharp.
Mist paid her crew and told them when to muster at the
Puff Inn in Awndyn-on-the-Strand to gain a cut of the profit
from the spice ship. She briefed them to hold their tongues
about Tris with a promise of future employment, and
dismissed them.
I flew into Awndyn feeling that the atmosphere had
changed; people were looking up at me suspiciously. I
visited the offices of the Black Coach, the postal system of
stagecoaches that uses the stables and hostels of
coaching inns. It was set up by my predecessors who were
reliant on horses. Its mail network was nominally
answerable to me as Comet, and despite their palpable
disquiet the Awndyn branch seemed to be coping just as
well as the last time I visited six years ago. I procured
horses from their yard for Mist, Lightning and the
Swordsman, and had to sign in triplicate for a carriageand-
pair for our luggage. I joined the others on the main
road and directed them to the Remige Road in the
direction of Eske manor and the Castle.
The sensation of the waves’ movement still lasted from
the ship. I felt as if I was rising and falling although I had
both feet on dry land. It was a pleasant feeling that lulled
and confused my senses; coupled with the warmth of
scolopendium it sent me into a condition of bliss.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Remige Road was one of the main routes built by the
Castle for the movement of fyrd to and from the Front. It was
wide, for two wagons abreast, and it had worn a deep
cutting into the chalk on the downs west of Awndyn where it
had not been cobbled. Lightning, Mist and Serein led the
coach-and-pair inland across a broom and gorse heath,
under a sky of the vivid blue that is the field of the Awian
flag. They rode alongside an oak plantation belonging to
Mist, then an orchard. Sunlight shone on the horses’ wellgroomed
flanks. Light reflected from the metal panels on
my boots and darted bright patches on the path.
Flying is the most selfish pastime in the world. It’s all I
ever want to do. Flying is being alone but not lonely, swept
up on the exhaust of the world; my wings and the ground
two magnets pushing each other apart. The sky is more
gentle than the touch of any lover, and gliding on a hot day
is as effortless as sleep. I hold out my wings, supported on
rounded air, and change direction with a tiny movement. I
traveled at an altitude too great to be seen from the
patchwork farmland and toy cottages. I urged myself higher,
trying to cram more miniature moated granges and
dwindling trees into my field of vision. I sang, “Oh, we met in
the Frozen Hound hotel, down on Turbary Road.”
Lightning and Mist seemed to be arguing. I dropped
height and circled above them, my backswept sickle wings
beating quickly with the wrist joint bent gracefully as a
falcon’s. I risked spooking the horses but I wanted to hear
the Archer.
“This is far worse than the year fifteen-oh-nine,” he
rebuked Mist angrily. “Gio Ami is much more desperate
than Eske was then.”
Mist said, “Well, I agree, but the Castle will weather
another such revolution, especially when you and I can
negotiate.”
“Let us send Comet ahead.”
“No. I want to be present when he gives his report.”
“What was the year fifteen-oh-nine, anyway?” asked
Wrenn.
“Oh, don’t get Lightning started or he won’t shut up till
nightfall.”
“Your charm never falters. Wrenn, I’ll tell you. Five
hundred years ago we pushed the Insects farther out of
Lowespass than their Wall had been for centuries. The
Insects were less of a threat, so the southern manors
decided they were safe. They thought they no longer
needed the Castle, so they refused to pay our dues. The
governor of Eske manor led the way, and the whole
Plainslands followed within the year.”
Mist sniggered. “When the taxes dried up, many Eszai
thought their power was being eroded and they panicked; it
split the Circle half and half. The Sailor—my predecessor—
led those who wanted to use violence, and San nearly
expelled him from the Castle. But Lightning’s diplomacy
won, as it will again.”
“Oh, yes,” said Wrenn admiringly. He drew nearer to
Mist.
Lightning continued: “The wisdom of our Emperor
resolved the situation. We’re only his servants, whatever
Ata may say. You see, San offered Eske’s only son a place
in the Circle. He was a damn good horseman and
deserved to be Hayl. Lord Governor Eske died of old age
fifteen years later, taxes unpaid. His immortal son inherited
the manor and the uprising simply collapsed.”
They reached the edge of the escarpment and looked
down; the land fell away like the inside of a bowl, to the flat
—or at most gently undulating—Plainslands. From the
curved grassy ridge that formed Awndyn’s border they
could see to the serrated horizon of Eske forest.
The square fields on the hillside were white with chalk
soil; they looked like they were covered in snow. Yellow
patches of barley with straggly orange poppies between
them contrasted with the sky and hallucinogenic-green
grass of the downs. Awndyn was a beautiful manorship.
Eske and Awndyn were the only two Plainslands manors
owned by families who originated, centuries ago, in Awia.
The Plainslands manors might seem weak and oldfashioned,
incessantly bickering over their boundaries, but
because the land was decentralized, its cultures were
stable, tolerant and as varied as the Plainslands
landscapes—peoples of forests, heath, Brandoch marsh
and Ghallain pampas.
At the foot of the hill the coach and riders forded the pure
water of a trout stream. Dust clouds and chaff blew across
the road from a tariff barn where schoolchildren, who
holiday at harvesttime, were brushing the paved floor in
readiness to store next month’s crop. They peered out from
under the barn’s thatched fringe. The older ones bowed
their heads when they saw our sunburst insignia—while the
teenage girls turned to each other and shrieked with
passion.
I descended and said to Lightning, “There are fewer
farmers here than usual. If they’ve gone to Gio, more
people are involved than I thought.”
“Great. With a shortage of labor and food the last thing
we need is the farmers joining a rebellion.”
The air brushing the pits of my wings and the paler silky
feathers under them was so erotic I started thinking of Tern
again. How she giggled when I pushed my cold face down
her bodice lacings. How her touch was so gentle I
screamed but she kept stroking. I remembered Tern
walking slowly in the snow, a parasol over her shoulder. My
flitting footsteps crunch as I sprint around the corner of the
black manor house. My body collides with hers. “Caught
you!” We fall embraced into the snow, laughing and kissing.
She would bend my flight feathers to give me a sensation of
speed, and I would encircle her whole body with them. Her
wondering face looked up at my smile. And all the time she
carried on her affair in secret. I snarled and spat down into
a corn field.
I borrowed the horses just over ten hours ago. It had
been one hour since we descended from Awndyn heath
and entered the arable land. It should take another thirty
hours’ travel to reach the Castle. In five hours it will be
sunset. One hour after that we will reach the Cygnet Ring
Coach Inn in the dense part of the forest. In eight hours I
would need another fix.
It was four P.M. when we entered the forest. The road cut
through it cleanly; the spaces were open and bright sunlight
permeated between the trees and threw moving highlights
on the ground. Bracken and angelica sprouted among piles
of bleached-white timber. In the tussocky clearings luscious
purple foxgloves stood like racks of lingerie. I saw the road
clearly from the air—two tracks from the wagon wheels with
a grassy strip between them.
The air above the road shimmered; it looked wet and
glassy. In every hollow of the dry track there was a mirage
of a silver puddle that peeled away as we got nearer, and
repeated farther up the road in the hot air rising from it.
We passed a cleared area beside the road intended for
a fyrd division muster point. About every forty kilometers we
passed a coach inn. These pubs and stables were
semifortified with high walls. Travelers, hunters and workers
of the surrounding farms could seek refuge there if Insects
set upon them. Luckily, there had been no attacks this far
south for twelve months. I considered the forest to be free
from Insects; we had spent the last five years hunting them
down.
Wrenn dozed on the back of his palfrey. The Swordsman
had no horsemanship whatsoever and sat like a sack of
spuds, his chin on his chest, nodding forward and jerking
awake so I thought he was going to fall under the hooves of
Ata’s mare. Ata reclined in thought, under a denim cap. Her
legs braced in the stirrups pulled her leather trousers tight
over well-defined muscles. She stared at the backside of
Lightning’s stallion.
Lightning knew the forest well, and he loved it. He rested
his bow horizontally on his knee and an arrow across it,
nocked to the string. Holding a weapon changes your
perception of the surrounding world. The very act of
carrying a bow tunes your awareness to find the quarry.
Lightning listened to every rustle in the undergrowth, or
breaking twigs in the canopy. He noticed the “coc-coc” of
pheasants, the sound of grasshoppers switched on by the
heat. He noticed the subtle odor of deer and differentiated
it from the stink of the horses, wild garlic and ditch water.
His senses were heightened—in the country, after an hour
smell and hearing became as important as sight. A less
experienced hunter would jump at any play of shadows and
snatch up his arrows, but Lightning was confident. He knew
that you always have more time to draw and loose a bow
than you think.
I noticed a commotion farther along the road. The
highway ascended a slight hill; near the top it was blocked
completely with people. At this distance I could only see
splodges of color, brown or black clothing, some pikes or
flagpoles moving about, and an occasional bright flash in
the center of the milling crowd that was either a mirror or
polished steel. I narrowed my eyes. This could be Gio’s
work.
I wheeled over my colleagues and called, “Lightning?”
“Yes?”
“There’s something strange ahead. I want to find out
what it is.”
“A den for you to sleep in, perhaps.”
I clacked my wings together impatiently. “It looks
unusual…Just because I’m hooked doesn’t mean I can’t
function,” I added, muttering. I pulled on the air and surged
up. I was only between one and two on the room-spinning
scale. I should be treated the same as when I’m clean,
especially if I have a good supply; it takes very careful
examination to tell the difference.
A company of about one hundred men was walking
slowly up the hill behind a double ox team that pulled…At
first it looked like a massive farm dray, but with an
enormous wooden beam across it. At the front the squaresectioned
beam was attached to a horizontal capstan
whose great spiked handles projected like an unfinished
cart wheel. A hawser made of twisted sinew joined a
leather sling half a meter wide. It was a trebuchet, a thing of
horrible potential.
The tops of heads, like dots, became pink as men
turned their faces up to see me. The drover slapped the
oxen’s snouts, and when the trebuchet team ground to a
halt he slipped wooden wedges under its solid wheels.
On the hilltop was another circular, grassed-over
clearing maintained for a fyrd camp. Tents packed the
earth, some small triangular shelters around a spacious
cream canvas pavilion. Most were thread-bare, stained
with dirt, grease and wine, but some were from brand-new
supplies. There were awnings and lean-tos, but I had no
time to take it in because people on the ground spotted me
and started shouting. Men dashed from all over the
encampment to the center where a huge bonfire
smoldered. They stoked it, poked it, and threw on new logs
and green boughs.
A thick column of dark gray smoke rose up. I saw it
coming and a second later I was completely enveloped.
Smoke burned my eyes and nose. I breathed in a lungful
and started coughing violently. Acrid smoke seared my
throat. My sinuses were full of it; my inflamed eyes ran with
tears.
Black flecks and sparks swirled past me. Leaves and
lichen burning around the edges stuck to my shirt. I beat my
palms on my stomach. I tumbled out of the billowing smoke,
blinded and disoriented. I started to fall. Air whipped past
me. Treetops hurtled up from where the sky was supposed
to be. The sky was underneath me. I rubbed my face
vigorously, tore out of my spin. I found myself above the
road again, very low.
The hard-faced men by the ox team drew their longbows
with disorganized timing and loosed. A hundred arrows
flew straight up; I banked away hard. Long shafts passed in
the air on my right. Flights whistled as they reached their
zenith, turned around and plunged back. A breeze brushed
my face from the nearest one. Spent arrows thumped on
the upper surface of my wings. Shafts slipped between my
fingered feathers. I straightened my flight path and beat
madly away over the forest.
This could not be a case of mistaken identity.
Hot with panic I yelped, “In San’s name, stop!” Arrows
poured around me like solid raindrops. “In the name of…
San Emperor, for the will of god…” But I was coughing too
much.
I flew out of range but they kept shooting for five seconds
to make their point. The arrows’ broad heads crackled
down behind me onto the topmost branches.
I winged back to the coach, furious. What’s it like to be
hit? To have a solid wooden rod impaled through my whole
body—would I be able to feel it with my insides?
I landed next to Lightning and Mist. “Did you see that?”
“Yes,” said Lightning.
“They aimed straight at me. Me! The Emperor’s
Messenger!” My clothes stank of smoke. I blew my nose
and flicked mucus off my fingers. “Bastards! Bastards! It’s
a wonder they didn’t hit. If it wasn’t for my agility…They
wouldn’t even stop for ‘the will of god and the protection of
the Circle’!”
“Aye,” said Mist. “You shouldn’t have gone ahead. Now
they know we’re here, and soon they’ll tell Gio.”
“Me! An Eszai!” I was smart enough to know I am not
universally loved, but I never thought I was hated.
Mist said, “There must be something in that camp they
don’t want us to see.”
“Probably another bloody big trebuchet like the one
they’re dragging up the hill! I didn’t see its serial number.”
I described the ox team and Mist listened with a faint
smile, either admiring Gio’s ingenuity or passionate for a
good chase. She said, “Why’s the trebuchet this side of
Eske, if he’s taking it to the Castle? Has Swallow given it to
him? Or has he stolen it? There, Lightning; you see that
Awndyn’s as treacherous as the other Plainslands manors.”
Wrenn’s eyes were wide in disbelief. He ventured, “Stop
here and see if they come down to us.”
“In range of the trebuchet? Why not carry a target and
make it their sport? We could offer foreign gold as prizes!”
Lightning had a clearer idea of Gio’s character.
“They must be very confident,” said Mist.
“They shot at me!” I said.
“Jant, quit wringing your hands and tell us—you know
these roads—how can we reach the Castle without pushing
past them?”
I said, “We’re about halfway to Eske. This is the only
coach route, unless we go back into Awndyn and join Shivel
Road. It’ll take a couple more days because it’d put us two
hundred kilometers out of our way. And it’s probably
packed with mangonels.”
Mist took off her cap and ruffled her hair, which was
damp with sweat. Her face betrayed the stress she was
under, some puffiness around her disturbing indigo eyes.
“Into the woods and outflank them, then. I’m carrying
important information that I don’t want them to capture.”
Wrenn found this ignominious. “We can fight if
necessary!”
“Unfortunately, Serein, I think they’d shoot you, too.”
I ordered my driver to take the carriage back to the last
coach inn, the Culver Inn, and wait there for instructions. If
he received none after three days, I told him, he should
return to Awndyn. I didn’t want to lose my possessions.
Lightning, Mist and Serein dismounted and led their horses
off the road into the forest undergrowth. At first the going
was hard; brambles hooked in my trousers and tore them.
The pungent smell of bracken was up around our noses.
Farther from the track, less light penetrated the canopy and
fewer plants grew between the trunks. Tinder-dry oak and
beech leaf litter crunched under our feet and the hooves. “I
hope Gio’s rebels don’t torch this,” I said.
Mist said, “God, now he thinks of it! Scout ahead and tell
us how far we have to walk before we can rejoin the road.”
I shrugged off my water bottle that glugged at every step,
and hung it on Wrenn’s saddle. I dashed away. It was
impossible to move without sound in the forest; stories that
tell of my predecessors doing so are just flattering lies. But I
have lively reactions and I can run so swiftly through the
tangle that no one registers the sound as human. I ducked
under branches, leapt over fallen brushwood and sprinted
with long strides. I sped up the rise and doubled back to the
road. It seemed clear beyond the camp. I hid behind a tree,
peered out and withdrew immediately. Another band of
men strutted past with their pikes on their shoulders.
I ran on again, enjoying myself, but every kilometer I
spotted more groups, so I returned to my friends, nimbly
through the spaces between snarled undergrowth. Hot
saliva was gushing into my mouth; I felt real once more.
“This isn’t good—they’re all along the road! We…” I
lowered my voice. “We could walk in the forest all the way
to Eske but there’s a hundred and twenty kilometers to go,
so it would take you days. I say we keep going until nightfall
and then try to rejoin the road farther on, when the rebels
should be encamped or indoors. I’ll scout ahead again.”
Mist said, “Lead on then, smoky creature.”
“Somewhere around here is the Cygnet Ring Inn
ratskeller. Foresters drink there so we should pick up a
track eventually.”
“Damn, you move so fast I can’t even see your
footholds,” Wrenn grumbled. “There’s no path here.”
“Then we make a path.”
We walked, leading the horses, over the copper-colored
floor, under the stippled green ceiling for the next few hours,
some distance from the road so we wouldn’t be heard. The
light began to fade and the dusk became darker by
degrees. The ground could not be seen clearly; tree boles
seemed to float toward us, distanceless. I felt as if
something sentient and silent was watching us. I couldn’t
decide whether it was large and invincible, or small and
instinctive.
On the road with their mounts, the others had been slow,
but now negotiating trees and bramble thickets they slowed
still further until they didn’t seem to make any headway at
all. I burned with frustration. I kept urging them on until Mist
lashed out, “I’m going as fast as I can! I can hardly see. I
keep stumbling over things and so does this stupid nag. I
hate this; we’re in the middle of nowhere and the Empire’s
suddenly crawling with people who despise us.”
Lightning intervened. “Look, Jant, let’s rest here, have a
few hours’ sleep and then check if the road is safe. The
newspapers said Eske is full of unrest and I don’t want to
be exhausted when I travel through town.”
“You’re all so unbelievably tardy,” I said, but I flopped
down immediately and made myself comfortable on the leaf
litter. The others, who were not as practiced at bivouacking
or as careless as a Rhydanne, looked about for a patch of
grass or a landmark to camp next to.
Wrenn threw his pack on the ground and sat on a stump
that was so rotten he bounced off it and it fell to pieces. He
brushed moss from his arse and began to unlace his boots.
Lightning paced about. “I think that the town will be safe
without Gio to stir up the Zascai. The ingrates don’t
understand how hard we have been working for them all
this time…” He tripped over a tree root and kicked it
angrily. “Creeping about in the dark like highwaymen!”
The post-coach jumps the news from manor to manor. I
imagined every governor realizing that the Castle is only
protected by tradition and their own beliefs. I almost heard
them thinking: what could be in this for us? “Half the
Plainslands has supported Gio for six months. We don’t
know what we’re heading into.”
Mist said, “I only know we must make haste to reach
San.” She made a small hearth, unrolled her blanket and
shared out some Trisian pan forte and a flask of red wine. “I
think Gio wants to cause us as much pain as possible
before we inevitably catch him. I can tell he must have little
hope because his methods are so desperate…” She fell
into a reverie and did not speak again. We heard people
passing by at the road’s nearest approach. I felt satisfied
that I could lie hidden and observe them, and they wouldn’t
know I was listening.
Lightning took out one of his books. He was writing his
three-hundredth romantic novel, which would probably be
much the same as the other two hundred and ninety-nine,
but maybe this time with a nautical theme. Their popularity
was a constant source of wonder to me. He usually pays
me to translate his unimaginative but ardent scribblings, but
he always has my translations checked. Lightning looked
wistful, a powerful emotion he had practiced over centuries,
which he now fell into easily. He had adopted it when it was
fashionable, although it didn’t suit him. “Swallow is never
here when I love her,” he said. “I wish I could speak to her. In
times of trouble, she finds an inner strength. Maybe it’s
because she lives in pain and is hardened to it.” He sighed,
and went back to writing, with the practicality of a lover who
has sought the same character in different women over
fifteen hundred years.
For the past hour I had thought of nothing but
scolopendium. My mouth watered for it and my joints
ached. I couldn’t hold out much longer before my need
began to show. It’s just a weakness of my body, I thought; it
isn’t really me. I opened a knotwork painted tobacco tin
containing my stash and a syringe. I acted casually to
protect me from the others; underneath I bubbled with
excitement and blame. “Don’t mind if I hook up?”
“Oh, go ahead.” Mist shook her head in disgust, though I
could tell she was taking notes.
“Thanks. You don’t know how much I…”
“I’m beginning to guess,” said Wrenn.
“So one day it’ll kill me. Want some?”
“Certainly not!” he said contemptuously. He walked to
the edge of the clearing and stood with his back to us to
have a piss. Then he returned and lay down on his coat with
his rapier to hand. He watched me covertly, pretending to
be asleep.
I hunched over and mantled wings around a candle stub.
I licked my needle more or less clean, ran it through the
flame and filled it from a skylark vial. I tied a tourniquet
around my upper arm, and made the injection. I flushed the
syringe out with my own blood and pulled the spike from my
arm. Then I keeled over, into the leaves. An aching nausea
filled my empty stomach and dispersed as my rush came
on. Gradually and gratefully I gave up on thinking about
anything at all.
The tops of the oak trees were pushed by a wind that
didn’t touch us below. Each gust churned the topmost
boughs in the distance, then shook the branches above us
as it passed.
A crunch sounded somewhere deep in the forest.
Lightning glanced up from his book and stood up silently.
He bent his longbow against his boot and strung it. He
kicked the fire out, then hauled me to my feet by the scruff
of my neck and simultaneously gave Wrenn a hefty kick on
the bum. The Swordsman woke with a start and Lightning
raised a finger to his lips. “Footsteps,” he whispered.
“Insects?” Wrenn’s eyes widened.
Lightning shook his head. After the first few trees the
ground was obscure. I listened. The footfalls extended deep
into the woods from our left to right. As they came closer,
we could tell they were made by men. There were at least
five directly ahead of us, but the noise seemed to stretch
out far on both sides.

Yes, we had a pact, which we began after the span of a
mortal lifetime had lapsed. We promised that it is
acceptable to have affairs because we will still love each
other the most, and we will always return to each other.
Actually, sleeping around should be refreshing because we
have to spend the rest of eternity together without
becoming bored.
I propped myself up on the velvet cushions. “Tern, why
Tornado? Amre, he’s stupid; demre, he can’t converse
worth shit; shanre, he’s bald; larore, he’s ugly; keem he’s
poor! Is that the kind of man you really like, so you don’t
love me anymore? Was your pride among the possessions
you lost in the fire? Keemam, is he better in bed than me
or, keemdem, are you so worried that I might be beaten in
a Challenge that you’re prepared to shag the whole
Circle?”
Tern said, “Why did you steal my money? Can I have it
back, please, or have you mainlined it all?”
I ignored this transparent attempt to change the subject. I
kept pleading: “Remember when I proposed, how I brought
you the filigree spider? We could go down to the Hall and
dance without music, the way we did back in ’ninety-five.
Come on! Wear your brooch—it can be our seventh
honeymoon.”
“Ten minutes and you’ll simply collapse.”
“Come to bed then.”
“That’s not the point! Shira, you’re never here yourself!”
“I’m the Messenger! The point of my existence is to
bugger off and bring back news! It’s my job!”
Tern drew the curtain across our room. I lay and watched
the details of its velvet folds; they looked like letters of the
alphabet.
She wiped her eyes and said quietly, “All your holidays
are spent in Scree. Fighting Insects nearly burned you out
—so off you go to the mountains. Do you have any women
there? Even when you’re here, you’re unconscious! I knew
your cycle would come around again. You can’t stay off cat
—you can’t stand to be sober for more than five years.
You’re not thinking about us; you are thinking about that
fucking drug.”
Tern knew how to hurt me. She had observed it well over
the last century and her infidelity had pushed me into
addiction before. If she was not adulterous I would not be a
junkie. “I took cat because I’m scared of the ships,” I said.
“Everybody knows that but Ata still forced me to sail.
Besides, I would rather not use cat at all than bother you
with it. It’s under control.”
“That’s not always apparent.”
Well, it wasn’t always true.
Tern kept going. “Oh, for god’s sake! If I upset you, you
suddenly start to notice—but you don’t think how your
actions affect anyone else! I should never have married a
Rhydanne.”
“Where did that come from?” I blinked.
“I don’t mean your appearance! Some things you just
can’t grasp, no matter how hard you try. It doesn’t occur to
you to think of anybody else, like you’re still living alone in a
hovel in the mountains. When you’re away on errands do
you ever think of me?”
“Yes. Yes, all the time! That whole Rhydanne thing is just
bullshit. Don’t lay it on me as well now.”
“The pact—”“How many?” Ata mouthed.
Lightning held up his free hand with the fingers
extended, clenched his fist, then opened the fingers again.
Wrenn sprang to his feet, crossed his arms over his
waist and drew his rapier and dagger at the same time.
Mist pawed uneasily for the 1851 Wrought sword that she
carried buckled to her pack.
The footsteps resolved; the people making them walked
about two meters apart. I peered into the gnarly gloom but I
couldn’t glimpse anybody. We should be able to see them
by now. I smelled hot oil. The crunching continued; they
were almost on us. They stopped. There was silence.
Wrenn went into guard.
A yellow glare turned our camp bright as day. Black
jumped to colors, disorienting us. They had been carrying
covered lanterns and with one accord they raised their
shutters.
I was less blinded than the others. I turned as a man
jumped from the forest behind us. Dagger in hand, he ran
past Lightning and cut the bowstring with a neat slice.
Lightning’s powerful longbow sprang back straight.
It gave a dry crack. Splits opened along the bow’s limbs
from the tips to the grip. It snapped its eighty-kilo draw
weight back into his arm. Lightning jerked away so the
string didn’t gash his face. The shivered wood creaked. He
dropped it and the arrow, and grabbed his left arm. “Damn
you, Gio Ami! Traitor and sneak!” He drew his sword with
an efficient gesture but his wrenched arm seemed
awkward.
The horses neighed and reared, frightened. They pulled
out their tether pegs and scattered.
I can’t take off. The branches are too dense for me to
push up between them. I’d be scratched to bits and never
break through into the clear air. Fuck it, there isn’t even
enough room between the trees for me to open my wings,
let alone run with them spread.
Gio sauntered toward Wrenn, gazing fixedly at him.
“Revenge isn’t worth it,” I said quietly.
“Comet, aren’t you fast?” Gio sneered. “Is fame worth it?
I walked through Wrenn’s party and no one spoke to me.
When I entered the hall, the Eszai all fell quiet and turned
their backs. You didn’t even notice me!”
He pointed his rapier at Wrenn. Gio still wore the blue
frock coat, open to his naked chest. His dusty trousers
were the same, tucked into scuffed boots with stirrup
were the same, tucked into scuffed boots with stirrup
guards. He had probably been riding between manors,
raising his rabble, for weeks. His fair hair was dirty; strands
escaped his ponytail and hung around his face. His lip
raised in loathing, hatred contorted his features; it burned in
his eyes as he stared at Lightning. I thought: This is not the
Gio I once knew. I must be careful until I know what he’s
become. I said, “What do you really want?”
“I want to fight the novice.”
Wrenn’s whole body language was a swagger. He spun
his poniard like a drumstick. “I’m Serein. I get to live till god
comes back. What’s it like to be older, Gio?”
Gio kept his rapier leveled at Wrenn. He motioned with
his dagger and the twenty or so men behind him placed
their lamps on the ground and advanced.
Lightning stepped across in front of Mist. His gallantry
annoyed Gio so much that he turned from Wrenn and made
a thrust low under Lightning’s sword. Lightning evaded it
expertly. Gio’s rapier was blacked with boot polish; the
point was difficult to see. He stabbed in again. Up went his
other hand to ward off an overhead blow from Wrenn.
“Oh, shit,” said Mist. She slid her Wrought sword from its
scabbard.
“Keep a clear head!” I shouted to her. “They’re nothing
but Insects—defend yourself!”
My old gangland fury seeped through my high. If these
guys are attacking me it’s their funeral! A man squared up
to me, tall and very broad. Everything was dark and
indistinct but I glimpsed the purple ribbon of Ghallain
Fencing School wound around his swept hilt. Bugger.
There’s no way I can stand against one of Gio’s fencing
instructors. The man smiled, his teeth incandescent white in
his shadowed face. He watched me like a cat with a mouse
many times its size. He strutted and said, “Comet?”
A fencing master wouldn’t use such bluster, only a poser
apprentice. To bolster their own self-esteem town-boys
have to believe they can fight. Heat rose into my head. I
yelled, “What?”
I ducked under his blade, came up well in distance,
kneed him in the balls and as he fell sank my ice axe in his
throat. The pick emerged from the back of his neck,
shining, covered in blood.
I didn’t see Gio’s next moves because I pounced onto
the man’s body, both feet on his chest, to pull my pick free. I
rolled and slammed it through the nearest foot with so much
force that I fastened it to the earth. The foot belonged to the
man Mist was fighting. He howled. He jerked his leg,
tripped over the handle, which jolted the pick from his shoe.
He reeled away.
It seemed that Gio was now the one prepared to die in
the struggle for immortality. Wrenn stamped the ground and
thrust at Gio. He blocked it halfway. His rapier and dagger
moved fast as an Insect’s feelers, keeping Wrenn at bay.
Wrenn failed to engage his sword and Gio reached right to
cut at Lightning.
None of the Zascai were prepared to help Gio take on
Lightning or Serein. They concentrated on me instead,
stepping forward warily, trying to time their attack together. I
backed against a tree and motioned for Mist to do the
same. She never stopped swearing as she raised her
katana with both hands. A gleam ran along its perfect edge,
daunting the rebels.
Gio circled Lightning’s short sword with his rapier blade
and then hit it hard under the forte. He flowed the move on
with grace, beat away the straight thrust Wrenn made at his
chest. He kicked a foot at Wrenn’s hips, shoving him off
balance. Wrenn bounded back, spread his wings.
The man fighting me turned and ran. I looked to Mist; she
was shaking, white hands wrapped around her hilt and an
expression of disbelief on her face. Blood peeled off the
blade’s razor edge. Her adversary lay on the ground in two
pieces. For one beat, blood pumped out slickly around his
solid guts. His lips moved, then set.
“Shit,” I said. “It went straight through him!” I hadn’t seen
before what a blade designed for cleaving Insects could do
to a human.
Mist said nothing, trying to think her way out of the horror.
Gio spun on the ball of his foot and lunged at Lightning.
Lightning missed his parry but instinctively turned away
from the point. It ripped through the left side of his shirt at
the waist and into his back.
Gio whipped out the black blade, thirty centimeters slick
with blood.
Lightning fell to his knees, heavily. Gio turned to Wrenn.
The Zascai stopped and looked at Lightning. He lay on
his side with his body arched, knees bent, his wounded
side raised from the ground. His eyes clenched shut with
agony; he drew deep breaths through his open mouth.
The thugs shrank back, their broadswords loose in their
hands. Gio’s charisma had worn off and they were
themselves again, every terrified individual. I shouted, “See
what you’ve done? Killed the Archer!” I made no attempt to
hide the panic in my voice. “Lord Micawater. The oldest
man in the world after the Emperor himself! Put your
weapons down!”
Their blades dropped to the earth. They turned tail and
fled, in ones and twos, every direction into the forest. I
yelled after them, “San will bring you to justice! I’ll see you
all hang!”
Gio and Wrenn were still dueling to kill fifty meters away.
Gio forced Wrenn to retreat against a broad oak trunk; he
was in danger of tripping over its roots. The last of Gio’s
allies raced past. A look passed between them—the
terrified man urged Gio to run. Gio glanced back, realized
his friends had split and his chance had gone. He jumped
out of Wrenn’s reach, shouted something I couldn’t catch,
then disappeared between the trees.
“What did he say?” said Wrenn. “Jant, chase him!”
“No such thing—look at Lightning!”
“Hurry!” Mist snapped. “Help me with Saker! Saker,
you’re going to be all right.”
Lightning’s square face was pallid as clay; sweat broke
out on his forehead. His body was rigid. “Leave me alone,”
he said faintly. He tried to fend me off and pull himself into a
sitting position, so Wrenn and I supported him, me on the
left and Wrenn on the right, and eased him against a tree
trunk. We propped him upright and I rucked up his shirt to
see the damage.
The rapier had passed through the forearm of his left
wing, between its two long bones; radius and ulna, and then
out and through the wing’s bicep before gouging deep into
his side. So his folded wing had been stuck through twice,
leaving two entrance holes and two exit holes, but it had
protected his side from receiving the length of the blade.
Lightning tried to spread his wing but couldn’t. “It’s only a
scratch,” he said, vaguely and inaccurately. I took its wrist,
held together its three elongated fingers and pulled it open
with a grating sound deep within the lacerated gristle.
Blood flowed in strong pulses from the upper limb and
soaked it. Normally broad with splayed feathers like a
hawk, it looked thin with the wet golden plumage plastered
down to the skin.
“Water. Hot water.” I rounded on Wrenn. “You can do
that, can’t you?”
Wrenn fetched a canteen from the fire Ata had built and
began to pour water through Lightning’s wing. I whispered,
“He can live without a pinion. The stab in his side’s more
serious. Here, cut away the shirt.”
Lightning tried to tug his wing out of my hand. He would
rather die of blood loss than be in such an improper
position. “I’m sorry, Saker,” I said aloud. “We have to treat
it.”
We mopped away the blood on his back, leaving a redbrown
map of his skin’s tiny pores and lines. The skin
around the puncture hole was spongy and inflamed.
Lightning was growing too confused to be rid of our
administrations. “Better luck next time,” he said to Wrenn,
then rested his head on his knees. “Ah…it bloody…hurts.”
I applied my tourniquet to his wing for a minute while I cut
strips from his shirt to make a field dressing. It was
impossible to tell how deep the wound was. I saw that it
was more than four centimeters, but I had been taught not
to probe them. I couldn’t do anything about internal
bleeding. I couldn’t prevent infection; I didn’t have sutures,
nothing even as basic as a mold plaster or a clean
bandage. Lightning looked so weak that all I felt was
shame. I had never seen him like this before, and I should
never have to. It wasn’t the right way around: as at Slake
Cross, I should be the injured one and Lightning should be
helping me. He’s the second-oldest Eszai, the richest
immortal. He is the center of Awia; he taught me its
language, etiquette, martial arts. His money drip-feeds
Wrought. What will happen without him? “My god, what are
we going to do?”
Mist said, “Finish the job.”
Wrenn said meekly, “How can I help?”
I yelled, “Look after your own sorry hide! Gio had a
system for fighting two men that you didn’t know!”
Mist spat, “Shira, keep working. Wrenn, then go and
fetch the horses.”
Wrenn plunged about in the forest, falling over, cracking
branches and making an awful noise. When he returned
holding the reins of our three mounts Mist took two from him
and left him with his palfrey. “Ride back to the Culver Inn,
find our coach and summon the driver. I’ll build the fire up
so you can see where we are.”
The Swordsman was only capable of a canter rather
than a gallop; he led his horse to the road and we heard its
hooves resound loud in the night then steadily fade. Mist
said, “I wish you weren’t tripping so hard.”
“Ha! I saved you.”
She looked surprised. “Well, a second later I saved you!
That man I cut apart, he…Oh, forget it…”
A quick fix would steady me and help me think clearly.
Or I could take my whole supply; unconsciousness was very
appealing. I pushed the inappropriate thought away and
said, “He can’t reach the Castle. In fact, I don’t want him to
lie in a coach even as far as Eske.”
Lightning forced himself to recover a little. Calmly but
muzzily he said, “San needs us. I’ll be there. Gio broke my
bow…Pass me my bow; I want it.” He was blanking out the
pain, which I admired because I have tried to do that more
than once and failed. “I hate rapiers. A murderer’s sword.
Worse than…”
“You haven’t been hurt before in my memory,” said Mist.
“Long ago.” Lightning sighed.
“There’s something I can give you,” I offered, gesturing
for Mist to fetch the splintered longbow and my pack.
“Everything will look a little strange for a while but you’ll be
too relaxed to care. Don’t worry and let yourself—”
Lightning seized my hand and clenched it so tightly I
winced. “No drugs. Promise?”
He spoke with such certainty that I nodded. “I promise.”
He huffed in great breaths, chest heaving like the sides
of a tent in a gale. Then he lay down carefully and in a
couple of gasps was unconscious. Mist dragged across his
opulent gold and pale yellow coat, its gray fur lining
collecting beechmast and broken twigs. We draped it over
him. Then I sat down beside him on a tree root. I ignored the
blood soaking through my trousers and tried to sense the
Circle. The Doctor once told me how, but she had more
practice than me. She had taught herself to feel when the
threads of our lifelines are strained. She can sense if
someone is close to death because they pull on the Circle
and it tries to hold them. Like a spider with her fingers on
invisible filaments, it’s possible that she already knows
Lightning is injured. The Emperor would feel it; after all, he
makes the links, sharing our time and preventing us from
dying.
I watched the rise and fall of Lightning’s shallow, inshock
breathing. If it stopped, I wanted to be prepared for
the terrible sensation, the very moment when he rips
through the Circle. No, I mustn’t think that.
Mist stalked up to the fire and turned to me, her
expression livid. “Zascai shouldn’t be able to murder Eszai.
Immortals can’t be struck down this way! Saker can’t die.
He’ll wake up. I’ll kill Gio Ami. I will—the bastard—how
could he dare?”
“Ata—”
Her white hair tousled as she beat her fists on her thighs.
“Gio Ami. When I’ve finished with him there won’t be
enough left for a dog to roll in!”
“Look,” I said loudly. “The thrust hit his wing and didn’t go
deep in his back. If dust doesn’t infect it, the wound may not
be fatal. But if we stay here, I won’t bet on it. Return to
Awndyn, and his so-called lover can nurse him.”
Mist’s eyes glittered; their shine in the darkness looked
halfway insane. “No—on to the Castle.”
“You landed us here. For once plan for someone other
than yourself.”
“I can’t believe a Rhydanne has the gall to say that!”
“Only half—”
She interrupted, “If we retreat we give Gio the
advantage.”
“As if we have the advantage now!” I glared at her.
“Wrenn’s illegal vendetta against Gio is bad enough without
you joining in. He’ll duel with Gio’s followers all together or
one at a time. Now you are trying hatred on for size.”
“You’re right,” she said softly.
“Eszai are supposed to work together; let’s earn our
immortality. Damn it, Mist, god will show up, coffee mug in
hand, before you bother cooperating. Go back to Awndyn,
where I’ll bring you San’s directions as I should have done
in the first place.”
Hours passed and Wrenn did not return. I watched over
the Archer, straining to see by the insipid moonlight. Mist
said little but glowered more and more until sometime in
said little but glowered more and more until sometime in
the early hours she burst out, “I should have gone instead!”
“Serein is a poor rider but nominally the best
Swordsman,” I said shortly.
“Well, where has he got to? Has he been captured?”
“I hope not. Lightning’s condition is deteriorating,
thankfully slowly because he’s strong. It’s imperative we get
him out of this wilderness.”
Mist stomped around the clearing, cracking twigs
underfoot and kicking dry leaves onto the hearth. I hissed,
“Keep quiet! And keep listening; Gio might return. You
islanders don’t realize how far your noise carries.”
Lightning woke up but only stayed conscious, unmoving,
for a few minutes. I tried everything except scolopendium
but I couldn’t bring him back.
I sighed. “Gio’s wrecked his chances of regaining the
Circle, that’s for sure. He could have—one of my
predecessors was displaced then rejoined it.”
Ata shook her head. “There was such a fast turnover of
Messengers that they had a good attitude; they saw it as a
temporary prize and a few more years of life. I remember
one man, three or four Messengers back, who when he lost
his Challenge joined the Imperial Fyrd. We saw him grow
old. But most people who leave the Circle are too broken to
try again.”
If I was displaced from the Castle as a Messenger, I
would try to convince San to make me a new place in the
Circle—an Eszai for reconnaissance. Somebody might
one day be able to outpace me, but they would never
manage a bird’s-eye view. It is theoretically possible for
someone to hold two titles in the Circle but it has never
happened because it’s so difficult to keep hold of even one
title. Anyway, seeing as every Eszai has to be beaten on
his own terms, I would change the requirements of my
Challenge to favor my strengths no matter who I’m up
against.
All I really fear is the advent of another hybrid like me
who has taught himself to fly and appears out of the blue
with a Challenge. As far as I know I am unique and I’m
careful not to have any children. In mortal living memory,
relations between the countries of Darkling and Awia have
become appalling; Rhydanne and Awians are active
enemies, at least in the Carniss area. I only know of one
marriage between them, when Jay “Dara,” a fyrd captain
from Rachiswater and man of rare tastes, climbed to Scree
to find himself a wife.
Jay was my best soldier and after Pasquin’s Tower
Battle nearly thirty years ago, when the governor of
Lowespass was killed, I placed Jay and his wife Genya as
governors in Lowespass fortress. I knew that I could check
on them there, and especially on any of their off-spring that
might have both a sprinter’s speed and long wings. But
unfortunately for Jay running Lowespass fortress is a
hazardous job, and twenty-one years later he died childless
when Insects ambushed him by the Wall.
Gradually the sky paled; the darkness shrank away into
the long shadows of the trees across the whole forest. The
dawn chorus broke out; roosting birds roused and called
from the branches above us. Mist listened to them with
extreme suspicion as she chewed the last of the pan forte.
She paused, hearing the clop of hooves and the heavy
whirring of ironbound coach wheels from the direction of the
road. Between the trees a light glowed, faded. The din
ceased. Wrenn’s voice called, “Comet? Hey!”
I raised my voice: “Hey, Serein! Over here!”
“Good morning. I’m sorry I took ages. It was a long way
and there were rebels everywhere.” The young man’s voice
swung toward us, obscured by the sound of hacking as he
cut his way through dewy briars. He emerged from a
thicket, grinned and pointed his rapier at the road. “But
they’ve all passed by now.”
I motioned for Wrenn to help me lift the Archer. He said,
“I feel as if I shouldn’t touch Lightning.”
“I understand. You heard tales of his exploits in history
when you were a boy, right? Well, you take his legs and I’ll
lift his arms.”
We struggled to carry Lightning out of the forest, over the
uneven ground. He seemed even bigger limp and lifeless,
and was a dead weight, although his bones were hollow.
Wrenn climbed into the coach, reached down to grasp him
under the arms and pull him up.
“It’s not as elegant a carriage as he might have wished,”
Mist remarked dryly, but with obvious relief.
I laid Lightning on his side, on the floor because the
seats were occupied by our sea chests. The wound in his
back started bleeding again, dark and clotted blood. Mist
stanched its sluggish flow with the last of the cloth. “What
am I supposed to do?” she snapped. “I don’t have the
faintest idea how to care for casualties. Jant, come with us
to Awndyn. Tris is three thousand kilometers away, and at
the moment your report is hardly San’s vital priority!”
“But I have to help San muster fyrd against Gio.”
Wrenn said, “You can’t stop Gio; you’re just a
messenger…Shit, I’m sorry, Jant.”
I said, “Don’t you dare go after Gio! Sit up there with the
driver.” Wrenn hopped onto the bench with the nervous
obedience of a captain receiving direct orders. I took the
opportunity to whisper, “I’ll accompany you to Awndyn and
we won’t stop en route. But when I leave you, don’t trust
Mist. She doesn’t fancy you, Wrenn; it’s all bluff. Ignore her
seductive words and low-cut tops if you know what’s best.
Without Lightning, you and I have little protection from her
schemes. And—I never thought I’d say this, but—beware of
Zascai. Too many are Gio’s devotees.”
“Jant, this is overcautious.”
“No. Do as I say. When I return with San’s orders I want
to find you alive.” I climbed into the coach and thumped the
ceiling. The driver cracked his reins, and we gathered
speed down the straight road. The forest formed a block on
both sides, a palisade of trees. The Remige Road was so
silent that I found it hard to believe our desperate fight had
actually occurred.
We reached the manor house after five hours and I
ransacked it for medicines. I explained everything to
Swallow Awndyn, who made sure that the Archer was given
a clean bed. The manor’s resident sawbones was a
sensible man, but seemed to be completely out of his
depth.
I wrote a letter for Swallow’s courier to deliver posthaste
to the Doctor at Hacilith University: “For the hand of Ella
Rayne only. Follow the bearer to Awndyn manor where
Lightning lies in a serious condition from rapier wounds. A
single thrust pierced his wing twice and made a puncture
lesion in his back near the kidneys which pours blood at the
slightest provocation. Rapid pulse and dyspnea; the rapier
blade was dirty. C.J.S.”
I caught a few hours of sleep but it was late on Monday
evening, a full twenty-four hours after we were ambushed,
when I felt able to leave Lightning and set out for the Castle.
I flew in a strikingly clear sky. A full moon gibbered over
the forest. Above me, stars between stars; the familiar
constellations could scarcely be distinguished among the
litter of faint points of light. The immensity of what had
happened began to weigh on me. “Saker,” I said aloud.
Lightning was hurt. But why now? He had survived so long. I
had never known him injured by Insects; he could only be
hurt by people, now that the Empire was turning on itself. I
flew, chilled by extreme loneliness. Tern has abandoned
me and now Lightning was gone. I need to take a bit more
scolopendium, I thought, and was suddenly terrified that I
might. I was vastly more afraid of scolopendium now that I
was alone.
Strange. I beat my wings, finding their strength
reassuring. I can rely on no one. Whatever I am going to do
is up to me now and I have to stay alert. We must trust the
Emperor. My wingtips brushed the forest canopy as I flew
low, throughout the night, back to the Castle.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
I followed the Eske Road in, a gray line ruled through the
woods. If I had to rely on my compass, then the crosswind,
gentle as it was, would have pushed me northward
kilometers off course.
By dawn, the Castle was a dark smudge on the horizon.
Even at this distance I could sense the tension: something
was wrong. Dozens of tiny fires were scattered just inside
the forest’s fringe where it ended at the clear grass of the
demesne surrounding the Castle.
Hundreds of specks fanned out from under the trees—
running men who purposefully converged on a few sites and
set to work. I approached watching timber being felled,
ranks formed out of thronging mobs. They abandoned carts
to choke the final approach of the road, and at the forest’s
edge they were winding back the huge wooden arms of
trebuchets. I counted six machines of the largest class. Men
with shovels were rapidly topping up their counterweight
boxes with earth, while another team systematically
dismantled the last watchtower on the Eske Road, carting
blocks back and distributing them, stacking a pile beside
each catapult.
Just forward from the trebuchet line, Gio’s rebels drew
up into a long ragged crescent in front of the Castle’s east
wall, centered on the Dace Gate. Facing them across the
open ground, with their backs to the Castle and the outer
moat, was a much smaller formation, the Castle’s defense.
They were framed between the Northeast and Southeast
towers: Fescue Select, Shivel Select in front of Fescue
General, Shivel General—the full fyrd of two Plainslands
manors, but only two. Either the rebellion was very
widespread or the manors could not marshal men in time.
Their banners cracked in the breeze, a sound that always
filled me with dread. The center was a solid block of heavily
armored hastai—veteran Select infantry—and a figure so
huge that as I angled over them I easily recognized
Tornado. To either side ranked pikemen raised a forest of
jostling pikes. Cavalry pawed restlessly at the flanks, Hayl’s
white horse pennant above the larger group. All the loyal
fyrd were unusually well equipped and their armor shone—
they were offering a deliberate contrast to the ragged
rebels.
Hundreds of helmets glinted as they looked up to see
me flying over. I waved my arms in acknowledgment. Don’t
look at me, I thought; watch the rebels! I passed above the
curtain wall, reassured by its bulk. Along the east wall,
longbowmen of the Imperial Fyrd were stationed between
the crenellations—I suddenly realized that the toothed tops
of the towers were not just for decoration; the defenders on
the parapet could shelter from missiles behind each merlon
tooth. But the Castle was the only fortress to have
crenellations—the Insect forts, like Lowespass, didn’t have
or need them. The Castle was a fortress designed for
protection against people as well as against Insects. “Shit,”
I said aloud in astonishment. “How long ago had San
anticipated this?”
The two forces faced each other, hearing the clacking as
six trebuchet arms wound tight and still tighter. Each side
waited for the other to move first. I banked around the
Southeast Tower thinking that I couldn’t tell Tawny anything
that he couldn’t see from the ground, so I circled up two
hundred meters in the dawn air, wary of more arrows.
Archers detached from the main crescent of rebels and
advanced slowly, their line like a loose screen. Tornado’s
infantry responded by locking their hooked square shields
together into an unbroken wall. A second later the ranks
raised their shields over their heads, forming a makeshift
roof against the arrows. The odd formation was unlike
anything I had seen before, but I admired Tawny’s ingenuity.
With a crash of counterweights, the arms of all six
trebuchets jerked up. I was far above them and saw, in
plan, six stones arc out. One smashed down just in front of
the machine—the stone had been too light; the middle two
fell short, ripping up turf swaths; a fourth crunched through
the canopy of the farthest plane tree in the paddock and
dropped into the moat in a white water spout. Two rocks
seemed to grow in size as they came up under me, shrank
on their descending trajectories and struck the
crenellations. Bowmen dived out of the way as chips flew
off the facing stone.
A distant roar of exultation burst from the woods, tinged
with fear at their own audacity. Teams of men hauled on the
capstans to rack the trebuchet arms down; then others
staggered forward and rolled a stone into each sling.
Appalled, I thought, isn’t Tawny going to do anything?
People are actually damaging the Castle itself. Zascai are
really attacking us. What have we done to make them hate
us so much they want us dead? Do they want to harm the
Emperor and annihilate the Circle? If Gio gets inside he
knows the way to the Throne Room. My mind whirled at
what would happen if every Eszai at once found himself
suddenly returned to mortality.
In less than a minute the trebuchets were ready to launch
again—their crews were obviously Eske’s trained fyrd.
Their accuracy improved: only one block fell short, in front of
the Yett Gate on the southeast wall. One went wide and
bounced along the paddock fence, smashing it into
matchwood; the remaining four thudded into the curtain
wall. The Castle bled more rubble into its inner moat. I
noticed that the wooden bridge to the Dace Gate had been
removed.
Now the rebel archers started to send volleys toward the
loyal fyrd. Arrows stuck in the shell of shields protecting the
infantry. They found their marks in horseflesh spreading
disorder and agitation throughout the cavalry.
Hayl Rosinante had had enough. He waved his
horsemen forward, and they surged and gathered speed,
spreading into a thin line, raising their lances. The archers
immediately turned and raced back toward the safety of
their own spearmen. From my vantage point I saw they
wouldn’t make it. Swift as Insects, Hayl’s men ran them
down. Ridged lance points devised to crack shell drove
straight through the soft bodies of Awians and humans. Half
the riders abandoned their lances in their impaled victims
and drew swords, continuing their charge toward the rebel
line.
I was…I had never expected to see mortals fighting
immortals, and here of all places. In front of the Castle with
Eszai leading troops against the Zascai we were sworn to
protect! I wheeled around, sick with disgust, and sped
toward the Throne Room.
As the breeze propelled me sideways, I kicked away from
the pinnacle tops and lead sheet roofs coming up under my
feet. Another horrible crash sounded from the direction of
the Dace Gate.
The Throne Room spire sprang like a frozen fountain
three hundred meters into the air. Its shadow swept around
an enormous sundial on the Berm Lawns. The spire was
built on Pentadrica Palace, which settled to accept it, ninety
centimeters into the ground. The pressure caused little
splits in the beams, cracks in the plaster. Its base was a
harder stone, to stop the spire’s weight crushing the blocks.
The end of the Throne Room was pierced by stained
glass windows in primary colors. The rose window crowned
it, twenty meters across. One of its multifoil panes was
propped open. I could fit through there. I pulled my wings to
my body and folded them up as I felt the feathers brush the
mullions. The arcuate sill passed below me; I slipped
through.
The dim, silent hall was five hundred meters long, its
cross-vaulted ceiling thirty meters high. At the far end was
the black screen; way below me was the tiled floor with its
scarlet carpet. People no taller than a centimeter looked up
as I appeared in front of the rose window, my wings
stretched in silhouette against its red and blue light.
I flew at the height of the diaphanous gallery adorned
with different colors of marble. Above me were smaller
lancet windows, the great bays divided by pointed arches
below. Every window gave a fragmentary view of another
part of the Castle.
My body rose and fell with wing beats. With every beat I
passed an arch—with columns like bundles of thin tubes,
supporting ribs interlacing the ceiling. I was in perfect
rhythm with the arcades’ march down the Throne Room.
They met at the vanishing point, where the Emperor sits.
The capstone bosses were larger than life—a doubleheaded
axe, oak leaves, turtles, cascading cornucopias,
flowers complex as chrysanthemums. The walls were bright
with daylight. The sun shone on the east side and cast the
shadow of the pointed windows all the way down the west
vault. San watches these shadows tilt, shorten and
reappear on the east vault every day. Above him, the
ceiling vanishes up into the octagonal spire; behind him
shines the sunburst.
The scent of incense thickened. The marksmen on the
balcony looked distressed; then the carved ebony screen
filled my vision. I swung my legs down, alighted gently on
the carpet before it, and trotted through the portal, pulling
my wings in and folding them. I knelt fluidly before the dais.
“My lord Emperor, I have returned from Tris and await
your command.”
A crash, scarcely muted by the pierced walls, echoed
through the hall. I winced. “What’s happening out there?
How can I help?”
San said, “The guards will inform me of the situation
outside. Am I right that you can add little news about the
rebellion?”
“Lightning is wounded. I left him at Awndyn manor.” I
outlined the ambush, the spice ship, and Stormy Petrel
hidden in a fissure. I paused at every clash or an outburst of
shouting, wondering if they were coming nearer. I could only
hear the loudest shouts, chaotic and disjointed. I fretted—
why didn’t San send me outside to watch them? The rocks
were smashing the outside wall and destroying the
buildings in the gap. Can they reach as far as the Palace? If
Tornado doesn’t keep them out of range Gio will aim for the
spire.
The Emperor listened impassively and at length said,
“Be calm, Comet. The Archer’s injuries are to be regretted,
yes, but he is not the whole Circle. There are other ways to
defeat Gio. Tell me about Tris—everything concerning the
island.”
“I have Mist’s written account.” I took the scuffed stack of
papers from my satchel, climbed the four steps to the
rostrum and passed it to San. His pinched, wolfish face
watched me keenly. Under his ivory cloak, his sleeves were
loose to the elbow. His fine white hair hung down to curl on
narrow shoulders.
A breathless guard ran past the screen then prostrated
himself on the floor, his sense of etiquette battling with the
need for urgency. “My lord,” he panted, “Hayl’s cavalry have
been turned back by the rebel pikemen but casualties are
light. Tornado says he must break the rebel lines in a melee
if he’s to stop the trebuchets.”
San nodded. “Tell Tornado I have full trust in his
judgment. However, remind him that there must be no
pursuit once he has broken the resistance.”
The guard stumbled to his feet, bowed, and left.
“My lord,” I said. “Perhaps I should go and help the
Strongman. We’re heavily outnumbered.”
The Emperor gave a grim smile. “This situation is not
unforeseen. Last month Queen Eleonora offered half her
fyrd to guard the walls. I declined as the involvement of
Awia in any such engagement would increase discord.
Instead the Plainslands manors have shown their loyalty,
and the weakness of Gio’s support.”
Two more crashes, only a second apart; falling slates
then silence. I looked tentatively at San, unable to hide my
doubt.
“Comet, remember that the Circle is composed of the
unsurpassed. The strongest warrior and finest horseman in
the world defend us. These walls were built by a succession
of the world’s preeminent architects. Gio Ami may be the
second-greatest swordsman ever but he cannot be
second-greatest swordsman ever but he cannot be
everywhere. His followers have disloyal natures or they
would not have joined him, and once the battle turns against
them he will be unable to hold them for long.”
“My lord.”
“Now, report on Tris.”
I began to describe everything that had happened on our
voyage, in chronological order. I took pleasure in doing my
job well. San listened to me talk, and act, as I paced back
and forth on the carpet before the dais, in a red patch of
light cast by the stained glass windows.
Another crash resounded, and the noise of shattering
glass—the telescopes and sundials in the Starglass
Quadrangle. The Emperor frowned and sent a guard to
check on the damage. The Starglass Quadrangle was full
of accurate instruments that set the time for the entire
Fourlands. In fact, the Fourlands’ prime meridian runs
through it; the north axis that crosses the east axis at zero
degrees through the Emperor’s throne.
Another soldier sped in. I stepped aside while he flung
himself on his knees in front of the throne and spieled out
the latest news seen from his vantage point on the Skein
Gate tower. “The Select Fyrds have engaged the rebel
center. The cavalry are regrouping on the flanks.”
“Very well, return to your post.”
I thought of the picture of San in Tris Istorio. He was
acting like a fyrd captain once more. I resumed speaking
but was interrupted every fifteen minutes by news of the
battle. There were longer waits between the trebuchet
impacts now and the shouts were farther away. Tornado
and Hayl are driving the rebels back, I thought with relief.
I spoke for so long that we had to break the court
session to give me a meal. The four hundred kilometers I
had just covered were taking their toll. By the time I finished
it was early evening, and the bombardment had ceased
some time ago. Nervous servants came in to light the
torchères and wind lamps down on chains from the ceiling
to fill them. I was exhausted from sleep deprivation and
practically flayed by San’s questions.
I stared at the four gemstone columns in the niche
behind the throne: blue azurite for Awia, purple porphyry for
Morenzia, green jade for the Plainslands, silver-gray
hematite for Darkling. For the first time I noticed that
although there was equal distance between them, the four
columns did not span the apse symmetrically. There was
room for another pillar on the far right, just by where some
small steps descended to an arched and iron-studded door
that led to the Emperor’s private rooms. There was a gap
where a column used to be—for the Pentadrica.
An Imperial Fyrd guardsman entered, bowing to give his
final message without meeting the Emperor’s eyes.
“Tornado reports that the rebels have been routed. Gio Ami
didn’t dare face him in combat and his body is not among
the fallen.”
“Very well. Tell Tornado and Hayl to bring their reports
as soon as they are able.”
The guard left and San returned his gaze to me. “So you
even left the Insect running loose?”
I picked at the unraveling seam of a fingerless glove. At
this very minute the Insect was probably dining on the
Capharnai. “Yes, my lord. We respected the Trisians’
wishes. It’ll be difficult enough to deal with them in future; we
didn’t want to exacerbate the crisis still further. Vendace
found it easy to reject Mist’s offer, because to the Senate
immortality is just a nebulous concept. Half of them don’t
believe in it.”
“I see. You failed to convince them. In fact you have given
them one more reason to mistrust us. The situation must be
healed, and quickly. Comet, you have worked hard so far.
Can you do better?”
I bowed. During my meal in the empty guardroom San
had written a missive that now lay on the marble arm of his
throne, neatly sealed with the crimson sunburst. He
regarded me carefully, as if he could read all my private
thoughts from my face. He resumed: “Gio’s followers hold
up our stagecoaches at every point between here and
Cobalt. Gio himself is not easily found, except when he
wants to be, it seems. This letter”—he picked up the small
envelope—“must be delivered to Mist urgently. Do you have
someone you can trust to do it?”
That was a poor precedent: a mortal asked to do my
work. I said, “Messages are only truly secure if delivered by
my hand.”
San’s pale thin lips turned up slightly. “I don’t doubt it,
Comet. But I have other work for you. Following his defeat,
Gio Ami will attempt to regroup. I know that he will be
holding a meeting in two days’ time in Eske, in a salle
d’armes hall that is a branch of his school.”
“Yes,” I said. “I’ve been there often.”
“I want you to go and listen to what he has to say, and
then come back and inform me.”
“Your wish.” Obviously I wouldn’t be able to walk straight
in, but I would relish finding a way to spy on Gio. He had
once given me fencing lessons and I knew he was an
excellent teacher; when in front of an audience he was a
born performer. I said, “I’ll send the letter with a fast,
dependable rider who should be able to slip past Gio. Mist
should receive it late on Wednesday night.”
“Very well. In the meantime, if Tornado needs your
assistance as a lookout or envoy do as he asks.”
Help the man who was fucking my beautiful wife? But
San gave me no time for introspection: “Comet, what do
you think of Tris?”
Danio was immediately brought to mind; I shied away
from the memory of her drumming feet, and recollected the
Amarot library. “The islanders love debate and casuistry
that’s misguided compared to our practicality. It’s great that
Tris now knows of the Fourlands. If we can make allies with
them, if they become willing to communicate with us, their
theories added to the Empire’s will increase our
inventiveness a hundredfold.”
“What is your opinion of the riches of Tris?”
“My lord, I think they’re very dangerous. They’ll cause
avarice, not to mention inflation.”
“And the people?”
I sighed. “On Tris, everything works, but that’s because
I sighed. “On Tris, everything works, but that’s because
it’s a tiny island. I think they have sorted out their problems
—a very long time ago, perhaps—and they’ve not changed
since. On Tris, a thief can become a honest governor…” In
our case, it’s usually the other way around. “But I find it
strange that the citizens of Capharnaum don’t want to
cooperate with the Empire, like Rhydanne, and they hide
themselves away when they clearly do care about the world
and want to improve it, like Awians…It’ll probably do Tris
good to learn of the real world. Maybe they’re in shock. I
hope that when they understand us the whole Empire will
benefit.”
San watched me carefully, sitting straight in the throne
without stirring. He was satisfied that I was telling the truth.
“Make sure that letter is sent to Mist swiftly and with the
highest security,” he said.
“Yes, my lord.”
“Go now and rest, but return on Friday and tell me
exactly what Gio says in Eske.”
San gave me the Top Secret sealed letter. I made
obeisance, taking a few steps back before turning and
passing the screen. As I left the Throne Room I called,
“Immortals and fyrd, bring any letters for Eske to my room
before midnight. Any questions about Tris, keep them.”
Walking down the corridor I caught sight of a flicker of
movement on the opposite wall and went back to
investigate. It was my reflection, pickled in a tall mirror
speckled with tarnish. An expression of horror crossed its
face—even in the half-light I don’t look as good as I did this
time last year. Still the same age of course, but my eyes
were ringed with deep shadow; my cut-off T-shirt was the
gray texture of clothes washed hundreds of times.
I called at the stables and watched my courier race away
with San’s letter. Enormous plane trees grew in the
wrecked paddock outside. I walked past the one that I had
sheltered underneath, two hundred years ago. Suddenly I
saw a vivid image of my tattered self back then, leaning
against the tree trunk. If I had known that any Challenger
was welcome to walk into the Castle at any time, I would not
have spent three days sitting under this very tree,
wondering how to present myself. On our way from Hacilith,
highwaymen had murdered my girlfriend and stolen the
money I’d gained by blackmailing the city’s governor. I
owned nothing but my crossbow and a switchblade.
On the third day under the plane tree I felt a presence
watching me—a man, all his colors subdued and outline
unfocused as if seen through gauze. I felt a chill and didn’t
dare move. I stared at him and he looked back, so strange,
full of confidence and concerns larger and more frightening
than I could comprehend. An adult world, seen by a young
man terrified for an instant by the inkling that he will join it
and have heavy responsibilities every day.
I didn’t know in eighteen-eighteen that I was looking
through thinned layers of time, at myself. But now I realized
that I was the ghost that my younger self saw. I wanted to tell
him that everything would work out fine, that he would win
his Challenge and two hundred years later he would still be
twenty-three. I couldn’t speak to him, but I smiled—and I
remember receiving that warm compassion, because when
I sat with my back against the plane tree’s bark, I wondered
at the manifestation but felt heartened and at ease.
Two centuries ago, what happened next was that at
nightfall some immortals returned from the Front. I rushed to
hold the reins of a horse carrying a well-built man with stripy
gray and white hair, and the Castle’s sunburst on a big
round shield. His horse’s withers were smeared with yellow
blood.
I don’t know why I expected Eszai to look different. A
sparkle of the Circle about him was simply my excited
imagination. He said, “You’re no groom.”
“I want to be Eszai.”
He must have wondered at what in the Empire I could
possibly excel. “Then come in, waif.” He kicked the horse’s
ribs and it cantered forward. Its hooves boomed over the
wooden bridge and echoed between the weighty towers of
the massive barbican.
I picked up some more steak sandwiches; I expend so
much energy flying that I have to eat vast amounts. I walked
from the kitchens through the ground-floor corridor of the
Mare’s Run, the inner west wing, past Hayl’s apartments. I
passed the Southwest Tower, where Tawny’s well-lit room
was located, full of indiscriminately chosen prizes: Insect
legs, bear pelts and jousters’ helmets. Then I climbed the
three hundred and thirty steps of my tower, leaning on the
wall all the way up, past the myrtle-green storeroom and the
bathroom on its first floor that smelled as musty as hessian.
I could lie on the bed for a while and fantasize about Tern—
although I am more in a mood for a Rhydanne. Or I could,
and I know I will, be distracted by the obvious alternative.
Wind-thrown rain began to scour the shutters. Tern had
not been in for months; my room was dark and bundles of
letters overflowed the shelves, piled everywhere. My
valuable pendulum clock had stopped; I wound and set it to
the right time and date. Masquerade masks hung around
the mirror, beside a hookah as tall as I am, its fuzzy orange
tube coiled around its brass pipe like a python. I spun the
oval mirror around on its stand, face to the wall.
Faded posters taped to the round ceiling advertised
music festivals, marathons, and Challenges when I wiped
the floor with the mortals who wanted to contest me. I’m
usually Challenged in winter when conditions for flying are
at their worst, and I set the same test that won me my
immortality—a race from the Emperor’s Throne Room to
the throne room of Rachiswater and back.
There was a vase of dried flowers, the only plants that
withstand Tern’s immortal forgetfulness. There were a few
neglected old projects: my guitar, tennis rackets and a
crossbow, all equally broken. There was my bike on which I
lavish much attention, wrapped in its red rope that I use to
lower it out of the window. Hanging on the wall above it was
a series of obsessively concentrated little pen-and-ink
sketches by Frost of jousting tournaments. The mantelpiece
was cluttered with some wax seals in their skippet boxes; a
souvenir from Hacilith—a spider’s web preserved between
two sheets of glass; and a lump of solidified Insect paper
with a coin pressed into it. By the window stood “Butterfly”
my Insect trophy wearing a sailor costume, and my suit of
armor stuck fast to the wall with decades of rust. An array of
kettles, toast forks and dirty plates filled the hearth. On the
dusty table beside my still’s retorts and condenser was a
note covered in Tern’s dying-spider handwriting. I screwed
it up and threw it in the cold fireplace. Looks as if the
temptation of Tornado was more than the pretty lady could
stand, I thought, fishing in my satchel for my syringe.
Once I start to feel the need I can go downhill very
rapidly, and the room seemed suddenly very warm. I have
to shoot some, I found myself thinking. No, I don’t need it.
Oh, yes, I bloody do; I don’t want to be sick. Maybe when
Tern sees how badly her adultery affects me she’ll come
back. The trouble is that we spend so long apart that when
we do meet we are still self-sufficient, which is a barrier to
becoming really close.
I sat down at my desk, reached behind me to pull down
one wing, unfolded it in front and held it between my knees.
I preened fingers through feathers like a harp, hearing them
rasp, and felt the thin skin ridged over my quills. Here are
veins I haven’t used and they looked tempting. But if I made
a slip and something went wrong, or if I damaged it and
was paralyzed, that would be the end of me. I have only shot
up in a wing once before when I was desperate. This was
sacred. Sighing but pleased at some show of willpower at
least, I untied the pendant thong from around my neck,
looped it over my right arm and licked the ends up between
my teeth. I flexed my fingers, impatiently tried to raise a
vein. Don’t poison yourself, Jant. Meditate your way to
Epsilon. Yeah, right. Why did Tarragon think I wanted to go
to Epsilon? The Shift was an unwanted side effect when I
only needed the drug to make me forget my pain. Why walk
through worlds if you’re immigrant in each?
I sat with the needle poised, feeling a last blast of guilty
defiance, then pushed it in neatly. In the space of a
heartbeat it hit like a coach-and-four. Feeling like a god, if a
rather incapable one, I located the chaise longue under my
maps and lay down. This was like flying into a wall.
My thoughts played out in the air above me, but they were
rudely curtailed by the door unlatching. A graceful and chic
figure entered, and seemed to flow over to me. Tern looked
at me closely. Her body was a fair; there were dances
there. Her spine a snake, voice like icing on cakes—
“Oh, typical,” she said crossly. She touched up her
lipstick in a mirror above my head.
“Where have you been?” I asked suspiciously.
Tern glanced down and must have realized from my
expression that subterfuge was pointless. “At Tawny’s
apartment…I had a good time.”
“What, all of it?”
“Tornado single-handedly held Gio off from attacking our
home. He said if Gio came nearer I should run to the
Throne Room. I have been encouraging him…Is it okay for
you to enjoy yourself but not me? I’ve heard that Tris is a
perfect land. You sailed off and left me here.” Tern slipped
out of her dress and searched around for her silk dressing
gown, clad only in a white bra and underskirt. I was too
stoned to be angry. I found it hard to care about anything,
not even if the strongest man in the world came in and bent
her over in front of me. I gave her my orphan look: please
take me home and put me in your bed.
“Wipe that off,” she said. “Are you going to lie there all
night with your hand dangling? We had a pact, Jant. You’re
not being sophisticated, just sedated.”
Yes, we had a pact, which we began after the span of a
mortal lifetime had lapsed. We promised that it is
acceptable to have affairs because we will still love each
other the most, and we will always return to each other.
Actually, sleeping around should be refreshing because we
have to spend the rest of eternity together without
becoming bored.
I propped myself up on the velvet cushions. “Tern, why
Tornado? Amre, he’s stupid; demre, he can’t converse
worth shit; shanre, he’s bald; larore, he’s ugly; keem he’s
poor! Is that the kind of man you really like, so you don’t
love me anymore? Was your pride among the possessions
you lost in the fire? Keemam, is he better in bed than me
or, keemdem, are you so worried that I might be beaten in
a Challenge that you’re prepared to shag the whole
Circle?”
Tern said, “Why did you steal my money? Can I have it
back, please, or have you mainlined it all?”
I ignored this transparent attempt to change the subject. I
kept pleading: “Remember when I proposed, how I brought
you the filigree spider? We could go down to the Hall and
dance without music, the way we did back in ’ninety-five.
Come on! Wear your brooch—it can be our seventh
honeymoon.”
“Ten minutes and you’ll simply collapse.”
“Come to bed then.”
“That’s not the point! Shira, you’re never here yourself!”
“I’m the Messenger! The point of my existence is to
bugger off and bring back news! It’s my job!”
Tern drew the curtain across our room. I lay and watched
the details of its velvet folds; they looked like letters of the
alphabet.
She wiped her eyes and said quietly, “All your holidays
are spent in Scree. Fighting Insects nearly burned you out
—so off you go to the mountains. Do you have any women
there? Even when you’re here, you’re unconscious! I knew
your cycle would come around again. You can’t stay off cat
—you can’t stand to be sober for more than five years.
You’re not thinking about us; you are thinking about that
fucking drug.”
Tern knew how to hurt me. She had observed it well over
the last century and her infidelity had pushed me into
addiction before. If she was not adulterous I would not be a
junkie. “I took cat because I’m scared of the ships,” I said.
“Everybody knows that but Ata still forced me to sail.
Besides, I would rather not use cat at all than bother you
with it. It’s under control.”
“That’s not always apparent.”
Well, it wasn’t always true.
Tern kept going. “Oh, for god’s sake! If I upset you, you
suddenly start to notice—but you don’t think how your
actions affect anyone else! I should never have married a
Rhydanne.”
“Where did that come from?” I blinked.
“I don’t mean your appearance! Some things you just
can’t grasp, no matter how hard you try. It doesn’t occur to
you to think of anybody else, like you’re still living alone in a
hovel in the mountains. When you’re away on errands do
you ever think of me?”
“Yes. Yes, all the time! That whole Rhydanne thing is just
bullshit. Don’t lay it on me as well now.”
“The pact—”