
“I don’t want you to. Goodnight.”
“But—” She had already brushed past him and gone out into
the waiting room. Head reeling, James watched Zoey wrap a
blanket around her and Connor offered an arm for support. With
Birkie leading the way, the four of them headed out the door,
and he followed.
“You coming, James?” Connor called over his shoulder.
“We’re just going to drop these gals off and then head home.”
No. No thanks. He used mind speech because a hand seemed
to have tightened around his throat. Jillian was alive. She was
all right. And she was dismissing him.
The truck headed south on the main street. James turned and
walked north. He could feel the wolf stirring within. The further
he walked, the more restless, almost anxious the wolf became.
Stop it, you dumb animal. She doesn’t want us. Get the picture? The
wolf settled reluctantly, and James could almost swear he heard
it whimper. Hell, he felt like whimpering too. This is wrong, this is
all wrong. Shit!
He reached the edge of town and kept walking until the paved
road gave way to gravel. The thumbnail moon was out, a silver
scythe in a field of stars. Farms became forest, and soon James
left the roadway and entered the trees. He paused beneath a
giant spruce, breathing in the rich scents of the woods at night.
And called the Change to take him.
He had almost forgotten what it was like to Change on
purpose, to be both wolf and man, aware and in control, to lope
through the forest in his lupine form, liberated, exhilarated. He
nosed along a game trail, picked up the spoor of deer and gave
chase until he had brought down an old doe. He feasted on the
hot, fresh meat, replenished his starved cells, fueled his rapid
metabolism. Drank deep from a cold mountain-fed stream.
The sheer freedom should have brought him joy, but James’s
heart was a lead weight in his chest. He thought about heading
back to Connor’s farm. Instead, he made his way to Elk Point.
On a great slab of stone overlooking the river valley, he laid his
head on his paws with a very human sigh. He had no idea how
to get Jillian to listen to him. Nor did he have any idea what he
wanted to say to her if he could. All he could think was that it
was over between them, that he had ended the relationship
almost before it had begun. He should be glad for that,
shouldn’t he? She would be much better off without him, safer. I
didn’t want to endanger her, didn’t want her to become a target by
hanging around with a Changeling. Looks like I got my goddamn
wish.
But how would he watch over her, protect her, when she
didn’t even want him around? And how would he be able to see
her and not want her?
The moon dipped lower in the sky. The white wolf pointed his
long muzzle toward it and howled, a long mournful drawn-out
note that carried across the entire valley, echoing off the cliffs
across the river. His battered heart found expression but not
solace in the song, and he howled and howled again until all the
real wolves in the area were compelled to join him.
Dawn gilded the eastern horizon when James finally walked
up the long lane of the Macleod farm, his boots crunching in the
gravel. He still didn’t trust his wolfen self to stay away from
Jillian so he’d returned to human form when he’d left Elk Point.
He’d hoped that the lengthy walk on two legs would help him
think things through, but he had only come to the same
conclusion as before. He had completely ruined things with
Jillian and wished he hadn’t. Wished there had been some other
way . . .
Heavy-hearted, he walked past the trees in front of Connor’s
house. Past the barns and the sheds and the corrals to the
house, his house now, hidden in a thick stand of mixed poplar
and spruce on the south side of the property. James closed the
door behind him, still very much aware of the action. He
wondered if someday he’d walk in and shut the door without
even thinking about it. Would he ever be that comfortable in his
human skin again?
It was cool but not cold in the house—it was June after all—
but he built a fire anyway. Just for the ambience he supposed.
There’s a real human attribute. One point for me. In truth, he
couldn’t care less about how human he was, just as long as the
damn wolf wasn’t in control. That was all that really mattered,
wasn’t it? James sat heavily on the couch and stared at the fire
for a long time, willing himself not to fall asleep. The very last
thing he wanted to do was dream of Jillian again.
When the fire finally burned down to ashes and went out,
James dreamed not of Jillian, but of Evelyn.
He was on his hands and knees weeding Connor’s sprawling
front garden. And suddenly she was next to him, planting tiny
new bulbs among the tall purple irises and sprays of golden
daylilies. In the arbitrary reality of dreams, it seemed completely
normal for her to be there. Of course she was there. Where else
would Evelyn be?
“What are you doing?” she asked him.
“Gardening.”
“No, silly. What are you doing about Jillian?”
“Nothing. I ended it.”
“Did she want to end it?”
“She does now.”
“But she didn’t before?”
“I never asked her.”
“That’s not very fair, James,” she chided gently. “You haven’t
even given her a chance.”
“I can’t give her a chance. It’s too dangerous.”
“Dangerous for who, James?”
“Something could happen to her. Someone might find out
what I am and then she’d be a target.”
“You don’t want what happened to me to happen to her.”
“Not to her, not to anyone. I can’t do that to someone again,
Evie. Not again.”
“You’ve always had that overactive sense of responsibility.
Remember how I used to tease you about that?” She planted
the last bulb and laid her hand over his. “What happened to me
wasn’t your fault, James. It was never your fault.”
“I should have protected you. I should have been stronger, I
should never—”
“Never have fallen in love with me? Never have tried to make
a life with me?”
His heart twisted painfully within him. “At least you’d still be
alive.”
“Maybe. And maybe not. A million things could happen to any
one of us on any given day. If I had been hit by a bus or struck
by lightning, would you shoulder the responsibility for that
too?”
He didn’t know how to answer.
“Are you sorry you loved me?”
“What? God, no. I . . . Evelyn, you were the most wonderful
thing that ever happened to me.”
“But when I died, it was the worst thing that ever happened to
you. Maybe you would have been better off never knowing me.”
“No.” His voice was firm with conviction. “No, I can’t be sorry
for that, I can’t wish that. We didn’t have very long together, but
every moment meant something to me.”
She smiled at him then, that beautiful beaming smile of hers
that seemed lit from within. “Well, silly, I’m not sorry for loving
you, either. Think about that. And think about Jillian again. I like
her. And you like her too.”
“Jesus, Evelyn.”
She laughed at his discomfort. “If you love Jillian, it doesn’t
take anything away from me, you know. I wish you’d give her a
chance, give yourself a chance.”
He shook his head. “I won’t put her in harm’s way like that.”
“You keep saying that. You think that someone might hurt her
because of what you are.”
He nodded, then frowned when she shook her head.
“You haven’t considered that Jillian spends a lot of time with
Changelings already. She works for Connor, lives in his clinic,
represents him every time she goes on a farm call, is associated
with him by the entire community,” Evelyn explained carefully
as if to a child. “Not only that, she sat with Culley and Devlin at
the Jersey Pub one night, and went shopping with Kenzie only
last week. She eats at the Finer Diner regularly, and Bill and
Jessie invited her to their home. It seems to me that whether
you’re in her life or not, James, she’s already surrounded by
Changelings.”
It had never even crossed his mind. How could he not have
noticed, how could he have been so stupid? Someone could be
out there, watching Jillian, homing in on her. Suddenly a new
thought occurred to him, a way to head off the danger. “Evelyn,
tell me who it was. Tell me who—” Shot you. Murdered you. He
couldn’t make himself say it aloud.
“I don’t know everything, James. Only the things that are
important.”
“This is important.” He hadn’t seen the intruders. Didn’t know
if there were a dozen or only one. He couldn’t even guess at a
suspect. Neither could anyone else. The fire effectively
destroyed any evidence the police might have used, and heavy
rain washed away any trail so that even a Changeling could not
follow. But what about Evelyn—had she seen, had she known?
“This is goddamn important.”
“Not as much as you think, hon. Vengeance won’t bring you
peace.”
“I was thinking more of a preemptive strike. That’ll bring me
plenty of peace.”
She shook her head. “Try mercy instead.”
Mercy. James was appalled by the notion. How could she say
such a—
She pointed to the ground. “Do you know what I’ve planted
here?”
“Evelyn, please.” He didn’t want to talk about gardening, but
her expression was serious. Reluctantly, he recalled the tiny
bulbs she’d been working with. “Um, crocuses?”
“Lily of the valley. Lots and lots of it. Tell me what you think of
that.”
For her sake, he tried. “I guess those will look nice here, but
it’s already mid-summer. It’ll take a long time before these little
bulbs really take hold, maybe another year before there are any
blossoms.” James considered. “Connor will like it, though. Lord
knows he needs flowers that come up by themselves. I just
don’t understand how he can be so great with animals and so
terrible with plants. Zoey, now, there’s hope for her but she’s
busy—”
“It’s not for Connor and Zoey, hon. I planted these especially
for you. Don’t you know what it means? You used to know a lot
about flowers and their language. You said your grandmother
taught you.”
“She did.” In fact, he had used that long-ago knowledge to
compose the bouquet for Jillian. He searched his mind and
came up blank. “I can’t seem to remember this one.”
“Lily of the valley means the “return of happiness.” That’s
why I picked it for you, James. It’s time. Your time.”
“Evelyn, I—”
He awakened then, to find the morning sun gilding the stones
on the cold fireplace and his face wet. God. Dear God. He felt offbalance,
both comforted and shaken. Part of him wanted to
linger in the glow of the dream, and the other part wanted to get
to work on something, anything, that would ground him.
Eventually the desire for solid reality won out, and James forced
himself to get up and get moving.
Still, the effects of the dream lingered. Frequently throughout
the day, he found himself having to run a sleeve over his eyes. It
had been so good, so damn good to see Evelyn, to see her
whole and smiling. To see her long dark hair glinting in the
sunshine, see her in her favorite gardening clothes—faded
jeans and one of his shirts with the sleeves rolled up a half
dozen times. A smudge of dirt on her face and laughter in her
dark eyes. Just hearing her voice had eased something inside
him.
Later, when the initial glow had worn off, he remembered that
she’d spoken about Jillian and a terrible suspicion formed.
Please don’t let my wolf have anything to do with this. That’s all he
needed was to have his furry alter ego try to further its goals by
invading his dreams, by planting images of the one person he
was most likely to listen to. It couldn’t do that, could it? What if
the comforting dream, in which Evelyn was so vital and alive,
was tainted? Fixed? Nothing more than lupine propaganda?
Christ, I’m getting paranoid. He was the wolf and the wolf was
him. Still, his animal side had acted on its own more than once,
and there was no denying it was totally devoted to Jillian.
Maybe his wolfen self was really his own subconscious—and
the dream just a product of his own desires.
And maybe he was losing his goddamn mind . . .
Luckily there was no lack of farmwork to bury himself in, no
shortage of tasks big and small to occupy his time and his
thoughts. He spent most of the day plowing under the entire
section of old alfalfa to enrich the soil, and had passed
Connor’s house only briefly. Hadn’t noticed anything different.
But late in the afternoon, after he brought grain to the horses in
the front paddock, he caught a glimpse of something white in the
gardens flanking Connor’s steps. Mounds of white, low to the
ground, almost like snow heaped amongst the sword-like iris
leaves and the clusters of yellow daylilies. What the hell?
Furious that his black-thumbed brother had carelessly dumped
something on the garden, James stalked over to see—and the
empty feed buckets dropped from his hands.
Lily of the valley was everywhere. Barely eight inches tall, the
tiny white bells on delicate stems massed above broad emerald
leaves, crowding between the irises and the daylilies, spilling
out of the garden in such abundance that the little plants were
even coming up through the cracks in the walkway, pushing
through the gravel driveway, marching across the lawn. Lily of
the valley was a spring flower and preferred shade—yet the
miniature plants sat in the hot June sun looking fresh and dewy,
as out of place as roses in a desert.
Stunned, James sank to his knees between the forgotten
buckets. He had worked the soil between the neglected daylilies
and irises by hand, knew for a fact, knew, there were no other
bulbs of any kind in the garden. He had weeded only two days
ago. The rich dark earth had been bare when he was done.
There had been nothing there, nothing at all.
Evelyn.
He remained motionless for a long time, not daring to move,
hardly daring to breathe, in case the beautiful apparition
vanished. It wasn’t until a breeze picked up and wafted among
the diminuitive blossoms, making them bob and sway, that
James ventured to touch one. He could feel the tiny stalk with
its bell-like blooms, cool and fresh. Real. Suddenly he leaned
into the flowers, gathering a great armful of them. Clutching
them to his chest, he bent his head and inhaled great lungfuls of
the scent again and again. He crushed handfuls of the delicate
bells to his face where their essence mingled with tears. The
delicate sweet scent seemed to wrap itself around his aching
heart like a healing balm, bringing a powerful peace.
James sat amid the blossoms for a long, long time. Calm.
Clearheaded. And thankful beyond all words. Thankful for the
affirmation of his dream, grateful to have seen Evelyn whole and
happy. Thankful to know that his rebellious wolfen side could
not possibly have conjured this.
A return to happiness. Evelyn said she had chosen these
flowers to convey that message to him. As he contemplated
that, a number of ideas suddenly fell together in ordered
sequence like tumblers in a lock about to open. James thought
of the wolf, his wolf, and its efforts to embrace survival whether
he wanted to live or not. Remembered Birkie’s words, that
survival meant going on with life in all ways. Recalled Connor’s
certainty that it was too late to turn back, to turn away from
being human. James had been so angry, so frustrated with all of
them. So resistant to everyone and everything.
Worst of all, he had resisted the one person, right in front of
him, who had been courageous enough to move forward with
her life and make something of it after a terrible and traumatic
ordeal. Jillian was not just surviving, but thriving. How could he
do less? A return to happiness. James knew suddenly, clearly,
that it was time for him to fully return to life and embrace all that
it meant.
He had to find Jillian, had to find a way to undo the damage
he’d done.
“The doctor said four weeks of rest. You’ve barely had one.”
“I can’t see myself missing four weeks of work. That’s too
much.”
“That’s the verdict, hon. You heard it yourself after the CAT
scan.” Birkie put a fragrant cup of herbal tea on the bedside
table. “Nothing but a lot of rest is going to improve that noggin
of yours. And even when you start to get better, any
overexertion is going to bring the symptoms back full force.”
Jillian sighed.“I know the drill. I’ve had a concussion before, a
few years ago. From the attack.”
“And you also know that having a concussion before is
exactly why you can’t expect to bounce back in a couple of
days from this one.”
“It’s just so darn hard to do nothing. Lying here, lying still, my
mind works just fine. I feel fine and think I should get up and do
something.”
“You are doing something—you’re whining.” Birkie grinned.
“First time in over a week. That tells me you’re starting to heal.
But you were paper-white and sweating after the ride over here
yesterday. I’m still not convinced you should have left my place
just yet.”
Jillian had had her own doubts about her decision. She’d
traveled by ambulance to the city for the CAT scan, sleeping
through most of the ride there and back. A little dizzy, a little
headache, but not too bad. After that, she’d expected riding
over to the clinic in Birkie’s truck would be a snap, but she
hadn’t taken into account the fact that she would be sitting up.
The dizziness and nausea were so intense, she’d had to close
her eyes most of the way. And once at the clinic, she’d been
forced to head straight to her bed to sleep it off. “You’ve been
wonderful to me, but I really wanted to be here. It’s home now.”
“Well, I understand that a person needs to be in their own
familiar surroundings with their own stuff. And at least I can
look in on you while I’m here during the day. I admit I worry
about you at night, though.”
“All I’m going to do is snore, I promise. You won’t be missing
anything but having to wait on me.”
“Ha. There was a real burden. You didn’t need any watching
after that first night, and you slept most of the whole first week.
It’s not like you demanded heated towels and chocolates on
your pillow.”
“Chocolates on my pillow was an option? I wish I’d known.”
“Drink your tea, hon, and we’ll see about the chocolate. By
the way, I’ve been putting your mail on the table. You have quite
a stack built up.”
“Bless you and thank you. I’d forgotten all about it. Although I
imagine it’s mostly bills.” Jillian sat up carefully. Sipped at the
tea. “You know what really bothers me? I still can’t figure out
how I managed to get a stupid concussion. Believe me, the air
bag went off. I didn’t hit anything.”
“Maybe not, but the air bag certainly hit you. You know, I’ll bet
you drive with your hands high on the wheel, don’t you?”
“What?”
“Say, about two and ten o’clock. Add to that the fact that
you’re on the short side like me. Bang, the air bag goes off and
the impact probably drove your wrist right to your head. Broke
the wrist, nearly cracked the skull.”
“Have you been watching reruns of CSI again?”
“You bet. But the Millers said so too. And we found out later
that there was a recall notice for that particular year and model
of truck because the air bag was discovered to be too powerful.
Let me tell you, Connor had that truck over to the dealership the
next day to have that bag ripped out and replaced. He feels
terrible that this happened to you.”
“I’m sure being hit by the air bag was better than hitting the
tree. I should feel bad about Connor’s truck. I must have banged
it up pretty good.”
“James says you banged yourself up pretty good on the
undercarriage. Lowen says that could account for the
concussion as well, plus you’ve got nine stitches in three
places to show for it.”
“Nine? Huh, I thought I counted seven.” She fingered gingerly
through her hair.
“You can count again this afternoon when Bev comes by to
take them out.”
Jillian closed her eyes and eased back down on the bed. The
urge to get up and do something had abruptly passed. Not only
was all her energy gone, but she couldn’t even remember what
it was like to have any. Her collarbone was throbbing again too,
but she reminded herself to be thankful it was just bruised and
not broken. Although it was tough to remember that when pain
woke her in the night. “I feel really bad that Connor’s going to
be shorthanded.”
“You’re the one that’s shorthanded. That cast still itching?”
Jillian surveyed her wrist and its fluorescent-pink casing.
“Nope, not today. At least not yet.”
“Good. Don’t worry about Connor, he’ll be just fine. He
managed for several years before you showed up. Ran full tilt,
but managed. Besides, it won’t hurt for him to gain a renewed
appreciation for you. We’re finished with calving season until
January rolls around, so that takes a lot of the pressure off. And
James has been riding along to assist with big projects like
herd checks and such. Speaking of James, he asked about you
again this morning. He still wants to see you.”
Jillian knew he had phoned Birkie’s house at least once a
day, sometimes twice. What was it going to take for him to get
the message? And how long could she hold out? She opened
her eyes and looked at her friend. “I don’t want to see him,
Birkie. I just can’t. It’s hard enough to be firm about this, you
don’t know how hard it is.”
“I think I have a pretty good idea, hon.” She sat on the edge of
the bed and seemed to consider something. “You know, I
haven’t said anything to you before, but perhaps I should have.
James cares about you a lot, much more than you know. Much
more than he knows, I suspect.”
Jillian automatically shook her head and was instantly sorry.
She froze in place until the wave of nausea subsided and the
pounding in her skull faded. “I gotta quit doing that,” she
squeaked.
“Here, let me help you with the tea. It’ll help settle things.”
The tea soothed her stomach immediately, which didn’t
surprise her. Birkie’s concoctions were always effective,
although Jillian had given up asking what was in them. The
older woman rattled off Latin plant names as easily as if they
were ordinary baking ingredients.
“James will be back you know, hon. He’s not a man to give up
once he knows what he wants.”
“And you think he wants me.” She didn’t dare entertain the
notion that it might be true. She had closed that particular door,
locked it and piled mental furniture against it. Didn’t want to
open it again. “Dammit, he dumped me, Birkie, dumped me and
didn’t even tell me why. It hurt a helluva lot. It still hurts. Why
would I want to give him the chance to do that again?”
“Men are funny creatures. They do the most ridiculous things
sometimes for the most noble of reasons. He might have been
trying to let you go because he believed it would be better for
you, even though he wanted you very much. Being protective.”
Jillian stared. “You’ve got to be kidding. Protective? What is
this, the Middle Ages? No wonder he sent such a strange bunch
of flowers to do his talking for him.” Her voice rose enough to
send nail-like spikes of pain through her head, but the surge of
anger wouldn’t let her stop. “And protect me from what? I
should have been protected from him. Why didn’t he tell me to
my face that he didn’t want a relationship? And he sure could
have mentioned it before I slept with him.” She swore then, both
from fury and pain. “If James really had some stupid archaic
notion of protecting me, he could have brought up his concerns
and discussed them with me so I could make my own damn
decision.” Jillian sank back on the bed, utterly spent and unable
to tell which hurt more, her heart or her head. Her stomach
roiled treacherously.
“Easy there, hon, it’s all true. Every word of it. Now don’t you
think you’d feel better if you told him exactly what you just told
me?”
Yeah. Yeah, she probably would. She’d tried to be firm and
reasonable at the doctors’ office. Even with her heart in tatters,
she’d tried to walk away—okay, more like limp away—with
some dignity. It was obvious now that it wasn’t going to be
enough. James refused to stay away. Still, she was far from
ready for a confrontation. “Can’t it wait until I’m vertical? I might
want to punch him out and I just can’t manage a proper Tae
Kwon Do position lying down.”
“You just let me know when you’re ready. I’ll try to hold him
off until then, but I confess it hasn’t been easy for me to shoo
him away. He’s hurting too.”
“He’s hurting? What did I ever do to him?” Jillian narrowed
her eyes at her friend. “What is it you know that I don’t? Has he
been talking to you?”
“Not a single blessed word, hon. Haven’t even seen his
handsome face except the night of the accident. However, what
I know is that James is a complicated man. There’s a tender
heart behind the thorny exterior. Things haven’t been easy for
him since his wife died.”
Died? Jillian was silent for a long moment. “You said he had
been married but I just assumed he was divorced. She died—
that’s so awful. Why didn’t you tell me that before?”
“I guess because it was awful. Maybe I hoped it would come
up when you and James were talking, that maybe he would say
something and I wouldn’t have to. Foolish of me, I know. But
Evelyn was my niece, you see, and well, I guess I prefer to
remember the happier things.”
“Oh Birkie, I’m so sorry.”
The older woman leaned over and squeezed Jillian’s hand.
“Thanks for that. Actually, I think you would have liked Evelyn.
You remind me of her in some ways. It happened several years
ago now, and most of us have made peace with it as best we
could. Except James, that is. He still blames himself for it.”
“Why? How . . . how did she die?”
“Murdered. Shot by an intruder in her own house. She was
pregnant.”
Jillian swallowed hard. There were no words for such an
enormous tragedy, the terrible waste of a life, of two lives. And
what had the loss done to James?
Birkie continued as if she had heard Jillian’s thoughts.
“James feels it’s his fault for not being there. He was out
moving cattle and arrived home to find her.”
My God. “But how could he think it’s his fault? He couldn’t
have known, couldn’t have anticipated. Nobody expects
something like that to happen, especially not in their own home.
Did they . . . did they catch the murderer?”
“No.” The older woman shook her head. “James was shot
too, when he entered the house. Didn’t see who it was. Whoever
did it walked away. And I think that made it even worse, for all of
us.”
Jillian understood that all too well. The men who’d attacked
her had never been found either. It had taken a lot of
counseling, a lot of hard work, to create some kind of closure
when closure could not naturally be found. Eventually she had
discovered a measure of peace within herself, but there would
always be moments that had to be managed, like that flashback
on the trail below Elk Point. She found herself wondering what it
was like to be James. Were there moments that still haunted
him?
Chapter Twenty-six
Douglas didn’t know what to make of his father’s sudden
improvement, but he was grateful for it. The morning after the
episode with the lady vet, Roderick Harrison had awakened in
his right mind—and stayed there. He hadn’t had an episode
since. No dementia, no loss of memory, no cognitive lapses.
Nothing. The doctors were extremely impressed, although
baffled. Some chalked it up to the new medication. The
Alzheimer’s seemed to be in some kind of remission, so much
so that other doctors questioned the original diagnosis. No one
looking at the old man would guess that the mere month before
he had mistaken his only son for a hired hand.
Roderick slid easily back into the routine of overseeing the
ranch. He spent increasing amounts of time with old Varley
Smith, the ranch manager, which wasn’t surprising—they’d
been friends for as long as Douglas could remember. His father
even went to a cattle auction, winning a good-looking group of
replacement heifers. He celebrated by joining Varley and a few
of the hands at the Shamrock Bar, a place he hadn’t gone into in
years. Not since the Alzheimer’s had begun to take hold. “I’ll
look out for him,” Varley had whispered to Douglas before they
drove off. And he had, as Douglas knew he would. They’d
returned after midnight with Roderick only pleasantly drunk.
The next day, he was in a sterling mood, eating a full breakfast
with gusto and hurrying out to take delivery of the heifers he’d
bought.
Normal. Ordinary. Everything just as it had always been
before Roderick’s mind had begun to play tricks on him. The full
moon came and went, and the wild episodes that so often
accompanied it failed to materialize. Roderick remained himself.
Douglas didn’t know how long this would last, but he was
grateful for the respite. Especially since the mental frenzy that
once so frequently gripped his father seemed to have migrated
into his own brain. Even Jack Daniels hadn’t been able to keep
it at bay. White wolves chased Douglas in his dreams, stalked
him from behind hay bales and outbuildings during the day.
He’d nearly screamed aloud yesterday afternoon when he
caught a glimpse of something white moving behind the house.
Turned out to be just sheets on the clothesline, put there by the
housekeeper. Douglas had been so unnerved, he’d spent the
rest of the day drinking himself into a stupor in his room. Slept
like the dead.
There was sunlight streaming in his window when he finally
woke, and the clock on the nightstand said 8:39. His father
would have something to say about that, no doubt. Roderick
would have been up, dressed, had his coffee and checked the
livestock by six. Still, Douglas didn’t particularly care. His brain
felt somewhat fuzzy but he wasn’t on edge. Was relaxed for the
first time in days. He drank a tumbler of Jack Daniels before he
got out of bed to make sure he stayed in that mellow frame of
mind. By the time he had a shower and dressed, he felt so
bombproof that if a dozen wolves suddenly parachuted into the
front yard, he doubted he’d be able to raise an eyebrow. He
negotiated the route to the kitchen, just as Varley burst in the
back door.
“Rod’s gone.”
“What?” No, no, he was feeling too good for this. Much too
good. “Gone where?”
“I don’t know. He took my pickup.”
“Well, maybe he just felt like going for a ride. He was okay this
morning, right?” He willed Varley to say yes.
“Well, yeah.” Varley seemed to relax a little. “Yeah, he was just
fine when I saw him earlier. Sorry to panic, Dougie. I guess I’m
not used to him driving, not since we had to take the keys away
from him last year. He’s probably just headed into town.”
It made sense. His father used to like to drive into Spirit River
a couple times a week just to get the mail if nothing else.
“Maybe you could take my vehicle and check. If I go, he’ll just
think I’m nursemaiding him and get all pissy. I really hate to
spoil it if he’s enjoying himself.” Douglas was pleased with that
last little brainwave. In reality, he didn’t feel up to facing the
bright sunlight out there, never mind his father.
“Good point, good point. I’ll see if I can catch up to him,
maybe talk him into going to the Diamond for coffee and pie. We
used to go there a lot, give the waitresses a hard time.” Varley
winked. “Don’t worry, Dougie, I’ll find him and ride herd on him
without him knowing it. Let you know how it goes.”
Douglas was relieved when the ranch manager left, more
relieved when he squinted through the window and saw his
own pickup heading down the lane to the highway. He
wondered if he should have another drink or just go back to
bed. Maybe both. With his father in Spirit River, and Varley
looking after him, Douglas could count on having the rest of the
day to relax. He felt his mood lift at the prospect, and suddenly
he felt like making some eggs, no, an omelet. A Spanish omelet,
by God, with a steak on the side. He whistled as he searched
the fridge for ingredients.
Roderick Harrison had often used his pickup truck as a blind.
If a hunter was patient enough, waited long enough, his quarry
would come to regard the vehicle as part of the landscape and
ignore it. He’d shot many a coyote, sometimes a deer, from the
open window while parked downwind near the edge of the
timber that covered the northern section of his ranch. The
method would earn him a hefty fine anywhere else, but it was
perfectly legal on his own land.
The blind principle worked equally well when he wasn’t
hunting, just wanting to observe. It was a good way to watch
testy mother cows with new calves, or get a count of the elk
herd that sometimes wandered into the south quarter to steal
hay.
He wasn’t observing cattle or elk this time. Roderick had
angled Varley’s truck to give himself a clear view of his target,
just a few hundred yards away. In addition, he’d parked the
pickup between two rusted-out trucks in the shade of an
abandoned building, a near-perfect location for
reconnaissance. He had a sleeping bag with him and enough
food for two days, but he wasn’t going to need it. Within the first
couple of hours, Roderick was able to confirm what he had
suspected since Dr. Descharme’s visit to his ranch.
There was a werewolf at the North Star Animal Hospital.
“The auras give them away every damn time,” he murmured
as he watched a tall dark-haired man leave the building again.
There were other people in the parking lot, but their auras were
thin and pale, almost watery by comparison. Light yellow
mostly, misty white or green. One old farmer would probably
have been horrified to learn his aura was pastel pink. But the tall
man’s aura was that vivid blue found at the heart of a lightning
bolt. It radiated from him, pulsed with energy like a live thing. Dr.
Connor Macleod was definitely a werewolf. But to Roderick’s
amazement, the veterinarian wasn’t the only one. By the end of
the day, five more werewolves had come and gone, two females
and three males.
The old man had seen enough. He was just reaching for the
ignition key when another arrival caught his eye. A big man, tall
like the vet, but more powerfully built. And blond. Roderick
stared, focusing and refocusing the lenses of his binoculars,
his bowels turning to ice water. “It can’t be. Jesus God, it just
can’t be.”
James Macleod had come back from the dead.
The lab tests said wolf.
Jillian stared at the papers in her hand and let the rest of the
mail slide to the floor. The DNA results on the white hair
samples revealed pure, unadulterated wolf. Jillian’s theories of a
wolf-dog hybrid vanished like a soap bubble, and she was left
with the uncomfortable knowledge that a genuine Canis Lupus
had somehow found its way into her apartment.
Maybe she shouldn’t have been so insistent about leaving
Birkie’s house.
She reread the letter that Ian Craddock had enclosed with the
results. He complimented her on the quality of samples she had
sent for testing. Yet, although the DNA was unquestionably one
hundred percent wolf, his lab had been completely unable to
determine which sub-species it belonged to. Despite its pure
white coloration, which would seem to indicate perhaps an
arctic wolf, the genetic material most closely matched the gray
wolf. But not completely. Craddock said he had given her a hefty
discount on the large bill because of this, although she
suspected it was actually because she had been a favored
student. But whatever her former teacher’s reasoning for the
reduction, she was too distracted to enjoy the economic good
news.
She’d met a wild wolf. But why would it approach her, why
would it be so affectionate—and protective? She supposed it
could have been raised by humans, might have learned to look
at humans as pack members. But if she saw it again, she’d have
to remind herself that it was wild, and wild things always
reverted to their true nature. Didn’t they? Animal handlers the
world over concurred that to assume a wild animal was tame
was not only disrespectful of the animal but also downright
dangerous.
But it was her wolf, her friend. The one who had saved her.
When she thought of the attack now, it wasn’t the pain and
terror she remembered most. It was the shining white shape
that emerged from the darkness and chased the men away. A
massive wolf, its snowy fur stroked by starlight, a creature so
beautiful that she was certain she was dreaming. Until it licked
her face.
The wolf had lain beside her and kept her warm. She had
thought she was going to die and was so grateful not to be
alone. She remembered that she had started crying then, and
the wolf had lapped away her tears. It had whined in its throat,
and there was near-human expression in its vivid blue eyes. It
was sad for me. It cared, I know that it cared about me. The results
from a DNA test, or any other test, wouldn’t change her certainty
of that.
I guess that’s my answer. I’ve never been afraid of the wolf before,
and I’m not going to start now. Maybe I won’t run outside looking for it,
and maybe I’d prefer it didn’t visit me in my apartment, but if I see it
again, I’m not going to be afraid.
So far, though, the wolf hadn’t returned. Not inside the clinic,
and nowhere else that Jillian was aware of. But the creature
knew where she lived. Did it wander around outside at night?
Had it watched over her as she came and went on farm calls
and errands, when she came home late from visiting with
Birkie? Or had it gone on its way—wherever that was? Maybe it
had. After all, it hadn’t shown up when she had the accident.
Had James scared it off?
The last time she’d seen the wolf, it was lying on her couch,
and what it was doing there remained a mystery. It was the
same night that James surprised her in her apartment, and she
could only conclude that he must have left a door open
somewhere. Jillian couldn’t imagine any other way that the
great white wolf had gained entry to the building. And how had
it gotten out?
“I feel like I’m missing something.” Did James know about the
white wolf? Had he seen it? Come to think of it, the wolf had
reentered her life at roughly the same time she’d met James.
Was that coincidence—or connection? She really should ask
James about it, see what he knew, but that could be difficult
when she didn’t want to talk to the man, didn’t want to see him
ever again.
The phone rang as if on cue.
“Jillian, we need to talk,” James began.
“Whatever happened to ‘hi, how are you?’”
“You keep hanging up, so now I’m cutting to the chase. Look,
I have things to say to you.”
If she was honest with herself, she wanted to hear them. She
really did. But she didn’t dare. “We already had this
conversation, James. I don’t think it’s a good idea to repeat it.”
“I think it’s—”
“Goodnight, James.” She put the receiver down. It was simple
self-defense, she reasoned with herself. So why did she feel so
guilty? Suddenly she banged her fist on the phone. “Damn it!”
She hadn’t asked him about the wolf.
Annoyed, she picked up the mail from the floor. It had taken
her three days to get around to looking at it. She had barely
opened half the envelopes, but she’d had enough for one day.
She piled it back on the table next to a stack of overdue wolf
mythology books. She sighed. She hated to ask Birkie or Zoey
to take them to the library—her friends already did so much for
her—maybe she could ask Caroline instead? The young
veterinary assistant often stopped by to ask if there was
anything Jillian needed.
“Energy. What I really need is energy. Isn’t there someplace I
can order some? Have it delivered like pizza?” Sudden fatigue
had Jillian sliding into a chair, feeling like the gravity in the room
had increased fourfold. It was frustrating, but she was learning
to relax and wait for her energy to return, to have faith that it
would return. It might take a few minutes or a few hours, but
after a little rest, her energy would come back. If nothing else,
having a concussion was a lesson in patience. Whether she
wanted more patience or not. Jillian sighed, pulled a book from
the stack and began turning pages. An hour later, she was still
there, engrossed in werewolf legends from France and Spain.
When she finally looked up, dusk had given way to night. She
stood and stretched—very slowly and carefully—then made her
way to the fridge where a quick check of the freezer revealed an
appalling lack of ice cream. No problem. There was some in the
staff lunchroom, and maybe some pudding or custard as well.
Her stomach was touchy these days, favoring bland and easyto-
eat items. The ongoing nausea had frightened her at first. But
the doctors had been thorough in their follow-up exams,
determining that the queasy stomach was linked to the
dizziness she could naturally expect as she recovered, not to
something scary like a blood clot on the brain.
Jillian pulled her comfy old bathrobe around her shoulders
and headed down the hallway. It had been a hot day and the
shadows on the tile floor were deep and cool. Easy on the eyes,
too. She could imagine the headlines: Mole woman subsists on
ice cream. Gains 500 pounds in the dark. Well maybe not. She’d
noticed the past couple of days that her jeans were loose
around the middle. Mole woman discovers new wonder diet—
concussion and ice cream.
Just as she neared the kitchen, there was movement at the
end of the dark hall. She blinked and held her breath as a large
pale object resolved itself into a canine shape. An enormous
canine shape, but no dog moved with such supple grace. It was
the white wolf—and it was heading in the opposite direction.
She held her breath as she watched, and even at this distance,
even in the shadows, she could see the orchestrated movement
of muscle under the snowy coat. Omigod. How long had the
wolf been here? Although it surely must have been lingering
outside her door, it seemed unaware that she was now in the
hallway. She took a step forward in spite of herself as the animal
disappeared around a corner. It was in the livestock wing.
Jillian hesitated only a moment. Then she was hurrying—
gingerly, and with a hand trailing the wall to steady herself—
down the hall as fast as her condition would permit. She
rounded the corner and regained sight of the wolf just as it
bounded silently to the top of the bales she’d stacked against
the far wall. It leapt across an impossible distance to land neatly
inside the loft door. Sheer surprise kept her frozen for an entire
second. And then she was running for the ladder. At least she
intended to run. The best she could manage was an
embarrassing sort of rapid shuffle. Breathing hard, she
clambered awkwardly up the ladder, favoring the arm with the
cast on it and trying to be quiet all at the same time.
Dizzy from the effort, Jillian topped the rungs and peered into
the loft. It was easy to spot the wolf, even in the dark. It would
have no trouble spotting her either, but luckily it wasn’t looking
in her direction. She was trying to catch her breath and decide
what to do next when she became aware of a fine vibration
running through the metal ladder rungs under her hands, her
feet. Her eyebrows rose as she began to feel it in her teeth too.
The vibration was subtle, not an earth tremor but finer, as if the
ladder was being bombarded with sound. But there was no
sound. . . .
She glanced up to see if the wolf had also noticed, and was
astonished to see the massive animal begin to shimmer like a
mirage. Its snowy fur gleamed with strange bluish light. A
breeze picked up, swirling bits of straw and dust into a lazy
vortex around the creature. Jillian could feel the cool, dry air on
her face now, and with it came the tang of ozone. Her skin
tingled, the hairs lifted on the back of her neck. Through it all,
the wolf stood perfectly still, even when blue sparks danced in
the air around it. Suddenly the animal vanished completely. In
its place stood a tall, powerful man. The breeze stopped, as did
the vibration. The last of the sparks sizzled into the straw and
winked out. And Jillian stared, open-mouthed, as James
Macleod shook himself, stretched, then walked over to the
window at the far end of the loft.
She struggled in vain to make sense of what her eyes were
telling her. Then backed slowly down the ladder, praying James
would not hear her. If it was James. When she reached the floor,
she half-stumbled, looking over her shoulder as she walked.
Thank God that she was still in her slippers—while her footfalls
were clumsy, they were at least silent. She hoped. Which was
more than she could say for her heart. It was pounding loudly in
her chest, so loud that she could hear it herself. Jillian drew air
in great shaky gulps that threatened to become hiccups until
she was forced to stuff the sleeve of her bathrobe over her
mouth to suppress the sound. Nausea and dizziness from the
exertion nearly overwhelmed her. She paused to lean on the
wall frequently for support as she made her unsteady way back
to her apartment.
Chapter Twenty-seven
Something was sparkling as Jillian opened her eyes. Blinking,
she realized the morning sun had caught the little crystals in the
dream catcher. Or was it afternoon sun? She had no idea what
time it was and didn’t feel well enough to care. Jillian lay in bed
and watched the light bounce around the wall in bright colors.
Amber, green, purple, red, blue. Blue. Blue sparkles, blue sparks.
There had been blue sparks last night when the white wolf
turned into James Macleod.
That had been one wild and crazy hallucination. She knew it
couldn’t have been a dream, at least not completely—she had
only to look over at the furniture stacked in front of her door.
The dresser, the table, even the magazine rack. And how dumb
was that? The last weighed, what? Two pounds, maybe three?
But she’d been desperate for anything she could get her hands
on, anything that might keep out whatever she thought she had
seen in the loft. And when the adrenaline had finally subsided,
she’d paid heavily for the overexertion. She’d spent half the
night in the bathroom throwing up and the other half trying to
rally the strength to get to her bed.
She was still paying for the night’s activity. She felt drained, ill.
A headache maintained a steady throb just behind her eyes.
And it didn’t help to know that she’d brought it on herself. “I
have a moderate to serious concussion. Birkie told me not to
overdo it, Connor told me not to overdo it, Lowen and Bev both
told me not to overdo it, even the clinician who ran the CAT
scan told me not to overdo it,” she lectured herself. “So what do
I do? Go running around the clinic in the dark. Of course I saw
weird things.”
One niggling question remained, however. Was everything
she saw a hallucination? The DNA tests on the white hair from
her couch had proven not only that a white wolf existed but that
it had been inside her apartment. Had the wolf found its way
back into the clinic last night? Had she followed a real wolf or a
dream wolf? But if it was a real wolf she followed, why did the
event suddenly turn into complete fantasy? And at what point?
That leap, for instance. Jillian worked it out in her head. The
livestock area was huge, and the span between the stacked
bales and the loft door had to be at least thirty-five feet, maybe
more. No wolf could jump that. A tiger might, she supposed, but
even a big cat would have to work at it. A wolf? No chance.
Therefore what she saw in the livestock wing could be no more
real than what she saw in the loft.
“Duh! What did I expect after racing down the hallway? And I
can’t believe I climbed up that stupid ladder. I’m lucky I didn’t
pass out and fall.” And as for the wolf turning into James, that
was no stretch of the imagination. She had just talked to him,
was just thinking about him, and then she had read all those
stupid stories. “Therefore, none of it was real. I didn’t see the
wolf in the hallway, I just thought I did.” She didn’t much like the
idea of seeing things, though. She got up carefully and headed
to the bathroom, stared at herself in the mirror. Her reflection
looked more tired than usual, disheveled, but not particularly
crazy. At least she didn’t seem to be foaming at the mouth or
rolling her eyes back in her head. “Lycanthropy. Werewolves.”
She tried out the words, watched for changes in the mirror. Saw
none. “Guess I’m still sane, even if I’m seeing things. Well,
mostly sane.” Her head pounded while she brushed her teeth,
and she decided to forego a shower. For a moment she thought
about breakfast, but her stomach refused to discuss the subject
unless it involved something creamy and frozen.
By the time she climbed back into bed, she was resigned to
staying there for the rest of the day. Jillian hoped Birkie would
stop by in the afternoon. It would be good to have a friend to
talk to, although she might not mention that part about the
ladder. Please God, let her bring ice cream. She moaned aloud as
she remembered all the stuff piled in front of her door. “Dear
God, skip the ice cream. Please let her bring a forklift.”
Roderick Harrison was just as Douglas remembered him. Just
as devoted to the Pine Point Ranch as ever. Just as
hardworking and active as always. Just as bullheaded and
bossy too. But gradually it became apparent that Roderick was
also as fixated as ever on something Douglas would rather
forget.
It began as a stray comment over dinner. “Wolf tracks in the
northwest pasture, Dougie. We’ve got to keep an eye on the
stock.”
It probably didn’t mean anything more than that, Douglas told
himself sternly, but still, his stomach clenched and he found
himself unable to finish the meal. When he retreated to his room,
it took a tall glass of Jack Daniels to help him calm down. More
to ensure he didn’t dream that night.
It was mid-morning before Douglas finally made his way
downstairs again. He was on his way to the kitchen, intent on
putting something gentle in his stomach, maybe poached eggs
and toast. Maybe just toast. Something to soak up the acid so
he could have a drink to start the day.
“Dad?” He was startled to find his father still in the house.
Shouldn’t he be out riding the goddamn range or something?
Roderick didn’t appear to notice him though. He was standing
in the living room, staring at the collection of family photos on
the stone mantel. There was still a photo of Douglas’s mother
there, a tall, pretty woman, her hair dark red and wavy just like
her son’s. Douglas had always liked the picture but now wished
he’d followed his instincts months ago and put it away. He took
a careful step backward, then another, hoping to exit the room,
but it was too late.
“Corena was a good woman.” Roderick continued to stare at
her photo. He was still as stone with his hands at his sides, but
they were clenched hard enough to make the veins stand out.
“It wasn’t her fault, not really. Damn werewolves, they laid claim
to her. I fought to keep her with me, but they claimed her and in
the end, they got her. I should never have listened to her. I
should’ve shot every damn one of them when I had the chance.
She’d still be alive if I’d done that.”
“Dad, I—”
“They’re back, you know. We didn’t finish the job and now
they’re back.”
“Goddammit, Dad, give it up already,” Douglas burst out. The
fleeting thought crossed his mind that if he’d had that drink, he
would have been mellow enough to keep his mouth shut, but
maybe he’d been silent too long, much too long. “I’m sick of
hearing about your fucking werewolves. You already shot two
people that I know of, and God only knows how many others.”
He was shouting now.
Roderick roared back. “I was protecting this family. I tried to
protect your mother, even after she had you, and then I tried to
protect you, too.”
“Protect me? You took a fourteen-year-old kid along to
commit a fucking murder. What kind of protection was that?”
Douglas paused and sucked in air. It was enough time for
something his father had said to sink in. “What do you mean,
even after she had me?”
“I raised you as my own. I didn’t ask any questions. We
couldn’t have kids and God help me, I wanted a son, someone I
could leave the ranch to.”
He stared at his father for several seconds. Jesus, Mary, and
Joseph, the man must be having a relapse. He walked over and
took his father’s arm, and when he spoke, it was with a lowered
voice. “Dad, it’s me, Douglas. Your son. And I have a sister,
remember? Rosa.”
“We adopted Rosa. Corena had a young niece out east that
got herself in trouble, so we took on the baby, pretended she
was ours. It was easy enough, she had red hair like your
mother. No one was ever supposed to know. Even Rosa
doesn’t know. Then a few years later your mother came up
pregnant with you.” Roderick shook his head from side to side,
still staring at the photo. “It was a damn hard pill to swallow.
God, I didn’t talk to her, couldn’t even look at her. But after you
were born, I thought maybe we could work things out.”
Douglas let go of his father’s arm then. This wasn’t sounding
like a recurrence of the Alzheimer’s, not at all. In fact, it didn’t
sound like any episode his father had ever had. “What are you
saying here? That I’m not your son? Are you trying to make me
believe my mother was a cheat?”
“It wasn’t her fault, not really. It was the damn werewolves.
She couldn’t help herself, couldn’t resist them.” The old man
turned and faced his son, his eyes sad but steady. “We had an
argument one night, and she went out. I found out later that
she’d met some of them wolf people in a bar, started hanging
around with them behind my back every chance she got. I didn’t
know then just how evil they were but I knew it would end
badly.”
“What? What?” Douglas sank into a chair then, his legs
rubbery and his heart beating against his ribs like an animal
trying to escape a cage. It was possible that his father had
slipped into some bizarre hallucination, some new neurosis.
Not just possible, but plausible. Maybe an aneurysm, a stroke?
Yet Rod appeared calm, his color good and his breathing
steady. His words were clear, distinguishable. Douglas looked
for some clue in his father’s eyes, some subtle tip-off that Rod
had regressed or fallen prey to some new ailment. He found
none. “What the fuck are you saying?”
“She left us for one of them, Dougie. She left us to become
one of them. She wanted to take you with her, make you one of
them too, but I couldn’t let her do that.” He turned back to the
photo and spoke more to himself than Douglas. “I couldn’t let
her.”
“Don’t hang up.” He’d given up on any kind of traditional
greeting. A couple dozen calls in a week had netted him nothing
more than the click of the receiver on Jillian’s end. “We need to
talk.”
“Please stop calling me.”
The connection went dead. Again. James swore and nearly
threw the cell phone out the window of the tractor cab, but at
the last moment jammed it into his shirt pocket instead. He’d
gotten the phone from Culley the day after the accident,
resolving to be more prepared to protect Jillian in the future.
After all, what if Birkie hadn’t tuned in to his mental calls for
help? What would he have done? Yet the cell phone sure wasn’t
helping him much now. Culley had regaled James with a mindnumbing
array of available models and features. But what he
really needed was a phone that could say the right words for
him, words that would persuade Jillian to listen.
Were there any? Her fine features made her look faery-like,
but Jillian Descharme was tough and strong and smart. He
couldn’t blame her for shutting him out. He’d been a complete
moron and he’d hurt her. It was unforgivable, and yet he had to
find a way to persuade her to give him a chance. Somehow.
He’d tried going in person. So far, knocking on her door
hadn’t yielded any better results than calling her. After the first
time, the door no longer opened. She was ignoring him, and
while that normally would have pissed him off, he was having a
hard time holding onto his anger for more than a moment. In
fact, what he felt was lonely. Sad. He missed her, so much so
that he’d gone out running as the wolf a few nights ago. Initially
he’d intended to distract himself, but instead, he ended up at the
clinic. He’d lain outside her door for a very long time, with his
head on his paws. Knowing she’d embrace the wolf if she saw
it, but wanting her to welcome the man.
He hadn’t Changed since.
James made a point of talking with Connor and Birkie
frequently. He always started out with farm topics—Any clinic
suppliers offer organic products? Anyone got Angus heifers for sale
right now?—and then eventually worked in questions about
Jillian. How’s her progress, how’s she coping? He could see in their
eyes that neither Birkie nor his brother was fooled by his casual
act, but thankfully they played along and didn’t ask questions
or, worse yet, offer sympathy.
He was pleased to learn that Jillian was up and around, and
active again, although it concerned him that her version of
being active meant walking the perimeter of the clinic’s ten-acre
property. Birkie had assured him that Jillian stopped to rest
frequently, but James knew full well the small blond woman
would push herself to go the distance, every day, no matter how
crappy she felt. She was already campaigning to return to work,
but Connor hadn’t relented yet. James could well imagine that
frustrated her—after all, she lived and slept and breathed her
work—but privately he sided with his brother. Birkie had let slip,
however, that she and Caroline were passing Jillian small
projects, not so much because they needed the help but to
keep Jillian from going stir-crazy and to help her feel connected
to the work she loved.
He could relate to that. Wasn’t he doing almost the same
thing? Making up excuses to go to the clinic, seeking small
tidbits of information just so he could keep from going crazy, so
he could feel some kind of connection to the woman he loved?
The shadows were long when he finally finished in the fields.
He shut down the equipment and climbed down from the
tractor, deciding to leave it where it stood. He was a long way
from the main farmyard but he wanted to stretch his legs. And
think. The scent of alfalfa and earth rose to meet him as he
walked across the fields. The sun was low in the sky and
golden—and James thought immediately of how it had glinted
in Jillian’s hair. Automatically he looked over toward the
forested coulees and remembered his night with her. There had
been passion, but the experience had also touched him deep
inside; some essence of Jillian had moved him. And the next
day he had ruined everything.
Ah, hell. He had to try again. And this time he’d damn well
camp out on her doorstep. If he could just persuade her to
listen. He didn’t dare think past that.
Chapter Twenty-eight
I can’t believe I’ve done this again. What was I thinking? She should
have known better, definitely should have known better. But
she had been so tired of lying around. Birkie had left for the day,
and Jillian had just wanted to get a little exercise, stretch her
muscles, just plain move. Except for the minor relapse the night
she’d followed an imaginary white wolf, she was making
tremendous progress. Her wrist had healed quickly, and the
itchy cast was finally gone. The concussion was healing too,
and she actually had bursts of energy at times. Small bursts, but
enough to give her hope that life would get back to normal
eventually. She was walking every day, but she had other
muscles that needed a workout. The doctors had encouraged
her to engage in mild activity, but maybe martial arts weren’t quite
mild enough.
The result was that she was lying on the concrete floor of the
livestock wing, weak, dizzy, and trying desperately not to throw
up. The floor was still soaked from being hosed down earlier,
but then, she hadn’t expected to be lying on it. Especially not in
an exercise bra and spandex bike shorts. She curled into a fetal
position as she began to shiver, yet her head spun horribly
every time she tried to get up. Could she possibly feel any
worse?
“Jillian!” James was suddenly kneeling beside her. “Christ,
are you all right? What happened?”
For one fraction of a second, Jillian’s heart thrilled traitorously
at the sound of his voice. Then her brain kicked in, and her
spirits sank like a lead weight in a pond. Things were, indeed,
worse. Of all the gin joints in all the world. . . .
He was feeling her forehead, and she swatted at his hand.
She swore as the sudden movement nearly caused the nausea
to break free.
“Talk to me, dammit, tell me where you’re hurt,” he ordered,
grabbing her flailing hand and checking her pulse.
“I’m trying not to puke, that’s what’s wrong,” she said
through gritted teeth. “Leave me alone.”
“No. Now what happened?”
She drew a long shaky breath. Two. “I was doing a few simple
exercises, running through some basic Tae Kwon Do
sequences. I just overdid it, that’s all. Got a little dizzy. I’ll be
fine.”
“Overdid it. You mean you pushed yourself too hard. Dammit,
it hasn’t even been a month yet since the accident. And here I
thought you were a pretty good doctor.”
“Well, so I’m a lousy patient, okay? I feel stupid enough
without an audience, thank you. Now go away—Stop! Stop
that!” He had slid his hands beneath her and turned her into
him, was carefully gathering her up. “Put me down, you jerk.”
“You’re right, you are a lousy patient. But you can’t stay here
on this cold, wet floor. Your teeth are chattering, for Christ’s
sake.”
“Oh God, please put me down, I’m going to—” She did. Again
and again, even when it seemed there couldn’t possibly be
anything left. Through it all, James held her steady. Warmth
surrounded her, calming and soothing her until the terrible
nausea subsided. Jillian lay limp and exhausted in James’s
arms, certain that there was nothing left of her but a thin outer
shell. “I told you I was gonna puke.”
“So you did. Better now?”
“A little maybe. God, I made such a mess. Get any on you?”
“Naw. Missed us both. And I’m sure this room has seen worse
messes than this. I’ll hose it down later.” He eased her around
so her head was resting on his shoulder. Held perfectly still for
a moment, to give her dizziness a chance to pass. “Let’s get
you to bed.”
“No.” She gripped his shirt as he began heading for the door.
“Don’t move. What if I throw up again?”
“Well, if you do, you do. We’re both washable. But you need
to lie down.”
Unable to muster an argument to that, Jillian just closed her
eyes tight and gritted her teeth in anticipation of the trip. Was
surprised at how smoothly he moved, how little motion she felt.
Instead, her senses were almost totally preoccupied with the
dependable strength of his muscled arms. Even the scent of his
shirt, his scent, calmed her. She relaxed in spite of herself, and
her eyes stayed closed.
I missed you. I’m so glad you came back. Jillian stroked the
great animal’s head, ran a hand over the long white fur,
marveled at the silky texture of it. The doctors kept trying to tell me
you weren’t real, that my mind made you up. But I knew you existed,
that you were real. I knew it inside. I knew it. She knew this feeling
too—there was nothing like it. Radiant warmth emanated from
the giant wolf, like the physical heat from a glowing campfire
infused with a reassuring emotional warmth. Smiling, she
opened her eyes——and found herself looking at a broad
heavily muscled chest. Slowly she lifted her gaze to a
shadowed but familiar face. Stared at the overlong white-blond
hair her fingers were presently stroking. What the hell was
James Macleod doing here? What was she doing here? His
brilliant blue eyes were closed, his breathing deep and regular.
Stunned, Jillian yanked her hand back just as it started to
shake and hastily tried to tuck her arm beside her. It wasn’t
possible though, not with the man’s powerful arms wrapped
around her. She could feel his big hands on her back, gentle,
protective. The heat from his body was soothing, like basking in
front of an open fire. The unique scent of him surrounded her.
She couldn’t breathe without inhaling the intoxicating blend of
powerful male and something else, something both familiar and
wild. She puzzled it out until she realized it was the forest she
smelled. No, more specifically, the forest at night . . .
This is crazy. I’m dreaming, right? I dreamed about the wolf and
now I’m dreaming about this man. Somebody please tell me I’m
dreaming. She was in her own bed, she could figure that much
out. The light from the clinic’s parking lot shed an amber glow
through the window blinds, brushed the shadows in the room
with bronze. A hundred thoughts whirled through her head and
none of them made any sense. Especially when the wolf-dream
was so fresh in her mind, the pleasant emotions lingering, her
body comfortable, her heart content.
The contentment was the most baffling thing of all. Why
wasn’t she hollering the place down? She should be furious,
shouldn’t she? She’d been trying so damn hard to never see
James again and here he was. In the flesh. Very hot sexy male
flesh. It was getting hard to breathe, not because he was
holding her tightly, but because she couldn’t help being
aroused. Thank God he’s only naked to the waist. Her body was
definitely on James’s side, her heart was on his side. All she
had left with which to resist James Macleod was her brain and it
was starting to fog over, too.
“Feeling better?”
God, his eyes were so blue, even in the dim light. “Yes. No.
What the hell are you doing in my bed, Macleod?”
“You were ice-cold and white as a sheet. You needed to get
warm. It was this or build a bonfire with your couch.”
“Okay, well, I’m fine now. Thanks. You can go home.”
“I’m not leaving until I think you’re fine. And then, not until we
talk.”
“No talking. No way. No fair.” Jillian shoved at him, struggled
out of his arms, and lurched out of bed, feeling as graceful as
Frankenstein’s monster. Dizziness rose in a wave, with nausea
close behind it, but she choked them both down as she turned
to face James. And immediately lost her breath. Did he have to
look so damn sexy? He was resting on his elbow, looking at her
with those intense Viking eyes. The over-long hair, the closecropped
beard, even the crinkling of hair on his broad chest
gleamed gold in the amber light. She wanted him, badly, wanted
to touch him and smell him and taste him. Her whole body
clenched. Hard. Which only added to her aggravation.
“Jeez, will you settle down? You’re going to make yourself
sick again. I only wanted you to hear my side of the story.”
She latched on to her anger as if to a life raft. “Your side?
Look here, James Macleod; you have no right to ask me to
listen to anything. Besides that, I can’t discuss a relationship
right now. I can’t think about it, I can’t focus on it. I have no time
right now to think about you and me. I’m concentrating on
trying to get better—”
“Bullshit!”
“What?” She gaped at him. She hadn’t seen him move, yet he
was standing in front of her, looming over her, his features as
fierce as they were sexy.
“I said bullshit. Right now, all you’ve got is time to think. Days
and days of time to think. So don’t stand there and try to tell me
you haven’t been thinking about you and me. I just want to
make sure you have all the facts before you decide to write me
off.”
“Write you off? You’re the one who disappeared without a
single damn word after our one and only night together.” Anger
set her pacing to the other side of the small apartment, anger
layered over hurt. The fact that she still hurt ticked her off even
more, and she wrapped herself in fury as if it was protective
armor.
“I didn’t leave without a word. I sent flowers and a card letting
you know.”
“Letting me know what, exactly?” Her head was pounding
and her stomach was sending warning signals, but raw emotion
superseded all. “That you were too cowardly to tell me to my
face that you didn’t want me?”
“That I love you.”
What? The nerve of the man. She whirled, about to tell him
what he could do with such an outrageous statement. But the
sudden movement was the last straw for her sensitive stomach.
She paled and her knees turned to Jell-O. “Omigod—”
She retched painfully, but her stomach was long since empty.
It seemed to take forever for the nausea to subside this time.
When it did, her head cleared as well, and Jillian found herself
kneeling over a wastebasket, supported by James’s powerful
arms. She had no idea how she got there.
“Done now?”
“Yeah. Yeah, I think so.” She shivered a little, then settled
back against him. “God, I’m sorry.”
“For what? I should be sorry for upsetting you, and I am. But I
meant what I said. I love you.” He picked her up gently and set
her on the bed. Went into the kitchen and rummaged in the
fridge until he found a can of lemon pop. He brought her a tall
glass of it with ice and sat beside her.
Jillian sipped the pop gratefully, but suspected it was going to
take a lot more than that to revive her. She felt worn out both
physically and emotionally. She really didn’t want to have this
conversation right now, but they seemed to be having it just the
same. It just wasn’t fair. “Look, I don’t understand at all. How
can you possibly love me when you ditched me like that?”
“I admit it wasn’t my best decision. I just didn’t think I’d be
very good for you.”
She was stunned. Had Birkie been right? Had protective male
logic been behind James’s actions? “Well, you did make me
puke twice, so maybe there’s something to that notion. Not to
mention knocking me down in the hallway, scaring me to death
in the loft. Oh, and breaking into my apartment. Yeah, you’re
probably standing at about negative twenty on the good-forJillian
scale.”
He had the grace to look sheepish. Standing with both hands
in the pockets of his jeans, James unexpectedly reminded
Jillian of a small boy who had broken a neighbor’s window. She
hurried on to make her point before she lost her resolve
completely. “But all that aside, you can just drop any misguided
male notions about trying to protect me. It’s my damn decision
to make as to whether or not I want to risk hanging around with
you.”
“Okay.”
“That’s it? That’s all I get? Just ‘okay’?”
For a split second he looked blank, then he put a hand to his
head. “Christ, I’m missing my cue to apologize, aren’t I? I am
sorry, really, really sorry. Sorry for all the stupid things I did and
sorry for not saying I was sorry sooner. Sorry that I’m not better
at being human—I mean, I’m sorry I’m not better at
relationships.”
That’s a lot of sorries. Jillian had the feeling this man didn’t offer
apologies lightly either. “I guess I’ll have to forgive you.” She
offered him a smile, hoping to see an answering one but none
appeared.
“So are we . . . are we back together then?”
She handed him the empty glass and sighed deeply. “That
was forgiveness, James, not necessarily reinstatement. And I
don’t know how we can get ‘back together’ when we hardly had
more than a day’s worth of a relationship to start with.”
“You know there was more than that. A lot more. It was
important from the start.”
“Maybe so, but you can’t ask me to make hugely important
relationship decisions right now.”
“Why not?”
She saw something like worry flicker over his face, but she
wasn’t going to make it one bit easier for him. “Duh! Because
I’m tired and I’m sick. Because I might throw up again, and if you
keep pressuring me, I’ll make certain I do it all over you. I’m
going to have a shower, a long one. And then I’m going to bed. I
want to feel a whole lot better before we continue this intense
conversation. So you can damn well wait till tomorrow to
discuss you and me any further.”
“Fair enough. I’ll wait.” He folded his arms. “But I’m waiting
right here.”
“God, you’re pushy, Macleod.” She said it without heat,
however. Instead, she ran a hand over her face and through her
hair. Sighed again. It just wasn’t fair to have a bare-chested
Viking right in front of her and not feel well enough to jump him.
She was certain that if he was in her bed, there would be sex.
Great sex. Lengthy terrific sex. But she was also certain that
even brief and mediocre sex would finish her off. And besides,
she hadn’t even made a decision about James yet. Not exactly.
Well, not officially. Certainly not one that she was ready to share
with him just yet. Oh hell, she knew what her decision was, she
just wanted him to suffer a little. “Fine, take the couch.”
“I’d rather bunk with you. You might get cold again.” He
surveyed her carefully. “I promise I won’t take it as a decision.”
His words caused a delicious tingle to travel up her spine, but
that wasn’t why she found she couldn’t refuse him. There was
something in those blue, blue eyes, some raw vulnerability she
didn’t understand. And then she did. He needed her to accept
this, accept him at this moment, even if she decided to send him
packing tomorrow. Her head was swimming and it wasn’t from
the concussion. “I’m . . . I’m . . . I’m going to have a shower now.
But no funny stuff when I get out, mister. I need some
uninterrupted sleep.”
She tried to sound firm. Assertive. In charge. But James’s
mouth curved into a subtle smile just then, and her heart did an
amazing double half gainer of Olympic quality. She rushed to
the bathroom before it showed on her face.
The hot water loosened a little of her tension, but not much.
She was in love with James Macleod, and she was both
exhilarated and appalled. I hardly know him. Okay, I kind of do, but I
want to know him a whole lot better. Will he let me? He’s so . . . She
tried to think of the right word. Prickly at times. Reserved. No,
more like guarded. Yet James had been anything but guarded
that day at the farm. And that night in the forest. . . . She sighed
and tore her thoughts away from that avenue. For now. Instead,
she remembered the things that Birkie had told her, the tragedy
that James had endured. Surely that would make anyone a little
prickly and reserved. And maybe hesitant about another
relationship. She wondered if she was up for the challenge of
building a relationship with James, then decided she must be.
After all, he hadn’t exactly shown her his best side, and here
she was in love with him anyway. Life was just never what you
expected.
She found a fresh pair of pajamas, her favorite flannels with
the little frogs. Dried her hair. Brushed her teeth. And resolved
that if there was going to be a relationship, then there were
going to be a few rules.
Her mental list of rules evaporated like water droplets on a hot
griddle when she came out of the bathroom. James was already
in her bed, resting on his elbow and holding the quilt open so
she could get in. Omigod, he’s naked. She remembered their
night in the forest together all too well, and it wasn’t nausea that
sent her stomach plummeting to her feet like a carnival ride. She
switched the light off almost in self-defense and took a couple
of deep breaths before crawling into bed. She deliberately faced
away from him, but he simply curled his muscled body around
her. The familiar heat enveloped her and that amazing sense of
safety, of well-being. A big hand began to glide up and down
her back. “I said no funny stuff.” Her voice sounded squeaky.
So much for being assertive.
“I agree, no funny stuff tonight, but you’ve got enough
tension here to string a piano. You’ll never get a good rest when
you’re all knotted up like this.”
She was about to argue when the big hand moved again and
suddenly she couldn’t say a word. The strong fingers were
surprisingly gentle as they knowingly worked their way up and
down her spine, her neck, her lower back, that tight spot
between her shoulders. James located and massaged every
knot as if they glowed in the dark and he could see them, untie
them. She felt herself relaxing in subtle stages, drifting
downward. She felt his lips brush the back of her neck just
before sleep claimed her.
James snapped awake, both his human and wolf sides fully
alert. The small figure curled next to him was moaning
restlessly, the blankets kicked aside.
“Shhh baby, wake up. You’re dreaming.” He gave her
shoulder a gentle shake, and felt her body shudder, then relax.
He pulled the covers back over her, curled his body close, and
slid an arm around her. He thought she was asleep—until she
covered his big hand with her smaller one and squeezed it.
There was no reason for the wild joy that whipped through him.
No reason for the dizzying thrill that followed as she turned and
opened one eye, a mere glimmer of green, and focused on him.
No reason for the elation that sang along his nerves as she
whispered his name.
Right then and there James decided he didn’t give a tinker’s
damn about reasons. All the misery of the past few weeks had
slid away during the night even as the tight fist of pain around
his heart had eased. Love washed over him like a midsummer
thunderstorm, sudden, wild, and fierce. Cleansing and bright.
And in its wake, peace.
He kissed the top of her head and nuzzled her hair. Breathed
in the unique mix of berry shampoo and essence of Jillian.
Wondered if he needed to be on guard—after all, he’d Changed
in his sleep recently. As tough as this small woman was, she
was human. Changing too close to her could send her flying
with enough force to break bones. Yet he knew his wolfen side
was completely devoted to Jillian. He had to trust that the wolf
would do nothing to endanger her.
What he really needed to worry about was how to tell her
about his wolfen side. How would he bring it up? And when?
Say, Jillian, did I mention I was a Changeling? He remembered
telling Evelyn for the first time. She’d laughed at him, refused to
take him seriously. He’d had to tell her over and over, and finally
show her, before she believed him. But she hadn’t been afraid.
Jillian wouldn’t be afraid either, he thought, once she knew
the truth. But it was much too soon to tell her. Definitely too
soon. He wanted to give the relationship some time to grow and
strengthen before he revealed his secret. He was confident she
would be able to handle it, would eventually embrace the truth
with all the wonder and curiosity that she brought to her work
with animals.
But it was one thing for her to accept the existence of
Changelings, and another to decide to be one. Would Jillian
want to enter his world fully? It would be her choice. He would
love her no matter what. He put the thoughts away, shelved
them in some mental corner for another time. It was too soon to
be thinking about such things. For now, he just wanted to savor
this unique contentment, this peace.
Chapter Twenty-nine
Jillian automatically slapped the alarm into silence. The clock
read 6:00 A.M., but it was Sunday. She didn’t have to get up. Of
course, she hadn’t had to get up for a long time, but she was
naturally a morning person, and she liked the routine. If you
sleep in, you miss things. Like the scents of dew-laden fields
drifting in the open window. Like naked men in her bed. James
was facing the window, but she could hear him breathing deep
and steady. Felt the heat radiate from his skin. He was on top of
the blankets, and she allowed her eyes to rove over his body,
study the shapes of muscle, the lines and angles of his
powerful frame. He looked delicious. Tingling warmth
blossomed low in her core and she fantasized about kissing
every square inch of James Macleod.
God, she felt good. Better than she had in days and days.
True, she hadn’t moved yet, but for this one moment in time
nothing hurt. Not her head and not her heart. But as for doing all
the things she’d like to do to the mouth-watering male next to
her, she doubted she would have the stamina. Damn. For now
she’d have to make do with planning out her moves for when
she was back to normal, when she wouldn’t have to hesitate to
—
“Ready to go waterskiing?”
She laughed and James rolled over, his movements smooth
and easy. Almost catlike. He kissed her forehead and rubbed
noses with her. “Good morning, sunshine.” Then those startling
blue eyes were looking into hers, and forming thoughts became
very difficult.
“I think you’re the second biggest surprise in my life,” she
blurted.
His eyebrows went up. “Second? I’ll have to try harder.”
“No, no, I mean, among the major cosmic events in my life,
you’re second. You would have been first, but there’s this wolf
—” “A wolf took first place away from me?” He looked amused.
“Maybe I should start at the beginning. No, wait, let me think.
I’m going to brush my teeth and think, and then I want to tell you
some things.”
She took her time in the bathroom. Last night’s shower had
made her hair dry in strange wisps and curls, and she fought to
tame it. It was harder to pull her thoughts together, though. She
was going to tell James about the white wolf—and she was
nervous. What if he didn’t believe her? At best, she would feel
ridiculous. At worst, it could end a very promising relationship.
How could she be with someone who would dismiss something
so important to her? Because the white wolf was important to
her. The creature had not only saved her life all those years ago,
but it had been an important factor in her recovery. And in her
eventual choice of profession. What role it played now, she
didn’t know, but it was still very much a part of her life. Even if
she didn’t understand it.
When Jillian came out, she found James brewing coffee in her
tiny kitchen. He had pulled on his jeans, but they were rakishly
unbuttoned. She swallowed, hard, and forced her eyes to look
somewhere else. Anywhere else . . . Finally she grabbed
James’s hand and steered him to the table. “I have some things
I want to tell you, things that are important to me. Will you
listen?”
“Of course I will.”
“I mean, really listen. All the way to the end and no falling
asleep from boredom.”
“Honey, you could read the phone book to me and still have
all of my attention. Whatever it is, if it’s important to you, it’s
important to me.”
She seriously doubted the phone book thing, but not that he
would listen. And so she told him. About the attack, about the
enormous white wolf that saved her. About the effect the wolf
had had on her life, about the reunion she’d had with it—or one
like it—since she’d arrived in Dunvegan. About the DNA tests
and her efforts to learn more about the wolf. Even about the
myths and legends she’d been reading and the dreams she’d
had lately. All of it. Every detail.
She took a deep breath then, not sure of what to do now. She
had to give James credit for paying attention as he’d said he
would. His intense gaze had never left her face, his coffee sat
untouched. But she couldn’t read his expression and that
worried her.
Finally he reached across the table and took her hand.
“You’ve had some very unique experiences. But the wolf didn’t
save you—”
“I see.” Disappointment shot through her like broken glass. “I
guess it all sounded pretty fantastic. I don’t know why I thought
you might believe me.”
“No! No, the wolf is real. There are plenty of wolves that live in
this area. And there’s a white one, too.”
“You’ve seen it?” She narrowed her eyes at him. He’d better
not be trying to appease her by making this up. “A huge one
with unusual eyes?”
“Yes, I’ve seen it. Many times.”
“Prove it.”
“It’s . . . it’s pure white but not an albino. No black hairs on the
ear tips, but it has a black nose, black claws. Not just big, but a
lot bigger than a normal wolf. You’re not imagining it, honey.”
She took a deep breath, suddenly aware she’d been holding
it, and her eyes filled with tears. “So you do believe me.”
“Well, why wouldn’t I? Even if I hadn’t seen the wolf for
myself, I’d still believe you.”
“I just . . . it’s just that, my head. . . .” She stammered into
silence.
“I get it. You have a brain injury—”
“It’s just a concussion.” Technically a concussion was a brain
injury, but calling it that made it sound so much worse.
“—so you expect people to question your grip on reality.
Maybe you’re questioning your grip on it, too.”
She rested her chin in her hand. “I guess maybe I am. That
hallucination last week really threw me. I mean, thinking that I
saw the wolf turn into you. How crazy is that? I’ve been a little
worried about my sanity since. I know I have the DNA results,
but emotionally, I guess I still needed some reassurance that the
wolf is real. Really real.”
“It’s living, breathing real.” He smiled at her then. “Big. White.
Blue eyes. Really real.”
“Thanks for that.”
“But it didn’t save you.”
“What?”
“That’s what I was trying to say. The white wolf is real, it came
to you and it chased the bad guys away. But it didn’t save you,
Jillian. You did that yourself. Sure, you thought of the wolf a lot.
But what you did was pick something to hang on to, to build
with. If it hadn’t been the wolf, you would have found something
else to use. You’re the one that climbed up out of hell. You did it
yourself, Jillian. You’re the strongest person I’ve ever known.”
His grip on her hand tightened as he looked at the table for a
long moment, then back at her. “I wish I could say I’d been like
that. When Evelyn died, I wanted to die too. And I sort of did. I
withdrew from everything and everyone. I thought I was
protecting them. I mean, after all, loving me had gotten Evelyn
killed—” He held up a hand as Jillian started to protest. “No, it’s
true. But I think I just might have been protecting myself all this
time, too.”
“Maybe you needed to.”
“Maybe. But I don’t need to now. And I don’t want to now. I
see you and I see not just someone I love, but someone I want
to be like.”
“You know, giving me a swelled head just can’t be good for
my concussion.”
He kissed her hand then, and held it to his cheek for a
moment. Then looked at her with a thoughtful expression. “You
know, some people would envy you the personal encounters
you’ve had with a wolf, the connection you seem to have with it.
Others might have a more negative outlook.”
“They might think I’m crazy? Hey, been there.”
“Oh no, they’ll believe you. But throughout history wolves
have often been associated with evil. Here you are with an up
close and personal relationship with a wolf and that makes you
evil too, at least in some people’s eyes.”
“Evil? You’re kidding. This is the twenty-first century—how
can people believe that?”
“Evil exists. What do you call the men who attacked you?”
She was quiet then. Evil. “Okay, you’re right, there’s definitely
human evil. But wolves? That seems pretty extreme.”
“There are some extreme people in this world. I’d want to be
careful who I tell about this.”
“I guess you’re right.” She thought of Douglas Harrison’s
father, how he’d raved about the big white devil and warned her
to run. But he was ill. No one would take him seriously, would
they? “Fortunately, I haven’t taken out any ads in the
newspaper. You and Birkie are the only ones who know about
the wolf. I’ve been meaning to talk to Connor about it, but it
seems every time I see him, we’re both busy.”
“It wouldn’t hurt to tell Connor. But otherwise, let’s keep it to
ourselves.”
She nodded. “That makes sense. Besides, it’s kind of special,
this thing with the wolf. I don’t want to tell everybody in the
whole world. It’ll spoil the magic, somehow. Maybe I’m afraid
too, that if I talk about it too much, the wolf will stop coming to
see me.”
“I don’t think so. I think the wolf will keep visiting for a long
time to come.” He sounded dead certain.
“I don’t want to be greedy. It’s so wonderful that the wolf
came to me at all, and to have gotten to see it again . . . Well,
there are no words. I’ll never understand why it picked me,
though. Why it would come here, come to me, of all people.”
There was a long pause. “Wolves are intelligent creatures.”
He cleared his throat, seemed to be measuring his words.
“They’re sensitive. Curious. I imagine a wolf can feel the good
energy from a place, a person.”
“But it’s a wild animal.”
“Doesn’t matter. Are you afraid of it?”
She didn’t have to think about that. “Logically I ought to be.
Anyone with sense would be. But no, I’m not and I can’t exactly
say why. I guess that sounds pretty dumb.”
“No. You’re intelligent and sensitive too. I’m pretty sure you
would know if the animal meant you harm. And I’m also certain
that you’re not going to act like a tourist with a bear and try to
feed it marshmallows out of your hand.”
“Well . . .” She recalled her encounter on the trail below Elk
Point. Even a tourist wouldn’t be crazy enough to hug a wolf,
and she decided not to mention that little lapse of judgment. “I
think a wolf would prefer dog biscuits, or maybe bacon.”
He laughed then, leaned over the table and kissed her. Sat
back and put his hands behind his head. “So you want to create
a wildlife center?”
The muscles had shifted in that broad Viking chest, and Jillian
couldn’t help being fascinated. James would have no trouble
using one of those heavy broadswords from a museum . . . or
carrying her away. . . .
“Hello? Wildlife center?” He was grinning as if he knew
exactly what she’d been thinking.
“It’s the next step for me.” She hoped her face hadn’t gone
red. She focused her eyes firmly on James’s face. Although that
was pretty distracting too. “A wildlife center, I mean. I want to
specialize in wildlife rehabilitation, especially wolves.”
“Connor’s mentioned there’s a need for one in this region.
But I thought he treated plenty of wild creatures in his clinic.
Seems like there’s always a fawn or two, or some kind of bird
there. What would your center do?”
“We can give initial treatment here, but government policy
dictates that the animals have to be shipped immediately to a
certified recovery center. The nearest one is hundreds of miles
away, and the travel subjects the animal to a great deal of
stress. Plus there aren’t enough rehab centers to fill the need so
too many animals end up euthanized that might have been
saved.” She rose and dumped the old pot of coffee, made fresh.
“I’d like to change that. If I had more experience under my belt, I
could write up a proposal, apply for a grant. Maybe some of the
local people would be interested, maybe volunteer some
services to help get it off the ground.”
“You’d need a place for it, though. Some land.”
She slid a cup toward James and sat down with her own.
“That’ll be the tough part. A wildlife rehab center takes a lot of
space, and you have to own the land or have a ninety-nine-year
lease on crown land before you can apply for the grants. There
are all kinds of rules and regs.” She sighed. “I know it’s a big
dream. It’s going to take a lot of time and money to make it come
true. But someday.”
“I have some land.”
Jillian shook her head. “You have a farm. For farming.”
“I also have land. I own a fair chunk of the river valley. That’s
not zoned for agriculture. Why couldn’t we use that? We could
start building anytime.”
“But . . . but you, why would, we aren’t. . . .”
“You said I was the second biggest surprise in your life. Well,
you’re the number one biggest surprise in mine, and I’m not
letting you out of my sight again. I figure a big project like a
wildlife center should keep you here for a long, long time.
Maybe give me enough time to talk you into building a life with
me, too.”
“A life?” Jillian floundered, her heart bumping against her
ribs. She was dizzy but not from the concussion. “I mean, we
like each other and all but. . . .”
He chuckled as he came around the table, leaned his face
close to hers, nuzzled her cheek. He brushed her lips with his,
making her breath hitch suddenly. “I think there’s a lot more
than ‘like’ between us, Jillian Descharme, and we both know it.
A lot more. And I want to give you more. I want you to take more.
Starting right now.” He pulled her from the chair, kissed her
long and slow and deep until she sighed into his mouth. He
steered her to the bed and laid her on top of the blankets,
followed her down. “I want to make love to you, and I want you
to just lie here and feel it. Don’t move, just feel, okay? Nothing
else.”
She frowned up at him. “It’s the concussion, isn’t it? I don’t
want you to make love to me if you think I’m an invalid.”
“Uh-uh, it’s not like that.” He kissed her again, slower.
“Naturally I’d refrain from acrobatics for now, but if I was afraid
of hurting you, we wouldn’t be doing this at all.” He had her
attention now. Trailed his fingers along her face. “I need this
from you, Jillian. I don’t know how to explain it, I just need you
to feel. Feel me touching you, feel my skin next to yours, feel me
inside of you.” His voice changed, thickened. The words came
out so low and deep that she could feel them vibrating within
her. “Feel me. I want you to feel me, Jillian.” And want me. Accept
me. All of me.
Those last words resonated within her head, almost seemed
to originate there. She could swear he hadn’t moved his lips.
But he was moving them now, placing soft, sensual kisses
along her brow, over her eyelids, her temple. His mouth was hot
against her skin, soothing and arousing at the same time. Her
breath caught in her throat as he suckled her earlobe, nibbled
along the line of her jaw, and outlined her lips with the tip of his
tongue.
She was already dizzy and dazzled by the time he slid his
mouth over hers. His lips enticed, persuaded, coaxed, with a
relentless tenderness. She didn’t notice that the buttons of her
pajamas had been carefully undone, the material pushed aside,
until he pulled her closer, skin to heated skin. She stretched
catlike, instinctively basking in the delicious glowing heat.
Melted before it. Her heart pounded in her ears and a delicious
shiver began at the base of her spine.
Still kissing her, he rolled so that she was on top. She
shrugged out of her pajama top and pressed herself against
him again, luxuriated in the sensation of her nipples against his
hot skin, rubbed them over the crinkling of hair on his broad
chest until they stood out and her breasts felt tight, aching.
Needing. Until she had to shimmy up and present them to be
kissed. She moaned long and low as James obliged. His big
powerful hands roved over her back, the rough palms rasping
deliciously over her skin and helping her to shimmy out of the
rest of the pajamas. James cupped her bottom, kneaded and
squeezed, even as he continued to lavish attention on her
breasts, building her excitement to a fever pitch. She wanted,
needed, had to have. She could feel his hard erection straining
upward against his jeans and rocked her hips, rubbed herself
against the bulging material. She reached down for the zipper,
but he caught her hand and kissed it, rolled her neatly onto her
back. “Yes, oh yes,” she breathed. “Now. Now, now, now.”
“Not yet,” he said. “Later, later, later.”
She groaned, reaching for his zipper again, but he dodged,
grabbing her hand, then seizing the other as well. She tried to
arch her back, strained to rub herself against him but there was
no relief from the wildness she felt, from the frantic need. She
turned her face away from his inflaming kisses. “Stop teasing.”
He kissed her again, but softly. Soothingly. “I’m not teasing
you, sweetheart. I have an itinerary.”
“An itinerary? That’s for travelers.”
“A very strict itinerary. And I am traveling. Watch me.” He
kissed his way rapidly from her throat to her navel, then
continued his kisses down her belly.
James nuzzled her mound, inhaled deeply. Her scent was
unique, delightful, enticing. It called to him to taste. She cried
out and came hard at the first stroke of his tongue, sending a
jolt of excitement through him. Quickly he unzipped his jeans
and slid them down before he strangled. Then bent his head to
her again, pressed his palms on the insides of her thighs,
holding her in place as she arched and bucked. He lapped at
the delicious downy folds, moaning deep in his throat as they
opened to him, revealed the tender pearl hidden away. Gently
he surrounded it with his lips, drew it into his mouth. Licked and
suckled it softly, felt it tighten like Jillian’s rose nipples. Her
gasps and cries of pleasure poured fuel on the fire in his own
body.
But this time was for her. He changed tactics then, made long
strokes with his tongue, darting it inside her, then laving up and
over her tiny bud. Plunge and stroke. Plunge and stroke. Build
the glorious tension within her.
It was building in him too. Her excitement was feeding his and
his body craved release. But what he craved more was the
expression of things he couldn’t put into words. The release he
needed most was of unnamable feelings that were suddenly
crowding his heart. He could only show Jillian, let his touch give
voice to what he couldn’t say. He wanted so much to give and
give to this woman, touch her body until he touched her soul.
Orgasm rippled through her, this one soft and long and
sweet. He rose then, and was instantly dazzled by the sight of
her. The morning sunlight had splashed across her translucent
skin, gilding her delicate breasts and turning her sea green eyes
to emerald. She arched her hips upward to meet him as he
buried himself in her, joined with her in the bright clear light.
James was more aware of his dual nature than he had ever
been. As a man, his heart was close to bursting with a powerful
mixture of joy and tenderness, with the rightness of the
moment. As a wolf, instinct older than time sang in his veins,
exulting in the taking of a mate. The knowledge that it was for
life welled up from his very soul, carried him higher and higher
until he tumbled into the heart of the sun.
Chapter Thirty
The sun was going down and Roderick Harrison’s dinner was
still being kept warm in a tinfoil cocoon in the oven. Douglas
was unconcerned. His father could be fixing fences on the far
side of the sprawling ranch. Could be tending a cow with a
problem, or searching for a calf. Could be in town having a beer
or two and losing a game of pool to Varley. The Alzheimer’s
continued to be in some sort of remission, and his father had
simply resumed his old life.
Must be fucking nice, Douglas thought bitterly. Meanwhile his
own life had been turned completely inside out. And no amount
of Jack Daniels could stop his father’s words from replaying in
his mind. She left us for one of them. She left us to become one of
them.
His mother had loved a werewolf. He didn’t doubt their
existence, he couldn’t, not after what he’d seen when he was
fourteen. And he didn’t doubt that his father hated werewolves,
certainly wouldn’t declare that his own wife had been with one
unless it was true. Roderick had never uttered such a thing
even when the Alzheimer’s was particularly bad. Nor had he
ever once said Douglas wasn’t his son. Oh sure, he’d looked
straight at him and not recognized him, even mistook him for an
employee on several occasions. But there was a big difference
between that and saying he didn’t have a son at all.
So whose son was he? Did having a werewolf father make
him a werewolf too? Would he know? He stared at the photo on
the mantel, at the smiling woman with curly auburn hair. His
hair. He shared that feature with her, shared the amber brown
eyes and the shape of the face, even the damn freckles. What
had he inherited from his unknown father? A talent for howling
at the moon? Tearing out the throats of deer?
He ran a hand over his face, rubbed his eyes as if trying to
erase that particular vision. Knowing Roderick Harrison,
Douglas found it hard to blame his mother for having an affair.
But why the hell couldn’t she have chosen a human lover? At
least he’d only have to wonder who he was, not what he was.
The coffee pot shook in his hand, scattering droplets. Finally
he set it down and gripped the edge of the counter to steady
himself. He yawned hugely, helplessly, until he thought his
head would split in two. In spite of all the drinking he’d done
recently, he’d slept poorly. Every time he nodded off, he’d
dreamed of wolves. Only he wasn’t being chased by them.
He was running with them.
He jerked when the phone rang, swore as he grabbed the
receiver. Varley was on the other end.
“Your dad there, Dougie?”
“No.”
“You know where he is?”
“Not a clue.” Frankly he’d flat-out avoided the old man since
that little revelation in the living room. Didn’t know if he simply
never wanted to see his father again or just not right now.
Douglas had questions, lots of questions—but would the
answers be worse than not knowing? And could he trust an
answer from his father? His stepfather, he amended quickly.
“Look, two of the rifles are missing from my place. Your
father’s favorites, the Browning and the Remington. Some
boxes of cartridges. He say anything to you about hunting?”
Dad’s got a gun? Douglas forced his voice to be calm. “Not
really. Said he found wolf tracks in the north section a few days
ago but never mentioned anything about going after them.”
“Shit.” Varley was silent for a long moment until Douglas
wondered if he’d hung up. “Shitfire. I know Rod’s doing really
well and all, but I just don’t like the idea of him wandering
around with a goddamn gun. Christ on crutches, Dougie. We
both know he could have a relapse at any time, but he could
also have an accident just because he’s old and he’s by
himself.”
“You’re right.” He said what he was expected to say then,
although he didn’t feel like it. “I’ll go look for him.”
“Good man. I’m going to get a couple of the guys to help me
check the woods on the other side of the north pasture. Keep
me posted, okay?”
“You got it. Thanks for the call.” Douglas put the phone down
carefully, his pulse pounding in his ears. “Thanks for the call,
my ass!” Every instinct he possessed told him that his worst
nightmare had just come true. Roderick Harrison wasn’t
hunting wolves at all.
He was hunting werewolves.
The sound of the back door slamming made him jump. He
was even more surprised when his father came through the
kitchen door and laid a quarter of venison on the counter with a
flourish.
“Got a nice young buck, down along the line of spruce in the
south pasture. Thought it was about time we had some game
on the table. Varley around?”
“He’s out looking for you. North section by the woods. He
was . . . figuring you might need a hand with whatever you got,”
Douglas lied a little. He heard his father’s words, saw the deer—
but it didn’t feel right, something was off. “You can call him on
his cell.”
Rod was in a buoyant mood as he picked up the phone. He
arranged for Varley to swing by the house and pick him up,
called for another hand to set up the table and the meat saw in
the machine shed. Argued amiably over whether to do sausage
or hamburger after they cut off some steaks, whether to use
plastic wrap or butcher’s paper.
Within a few minutes, Douglas was left standing alone in the
kitchen staring at the bloody spot on the counter. Rod had
taken the quarter with him to trim down and package.
All normal. All ordinary. Everything just as it had always been.
Except Douglas’s gut said it wasn’t. He sighed and poured half
a cup of coffee, topped it up with the Jack Daniels he had
stashed in the bottom cupboard. Considered drinking it.
Then poured it down the sink.
“It’s brilliant.” Connor spread out the sketches on the table in
the lunchroom. “The design isn’t just great, it’s absolutely
brilliant. Jillian drew these?”
“She did.” There was pride in James’s voice. “This is her
dream, and she’s been designing it for years in her head. I just
encouraged her to put it on paper.”
“She has an amazing grasp of how wild animals think, what
they need to feel secure. Look at how there are no corners, no
hard angles. It’s—what’s the word I’m looking for?—organic,
flowing. I’ve never seen anything like it. You didn’t help?”
“A couple small tweaks, just recommendations really. She did
it all, created something incredible.”
She’s done more than that. She’s worked a miracle. Connor
shielded his thoughts as he looked at his brother. James was
relaxed, easy in his own skin. His human skin. And happy.
Connor had to look back a lot of years to remember his brother
happy.
And as for Jillian, well, she seemed to be floating on air.
Glowing since he’d finally consented to let her résumé work
part-time. Officially at least. He knew full well she’d been doing
little things for Birkie and Caroline when he wasn’t looking,
everything from running lab tests to updating files. At first
Connor tried to talk Jillian into manning the reception area for
half days. She was so horrified by the prospect that he had
relented at once. What had he been thinking? Jillian was too
good a veterinarian to be tied to a desk. Instead, he relegated
the small animal surgeries to her. Besides, considering some of
the customers that came through the front door, surgery was
probably a lot less stressful for her.
Jillian appeared in the doorway just then, still dressed in her
greens. Connor watched as James swept her under his arm and
kissed the top of her head. Both of them smiled and Connor’s
eyes moistened unexpectedly. “Finished in surgery already?”
he managed.
“There were only a couple of spays today. And I removed a
lump from Poodle’s leg.”
“That old Siamese? Good God, he must have used up eight
and three-quarters of his nine lives by now.” Connor shook his
head.
“Poodle?” James looked baffled.
“It’s his name,” explained Jillian. “Kind of like the old Mr.
Magoo cartoons. Remember his cat was named Bowser?”
“I thought that was because he couldn’t see it was a cat.
Maybe Mrs. Malkinson has the same problem.”
Birkie joined the conversation from the hallway. “Enid
Malkinson can identify a finch in a bush at a hundred yards. She
wanted a poodle for her birthday one year, but her husband
gave her a kitten instead.”
“And the rest is history,” said Connor. “A lot of history
actually. That was what, two husbands and three decades ago?
Poodle’s a genuine antique.”
“Speaking of antiques, bossman, I’ve got a couple of overdue
accounts I need you to look at.” Birkie headed back to the front.
“I hate numbers,” Connor grumbled but followed her.
Jillian could still hear the sound of retreating footsteps when
James began placing soft tender kisses on her throat, her ear,
along her jaw. He took her mouth slowly and sweetly until she
lost her breath and had to pull back, one hand planted on his
chest to keep him at bay. “You make me dizzy.”
“I could make you more than that. Let’s go back to your
apartment.” He leaned in to kiss her again, but she dodged and
fled to the other side of the table, laughing. She spotted the
sketches.
“Hey, these are mine.”
“I was showing Connor the design for the center. He thinks
it’s great.”
“He’s okay with the location? What about Zoey? Is it too close
to their farm?”
“We own the farm together, and no, he doesn’t think it’s too
close and I’m sure Zoey will agree when she sees the plans. We
already owned the section of river valley that borders the farm.
But I bought this land adjacent to it not long ago, thought it
might come in handy.” He grinned then. “And see? It already
has.”
“You have great powers of prediction.”
“I can predict more. I can predict that you’re going to move in
with me today.”
“You predicted that yesterday and it didn’t happen.”
“But that was then and this is now. Come home with me.”
She shook her head. “I want a little more time. I’m thrilled to be
working, even a little. I need to be working. But my energy
doesn’t last, and I’m just as thrilled to be able to be home in bed
in thirty seconds flat. Plus I don’t have to cook a single thing. I
swear Bill and Jessie have doubled the amount of food they
stock this fridge with.”
“Feed a concussion, starve a fever?” He circled the table and
slid his arms around her, planting a tender kiss on her forehead.
“I admit, you look tired out, honey. Wish I could kiss your
concussion better for you.”
“It is getting better. It just takes time.”
“I shouldn’t be so impatient. It’s just that I want you with me,
want to get started on that life together.”
She sat in the chair he pulled out for her, was silent for a long
moment. “I think we’ve started already.”
“Well, I spend the night here.”
“No, more than that. I mean . . . James, I’m pregnant.”
Stunned, he knelt awkwardly in front of her and took her
hands, his eyes searching her face.
“I’m sorry, I’m really sorry, James, I don’t know how it
happened—well I know how it happened—but I take the pill for
God’s sake. I’ve never missed taking it, never. Not once.” She
put her hands to her head. “I tested twice to be sure, yesterday
and today, but it’s positive. I’m just so sorry.”
He placed a finger over her lips. “Stop right there. Stop saying
you’re sorry; you’ve got nothing to be sorry about. You didn’t
do this. I should be apologizing to you.”
“I guess we did it, really. Both of us together.”
“Okay. When did we do it? I mean, how long?”
“It has to have been the very first time we were together. In
the forest. I thought I was late because of the accident, thought
maybe the concussion had, you know, thrown off my system or
some darn thing, but . . . oh, I never expected this.”
“Well, it’s a surprise, but as surprises go, it’s a pretty great
one.”
“What?”
He wrapped his arms around her, pulled her down into his lap
and kissed her hair, her brow, her cheeks. “It’s great. Wonderful.
Fantastic. Terrific. Um . . . I can’t even think of enough words,
but it’s definitely great.”
She grabbed his face then, made him look at her. “You’re
happy about it?”
“Didn’t you hear what I just said? Hell, yes, I’m happy about
it.” He pulled back a little to look at her. “What about you? Are
you okay with this?”
“Well, like you said, it’s a surprise. A big one. I . . . I don’t know
how I feel yet. I need some time to wrap my head around it, and I
need to figure out how to fit it in with being a veterinarian.”
He pointed a stern finger at her. “No steer wrestling.”
“Definitely no steer wrestling. I’ll have to modify a lot of my
activities. And see, I just don’t know how that’ll impact my job.”
“Jeez, you’re worried about your job? You belong here.
You’ve had a concussion for weeks and the clinic didn’t fall
down. Everyone pulled together, and you’re doing what you
can. You did, what, three surgeries this morning?”
“Yeah, but they were just little ones. There’s an end to a
concussion. I get better and people don’t have to take up slack
for me, everything’s back to normal. At least, that’s what’s
supposed to happen.”
“Pregnancy’s not a permanent condition, honey.”
“No, but being a parent is.”
“You wouldn’t be the first veterinarian with a family.” James
tucked her head under his chin, breathed in the smell of her
hair. “There’s going to be challenges, but we’ll figure it out as
we go. Why don’t we start by getting married?”
“You don’t have to marry me.”
“What the hell did you think I was planning to do? Haven’t
you heard anything I’ve said about building a life together?
Haven’t I pestered you every day for two weeks to move in with
me?”
“It’s not the same—”
“Jillian.” He lifted her chin with a finger until her eyes met his.
“I’m sorry if I haven’t been clear enough. You shouldn’t have a
single moment of concern as to my feelings or my intentions. I
love you. I’m not easy to love or to live with, but I’m just selfish
enough to want to marry you anyway. I want to live with you in a
home in the country and build a wildlife center and fill it up with
deer and wolves and foxes and owls.”
“Moose, too. Sometimes we get moose.”
“And especially moose. Am I being clear enough now?”
“I think maybe I’m starting to get the picture.”
He took her lips, softly, gently. Kissed her until she moaned
low in her throat. “Is that a yes I hear?”
“Mmmmm—yes. Hey! Stop!”
He had scooped her up and was heading down the hall. “First
things first. You’re tired, you need to lie down. I’ll bet you
haven’t had breakfast either, and it’s already time for lunch.”
“You’re going to be a real pain about this, aren’t you?”
He paused in front of her door until she reached down and
opened it. Swung her inside. “You bet. I’m going to make your
life miserable, and I’m going to begin by making you something
to eat.” He set her carefully on the edge of the bed, stood back
and looked at her with concern. “I should have asked. Are you
feeling okay? Are you sick or anything?”
“I’m not throwing up in the mornings. Although I have to
wonder how much of the nausea I’ve had since the accident
was due to the concussion and how much was because I’m
pregnant.” She covered her lips with her fingers on that last
word. “God, I’m not used to saying that yet. It feels weird. Kind
of scary. Okay, a lot scary. This is really going to change my
life.”
“Our life,” he corrected and sat beside her, gathered her
under one arm. “But we’ll be okay. It’s sooner than we might
have planned, but what’s that plaque on Birkie’s desk say? The
one with the John Lennon quote on it.”
“Life is what happens to you while you’re busy making other
plans.”
“See? This is unexpected, but that doesn’t mean it’s not a
good thing.” He kissed the top of her head. “A wonderful thing.
We’ll raise this child right in the midst of all those animals we
rescue. Not to mention we’ve already got three ponies and a
dozen dogs for him on the farm. That’s a pretty good life for a
kid, don’t you think?”
She hugged him tightly then, unable to speak, and held on for
a long time.
Chapter Thirty-one
“I’m moving to the country, I’m getting married, and I’m having
a baby,” Jillian told her reflection in the mirror. She saw a young
woman with short but unruly blond hair, green eyes, and fine
features. The same woman she saw in the mirror every day, but
somehow she was different now. “Wow, that’s a lot of changes.
And not necessarily in that order either.”
Connor had called James for help in dehorning a pen of
cattle. She’d napped while he was gone, not because he wanted
her to but because she couldn’t help it. She did tire easily. She’d
chalked it up to the concussion until this week when yet
another period failed to appear. That was when she got Caroline
to drive her downtown to one of the pharmacies. She’d loaded
up a shopping basket with tons of things she didn’t need, just
so she could bury two pregnancy test kits in the bottom of it.
She thanked her lucky stars—if she had any—that she got a
young cashier who didn’t know who she was, and that Caroline
didn’t come back before everything was paid for and bagged.
She’d tested the minute she got back to her apartment. The
strip turned blue. She’d heard that sometimes the strip was hard
to read, but no, this was definitely blue. Jillian spent the rest of
the day and half the night trying to think of non-pregnant
reasons why she was testing positive. She waited until James
left for the farm early that morning and tested again. Blue.
She certainly hadn’t planned on blurting the news to James at
lunchtime, but it had worked out just fine. He was just fine,
which was the amazing part. Or maybe not so amazing,
considering the kind of man he was. Like Birkie had said, James
was a complicated man with a tender and loving heart. Just last
week, Jillian found him cuddling a couple of orphan puppies in
the back room. He tried to claim they were cold and he was just
warming them up, but she didn’t buy it. So it wasn’t too hard to
picture his big powerful hands holding a tiny baby. It wasn’t
hard to imagine him with a child either, not after he’d spent
twenty minutes in the clinic’s waiting room letting an 8-year-old
girl show him her pet iguana. James would be a great dad.
But what about her? She’d never thought much about the
whole parenting thing. Her entire focus had been on getting
through all the years of study and classes and practicums to
become a vet. I would have thought about kids eventually. I like kids
almost as much as animals. It was dealing with adults that could
be difficult. She’d often wished the patients she treated didn’t
have owners attached. Unless it was a child. She got along just
fine with the kids who brought their pets to the clinic. She’d
probably be okay with this whole baby thing too, if she ever got
used to the idea.
Jillian puttered around the apartment, discovered the kitchen
garbage can was overflowing, and decided to take it out before
it walked away on its own. James was probably still helping
Connor. She glanced around for him, but as she passed the
livestock wing, she noticed that the cattle pen was empty and
the floor had already been hosed down. She checked her watch
and noted that the clinic had closed several minutes ago. Maybe
James had gone back to the farm for something. No matter, he’d
turn up eventually.
She squinted as she approached the back door and tried to
shade her eyes. The late afternoon sun was glaring through the
window, reflecting off the white tile floor and the pale walls of
the hallway. It was a relief to step outside. It was bright out here
too, but at least the light was coming from only one direction.
Blinking, Jillian headed for the trees at the back of the parking
lot where the bin was set up. It was a hot day and the shade was
welcome by the time she tossed in her bag, but with the aroma
of eau de dumpster hanging heavy in the air, she didn’t want to
linger. Resigning herself to re-crossing the wide expanse of
sunlit pavement, Jillian turned. And stopped dead.
Roderick Harrison was pointing a rifle at her.
“What the hell are you doing? Put that down!” Jillian
demanded, sounding a lot braver than she felt. She was
deliberately assertive, sensing it would be a mistake to act like a
victim. The man wasn’t wild-eyed and raving like the last time
she’d seen him, but there was an intensity to him that would
have been scary even without the weapon. She clenched her
fists, automatically looking for some way to engage him, but he
was well out of her reach. Besides, her martial arts training
covered only attackers with hand weapons. A rifle could kill
from a distance.
“I told you to run while you could. Told you to get away, but
you wouldn’t listen. I can see the blue, you know.”
“The blue what?” It was good that he was talking. Maybe she
could keep him talking. Please God, let someone see me out here.
She thought about screaming for help, but that didn’t seem like
a good idea, not with the gun aimed at her midsection. She
could be dead long before anyone heard her.
“The aura. You all have it. The whole damn nest of you.” He
spat on the pavement without taking his eyes off her. “Corena
would never have left if it wasn’t for you. She’d still be alive.
She’d still be with me.”
“Who’s Corena?”
“You know damn well who she is. You all know each other.
And no one’s allowed to leave the pack, are they? Goddamn
fucking werewolves. You’re just like the goddamn mafia, you
gotta have control, gotta have order. She tried to leave, and you
killed her.”
She should have guessed this was about werewolves. She
tried to play along, sound calm and reasonable. “I’m sorry to
hear you lost someone. But I’m sure nobody here had anything
to do with it.”
“I’ve seen that big white devil here, seen his whole pack here.
This is goddamn werewolf headquarters.”
He had seen the white wolf. That was the reason behind this.
But what was the right thing to say? He’d expect her to deny it.
Acceptance. Validate what he’s witnessed. “It’s true that the wolf
has been here. The white wolf is a frequent visitor to our clinic.”
It surprised him. He seemed to consider for a few seconds,
studied her through narrowed eyes. “And the others?”
She drew a blank then. “What others? I’ve only seen one
wolf.”
“Kept you for himself then. Kept you away from the others. I
should have known when I saw his aura all over you. He’s
going to change you, and keep you. Breed up a whole new
pack.” He pointed at her belly with the gun. “Already started.”
A shiver ran through her. This was too weird, much too weird.
How the hell did this guy know she was pregnant? She hadn’t
known herself until—Forget that, she ordered herself. Focus on
what to say now. How do I talk my way out of this? How do you reason
with a crazy person? “But I’m not a werewolf myself.”
“That’s only a matter of time.” He raised the rifle, aiming at her
head.
Oh Jesus. Think “Corena wouldn’t want you to do this.”
“I let her talk me out of it once. I should never have listened.”
His finger was on the trigger. “Liars and deceivers. That’s what
you are, all of you. Pretending to be human, but underneath
you’re all teeth and claws, just waiting for a chance to use
them.”
Jillian jolted at the sound of glass breaking from the direction
of the clinic. Harrison glanced behind him, and she used the
distraction to dive to one side. She landed hard, scrambled up
ready to run, when an unearthly howl, a blood-freezing battle
cry, held her in place. An enormous white wolf, her wolf, was
racing toward them, glittering shards of broken glass still flying
from its coat. The sun glinted off its bared teeth as it leapt for
her assailant. And Harrison swung to meet the attack. “No,
don’t!” she screamed.
The explosion hurt her ears, deafened her. Wolf and man hit
the ground together, rolled. The rifle skittered to the pavement.
Then the white wolf lay still. Blood soaked its snowy white fur
and pooled in the sun.
Her ears still ringing, Jillian couldn’t think, could only react.
She ran to the wolf, scrambled to find a pulse. “Stay with me,
stay with me,” she chanted, over and over, as she put pressure
on the terrible wound in an effort 