             THE EMPEROR’S NEW  CLOTHES

     Many years ago, there was an Emperor, who was so
excessively fond of new clothes, that he spent all his
money in dress. He did not trouble himself in the least
about his soldiers; nor did he care to go either to the
theatre or the chase, except for the opportunities then
afforded him for displaying his new clothes. He had a
different suit for each hour of the day; and as of any other
king or emperor, one is accustomed to say, ‘he is sitting in
council,’ it was always said of him, ‘The Emperor is sitting
in his wardrobe.’
    Time passed merrily in the large town which was his
capital; strangers arrived every day at the court. One day,
two rogues, calling themselves weavers, made their
appearance. They gave out that they knew how to weave
stuffs of the most beautiful colors and elaborate patterns,
the clothes manufactured from which should have the
wonderful property of remaining invisible to everyone
who was unfit for the office he held, or who was
extraordinarily simple in character.
     ‘These must, indeed, be splendid clothes!’ thought the
Emperor. ‘Had I such a suit, I might at once find out what
men in my realms are unfit for their office, and also be
able to distinguish the wise from the foolish! This stuff
must be woven for me immediately.’ And he caused large
sums of money to be given to both the weavers in order
that they might begin their work directly.
So the two pretended weavers set up two looms, and
affected to work very busily, though in reality they did
nothing at all. They asked for the most delicate silk and
the purest gold thread; put both into their own knapsacks;
and then continued their pretended work at the empty
looms until late at night.
    ‘I should like to know how the weavers are getting on
with my cloth,’ said the Emperor to himself, after some
little time had elapsed; he was, however, rather
embarrassed, when he remembered that a simpleton, or
one unfit for his office, would be unable to see the
manufacture. To be sure, he thought he had nothing to
risk in his own person; but yet, he would prefer sending
somebody else, to bring him intelligence about the
weavers, and their work, before he troubled himself in the
affair. All the people throughout the city had heard of the
wonderful property the cloth was to possess; and all were
anxious to learn how wise, or how ignorant, their
neighbors might prove to be.
    ‘I will send my faithful old minister to the weavers,’
said the Emperor at last, after some deliberation, ‘he will
be best able to see how the cloth looks; for he is a man of
sense, and no one can be more suitable for his office than
be is.’
   So the faithful old minister went into the hall, where
the knaves were working with all their might, at their
empty looms. ‘What can be the meaning of this?’ thought
the old man, opening his eyes very wide. ‘I cannot
discover the least bit of thread on the looms.’ However,
he did not express his thoughts aloud.
The impostors requested him very courteously to be so
good as to come nearer their looms; and then asked him
whether the design pleased him, and whether the colors
were not very beautiful; at the same time pointing to the
empty frames. The poor old minister looked and looked,
he could not discover anything on the looms, for a very
good reason, viz: there was nothing there. ‘What!’ thought
he again. ‘Is it possible that I am a simpleton? I have never
thought so myself; and no one must know it now if I am
so. Can it be, that I am unfit for my office? No, that must
not be said either. I will never confess that I could not see
the stuff.’
    ‘Well, Sir Minister!’ said one of the knaves, still
pretending to work. ‘You do not say whether the stuff
pleases you.’
    ‘Oh, it is excellent!’ replied the old minister, looking at
the loom through his spectacles. ‘This pattern, and the
colors, yes, I will tell the Emperor without delay, how
very beautiful I think them.’
    ‘We shall be much obliged to you,’ said the impostors,
and then they named the different colors and described the
pattern of the pretended stuff. The old minister listened
attentively to their words, in order that he might repeat
them to the Emperor; and then the knaves asked for more
silk and gold, saying that it was necessary to complete
what they had begun. However, they put all that was
given them into their knapsacks; and continued to work
with as much apparent diligence as before at their empty
looms.
    The Emperor now sent another officer of his court to
see how the men were getting on, and to ascertain
whether the cloth would soon be ready. It was just the
same with this gentleman as with the minister; he surveyed
the looms on all sides, but could see nothing at all but the
empty frames.
    ‘Does not the stuff appear as beautiful to you, as it did
to my lord the minister?’ asked the impostors of the
Emperor’s second ambassador; at the same time making
the same gestures as before, and talking of the design and
colors which were not there.
   ‘I certainly am not stupid!’ thought the messenger. ‘It
must be, that I am not fit for my good, profitable office!
That is very odd; however, no one shall know anything
about it.’ And accordingly he praised the stuff he could
not see, and declared that he was delighted with both
colors and patterns. ‘Indeed, please your Imperial Majesty,’
said he to his sovereign when he returned, ‘the cloth
which the weavers are preparing is extraordinarily
magnificent.’
The whole city was talking of the splendid cloth which
the Emperor had ordered to be woven at his own
expense.
   And now the Emperor himself wished to see the costly
manufacture, while it was still in the loom. Accompanied
by a select number of officers of the court, among whom
were the two honest men who had already admired the
cloth, he went to the crafty impostors, who, as soon as
they were aware of the Emperor’s approach, went on
working more diligently than ever; although they still did
not pass a single thread through the looms.
‘Is not the work absolutely magnificent?’ said the two
officers of the crown, already mentioned. ‘If your Majesty
will only be pleased to look at it! What a splendid design!
What glorious colors!’ and at the same time they pointed
to the empty frames; for they imagined that everyone else
could see this exquisite piece of workmanship.
    ‘How is this?’ said the Emperor to himself. ‘I can see
nothing! This is indeed a terrible affair! Am I a simpleton,
or am I unfit to be an Emperor? That would be the worst
thing that could happen—Oh! the cloth is charming,’ said
he, aloud. ‘It has my complete approbation.’ And he
smiled most graciously, and looked closely at the empty
looms; for on no account would he say that he could not
see what two of the officers of his court had praised so
much. All his retinue now strained their eyes, hoping to
discover something on the looms, but they could see no
more than the others; nevertheless, they all exclaimed,
    ‘Oh, how beautiful!’ and advised his majesty to have some
new clothes made from this splendid material, for the
approaching procession. ‘Magnificent! Charming!
Excellent!’ resounded on all sides; and everyone was
uncommonly gay. The Emperor shared in the general
satisfaction; and presented the impostors with the riband of
an order of knighthood, to be worn in their button-holes,
and the title of ‘Gentlemen Weavers.’
The rogues sat up the whole of the night before the
day on which the procession was to take place, and had
sixteen lights burning, so that everyone might see how
anxious they were to finish the Emperor’s new suit. They
pretended to roll the cloth off the looms; cut the air with
their scissors; and sewed with needles without any thread
in them. ‘See!’ cried they, at last. ‘The Emperor’s new
clothes are ready!’
   And now the Emperor, with all the grandees of his
court, came to the weavers; and the rogues raised their
arms, as if in the act of holding something up, saying,
    ‘Here are your Majesty’s trousers! Here is the scarf! Here is
the mantle! The whole suit is as light as a cobweb; one
might fancy one has nothing at all on, when dressed in it;
that, however, is the great virtue of this delicate cloth.’
    ‘Yes indeed!’ said all the courtiers, although not one of
them could see anything of this exquisite manufacture.
‘If your Imperial Majesty will be graciously pleased to
take off your clothes, we will fit on the new suit, in front
of the looking glass.’
     The Emperor was accordingly undressed, and the
rogues pretended to array him in his new suit; the
Emperor turning round, from side to side, before the
looking glass.
    ‘How splendid his Majesty looks in his new clothes,
and how well they fit!’ everyone cried out. ‘What a
design! What colors! These are indeed royal robes!’
    ‘The canopy which is to be borne over your Majesty,
in the procession, is waiting,’ announced the chief master
of the ceremonies.
   ‘I am quite ready,’ answered the Emperor. ‘Do my new
clothes fit well?’ asked he, turning himself round again
before the looking glass, in order that he might appear to
be examining his handsome suit.
The lords of the bedchamber, who were to carry his
Majesty’s train felt about on the ground, as if they were
lifting up the ends of the mantle; and pretended to be
carrying something; for they would by no means betray
anything like simplicity, or unfitness for their office.
    So now the Emperor walked under his high canopy in
the midst of the procession, through the streets of his
capital; and all the people standing by, and those at the
windows, cried out, ‘Oh! How beautiful are our
Emperor’s new clothes! What a magnificent train there is
to the mantle; and how gracefully the scarf hangs!’ in
short, no one would allow that he could not see these
much-admired clothes; because, in doing so, he would
have declared himself either a simpleton or unfit for his
office. Certainly, none of the Emperor’s various suits, had
ever made so great an impression, as these invisible ones.
   ‘But the Emperor has nothing at all on!’ said a little
child.
   ‘Listen to the voice of innocence!’ exclaimed his father;
and what the child had said was whispered from one to
another.
    ‘But he has nothing at all on!’ at last cried out all the
people. The Emperor was vexed, for he knew that the
people were right; but he thought the procession must go
on now! And the lords of the bedchamber took greater
pains than ever, to appear holding up a train, although, in
reality, there was no train to hold.
    

          
                 THE SWINEHERD


    There was once a poor Prince, who had a kingdom.
His kingdom was very small, but still quite large enough
to marry upon; and he wished to marry.
It was certainly rather cool of him to say to the
Emperor’s daughter, ‘Will you have me?’ But so he did;
for his name was renowned far and wide; and there were a
hundred princesses who would have answered, ‘Yes!’ and
   ‘Thank you kindly.’ We shall see what this princess said.
Listen!
    It happened that where the Prince’s father lay buried,
there grew a rose tree—a most beautiful rose tree, which
blossomed only once in every five years, and even then
bore only one flower, but that was a rose! It smelt so sweet
that all cares and sorrows were forgotten by him who
inhaled its fragrance.
    And furthermore, the Prince had a nightingale, who
could sing in such a manner that it seemed as though all
sweet melodies dwelt in her little throat. So the Princess
was to have the rose, and the nightingale; and they were
accordingly put into large silver caskets, and sent to her.
The Emperor had them brought into a large hall,
where the Princess was playing at ‘Visiting,’ with the ladies
of the court; and when she saw the caskets with the
presents, she clapped her hands for joy.
    ‘Ah, if it were but a little pussy-cat!’ said she; but the
rose tree, with its beautiful rose came to view.
    ‘Oh, how prettily it is made!’ said all the court ladies.
   ‘It is more than pretty,’ said the Emperor, ‘it is
charming!’
But the Princess touched it, and was almost ready to
cry.
‘Fie, papa!’ said she. ‘It is not made at all, it is natural!’
‘Let us see what is in the other casket, before we get
into a bad humor,’ said the Emperor. So the nightingale
came forth and sang so delightfully that at first no one
could say anything ill-humored of her.
‘Superbe! Charmant! exclaimed the ladies; for they all
used to chatter French, each one worse than her neighbor.
‘How much the bird reminds me of the musical box
that belonged to our blessed Empress,’ said an old knight.
‘Oh yes! These are the same tones, the same execution.’
‘Yes! yes!’ said the Emperor, and he wept like a child at
the remembrance.
‘I will still hope that it is not a real bird,’ said the
Princess.
‘Yes, it is a real bird,’ said those who had brought it.
‘Well then let the bird fly,’ said the Princess; and she
positively refused to see the Prince.
However, he was not to be discouraged; he daubed his
face over brown and black; pulled his cap over his ears,
and knocked at the door.
‘Good day to my lord, the Emperor!’ said he. ‘Can I
have employment at the palace?’
‘Why, yes,’ said the Emperor. ‘I want some one to take
care of the pigs, for we have a great many of them.’
So the Prince was appointed ‘Imperial Swineherd.’ He
had a dirty little room close by the pigsty; and there he sat
the whole day, and worked. By the evening he had made
a pretty little kitchen-pot. Little bells were hung all round
it; and when the pot was boiling, these bells tinkled in the
most charming manner, and played the old melody,
‘Ach! du lieber Augustin, Alles ist weg, weg, weg!’*
* ‘Ah! dear Augustine! All is gone, gone, gone!’
But what was still more curious, whoever held his
finger in the smoke of the kitchen-pot, immediately smelt
all the dishes that were cooking on every hearth in the
city—this, you see, was something quite different from the
rose.
Now the Princess happened to walk that way; and
when she heard the tune, she stood quite still, and seemed
pleased; for she could play ‘Lieber Augustine"; it was the
only piece she knew; and she played it with one finger.
‘Why there is my piece,’ said the Princess. ‘That
swineherd must certainly have been well educated! Go in
and ask him the price of the instrument.’
So one of the court-ladies must run in; however, she
drew on wooden slippers first.
‘What will you take for the kitchen-pot?’ said the lady.
‘I will have ten kisses from the Princess,’ said the
swineherd.
‘Yes, indeed!’ said the lady.
‘I cannot sell it for less,’ rejoined the swineherd.
‘He is an impudent fellow!’ said the Princess, and she
walked on; but when she had gone a little way, the bells
tinkled so prettily
‘Ach! du lieber Augustin, Alles ist weg, weg, weg!’
‘Stay,’ said the Princess. ‘Ask him if he will have ten
kisses from the ladies of my court.’
‘No, thank you!’ said the swineherd. ‘Ten kisses from
the Princess, or I keep the kitchen-pot myself.’
‘That must not be, either!’ said the Princess. ‘But do
you all stand before me that no one may see us.’
And the court-ladies placed themselves in front of her,
and spread out their dresses—the swineherd got ten kisses,
and the Princess—the kitchen-pot.
That was delightful! The pot was boiling the whole
evening, and the whole of the following day. They knew
perfectly well what was cooking at every fire throughout
the city, from the chamberlain’s to the cobbler’s; the
court-ladies danced and clapped their hands.
‘We know who has soup, and who has pancakes for
dinner to-day, who has cutlets, and who has eggs. How
interesting!’
‘Yes, but keep my secret, for I am an Emperor’s
daughter.’
    The swineherd—that is to say—the Prince, for no one
knew that he was other than an ill-favored swineherd, let
not a day pass without working at something; he at last
constructed a rattle, which, when it was swung round,
played all the waltzes and jig tunes, which have ever been
heard since the creation of the world.
‘Ah, that is superbe!’ said the Princess when she passed
by. ‘I have never heard prettier compositions! Go in and
ask him the price of the instrument; but mind, he shall
have no more kisses!’
‘He will have a hundred kisses from the Princess!’ said
the lady who had been to ask.
‘I think he is not in his right senses!’ said the Princess,
and walked on, but when she had gone a little way, she
stopped again. ‘One must encourage art,’ said she, ‘I am
the Emperor’s daughter. Tell him he shall, as on yesterday,
have ten kisses from me, and may take the rest from the
ladies of the court.’
‘Oh—but we should not like that at all!’ said they.
‘What are you muttering?’ asked the Princess. ‘If I can kiss
him, surely you can. Remember that you owe everything
to me.’ So the ladies were obliged to go to him again.
   ‘A hundred kisses from the Princess,’ said he, ‘or else let
everyone keep his own!’
   ‘Stand round!’ said she; and all the ladies stood round
her whilst the kissing was going on.
   ‘What can be the reason for such a crowd close by the
pigsty?’ said the Emperor, who happened just then to step
out on the balcony; he rubbed his eyes, and put on his
spectacles. ‘They are the ladies of the court; I must go
down and see what they are about!’ So he pulled up his
slippers at the heel, for he had trodden them down.
    As soon as he had got into the court-yard, he moved
very softly, and the ladies were so much engrossed with
counting the kisses, that all might go on fairly, that they
did not perceive the Emperor. He rose on his tiptoes.
‘What is all this?’ said he, when he saw what was going
on, and he boxed the Princess’s ears with his slipper, just
as the swineherd was taking the eighty-sixth kiss.
‘March out!’ said the Emperor, for he was very angry;
and both Princess and swineherd were thrust out of the
city.
The Princess now stood and wept, the swineherd
scolded, and the rain poured down.
    ‘Alas! Unhappy creature that I am!’ said the Princess. ‘If
I had but married the handsome young Prince! Ah! how
unfortunate I am!’
And the swineherd went behind a tree, washed the
black and brown color from his face, threw off his dirty
clothes, and stepped forth in his princely robes; he looked
so noble that the Princess could not help bowing before
him.
    ‘I am come to despise thee,’ said he. ‘Thou would’st
not have an honorable Prince! Thou could’st not prize the
rose and the nightingale, but thou wast ready to kiss the
swineherd for the sake of a trumpery plaything. Thou art
rightly served.’
He then went back to his own little kingdom, and shut
the door of his palace in her face. Now she might well
sing,
‘Ach! du lieber Augustin, Alles ist weg, weg, weg!’


                 THE REAL PRINCESS


      There was once a Prince who wished to marry a
Princess; but then she must be a real Princess. He travelled
all over the world in hopes of finding such a lady; but
there was always something wrong. Princesses he found in
plenty; but whether they were real Princesses it was
impossible for him to decide, for now one thing, now
another, seemed to him not quite right about the ladies.
At last he returned to his palace quite cast down, because
he wished so much to have a real Princess for his wife.
      One evening a fearful tempest arose, it thundered and
lightened, and the rain poured down from the sky in
torrents: besides, it was as dark as pitch. All at once there
was heard a violent knocking at the door, and the old
King, the Prince’s father, went out himself to open it.
It was a Princess who was standing outside the door.
What with the rain and the wind, she was in a sad
condition; the water trickled down from her hair, and her
clothes clung to her body. She said she was a real Princess.
‘Ah! we shall soon see that!’ thought the old Queenmother;
however, she said not a word of what she was
going to do; but went quietly into the bedroom, took all
the bed-clothes off the bed, and put three little peas on the
bedstead. She then laid twenty mattresses one upon
another over the three peas, and put twenty feather beds
over the mattresses.
   Upon this bed the Princess was to pass the night.
   The next morning she was asked how she had slept.
   Oh, very badly indeed!’ she replied. ‘I have scarcely
closed my eyes the whole night through. I do not know
what was in my bed, but I had something hard under me,
and am all over black and blue. It has hurt me so much!’
Now it was plain that the lady must be a real Princess,
since she had been able to feel the three little peas through
the twenty mattresses and twenty feather beds. None but a
real Princess could have had such a delicate sense of
feeling.
   The Prince accordingly made her his wife; being now
convinced that he had found a real Princess. The three
peas were however put into the cabinet of curiosities,
where they are still to be seen, provided they are not lost.
Wasn’t this a lady of real delicacy?


                I. A Beginning


   Every author has some peculiarity in his descriptions or
in his style of writing. Those who do not like him,
magnify it, shrug up their shoulders, and exclaim—there
he is again! I, for my part, know very well how I can bring
about this movement and this exclamation. It would
happen immediately if I were to begin here, as I intended
to do, with: ‘Rome has its Corso, Naples its Toledo’—
‘Ah! that Andersen; there he is again!’ they would cry; yet
    I must, to please my fancy, continue quite quietly, and
add: ‘But Copenhagen has its East Street.’
Here, then, we will stay for the present. In one of the
houses not far from the new market a party was invited—a
very large party, in order, as is often the case, to get a
return invitation from the others. One half of the
company was already seated at the card-table, the other
half awaited the result of the stereotype preliminary
observation of the lady of the house:
   ‘Now let us see what we can do to amuse ourselves.’
They had got just so far, and the conversation began to
crystallise, as it could but do with the scanty stream which
the commonplace world supplied. Amongst other things
they spoke of the middle ages: some praised that period as
far more interesting, far more poetical than our own too
sober present; indeed Councillor Knap defended this
opinion so warmly, that the hostess declared immediately
on his side, and both exerted themselves with unwearied
eloquence. The Councillor boldly declared the time of
King Hans to be the noblest and the most happy period.*
* A.D. 1482-1513
     While the conversation turned on this subject, and was
only for a moment interrupted by the arrival of a journal
that contained nothing worth reading, we will just step
out into the antechamber, where cloaks, mackintoshes,
sticks, umbrellas, and shoes, were deposited. Here sat two
female figures, a young and an old one. One might have
thought at first they were servants come to accompany
their mistresses home; but on looking nearer, one soon
saw they could scarcely be mere servants; their forms were
too noble for that, their skin too fine, the cut of their dress
too striking. Two fairies were they; the younger, it is true,
was not Dame Fortune herself, but one of the waitingmaids
of her handmaidens who carry about the lesser good
things that she distributes; the other looked extremely
gloomy—it was Care. She always attends to her own
serious business herself, as then she is sure of having it
done properly.
     They were telling each other, with a confidential
interchange of ideas, where they had been during the day.
The messenger of Fortune had only executed a few
unimportant commissions, such as saving a new bonnet
from a shower of rain, etc.; but what she had yet to
perform was something quite unusual.
    ‘I must tell you,’ said she, ‘that to-day is my birthday;
and in honor of it, a pair of walking-shoes or galoshes has
been entrusted to me, which I am to carry to mankind.
These shoes possess the property of instantly transporting
him who has them on to the place or the period in which
he most wishes to be; every wish, as regards time or place,
or state of being, will be immediately fulfilled, and so at
last man will be happy, here below.’
   ‘Do you seriously believe it?’ replied Care, in a severe
tone of reproach. ‘No; he will be very unhappy, and will
assuredly bless the moment when he feels that he has freed
himself from the fatal shoes.’
‘Stupid nonsense!’ said the other angrily. ‘I will put
them here by the door. Some one will make a mistake for
certain and take the wrong ones—he will be a happy
man.’
   Such was their conversation.


            II. What Happened to the Councillor


     It was late; Councillor Knap, deeply occupied with the
times of King Hans, intended to go home, and malicious
Fate managed matters so that his feet, instead of finding
their way to his own galoshes, slipped into those of
Fortune. Thus caparisoned the good man walked out of
the well-lighted rooms into East Street. By the magic
power of the shoes he was carried back to the times of
King Hans; on which account his foot very naturally sank
in the mud and puddles of the street, there having been in
those days no pavement in Copenhagen.
     ‘Well! This is too bad! How dirty it is here!’ sighed the
Councillor. ‘As to a pavement, I can find no traces of one,
and all the lamps, it seems, have gone to sleep.’
The moon was not yet very high; it was besides rather
foggy, so that in the darkness all objects seemed mingled
in chaotic confusion. At the next corner hung a votive
lamp before a Madonna, but the light it gave was little
better than none at all; indeed, he did not observe it
before he was exactly under it, and his eyes fell upon the
bright colors of the pictures which represented the wellknown
group of the Virgin and the infant Jesus.
    ‘That is probably a wax-work show,’ thought he; ‘and
the people delay taking down their sign in hopes of a late
visitor or two.’
A few persons in the costume of the time of King Hans
passed quickly by him.
    ‘How strange they look! The good folks come probably
from a masquerade!’
Suddenly was heard the sound of drums and fifes; the
bright blaze of a fire shot up from time to time, and its
ruddy gleams seemed to contend with the bluish light of
the torches. The Councillor stood still, and watched a
most strange procession pass by. First came a dozen
drummers, who understood pretty well how to handle
their instruments; then came halberdiers, and some armed
with cross-bows. The principal person in the procession
was a priest. Astonished at what he saw, the Councillor
asked what was the meaning of all this mummery, and
who that man was.
    ‘That’s the Bishop of Zealand,’ was the answer.
    ‘Good Heavens! What has taken possession of the
Bishop?’ sighed the Councillor, shaking his bead. It
certainly could not be the Bishop; even though he was
considered the most absent man in the whole kingdom,
and people told the drollest anecdotes about him.
   Reflecting on the matter, and without looking right or
left, the Councillor went through East Street and across
the Habro-Platz. The bridge leading to Palace Square was
not to be found; scarcely trusting his senses, the nocturnal
wanderer discovered a shallow piece of water, and here
fell in with two men who very comfortably were rocking
to and fro in a boat.
   ‘Does your honor want to cross the ferry to the
Holme?’ asked they.
   ‘Across to the Holme!’ said the Councillor, who knew
nothing of the age in which he at that moment was. ‘No,
I am going to Christianshafen, to Little Market Street.’
Both men stared at him in astonishment.
   ‘Only just tell me where the bridge is,’ said he. ‘It is
really unpardonable that there are no lamps here; and it is
as dirty as if one had to wade through a morass.’
The longer he spoke with the boatmen, the more
unintelligible did their language become to him.
    ‘I don’t understand your Bornholmish dialect,’ said he
at last, angrily, and turning his back upon them. He was
unable to find the bridge: there was no railway either. ‘It is
really disgraceful what a state this place is in,’ muttered he
to himself. Never had his age, with which, however, he
was always grumbling, seemed so miserable as on this
evening. ‘I’ll take a hackney-coach!’ thought he. But
where were the hackneycoaches? Not one was to be seen.
    ‘I must go back to the New Market; there, it is to be
hoped, I shall find some coaches; for if I don’t, I shall
never get safe to Christianshafen.’
So off he went in the direction of East Street, and had
nearly got to the end of it when the moon shone forth.
‘God bless me! What wooden scaffolding is that which
they have set up there?’ cried he involuntarily, as he
looked at East Gate, which, in those days, was at the end
of East Street.
   He found, however, a little side-door open, and
through this he went, and stepped into our New Market
of the present time. It was a huge desolate plain; some
wild bushes stood up here and there, while across the field
flowed a broad canal or river. Some wretched hovels for
the Dutch sailors, resembling great boxes, and after which
the place was named, lay about in confused disorder on
the opposite bank.
   ‘I either behold a fata morgana, or I am regularly tipsy,’
whimpered out the Councillor. ‘But what’s this?’
He turned round anew, firmly convinced that he was
seriously ill. He gazed at the street formerly so well known
to him, and now so strange in appearance, and looked at
the houses more attentively: most of them were of wood,
slightly put together; and many had a thatched roof.
‘No—I am far from well,’ sighed he; ‘and yet I drank
only one glass of punch; but I cannot suppose it—it was,
too, really very wrong to give us punch and hot salmon
for supper. I shall speak about it at the first opportunity. I
have half a mind to go back again, and say what I suffer.
But no, that would be too silly; and Heaven only knows if
they are up still.’
    He looked for the house, but it had vanished.
   ‘It is really dreadful,’ groaned he with increasing
anxiety; ‘I cannot recognise East Street again; there is not a
single decent shop from one end to the other! Nothing
but wretched huts can I see anywhere; just as if I were at
Ringstead. Ohl I am ill! I can scarcely bear myself any
longer. Where the deuce can the house be? It must be
here on this very spot; yet there is not the slightest idea of
resemblance, to such a degree has everything changed this
night! At all events here are some people up and stirring.
Oh! oh! I am certainly very ill.’
   He now hit upon a half-open door, through a chink of
which a faint light shone. It was a sort of hostelry of those
times; a kind of public-house. The room had some
resemblance to the clay-floored halls in Holstein; a pretty
numerous company, consisting of seamen, Copenhagen
burghers, and a few scholars, sat here in deep converse
over their pewter cans, and gave little heed to the person
who entered.
   ‘By your leave!’ said the Councillor to the Hostess,
who came bustling towards him. ‘I’ve felt so queer all of a
sudden; would you have the goodness to send for a
hackney-coach to take me to Christianshafen?’
The woman examined him with eyes of astonishment,
and shook her head; she then addressed him in German.
The Councillor thought she did not understand Danish,
and therefore repeated his wish in German. This, in
connection with his costume, strengthened the good
woman in the belief that he was a foreigner. That he was
ill, she comprehended directly; so she brought him a
pitcher of water, which tasted certainly pretty strong of the
sea, although it had been fetched from the well.
The Councillor supported his head on his hand, drew a
long breath, and thought over all the wondrous things he
saw around him.
   ‘Is this the Daily News of this evening?’ be asked
mechanically, as he saw the Hostess push aside a large
sheet of paper.
   The meaning of this councillorship query remained, of
course, a riddle to her, yet she handed him the paper
without replying. It was a coarse wood-cut, representing a
splendid meteor ‘as seen in the town of Cologne,’ which
was to be read below in bright letters.
‘That is very old!’ said the Councillor, whom this piece
of antiquity began to make considerably more cheerful.
‘Pray how did you come into possession of this rare print?
It is extremely interesting, although the whole is a mere
fable. Such meteorous appearances are to be explained in
this way—that they are the reflections of the Aurora
Borealis, and it is highly probable they are caused
principally by electricity.’
Those persons who were sitting nearest him and beard
his speech, stared at him in wonderment; and one of them
rose, took off his hat respectfully, and said with a serious
countenance, ‘You are no doubt a very learned man,
Monsieur.’
    ‘Oh no,’ answered the Councillor, ‘I can only join in
conversation on this topic and on that, as indeed one must
do according to the demands of the world at present.’
   ‘Modestia is a fine virtue,’ continued the gentleman;
    ‘however, as to your speech, I must say mihi secus videtur:
yet I am willing to suspend my judicium.’
    ‘May I ask with whom I have the pleasure of speaking?’
asked the Councillor.
‘I am a Bachelor in Theologia,’ answered the
gentleman with a stiff reverence.
This reply fully satisfied the Councillor; the title suited
the dress. ‘He is certainly,’ thought he, ‘some village
schoolmaster-some queer old fellow, such as one still often
meets with in Jutland.’
‘This is no locus docendi, it is true,’ began the clerical
gentleman; ‘yet I beg you earnestly to let us profit by your
learning. Your reading in the ancients is, sine dubio, of
vast extent?’
   ‘Oh yes, I’ve read a something, to be sure,’ replied the
Councillor. ‘I like reading all useful works; but I do not
on that account despise the modern ones; ‘tis only the
unfortunate ‘Tales of Every-day Life’ that I cannot bear—
we have enough and more than enough such in reality.’
   ‘‘Tales of Every-day Life?’’ said our Bachelor
inquiringly.
   ‘I mean those new fangled novels, twisting and
writhing themselves in the dust of commonplace, which
also expect to find a reading public.’
   ‘Oh,’ exclaimed the clerical gentleman smiling, ‘there is
much wit in them; besides they are read at court. The
King likes the history of Sir Iffven and Sir Gaudian
particularly, which treats of King Arthur, and his Knights
of the Round Table; he has more than once joked about it
with his high vassals.’
‘I have not read that novel,’ said the Councillor; ‘it
must be quite a new one, that Heiberg has published
lately.’
   ‘No,’ answered the theologian of the time of King
Hans: ‘that book is not written by a Heiberg, but was
imprinted by Godfrey von Gehmen.’
   ‘Oh, is that the author’s name?’ said the Councillor. ‘It
is a very old name, and, as well as I recollect, he was the
first printer that appeared in Denmark.’
    ‘Yes, he is our first printer,’ replied the clerical
gentleman hastily.
So far all went on well. Some one of the worthy
burghers now spoke of the dreadful pestilence that had
raged in the country a few years back, meaning that of
1484. The Councillor imagined it was the cholera that was
meant, which people made so much fuss about; and the
discourse passed off satisfactorily enough. The war of the
buccaneers of 1490 was so recent that it could not fail
being alluded to; the English pirates had, they said, most
shamefully taken their ships while in the roadstead; and
the Councillor, before whose eyes the Herostratic* event
of 1801 still floated vividly, agreed entirely with the others
in abusing the rascally English. With other topics he was
not so fortunate; every moment brought about some new
confusion, and threatened to become a perfect Babel; for
the worthy Bachelor was really too ignorant, and the
simplest observations of the Councillor sounded to him
too daring and phantastical. They looked at one another
from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet; and
when matters grew to too high a pitch, then the Bachelor
talked Latin, in the hope of being better understood—but
it was of no use after all.
    * Herostratus, or Eratostratus—an Ephesian, who
wantonly set fire to the famous temple of Diana, in order
to commemorate his name by so uncommon an action.
    ‘What’s the matter?’ asked the Hostess, plucking the
Councillor by the sleeve; and now his recollection
returned, for in the course of the conversation he had
entirely forgotten all that had preceded it.
‘Merciful God, where am I!’ exclaimed he in agony;
and while he so thought, all his ideas and feelings of
overpowering dizziness, against which he struggled with
the utmost power of desperation, encompassed him with
renewed force. ‘Let us drink claret and mead, and Bremen
beer,’ shouted one of the guests—‘and you shall drink
with us!’
Two maidens approached. One wore a cap of two
staring colors, denoting the class of persons to which she
belonged. They poured out the liquor, and made the most
friendly gesticulations; while a cold perspiration trickled
down the back of the poor Councillor.
  ‘What’s to be the end of this! What’s to become of
me!’ groaned he; but he was
forced, in spite of his opposition, to drink with the rest.
   They took hold of the worthy man; who, hearing on
every side that he was intoxicated, did not in the least
doubt the truth of this certainly not very polite assertion;
but on the contrary, implored the ladies and gentlemen
present to procure him a hackney-coach: they, however,
imagined he was talking Russian.
   Never before, he thought, had he been in such a coarse
and ignorant company; one might almost fancy the people
had turned heathens again. ‘It is the most dreadful
moment of my life: the whole world is leagued against
me!’ But suddenly it occurred to him that he might stoop
down under the table, and then creep unobserved out of
the door. He did so; but just as he was going, the others
remarked what he was about; they laid hold of him by the
    legs; and now, happily for him, off fell his fatal shoes—and
with them the charm was at an end.
The Councillor saw quite distinctly before him a
lantern burning, and behind this a large handsome house.
All seemed to him in proper order as usual; it was East
Street, splendid and elegant as we now see it. He lay with
his feet towards a doorway, and exactly opposite sat the
watchman asleep.
    ‘Gracious Heaven!’ said he. ‘Have I lain here in the
street and dreamed? Yes; ‘tis East Street! How splendid
and light it is! But really it is terrible what an effect that
one glass of punch must have had on me!’
Two minutes later, he was sitting in a hackney-coach
and driving to Frederickshafen. He thought of the distress
and agony he had endured, and praised from the very
bottom of his heart the happy reality—our own time—
which, with all its deficiencies, is yet much better than that
in which, so much against his inclination, he had lately
been.
    

             III. The Watchman’s Adventure


    ‘Why, there is a pair of galoshes, as sure as I’m alive!’
said the watchman, awaking from a gentle slumber. ‘They
belong no doubt to the lieutenant who lives over the way.
They lie close to the door.’
   The worthy man was inclined to ring and deliver them
at the house, for there was still a light in the window; but
he did not like disturbing the other people in their beds,
and so very considerately he left the matter alone.
‘Such a pair of shoes must be very warm and
comfortable,’ said he; ‘the leather is so soft and supple.’
They fitted his feet as though they had been made for him.
‘‘Tis a curious world we live in,’ continued he,
soliloquizing. ‘There is the lieutenant, now, who might go
quietly to bed if he chose, where no doubt he could
stretch himself at his ease; but does he do it? No; he
saunters up and down his room, because, probably, he has
enjoyed too many of the good things of this world at his
dinner. That’s a happy fellow! He has neither an infirm
mother, nor a whole troop of everlastingly hungry
children to torment him. Every evening he goes to a
party, where his nice supper costs him nothing: would to
Heaven I could but change with him! How happy should
I be!’
While expressing his wish, the charm of the shoes,
which he had put on, began to work; the watchman
entered into the being and nature of the lieutenant. He
stood in the handsomely furnished apartment, and held
between his fingers a small sheet of rose-colored paper, on
which some verses were written—written indeed by the
officer himself; for who has not’, at least once in his life,
had a lyrical moment? And if one then marks down one’s
thoughts, poetry is produced. But here was written:
   OH, WERE I RICH!
   ‘Oh, were I rich! Such was my wish, yea
such
When hardly three feet high, I longed for
much.
Oh, were I rich! an officer were I,
With sword, and uniform, and plume so
high.
And the time came, and officer was I!
But yet I grew not rich. Alas, poor me!
Have pity, Thou, who all man’s wants dost
see.
  ‘I sat one evening sunk in dreams of bliss,
A maid of seven years old gave me a kiss,
I at that time was rich in poesy
And tales of old, though poor as poor
could be;
But all she asked for was this poesy.
Then was I rich, but not in gold, poor me!
As Thou dost know, who all men’s hearts
canst see.
‘Oh, were I rich! Oft asked I for this boon.
The child grew up to womanhood full
soon.
   She is so pretty, clever, and so kind
Oh, did she know what’s hidden in my
mind—
   A tale of old. Would she to me were kind!.
But I’m condemned to silence! oh, poor
me!
   As Thou dost know, who all men’s hearts
canst see.
  ‘Oh, were I rich in calm and peace of
mind,
  My grief you then would not here written
find!
O thou, to whom I do my heart devote,
Oh read this page of glad days now remote,
A dark, dark tale, which I tonight devote!
   Such verses as these people write when they are in
love! But no man in his senses ever thinks of printing
them. Here one of the sorrows of life, in which there is
real poetry, gave itself vent; not that barren grief which
the poet may only hint at, but never depict in its detail—
misery and want: that animal necessity, in short, to snatch
at least at a fallen leaf of the bread-fruit tree, if not at the
fruit itself. The higher the position in which one finds
oneself transplanted, the greater is the suffering. Everyday
necessity is the stagnant pool of life—no lovely picture
reflects itself therein. Lieutenant, love, and lack of
money—that is a symbolic triangle, or much the same as
the half of the shattered die of Fortune. This the lieutenant
felt most poignantly, and this was the reason he leant his
head against the window, and sighed so deeply.
‘The poor watchman out there in the street is far
happier than I. He knows not what I term privation. He
has a home, a wife, and children, who weep with him
over his sorrows, who rejoice with him when he is glad.
    Oh, far happier were I, could I exchange with him my
being—with his desires and with his hopes perform the
weary pilgrimage of life! Oh, he is a hundred times
happier than I!’
    In the same moment the watchman was again
watchman. It was the shoes that caused the metamorphosis
by means of which, unknown to himself, he took upon
him the thoughts and feelings of the officer; but, as we
have just seen, he felt himself in his new situation much
less contented, and now preferred the very thing which
but some minutes before he had rejected. So then the
watchman was again watchman.
    ‘That was an unpleasant dream,’ said he; ‘but ‘twas droll
enough altogether. I fancied that I was the lieutenant over
there: and yet the thing was not very much to my taste
after all. I missed my good old mother and the dear little
ones; who almost tear me to pieces for sheer love.’
He seated himself once more and nodded: the dream
continued to haunt him, for he still had the shoes on his
feet. A falling star shone in the dark firmament.
‘There falls another star,’ said he: ‘but what does it
matter; there are always enough left. I should not much
mind examining the little glimmering things somewhat
nearer, especially the moon; for that would not slip so
easily through a man’s fingers. When we die—so at least
says the student, for whom my wife does the washing—
we shall fly about as light as a feather from one such a star
to the other. That’s, of course, not true: but ‘twould be
pretty enough if it were so. If I could but once take a leap
up there, my body might stay here on the steps for what I
care.’
   Behold—there are certain things in the world to which
one ought never to give utterance except with the greatest
caution; but doubly careful must one be when we have
the Shoes of Fortune on our feet. Now just listen to what
happened to the watchman.
   As to ourselves, we all know the speed produced by the
employment of steam; we have experienced it either on
railroads, or in boats when crossing the sea; but such a
flight is like the travelling of a sloth in comparison with
the velocity with which light moves. It flies nineteen
million times faster than the best race-horse; and yet
electricity is quicker still. Death is an electric shock which
our heart receives; the freed soul soars upwards on the
wings of electricity. The sun’s light wants eight minutes
and some seconds to perform a journey of more than
twenty million of our Danish* miles; borne by electricity,
the soul wants even some minutes less to accomplish the
same flight. To it the space between the heavenly bodies is
not greater than the distance between the homes of our
friends in town is for us, even if they live a short way from
each other; such an electric shock in the heart, however,
costs us the use of the body here below; unless, like the
watchman of East Street, we happen to have on the Shoes
of Fortune.
     *A Danish mile is nearly 4 3/4 English.
In a few seconds the watchman had done the fifty-two
thousand of our miles up to the moon, which, as everyone
knows, was formed out of matter much lighter than our
earth; and is, so we should say, as soft as newly-fallen
snow. He found himself on one of the many circumjacent
mountain-ridges with which we are acquainted by means
of Dr. Madler’s ‘Map of the Moon.’ Within, down it sunk
perpendicularly into a caldron, about a Danish mile in
depth; while below lay a town, whose appearance we can,
in some measure, realize to ourselves by beating the white
of an egg in a glass Of water. The matter of which it was
built was just as soft, and formed similar towers, and
domes, and pillars, transparent and rocking in the thin air;
while above his head our earth was rolling like a large fiery
ball.
     He perceived immediately a quantity of beings who
were certainly what we call ‘men"; yet they looked
different to us. A far more, correct imagination than that
of the pseudo-Herschel* had created them; and if they had
been placed in rank and file, and copied by some skilful
painter’s hand, one would, without doubt, have exclaimed
involuntarily, ‘What a beautiful arabesque!’
*This relates to a book published some years ago in
Germany, and said to be by Herschel, which contained a
description of the moon and its inhabitants, written with
such a semblance of truth that many were deceived by the
imposture.
    Probably a translation of the celebrated Moon hoax,
written by Richard A. Locke, and originally published in
New York.
   They had a language too; but surely nobody can expect
that the soul of the watchman should understand it. Be
that as it may, it did comprehend it; for in our souls there
germinate far greater powers than we poor mortals, despite
all our cleverness, have any notion of. Does she not show
us—she the queen in the land of enchantment—her
astounding dramatic talent in all our dreams? There every
acquaintance appears and speaks upon the stage, so entirely
in character, and with the same tone of voice, that none of
us, when awake, were able to imitate it. How well can she
recall persons to our mind, of whom we have not thought
for years; when suddenly they step forth ‘every inch a
man,’ resembling the real personages, even to the finest
features, and become the heroes or heroines of our world
of dreams. In reality, such remembrances are rather
unpleasant: every sin, every evil thought, may, like a clock
with alarm or chimes, be repeated at pleasure; then the
question is if we can trust ourselves to give an account of
every unbecoming word in our heart and on our lips.
The watchman’s spirit understood the language of the
inhabitants of the moon pretty well. The Selenites*
disputed variously about our earth, and expressed their
doubts if it could be inhabited: the air, they said, must
certainly be too dense to allow any rational dweller in the
moon the necessary free respiration. They considered the
moon alone to be inhabited: they imagined it was the real
heart of the universe or planetary system, on which the
genuine Cosmopolites, or citizens of the world, dwelt.
What strange things men—no, what strange things
Selenites sometimes take into their heads!
*Dwellers in the moon.
    About politics they had a good deal to say. But little
Denmark must take care what it is about, and not run
counter to the moon; that great realm, that might in an illhumor
bestir itself, and dash down a hail-storm in our
faces, or force the Baltic to overflow the sides of its
gigantic basin.
We will, therefore, not listen to what was spoken, and
on no condition run in the possibility of telling tales out of
school; but we will rather proceed, like good quiet
citizens, to East Street, and observe what happened
meanwhile to the body of the watchman.
He sat lifeless on the steps: the morning-star,* that is to
say, the heavy wooden staff, headed with iron spikes, and
which had nothing else in common with its sparkling
brother in the sky, had glided from his hand; while his
eyes were fixed with glassy stare on the moon, looking for
the good old fellow of a spirit which still haunted it.
*The watchmen in Germany, had formerly, and in
some places they still carry with them, on their rounds at
night, a sort of mace or club, known in ancient times by
the above denomination.
    ‘What’s the hour, watchman?’ asked a passer-by. But
when the watchman gave no reply, the merry roysterer,
who was now returning home from a noisy drinking bout,
took it into his bead to try what a tweak of the nose
would do, on which the supposed sleeper lost his balance,
the body lay motionless, stretched out on the pavement:
the man was dead. When the patrol came up, all his...
