      The Cock and the Pearl


   A cock was once strutting up and down the farmyard
among the hens when suddenly he espied something
shinning amid the straw. ‘Ho! ho!’ quoth he, ‘that’s for
me,’ and soon rooted it out from beneath the straw. What
did it turn out to be but a Pearl that by some chance had
been lost in the yard? ‘You may be a treasure,’ quoth
Master Cock, ‘to men that prize you, but for me I would
rather have a single barley-corn than a peck of pearls.’
   Precious things are for those that can prize them.

     The Wolf and the Lamb


    Once upon a time a Wolf was lapping at a spring on a
hillside, when, looking up, what should he see but a Lamb
just beginning to drink a little lower down. ‘There’s my
supper,’ thought he, ‘if only I can find some excuse to
seize it.’ Then he called out to the Lamb, ‘How dare you
muddle the water from which I am drinking?’
   ‘Nay, master, nay,’ said Lambikin; ‘if the water be
muddy up there, I cannot be the cause of it, for it runs
down from you to me.’
   ‘Well, then,’ said the Wolf, ‘why did you call me bad
names this time last year?’
   ‘That cannot be,’ said the Lamb; ‘I am only six months
old.’
   ‘I don’t care,’ snarled the Wolf; ‘if it was not you it was
your father;’ and with that he rushed upon the poor little
Lamb and .WARRA WARRA WARRA WARRA
WARRA .ate her all up. But before she died she gasped
out .’Any excuse will serve a tyrant.’

   The Dog and the Shadow


    It happened that a Dog had got a piece of meat and was
carrying it home in his mouth to eat it in peace. Now on
his way home he had to cross a plank lying across a
running brook. As he crossed, he looked down and saw
his own shadow reflected in the water beneath. Thinking
it was another dog with another piece of meat, he made
up his mind to have that also. So he made a snap at the
shadow in the water, but as he opened his mouth the
piece of meat fell out, dropped into the water and was
never seen more.
   Beware lest you lose the substance by grasping at the
shadow.

   The Lion’s Share


    The Lion went once a-hunting along with the Fox, the
Jackal, and the Wolf. They hunted and they hunted till at
last they surprised a Stag, and soon took its life. Then
came the question how the spoil should be divided.
‘Quarter me this Stag,’ roared the Lion; so the other
animals skinned it and cut it into four parts. Then the Lion
took his stand in front of the carcass and pronounced
judgment: The first quarter is for me in my capacity as
King of Beasts; the second is mine as arbiter; another share
comes to me for my part in the chase; and as for the fourth
quarter, well, as for that, I should like to see which of you
will dare to lay a paw upon it.’
    ‘Humph,’ grumbled the Fox as he walked away with
his tail between his legs; but he spoke in a low growl
.’You may share the labours of the great, but you will not
share the spoil.’


   The Wolf and the Crane


   A Wolf had been gorging on an animal he had killed,
when suddenly a small bone in the meat stuck in his throat
and he could not swallow it. He soon felt terrible pain in
his throat, and ran up and down groaning and groaning
and seeking for something to relieve the pain. He tried to
induce every one he met to remove the bone. ‘I would
give anything,’ said he, ‘if you would take it out.’ At last
the Crane agreed to try, and told the Wolf to lie on his
side and open his jaws as wide as he could. Then the
Crane put its long neck down the Wolf’s throat, and with
its beak loosened the bone, till at last it got it out.
‘Will you kindly give me the reward you promised?’
said the Crane.
     The Wolf grinned and showed his teeth and said: ‘Be
content. You have put your head inside a Wolf’s mouth
and taken it out again in safety; that ought to be reward
enough for you.’
Gratitude and greed go not together.

  
   The Man and the Serpent


     A Countryman’s son by accident trod upon a Serpent’s
tail, which turned and bit him so that he died. The father
in a rage got his axe, and pursuing the Serpent, cut off part
of its tail. So the Serpent in revenge began stinging several
of the Farmer’s cattle and caused him severe loss. Well, the
Farmer thought it best to make it up with the Serpent, and
brought food and honey to the mouth of its lair, and said
to it: ‘Let’s forget and forgive; perhaps you were right to
punish my son, and take vengeance on my cattle, but
surely I was right in trying to revenge him; now that we
are both satisfied why should not we be friends again?’
    ‘No, no,’ said the Serpent; ‘take away your gifts; you
can never forget the death of your son, nor I the loss of
my tail.’
    Injuries may be forgiven, but not forgotten.

   The Town Mouse and the  Country Mouse


      Now you must know that a Town Mouse once upon a
time went on a visit to his cousin in the country. He was
rough and ready, this cousin, but he loved his town friend
and made him heartily welcome. Beans and bacon, cheese
and bread, were all he had to offer, but he offered them
freely. The Town Mouse rather turned up his long nose at
this country fare, and said: ‘I cannot understand, Cousin,
how you can put up with such poor food as this, but of
course you cannot expect anything better in the country;
come you with me and I will show you how to live.
When you have been in town a week you will wonder
how you could ever have stood a country life.’ No sooner
said than done: the two mice set off for the town and
arrived at the Town Mouse’s residence late at night. ‘You
will want some refreshment after our long journey,’ said
the polite Town Mouse, and took his friend into the
grand dining-room. There they found the remains of a
fine feast, and soon the two mice were eating up jellies
and cakes and all that was nice. Suddenly they heard
growling and barking. ‘What is that?’ said the Country
Mouse. ‘It is only the dogs of the house,’ answered the
other. ‘Only!’ said the Country Mouse. ‘I do not like that
music at my dinner.’ Just at that moment the door flew
open, in came two huge mastiffs, and the two mice had to
scamper down and run off. ‘Good-bye, Cousin,’ said the
Country Mouse, ‘What! going so soon?’ said the other.
‘Yes,’ he replied;
‘Better beans and bacon in peace than cakes and ale in
fear.’


      The Fox and the Crow


      A Fox once saw a Crow fly off with a piece of cheese
in its beak and settle on a branch of a tree. ‘That’s for me,
as I am a Fox,’ said Master Reynard, and he walked up to
the foot of the tree. ‘Good-day, Mistress Crow,’ he cried.
‘How well you are looking to-day: how glossy your
feathers; how bright your eye. I feel sure your voice must
surpass that of other birds, just as your figure does; let me
hear but one song from you that I may greet you as the
Queen of Birds.’ The Crow lifted up her head and began
to caw her best, but the moment she opened her mouth
the piece of cheese fell to the ground, only to be snapped
up by Master Fox. ‘That will do,’ said he. ‘That was all I
wanted. In exchange for your cheese I will give you a
piece of advice for the future .’Do not trust flatterers.’


            The Sick Lion


      A Lion had come to the end of his days and lay sick
unto death at the mouth of his cave, gasping for breath.
The animals, his subjects, came round him and drew
nearer as he grew more and more helpless. When they saw
him on the point of death they thought to themselves:
‘Now is the time to pay off old grudges.’ So the Boar
came up and drove at him with his tusks; then a Bull
gored him with his horns; still the Lion lay helpless before
them: so the Ass, feeling quite safe from danger, came up,
and turning his tail to the Lion kicked up his heels into his
face. ‘This is a double death,’ growled the Lion.
Only cowards insult dying majesty.


         The Ass and the Lapdog


      A Farmer one day came to the stables to see to his
beasts of burden: among them was his favourite Ass, that
was always well fed and often carried his master. With the
Farmer came his Lapdog, who danced about and licked his
hand and frisked about as happy as could be. The Farmer
felt in his pocket, gave the Lapdog some dainty food, and
sat down while he gave his orders to his servants. The
Lapdog jumped into his master’s lap, and lay there
blinking while the Farmer stroked his ears. The Ass, seeing
this, broke loose from his halter and commenced prancing
about in imitation of the Lapdog. The Farmer could not
hold his sides with laughter, so the Ass went up to him,
and putting his feet upon the Farmer’s shoulder attempted
to climb into his lap. The Farmer’s servants rushed up
with sticks and pitchforks and soon taught the Ass that
clumsy jesting is no joke.

   
     The Lion and the Mouse



      Once when a Lion was asleep a little Mouse began
running up and down upon him; this soon wakened the
Lion, who placed his huge paw upon him, and opened his
big jaws to swallow him. ‘Pardon, O King,’ cried the little
Mouse: ‘forgive me this time, I shall never forget it: who
knows but what I may be able to do you a turn some of
these days?’ The Lion was so tickled at the idea of the
Mouse being able to help him, that he lifted up his paw
and let him go. Some time after the Lion was caught in a
trap, and the hunters who desired to carry him alive to the
King, tied him to a tree while they went in search of a
waggon to carry him on. Just then the little Mouse
happened to pass by, and seeing the sad plight in which
the Lion was, went up to him and soon gnawed away the
ropes that bound the King of the Beasts. ‘Was I not right?’
said the little Mouse.
     Little friends may prove great friends.

    The Swallow and the Other Birds



      It happened that a Countryman was sowing some
hemp seeds in a field where a Swallow and some other
birds were hopping about picking up their food. ‘Beware
of that man,’ quoth the Swallow. ‘Why, what is he doing?’
said the others. ‘That is hemp seed he is sowing; be careful
to pick up every one of the seeds, or else you will repent
it.’ The birds paid no heed to the Swallow’s words, and by
and by the hemp grew up and was made into cord, and of
the cords nets were made, and many a bird that had
despised the Swallow’s advice was caught in nets made out
of that very hemp. ‘What did I tell you?’ said the Swallow.
Destroy the seed of evil, or it will grow up to your
ruin.


      The Frogs Desiring a King



     The Frogs were living as happy as could be in a marshy
swamp that just suited them; they went splashing about
caring for nobody and nobody troubling with them. But
some of them thought that this was not right, that they
should have a king and a proper constitution, so they
determined to send up a petition to Jove to give them
what they wanted. ‘Mighty Jove,’ they cried, ‘send unto
us a king that will rule over us and keep us in order.’ Jove
laughed at their croaking, and threw down into the
swamp a huge Log, which came downrplashto the swamp.
The Frogs were frightened out of their lives by the
commotion made in their midst, and all rushed to the
bank to look at the horrible monster; but after a time,
seeing that it did not move, one or two of the boldest of
them ventured out towards the Log, and even dared to
touch it; still it did not move. Then the greatest hero of
the Frogs jumped upon the Log and commenced dancing
up and down upon it, thereupon all the Frogs came and
did the same; and for some time the Frogs went about
their business every day without taking the slightest notice
of their new King Log lying in their midst. But this di
not suit them, so they sent another petition to Jove, and
said to him, ‘We want a real king; one that will really rule
over us.’ Now this made Jove angry, so he sent among
them a big Stork that soon set to work gobbling them all
up. Then the Frogs repented when too late.
Better no rule than cruel rule.

    
      The Fox and the Stork


    At one time the Fox and the Stork were on visiting
terms and seemed very good friends. So the Fox invited
the Stork to dinner, and for a joke put nothing before her
but some soup in a very shallow dish. This the Fox could
easily lap up, but the Stork could only wet the end of her
long bill in it, and left the meal as hungry as when she
began. ‘I am sorry,’ said the Fox, ‘the soup is not to your
liking.’
     ‘Pray do not apologise,’ said the Stork. ‘I hope you will
return this visit, and come and dine with me soon.’ So a
day was appointed when the Fox should visit the Stork;
but when they were seated at table all that was for their
dinner was contained in a very long-necked jar with a
narrow mouth, in which the Fox could not insert his
snout, so all he could manage to do was to lick the outside
of the jar.
    ‘I will not apologise for the dinner,’ said the Stork:
    ‘One bad turn deserves another.’

    The Frog and the Ox


    ‘Oh Father,’ said a little Frog to the big one sitting by
the side of a pool, ‘I have seen such a terrible monster! It
was as big as a mountain, with horns on its head, and a
long tail, and it had hoofs divided in two.’
‘Tush, child, tush,’ said the old Frog, ‘that was only
Farmer White’s Ox. It isn’t so big either; he may be a little
bit taller than I, but I could easily make myself quite as
broad; just you see.’ So he blew himself out, and blew
himself out, and blew himself out. ‘Was he as big as that?’
asked he.
     ‘Oh, much bigger than that,’ said the young Frog.
Again the old one blew himself out, and asked the
young one if the Ox was as big as that.
    ‘Bigger, father, bigger,’ was the reply.
So the Frog took a deep breath, and blew and blew and
blew, and swelled and swelled and swelled. And then he
said: ‘I’m sure the Ox is not as big asBut at this moment
he burst.
Self-conceit may lead to self-destruction.


           Androcles


    A slave named Androcles once escaped from his master
and fled to the forest. As he was wandering about there he
came upon a Lion lying down moaning and groaning. At
first he turned to flee, but finding that the Lion did not
pursue him, he turned back and went up to him. As he
came near, the Lion put out his paw, which was all
swollen and bleeding, and Androcles found that a huge
thorn had got into it, and was causing all the pain. He
pulled out the thorn and bound up the paw of the Lion,
who was soon able to rise and lick the hand of Androcles
like a dog. Then the Lion took Androcles to his cave, and
every day used to bring him meat from which to live. But
shortly afterwards both Androcles and the Lion were
captured, and the slave was sentenced to be thrown to the
Lion, after the latter had been kept without food for
several days. The Emperor and all his Court came to see
the spectacle, and Androcles was led out into the middle
of the arena. Soon the Lion was let loose from his den,
and rushed bounding and roaring towards his victim. But
as soon as he came near to Androcles he recognised his
friend, and fawned upon him, and licked his hands like a
friendly dog. The Emperor, surprised at this, summoned
Androcles to him, who told him the whole story.
Whereupon the slave was pardoned and freed, and the
Lion let loose to his native forest.
Gratitude is the sign of noble souls.


    The Bat, the Birds, and the Beasts



     A great conflict was about to come off between the
Birds and the Beasts. When the two armies were collected
together the Bat hesitated which to join. The Birds that
passed his perch said: ‘Come with us"; but he said: ‘I am a
Beast.’ Later on, some Beasts who were passing
underneath him looked up and said: ‘Come with us"; but
he said: ‘I am a Bird.’ Luckily at the last moment peace
was made, and no battle took place, so the Bat came to the
Birds and wished to join in the rejoicings, but they all
turned against him and he had to fly away. He then went
to the Beasts, but soon had to beat a retreat, or else they
would have torn him to pieces. ‘Ah,’ said the Bat, ‘I see
now,
    ‘He that is neither one thing nor the other has no
friends.’

    
        The Dog and the Wolf


    A gaunt Wolf was almost dead with hunger when he
happened to meet a House-dog who was passing by. ‘Ah,
Cousin,’ said the Dog. ‘I knew how it would be; your
irregular life will soon be the ruin of you. Why do you
not work steadily as I do, and get your food regularly
given to you?’
    ‘I would have no objection,’ said the Wolf, ‘if I could
only get a place.’
    ‘I will easily arrange that for you,’ said the Dog; ‘come
with me to my master and you shall share my work.’
So the Wolf and the Dog went towards the town
together. On the way there the Wolf noticed that the hair
on a certain part of the Dog’s neck was very much worn
away, so he asked him how that had come about.
‘Oh, it is nothing,’ said the Dog. ‘That is only the place
where the collar is put on at night to keep me chained up;
it chafes a bit, but one soon gets used to it.’
   ‘Is that all?’ said the Wolf. ‘Then good-bye to you,
Master Dog.’
Better starve free than be a fat slave.

   
     The Hart in the Ox-Stall


     A Hart hotly pursued by the hounds fled for refuge into
an ox-stall, and buried itself in a truss of hay, leaving
nothing to be seen but the tips of his horns. Soon after the
Hunters came up and asked if any one had seen the Hart.
The stable boys, who had been resting after their dinner,
looked round, but could see nothing, and the Hunters
went away. Shortly afterwards the master came in, and
looking round, saw that something unusual had taken
place. He pointed to the truss of hay and said: ‘What are
those two curious things sticking out of the hay?’ And
when the stable boys came to look they discovered the
Hart, and soon made an end of him. He thus learnt that
Nothing escapes the master’s eye.


    The Horse, Hunter, and Stag


    A quarrel had arisen between the Horse and the Stag,
so the Horse came to a Hunter to ask his help to take
revenge on the Stag. The Hunter agreed, but said: ‘If you
desire to conquer the Stag, you must permit me to place
this piece of iron between your jaws, so that I may guide
you with these reins, and allow this saddle to be placed
upon your back so that I may keep steady upon you as we
follow after the enemy.’ The Horse agreed to the
conditions, and the Hunter soon saddled and bridled him.
Then with the aid of the Hunter the Horse soon
overcame the Stag, and said to the Hunter: ‘Now, get off,
and remove those things from my mouth and back.’
   ‘ Not so fast, friend,’ said the Hunter. ‘I have now got
you under bit and spur, and prefer to keep you as you are
at present.’
    If you allow men to use you for your own purposes,
they will use you for theirs.


    The Ant and the Grasshopper


     In a field one summer’s day a Grasshopper was hopping
about, chirping and singing to its heart’s content. An Ant
passed by, bearing along with great toil an ear of corn he
was taking to the nest.
‘Why not come and chat with me,’ said the
Grasshopper, ‘instead of toiling and moiling in that way?’
‘I am helping to lay up food for the winter,’ said the
Ant, ‘and recommend you to do the same.’
‘Why bother about winter?’ said the Grasshopper; we
have got plenty of food at present.’ But the Ant went on
its way and continued its toil. When the winter came the
Grasshopper had no food and found itself dying of hunger,
while it saw the ants distributing every day corn and grain
from the stores they had collected in the summer. Then
the Grasshopper knew:
It is best to prepare for the days of necessity.


         The Fox and the Cat


    A Fox was boasting to a Cat of its clever devices for
escaping its enemies. ‘I have a whole bag of tricks,’ he
said, ‘which contains a hundred ways of escaping my
enemies.’
    ‘I have only one,’ said the Cat; ‘but I can generally
manage with that.’ Just at that moment they heard the cry
of a pack of hounds coming towards them, and the Cat
immediately scampered up a tree and hid herself in the
boughs. ‘This is my plan,’ said the Cat. ‘What are you
going to do?’ The Fox thought first of one way, then of
another, and while he was debating the hounds came
nearer and nearer, and at last the Fox in his confusion was
caught up by the hounds and soon killed by the huntsmen.
Miss Puss, who had been looking on, said:
‘Better one safe way than a hundred on which you
cannot reckon.’

  
     The Shepherd’s Boy


     There was once a young Shepherd Boy who tended his
sheep at the foot of a mountain near a dark forest. It was
rather lonely for him all day, so he thought upon a plan by
which he could get a little company and some excitement.
He rushed down towards the village calling out ‘Wolf,
Wolf,’ and the villagers came out to meet him, and some
of them stopped with him for a considerable time. This
pleased the boy so much that a few days afterwards he
tried the same trick, and again the villagers came to his
help. But shortly after this a Wolf actually did come out
from the forest, and began to worry the sheep, and the
boy of course cried out ‘Wolf, Wolf,’ still louder than
before. But this time the villagers, who had been fooled
twice before, thought the boy was again deceiving them,
and nobody stirred to come to his help. So the Wolf made
a good meal off the boy’s flock, and when the boy
complained, the wise man of the village said:
‘A liar will not be believed, even when he speaks the
truth.’


    The Young Thief and His Mother


    A young Man had been caught in a daring act of theft
and had been condemned to be executed for it. He
expressed his desire to see his Mother, and to speak with
her before he was led to execution, and of course this was
granted. When his Mother came to him he said: ‘I want to
whisper to you,’ and when she brought her ear near him,
he nearly bit it off. All the bystanders were horrified, and
asked him what he could mean by such brutal and
inhuman conduct. ‘It is to punish her,’ he said. ‘When I
was young I began with stealing little things, and brought
them home to Mother. Instead of rebuking and punishing
me, she laughed and said: ‘It will not be noticed.’ It is
because of her that I am here to-day.’
   ‘He is right, woman,’ said the Priest; ‘the Lord hath
said:
   ‘Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he
is old he will not depart therefrom.’


        Avaricious and Envious

 
    Two neighbours came before Jupiter and prayed him to
grant their hearts’ desire. Now the one was full of avarice,
and the other eaten up with envy. So to punish them
both, Jupiter granted that each might have whatever he
wished for himself, but only on condition that his
neighbour had twice as much. The Avaricious man prayed
to have a room full of gold. No sooner said than done; but
all his joy was turned to grief when he found that his
neighbour had two rooms full of the precious metal. Then
came the turn of the Envious man, who could not bear to
think that his neighbour had any joy at all. So he prayed
that he might have one of his own eyes put out, by which
means his companion would become totally blind.
Vices are their own punishment.


         The Crow and the Pitcher


     A Crow, half-dead with thirst, came upon a Pitcher
which had once been full of water; but when the Crow
put its beak into the mouth of the Pitcher he found that
only very little water was left in it, and that he could not
reach far enough down to get at it. He tried, and he tried,
but at last had to give up in despair. Then a thought came
to him, and he took a pebble and dropped it into the
Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and dropped it into
the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and dropped
that into the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and
dropped that into the Pitcher. Then he took another
pebble and dropped that into the Pitcher. Then he took
another pebble and dropped that into the Pitcher. At last,
at last, he saw the water mount up near him, and after
casting in a few more pebbles he was able to quench his
thirst and save his life.
    Little by little does the trick.


    The Man and the Satyr


    A Man had lost his way in a wood one bitter winter’s
night. As he was roaming about, a Satyr came up to him,
and finding that he had lost his way, promised to give him
a lodging for the night, and guide him out of the forest in
the morning. As he went along to the Satyr’s cell, the Man
raised both his hands to his mouth and kept on blowing at
them. ‘What do you do that for?’ said the Satyr.
    ‘My hands are numb with the cold,’ said the Man, ‘and
my breath warms them.’
After this they arrived at the Satyr’s home, and soon the
Satyr put a smoking dish of porridge before him. But
when the Man raised his spoon to his mouth he began
blowing upon it. ‘And what do you do that for?’ said the
Satyr.
    ‘The porridge is too hot, and my breath will cool it.’
    ‘Out you go,’ said the Satyr. ‘I will have nought to do
with a man who can blow hot and cold with the same
breath.’


     The Goose With the Golden Eggs


     One day a countryman going to the nest of his Goose
found there an egg all yellow and glittering. When he
took it up it was as heavy as lead and he was going to
throw it away, because he thought a trick had been played
upon him. But he took it home on second thoughts, and
soon found to his delight that it was an egg of pure gold.
Every morning the same thing occurred, and he soon
became rich by selling his eggs. As he grew rich he grew
greedy; and thinking to get at once all the gold the Goose
could give, he killed it and opened it only to find nothing.
Greed oft o’er reaches itself.


    The Labourer and the Nightingale


     A Labourer lay listening to a Nightingale’s song
throughout the summer night. So pleased was he with it
that the next night he set a trap for it and captured it.
‘Now that I have caught thee,’ he cried, ‘thou shalt always
sing to me.’
   ‘We Nightingales never sing in a cage.’ said the bird.
   ‘Then I’ll eat thee.’ said the Labourer. ‘I have always
heard say that a nightingale on toast is dainty morsel.’
    ‘Nay, kill me not,’ said the Nightingale; ‘but let me
free, and I’ll tell thee three things far better worth than my
poor body.’ The Labourer let him loose, and he flew up to
a branch of a tree and said: ‘Never believe a captive’s
promise; that’s one thing. Then again: Keep what you
have. And third piece of advice is: Sorrow not over what
is lost forever.’ Then the song-bird flew away.


    The Fox, the Cock, and the Dog


    One moonlight night a Fox was prowling about a
farmer’s hen-coop, and saw a Cock roosting high up
beyond his reach. ‘Good news, good news!’ he cried.
   ‘Why, what is that?’ said the Cock.
   ‘King Lion has declared a universal truce. No beast may
hurt a bird henceforth, but all shall dwell together in
brotherly friendship.’
   ‘Why, that is good news,’ said the Cock; ‘and there I
see some one coming, with whom we can share the good
tidings.’ And so saying he craned his neck forward and
looked afar off.
   ‘What is it you see?’ said the Fox.
   ‘It is only my master’s Dog that is coming towards us.
What, going so soon?’ he continued, as the Fox began to
turn away as soon as he had heard the news. ‘Will you not
stop and congratulate the Dog on the reign of universal
peace?’
   ‘I would gladly do so,’ said the Fox, ‘but I fear he may
not have heard of King Lion’s decree.’
Cunning often outwits itself.

   
       The Wind and the Sun


    The Wind and the Sun were disputing which was the
stronger. Suddenly they saw a traveller coming down the
road, and the Sun said: ‘I see a way to decide our dispute.
Whichever of us can cause that traveller to take off his
cloak shall be regarded as the stronger. You begin.’ So the
Sun retired behind a cloud, and the Wind began to blow
as hard as it could upon the traveller. But the harder he
blew the more closely did the traveller wrap his cloak
round him, till at last the Wind had to give up in despair.
Then the Sun came out and shone in all his glory upon
the traveller, who soon found it too hot to walk with his
cloak on.
    Kindness effects more than severity.


      The Man, the Boy, and the   Donkey


    A Man and his son were once going with their Donkey
to market. As they were walking along by its side a
countryman passed them and said: ‘You fools, what is a
Donkey for but to ride upon?’
   So the Man put the Boy on the Donkey and they went
on their way. But soon they passed a group of men, one of
whom said: ‘See that lazy youngster, he lets his father walk
while he rides.’
    So the Man ordered his Boy to get off, and got on
himself. But they hadn’t gone far when they passed two
women, one of whom said to the other: ‘Shame on that
lazy lout to let his poor little son trudge along.’
Well, the Man didn’t know what to do, but at last he
took his Boy up before him on the Donkey. By this time
they had come to the town, and the passers-by began to
jeer and point at them. The Man stopped and asked what
they were scoffing at. The men said: ‘Aren’t you ashamed
of yourself for overloading that poor donkey of yoursu and
your hulking son?’
    The Man and Boy got off and tried to think what to
do. They thought and they thought, till at last they cut
down a pole, tied the donkey’s feet to it, and raised the
pole and the donkey to their shoulders. They went along
amid the laughter of all who met them till they came to
Market Bridge, when the Donkey, getting one of his feet
loose, kicked out and caused the Boy to drop his end of
the pole. In the struggle the Donkey fell over the bridge,
and his fore-feet being tied together he was drowned.
‘That will teach you,’ said an old man who had
followed them:
    ‘Please all, and you will please none.’

     
         The Miser and His Gold


     Once upon a time there was a Miser who used to hide
his gold at the foot of a tree in his garden; but every week
he used to go and dig it up and gloat over his gains. A
robber, who had noticed this, went and dug up the gold
and decamped with it. When the Miser next came to gloat
over his treasures, he found nothing but the empty hole.
He tore his hair, and raised such an outcry that all the
neighbours came around him, and he told them how he
used to come and visit his gold. ‘Did you ever take any of
it out?’ asked one of them.
    ‘Nay,’ said he, ‘I only came to look at it.’
    ‘Then come again and look at the hole,’ said a
neighbour; ‘it will do you just as much good.’
Wealth unused might as well not exist.


     The Fox Without a Tail


    It happened that a Fox caught its tail in a trap, and in
struggling to release himself lost all of it but the stump. At
first he was ashamed to show himself among his fellow
foxes. But at last he determined to put a bolder face upon
his misfortune, and summoned all the foxes to a general
meeting to consider a proposal which he had to place
before them. When they had assembled together the Fox
proposed that they should all do away with their tails. He
pointed out how inconvenient a tail was when they were
pursued by their enemies, the dogs; how much it was in
the way when they desired to sit down and hold a friendly
conversation with one another. He failed to see any
advantage in carrying about such a useless encumbrance.
‘That is all very well,’ said one of the older foxes; ‘but I do
not think you would have recommended us to dispense
with our chief ornament if you had not happened to lose
it yourself.’
     Distrust interested advice.

        Belling the Cat


      Long ago, the mice had a general council to consider
what measures they could take to outwit their common
enemy, the Cat. Some said this, and some said that; but at
last a young mouse got up and said he had a proposal to
make, which he thought would meet the case. ‘You will
all agree,’ said he, ‘that our chief danger consists in the sly
and treacherous manner in which the enemy approaches
us. Now, if we could receive some signal of her approach,
we could easily escape from her. I venture, therefore, to
propose that a small bell be procured, and attached by a
ribbon round the neck of the Cat. By this means we
should always know when she was about, and could easily
retire while she was in the neighbourhood.’
This proposal met with general applause, until an old
mouse got up and said: ‘That is all very well, but who is to
bell the Cat?’ The mice looked at one another and nobody
spoke. Then the old mouse said:
     ‘It is easy to propose impossible remedies.’

    
       The Hare and the Tortoise  


     The Hare was once boasting of his speed before the
other animals. ‘I have never yet been beaten,’ said he,
‘when I put forth my full speed. I challenge any one here
to race with me.’
The Tortoise said quietly, ‘I accept your challenge.’
    ‘That is a good joke,’ said the Hare; ‘I could dance
round you all the way.’
    ‘Keep your boasting till you’ve beaten,’ answered the
Tortoise. ‘Shall we race?’
So a course was fixed and a start was made. The Hare
darted almost out of sight at once, but soon stopped and,
to show his contempt for the Tortoise, lay down to have a
nap. The Tortoise plodded on and plodded on, and when
the Hare awoke from his nap, he saw the Tortoise just
near the winning-post and could not run up in time to
save the race. Then said the Tortoise:
    ‘Plodding wins the race.’

       The Hare With Many Friends


    A Hare was very popular with the other beasts who all
claimed to be her friends. But one day she heard the
hounds approaching and hoped to escape them by the aid
of her many Friends. So, she went to the horse, and asked
him to carry her away from the hounds on his back. But
he declined, stating that he had important work to do for
his master. ‘He felt sure,’ he said, ‘that all her other friends
would come to her assistance.’ She then applied to the
bull, and hoped that he would repel the hounds with his
horns. The bull replied: ‘I am very sorry, but I have an
appointment with a lady; but I feel sure that our friend the
goat will do what you want.’ The goat, however, feared
that his back might do her some harm if he took her upon
it. The ram, he felt sure, was the proper friend to apply to.
So she went to the ram and told him the case. The ram
replied: ‘Another time, my dear friend. I do not like to
interfere on the present occasion, as hounds have been
known to eat sheep as well as hares.’ The Hare then
applied, as a last hope, to the calf, who regretted that he
was unable to help her, as he did not like to take the
responsibility upon himself, as so many older persons than
himself had declined the task. By this time the hounds
were quite near, and the Hare took to her heels and
luckily escaped.
     He that has many friends, has no friends.


      The Lion in Love  


     A Lion once fell in love with a beautiful maiden and
proposed marriage to her parents. The old people did not
know what to say. They did not like to give their
daughter to the Lion, yet they did not wish to enrage the
King of Beasts. At last the father said: ‘We feel highly
honoured by your Majesty’s proposal, but you see our
daughter is a tender young thing, and we fear that in the
vehemence of your affection you might possibly do her
some injury. Might I venture to suggest that your Majesty
should have your claws removed, and your teeth
extracted, then we would gladly consider your proposal
again.’ The Lion was so much in love that he had his
claws trimmed and his big teeth taken out. But when he
came again to the parents of the young girl they simply
laughed in his face, and bade him do his worst.
Love can tame the wildest.


     The Bundle of Sticks


    An old man on the point of death summoned his sons
around him to give them some parting advice. He ordered
his servants to bring in a faggot of sticks, and said to his
eldest son: ‘Break it.’ The son strained and strained, but
with all his efforts was unable to break the Bundle. The
other sons also tried, but none of them was successful.
‘Untie the faggots,’ said the father, ‘and each of you take a
stick.’ When they had done so, he called out to them:
‘Now, break,’ and each stick was easily broken. ‘You see
my meaning,’ said their father.
Union gives strength.


     The Lion, the Fox, and the Beasts



    The Lion once gave out that he was sick unto death
and summoned the animals to come and hear his last Will
and Testament. So the Goat came to the Lion’s cave, and
stopped there listening for a long time. Then a Sheep
went in, and before she came out a Calf came up to
receive the last wishes of the Lord of the Beasts. But soon
the Lion seemed to recover, and came to the mouth of his
cave, and saw the Fox, who had been waiting outside for
some time. ‘Why do you not come to pay your respects to
me?’ said the Lion to the Fox.
   ‘I beg your Majesty’s pardon,’ said the Fox, ‘but I
noticed the track of the animals that have already come to
you; and while I see many hoof-marks going in, I see
none coming out. Till the animals that have entered your
cave come out again I prefer to remain in the open air.’
It is easier to get into the enemy’s toils than out again.


      The Ass’s Brains


     The Lion and the Fox went hunting together. The
Lion, on the advice of the Fox, sent a message to the Ass,
proposing to make an alliance between their two families.
The Ass came to the place of meeting, overjoyed at the
prospect of a royal alliance. But when he came there the
Lion simply pounced on the Ass, and said to the Fox:
‘Here is our dinner for to-day. Watch you here while I go
and have a nap. Woe betide you if you touch my prey.’
The Lion went away and the Fox waited; but finding that
his master did not return, ventured to take out the brains
of the Ass and ate them up. When the Lion came back he
soon noticed the absence of the brains, and asked the Fox
in a terrible voice: ‘What have you done with the brains?’
     ‘Brains, your Majesty! it had none, or it would never
have fallen into your trap.’
    Wit has always an answer ready.


    The Milkmaid and Her Pail


    Patty the Milkmaid was going to market carrying her
milk in a Pail on her head. As she went along she began
calculating what she would do with the money she would
get for the milk. ‘I’ll buy some fowls from Farmer Brown,’
said she, ‘and they will lay eggs each morning, which I
will sell to the parson’s wife. With the money that I get
from the sale of these eggs I’ll buy myself a new dimity
frock and a chip hat; and when I go to market, won’t all
the young men come up and speak to me! Polly Shaw will
be that jealous; but I don’t care. I shall just look at her and
toss my head like this. As she spoke she tossed her head
back, the Pail fell off it, and all the milk was spilt. So she
had to go home and tell her mother what had occurred.
    ‘Ah, my child,’ said the mother,
    ‘Do not count your chickens before they are hatched.’



     The Buffoon and the Countryman


     At a country fair there was a Buffoon who made all the
people laugh by imitating the cries of various animals. He
finished off by squeaking so like a pig that the spectators
thought that he had a porker concealed about him. But a
Countryman who stood by said: ‘Call that a pig s squeak!
Nothing like it. You give me till tomorrow and I will
show you what it’s like.’ The audience laughed, but next
day, sure enough, the Countryman appeared on the stage,
and putting his head down squealed so hideously that the
spectators hissed and threw stones at him to make him
stop. ‘You fools!’ he cried, ‘see what you have been
hissing,’ and held up a little pig whose ear he had been
pinching to make him utter the squeals.
   Men often applaud an imitation and hiss the real thing.


   
              EDITOR’S NOTE


     Nathaniel Hawthorne was already a man of forty-six,
and a tale writer of some twenty-four years’ standing,
when ‘The Scarlet Letter’ appeared. He was born at
Salem, Mass., on July 4th, 1804, son of a sea-captain. He
led there a shy and rather sombre life; of few artistic
encouragements, yet not wholly uncongenial, his moody,
intensely meditative temperament being considered. Its
colours and shadows are marvelously reflected in his
‘Twice-Told Tales’ and other short stories, the product of
his first literary period. Even his college days at Bowdoin
did not quite break through his acquired and inherited
reserve; but beneath it all, his faculty of divining men and
women was exercised with almost uncanny prescience and
subtlety. ‘The Scarlet Letter,’ which explains as much of
this unique imaginative art, as is to be gathered from
reading his highest single achievement, yet needs to be
ranged with his other writings, early and late, to have its
last effect. In the year that saw it published, he began ‘The
House of the Seven Gables,’ a later romance or prosetragedy
of the Puritan-American community as he had
himself known it - defrauded of art and the joy of life,
‘starving for symbols’ as Emerson has it. Nathaniel
Hawthorne died at Plymouth, New Hampshire, on May
18th, 1864.
   The following is the table of his romances, stories, and
other works:
    Fanshawe, published anonymously, 1826; Twice-Told
Tales, 1st Series, 1837; 2nd Series, 1842; Grandfather’s
Chair, a history for youth, 1845: Famous Old People
(Grandfather’s Chair), 1841 Liberty Tree: with the last
words of Grandfather’s Chair, 1842; Biographical Stories
for Children, 1842; Mosses from an Old Manse, 1846;
The Scarlet Letter, 1850; The House of the Seven Gables,
1851: True Stories from History and Biography (the
whole History of Grandfather’s Chair), 1851 A Wonder
Book for Girls and Boys, 1851; The Snow Image and
other Tales, 1851: The Blithedale Romance, 1852; Life of
Franklin Pierce, 1852; Tanglewood Tales (2nd Series of
the Wonder Book), 1853; A Rill from the Town-Pump,
with remarks, by Telba, 1857; The Marble Faun; or, The
Romance of Monte Beni (4 EDITOR’S NOTE)
(published in England under the title of ‘Transformation’),
1860, Our Old Home, 1863; Dolliver Romance (1st Part
in ‘Atlantic Monthly’), 1864; in 3 Parts, 1876; Pansie, a
fragment, Hawthorne’ last literary effort, 1864; American
Note-Books, 1868; English Note Books, edited by Sophia
Hawthorne, 1870; French and Italian Note Books, 1871;
Septimius Felton; or, the Elixir of Life (from the ‘Atlantic
Monthly’), 1872; Doctor Grimshawe’s Secret, with
Preface and Notes by Julian Hawthorne, 1882.
      Tales of the White Hills, Legends of New England,
Legends of the Province House, 1877, contain tales which
had already been printed in book form in ‘Twice-Told
Tales’ and the ‘Mosses’ ‘Sketched and Studies,’ 1883.
Hawthorne’s contributions to magazines were
numerous, and most of his tales appeared first in
periodicals, chiefly in ‘The Token,’ 1831-1838, ‘New
England Magazine,’ 1834,1835; ‘Knickerbocker,’ 1837-
1839; ‘Democratic Review,’ 1838-1846; ‘Atlantic
Monthly,’ 1860-1872 (scenes from the Dolliver Romance,
Septimius Felton, and passages from Hawthorne’s Note-
Books).
     Works: in 24 volumes, 1879; in 12 volumes, with
introductory notes by Lathrop, Riverside Edition, 1883.
Biography, etc. ; A. H. Japp (pseud. H. A. Page),
Memoir of N. Hawthorne, 1872; J. T. Field’s ‘Yesterdays
with Authors,’ 1873 G. P. Lathrop, ‘A Study of
Hawthorne,’ 1876; Henry James English Men of Letters,
1879; Julian Hawthorne, ‘Nathaniel Hawthorne and his
wife,’ 1885; Moncure D. Conway, Life of Nathaniel
Hawthorne, 1891; Analytical Index of Hawthorne’s
Works, by E. M. O’Connor 1882.


    THE CUSTOM-HOUSE
  INTRODUCTORY TO ‘THE
     SCARLET LETTER"


     It is a little remarkable, that—though disinclined to talk
overmuch of myself and my affairs at the fireside, and to
my personal friends—an autobiographical impulse should
twice in my life have taken possession of me, in addressing
the public. The first time was three or four years since,
when I favoured the reader—inexcusably, and for no
earthly reason that either the indulgent reader or the
intrusive author could imagine—with a description of my
way of life in the deep quietude of an Old Manse. And
now—because, beyond my deserts, I was happy enough to
find a listener or two on the former occasion—I again
seize the public by the button, and talk of my three years’
experience in a Custom-House. The example of the
famous ‘P. P. , Clerk of this Parish,’ was never more
faithfully followed. The truth seems to be, however, that
when he casts his leaves forth upon the wind, the author
addresses, not the many who will fling aside his volume,
or never take it up, but the few who will understand him
better than most of his schoolmates or lifemates. Some
authors, indeed, do far more than this, and indulge
themselves in such confidential depths of revelation as
could fittingly be addressed only and exclusively to the
one heart and mind of perfect sympathy; as if the printed
book, thrown at large on the wide world, were certain to
find out the divided segment of the writer’s own nature,
and complete his circle of existence by bringing him into
communion with it. It is scarcely decorous, however, to
speak all, even where we speak impersonally. But, as
thoughts are frozen and utterance benumbed, unless the
speaker stand in some true relation with his audience, it
may be pardonable to imagine that a friend, a kind and
apprehensive, though not the closest friend, is listening to
our talk; and then, a native reserve being thawed by this
genial consciousness, we may prate of the circumstances
that lie around us, and even of ourself, but still keep the
inmost Me behind its veil. To this extent, and within these
limits, an author, methinks, may be autobiographical,
without violating either the reader’s rights or his own.
     It will be seen, likewise, that this Custom-House sketch
has a certain propriety, of a kind always recognised in
literature, as explaining how a large portion of the
following pages came into my possession, and as offering
proofs of the authenticity of a narrative therein contained.
This, in fact—a desire to put myself in my true position as
editor, or very little more, of the most prolix among the
tales that make up my volume—this, and no other, is my
true reason for assuming a personal relation with the
public. In accomplishing the main purpose, it has appeared
allowable, by a few extra touches, to give a faint
representation of a mode of life not heretofore described,
together with some of the characters that move in it,
among whom the author happened to make one.
     In my native town of Salem, at the head of what, half a
century ago, in the days of old King Derby, was a bustling
wharf—but which is now burdened with decayed wooden
warehouses, and exhibits few or no symptoms of
commercial life; except, perhaps, a bark or brig, half-way
down its melancholy length, discharging hides; or, nearer
at hand, a Nova Scotia schooner, pitching out her cargo of
firewood—at the head, I say, of this dilapidated wharf,
which the tide often overflows, and along which, at the
base and in the rear of the row of buildings, the track of
many languid years is seen in a border of unthrifty grass—
here, with a view from its front windows adown this not
very enlivening prospect, and thence across the harbour,
stands a spacious edifice of brick. From the loftiest point of
its roof, during precisely three and a half hours of each
forenoon, floats or droops, in breeze or calm, the banner
of the republic; but with the thirteen stripes turned
vertically, instead of horizontally, and thus indicating that a
civil, and not a military, post of Uncle Sam’s government
is here established. Its front is ornamented with a portico
of half-a-dozen wooden pillars, supporting a balcony,
beneath which a flight of wide granite steps descends
towards the street Over the entrance hovers an enormous
specimen of the American eagle, with outspread wings, a
shield before her breast, and, if I recollect aright, a bunch
of intermingled thunder- bolts and barbed arrows in each
claw. With the customary infirmity of temper that
characterizes this unhappy fowl, she appears by the
fierceness of her beak and eye, and the general truculency
of her attitude, to threaten mischief to the inoffensive
community; and especially to warn all citizens careful of
their safety against intruding on the premises which she
overshadows with her wings. Nevertheless, vixenly as she
looks, many people are seeking at this very moment to
shelter themselves under the wing of the federal eagle;
imagining, I presume, that her bosom has all the softness
and snugness of an eiderdown pillow. But she has no great
tenderness even in her best of moods, and, sooner or
later—oftener soon than late—is apt to fling off her
nestlings with a scratch of her claw, a dab of her beak, or a
rankling wound from her barbed arrows.
       The pavement round about the above-described
edifice—which we may as well name at once as the
Custom-House of the port—has grass enough growing in
its chinks to show that it has not, of late days, been worn
by any multitudinous resort of business. In some months
of the year, however, there often chances a forenoon
when affairs move onward with a livelier tread. Such
occasions might remind the elderly citizen of that period,
before the last war with England, when Salem was a port
by itself; not scorned, as she is now, by her own merchants
and ship-owners, who permit her wharves to crumble to
ruin while their ventures go to swell, needlessly and
imperceptibly, the mighty flood of commerce at New
York or Boston. On some such morning, when three or
four vessels happen to have arrived at once usually from
Africa or South America—or to be on the verge of their
departure thitherward, there is a sound of frequent feet
passing briskly up and down the granite steps. Here, before
his own wife has greeted him, you may greet the seaflushed
ship-master, just in port, with his vessel’s papers
under his arm in a tarnished tin box. Here, too, comes his
owner, cheerful, sombre, gracious or in the sulks,
accordingly as his scheme of the now accomplished
voyage has been realized in merchandise that will readily
be turned to gold, or has buried him under a bulk of
incommodities such as nobody will care to rid him of.
Here, likewise—the germ of the wrinkle-browed, grizzlybearded,
careworn merchant—we have the smart young
clerk, who gets the taste of traffic as a wolf-cub does of
blood, and already sends adventures in his master’s ships,
when he had better be sailing mimic boats upon a millpond.
Another figure in the scene is the outward-bound
sailor, in quest of a protection; or the recently arrived one,
pale and feeble, seeking a passport to the hospital. Nor
must we forget the captains of the rusty little schooners
that bring firewood from the British provinces; a roughlooking
set of tarpaulins, without the alertness of the
Yankee aspect, but contributing an item of no slight
importance to our decaying trade.
      Cluster all these individuals together, as they sometimes
were, with other miscellaneous ones to diversify the
group, and, for the time being, it made the Custom-
House a stirring scene. More frequently, however, on
ascending the steps, you would discern — in the entry if it
were summer time, or in their appropriate rooms if wintry
or inclement weathers row of venerable figures, sitting in
old-fashioned chairs, which were tipped on their hind legs
back against the wall. Oftentimes they were asleep, but
occasionally might be heard talking together, ill voices
between a speech and a snore, and with that lack of energy
that distinguishes the occupants of alms-houses, and all
other human beings who depend for subsistence on
charity, on monopolized labour, or anything else but their
own independent exertions. These old gentlemen—seated,
like Matthew at the receipt of custom, but not very liable
to be summoned thence, like him, for apostolic errands—
were Custom-House officers.
       Furthermore, on the left hand as you enter the front
door, is a certain room or office, about fifteen feet square,
and of a lofty height, with two of its arched windows
commanding a view of the aforesaid dilapidated wharf,
and the third looking across a narrow lane, and along a
portion of Derby Street. All three give glimpses of the
shops of grocers, block-makers, slop-sellers, and shipchandlers,
around the doors of which are generally to be
seen, laughing and gossiping, clusters of old salts, and such
other wharf-rats as haunt the Wapping of a seaport. The
room itself is cobwebbed, and dingy with old paint; its
floor is strewn with grey sand, in a fashion that has
elsewhere fallen into long disuse; and it is easy to
conclude, from the general slovenliness of the place, that
this is a sanctuary into which womankind, with her tools
of magic, the broom and mop, has very infrequent access.
       In the way of furniture, there is a stove with a voluminous
funnel; an old pine desk with a three-legged stool beside
it; two or three wooden-bottom chairs, exceedingly
decrepit and infirm; and—not to forget the library—on
some shelves, a score or two of volumes of the Acts of
Congress, and a bulky Digest of the Revenue laws. A tin
pipe ascends through the ceiling, and forms a medium of
vocal communication with other parts of be edifice. And
here, some six months ago—pacing from corner to corner,
or lounging on the long-legged tool, with his elbow on
the desk, and his eyes wandering up and down the
columns of the morning newspaper—you might have
recognised, honoured reader, the same individual who
welcomed you into his cheery little study, where the
sunshine glimmered so pleasantly through the willow
branches on the western side of the Old Manse. But now,
should you go thither to seek him, you would inquire in
vain for the Locofoco Surveyor. The besom of reform
hath swept him out of office, and a worthier successor
wears his dignity and pockets his emoluments.
      This old town of Salem—my native place, though I
have dwelt much away from it both in boyhood and
maturer years—possesses, or did possess, a hold on my
affection, the force of which I have never realized during
my seasons of actual residence here. Indeed, so far as its
physical aspect is concerned, with its flat, unvaried surface,
covered chiefly with wooden houses, few or none of
which pretend to architectural beauty—its irregularity,
which is neither picturesque nor quaint, but only tame—
its long and lazy street, lounging wearisomely through the
whole extent of the peninsula, with Gallows Hill and New
Guinea at one end, and a view of the alms-house at the
other—such being the features of my native town, it
would be quite as reasonable to form a sentimental
attachment to a disarranged checker-board. And yet,
though invariably happiest elsewhere, there is within me a
feeling for Old Salem, which, in lack of a better phrase, I
must be content to call affection. The sentiment is
probably assignable to the deep and aged roots which my
family has stuck into the soil. It is now nearly two
centuries and a quarter since the original Briton, the
earliest emigrant of my name, made his appearance in the
wild and forest—bordered settlement which has since
become a city. And here his descendants have been born
and died, and have mingled their earthly substance with
the soil, until no small portion of it must necessarily be
akin to the mortal frame wherewith, for a little while, I
walk the streets. In part, therefore, the attachment which I
speak of is the mere sensuous sympathy of dust for dust.
Few of my countrymen can know what it is; nor, as
frequent transplantation is perhaps better for the stock,
need they consider it desirable to know.
       But the sentiment has likewise its moral quality. The
figure of that first ancestor, invested by family tradition
with a dim and dusky grandeur, was present to my boyish
imagination as far back as I can remember. It still haunts
me, and induces a sort of home-feeling with the past,
which I scarcely claim in reference to the present phase of
the town. I seem to have a stronger claim to a residence
here on account of this grave, bearded, sable-cloaked, and
steeple-crowned progenitor-who came so early, with his
Bible and his sword, and trode the unworn street with
such a stately port, and made so large a figure, as a man of
war and peace—a stronger claim than for myself, whose
name is seldom heard and my face hardly known. He was
a soldier, legislator, judge; he was a ruler in the Church;
he had all the Puritanic traits, both good and evil. He was
likewise a bitter persecutor; as witness the Quakers, who 
have remembered him in their histories, and relate an
incident of his hard severity towards a woman of their
sect, which will last longer, it is to be feared, than any
record of his better deeds, although these were many. His
son, too, inherited the persecuting spirit, and made himself
so conspicuous in the martyrdom of the witches, that their
blood may fairly be said to have left a stain upon him. So
deep a stain, indeed, that his dry old bones, in the
Charter-street burial-ground, must still retain it, if they
have not crumbled utterly to dust I know not whether
these ancestors of mine bethought themselves to repent,
and ask pardon of Heaven for their cruelties; or whether
they are now groaning under the heavy consequences of
them in another state of being. At all events, I, the present
writer, as their representative, hereby take shame upon
myself for their sakes, and pray that any curse incurred by
them—as I have heard, and as the dreary and
unprosperous condition of the race, for many a long year
back, would argue to exist—may be now and henceforth
removed.
     Doubtless, however, either of these stern and blackbrowed
Puritans would have thought it quite a sufficient
retribution for his sins that, after so long a lapse of years,
the old trunk of the family tree, with so much venerable
moss upon it, should have borne, as its topmost bough, an
idler like myself. No aim that I have ever cherished would
they recognise as laudable; no success of mine—if my life,
beyond its domestic scope, had ever been brightened by
success—would they deem otherwise than worthless, if
not positively disgraceful. ‘What is he?’ murmurs one grey
shadow of my forefathers to the other. ‘A writer of story
books! What kind of business in life—what mode of
glorifying God, or being serviceable to mankind in his day
and generation—may that be? Why, the degenerate fellow
might as well have been a fiddler!’ Such are the
compliments bandied between my great grandsires and
myself, across the gulf of time And yet, let them scorn me
as they will, strong traits of their nature have intertwined
themselves with mine.
         Planted deep, in the town’s earliest infancy and
childhood, by these two earnest and energetic men, the
race has ever since subsisted here; always, too, in
respectability; never, so far as I have known, disgraced by a
single unworthy member; but seldom or never, on the
other hand, after the first two generations, performing any
memorable deed, or so much as putting forward a claim to
public notice. Gradually, they have sunk almost out of
sight; as old houses, here and there about the streets, get  
covered half-way to the eaves by the accumulation of new
soil. From father to son, for above a hundred years, they
followed the sea; a grey-headed shipmaster, in each
generation, retiring from the quarter-deck to the
homestead, while a boy of fourteen took the hereditary
place before the mast, confronting the salt spray and the
gale which had blustered against his sire and grandsire.
The boy, also in due time, passed from the forecastle to
the cabin, spent a tempestuous manhood, and returned
from his world-wanderings, to grow old, and die, and
mingle his dust with the natal earth. This long connexion
of a family with one spot, as its place of birth and burial,
creates a kindred between the human being and the
locality, quite independent of any charm in the scenery or
moral circumstances that surround him. It is not love but
instinct. The new inhabitant—who came himself from a
foreign land, or whose father or grandfather came—has
little claim to be called a Salemite; he has no conception of
the oyster—like tenacity with which an old settler, over
whom his third century is creeping, clings to the spot
where his successive generations have been embedded. It
is no matter that the place is joyless for him; that he is
weary of the old wooden houses, the mud and dust, the
dead level of site and sentiment, the chill east wind, and    
the chillest of social atmospheres;—all these, and whatever
faults besides he may see or imagine, are nothing to the
purpose. The spell survives, and just as powerfully as if the
natal spot were an earthly paradise. So has it been in my
case. I felt it almost as a destiny to make Salem my home;
so that the mould of features and cast of character which
had all along been familiar here—ever, as one
representative of the race lay down in the grave, another
assuming, as it were, his sentry-march along the main
street—might still in my little day be seen and recognised
in the old town. Nevertheless, this very sentiment is an
evidence that the connexion, which has become an
unhealthy one, should at least be severed. Human nature
will not flourish, any more than a potato, if it be planted
and re-planted, for too long a series of generations, in the
same worn-out soil. My children have had other birthplaces,
and, so far as their fortunes may be within my
control, shall strike their roots into accustomed earth.
       On emerging from the Old Manse, it was chiefly this
strange, indolent, unjoyous attachment for my native town
that brought me to fill a place in Uncle Sam’s brick
edifice, when I might as well, or better, have gone
somewhere else. My doom was on me, It was not the first
time, nor the second, that I had gone away—as it seemed,
permanently—but yet returned, like the bad halfpenny, or
as if Salem were for me the inevitable centre of the
universe. So, one fine morning I ascended the flight of
granite steps, with the President’s commission in my
pocket, and was introduced to the corps of gentlemen
who were to aid me in my weighty responsibility as chief
executive officer of the Custom-House.
      I doubt greatly—or, rather, I do not doubt at all—
whether any public functionary of the United States,
either in the civil or military line, has ever had such a
patriarchal body of veterans under his orders as myself.
The whereabouts of the Oldest Inhabitant was at once
settled when I looked at them. For upwards of twenty
years before this epoch, the independent position of the
Collector had kept the Salem Custom-House out of the
whirlpool of political vicissitude, which makes the tenure
of office generally so fragile. A soldier—New England’s
most distinguished soldier—he stood firmly on the
pedestal of his gallant services; and, himself secure in the
wise liberality of the successive administrations through
which he had held office, he had been the safety of his
subordinates in many an hour of danger and heart-quake
General Miller was radically conservative; a man over
whose kindly nature habit had no slight influence;     
     