Obama addresses UN as Palestinian bid prompts rallies

Barack Obama has told the UN General Assembly the Palestinians deserve their own state,

 but that this would only be achieved through talks with Israel.


The US president's speech came as diplomatic efforts for Palestinian UN membership 

intensified, while thousands rallied in the West Bank.


He added there could be no "short cut" to peace, and is expected to urge the Palestinians

 to give up the initiative.

A Palestinian official said the UN would be given time to study the bid.


Mr Obama has held talks with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, and is to meet 

Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas later.


More time?

Mr Abbas has so far appeared determined to press ahead with the statehood bid on Friday, 

after his address to the UN General Assembly, with a written request to Secretary General 

Ban Ki-moon.f his request is approved by Mr Ban, the Security Council will then examine 

and vote on it. In order to pass, the request must get the votes of nine out of 15 

council members, with no vetoes from the permanent members.


The US has vowed to veto the request, and correspondents say Western diplomats are 

exploring ways to put off the voting process to buy themselves more time.


Should the Palestinian effort at the Security Council fail, Mr Abbas could ask for a vote 

of the General Assembly for enhanced observer status - which is enjoyed by others such as 

the Vatican - in which case no veto would be possible.


Speaking on the fringes of the summit, Palestinian negotiator Nabil Shaath said Mr Abbas 

would give "some time to the Security Council to consider first our full membership 

request before heading to the General Assembly".


French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said later a UN vote on the issue was still "several 

weeks" away, suggesting there would be time to avoid a confrontation.

'Time has come'


Mr Obama earlier told the meeting: "Peace will not come through statements and 

resolutions at the UN."


"I am convinced that there is no short cut to the end of a conflict that has endured for 

decades."


"Ultimately, it is Israelis and Palestinians - not us - who must reach agreement on the 

issues that divide them: on borders and security; on refugees and Jerusalem."After the US 

president's speech, French President Nicolas Sarkozy suggested a compromise, saying the 

Israelis and Palestinians should be given a clear timeline - a month to start 

negotiations, six months to deal with borders and security and a year to finalise a 

"definitive agreement".


Analysts say this falls in line with an initiative previously promoted by EU foreign 

policy chief Catherine Ashton and the "quartet" of US, European, Russian and UN 

mediators.


The quartet's aim to give the two sides a year to reach a framework agreement is based on 

Mr Obama's vision of borders fashioned from Israel's pre-1967 boundary, with agreed land 

swaps.


UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon opened the summit earlier with a call for new 

international efforts to break the Middle East stalemate.


He pledged "unrelenting" UN efforts to push forward the peace process.

'End occupation'


Palestinians say their bid for statehood has been inspired by the Arab Spring, and is the 

result of years of failed peace talks.


In the West Bank on Wednesday, schools and government offices were shut to allow for 

demonstrations backing the UN membership bid in Ramallah, Bethlehem, Nablus and Hebron. 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Greece accelerates austerity cuts in return for aid 




The Greek government is to impose tougher austerity measures in a move to persuade international lenders to give it more bailout funds.

A cabinet meeting on Wednesday agreed to further cuts in pensions, to extend a property tax, and to put tens of thousands of public workers on notice.

It follows two days of tough talks with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and European authorities.

Some state pensions will be cut by up to 20%, a government official said.

The Greek cabinet met for more than six hours to discuss further austerity measures in return for an 8bn-euro (£6.9bn) tranche of aid needed to avoid default.

Athens has been in two days of negotiations with the so-called troika of the IMF, European Commission and European Central Bank over the terms of its bailout.

The new measures include raising the number of civil servants to be suspended on partial pay to 30,000 by the end of this year from 20,000.

Monthly pensions above 1,200 euros will be subject to a 20% cut of the amount above that threshold.

Pensioners below the age of 55 will see a 40% cut in the amounts of their pensions above the 1,000 euros limit.

Riots and strikes

Government spokesman Ilias Mossialos said the series of measures agreed by the cabinet on Wednesday "would allow us to comply with the bailout plan through 2014".

Mr Mossialos said discussions with the troika would be completed after the arrival of inspectors early next week.

Fears in the financial markets that Greece was close to defaulting on its debts had sent share prices tumbling and the euro lower.

The prospect of more tax increases and spending cuts are likely to be met with mounting opposition in a country that has already seen riots and general strikes by 

public sector workers.

Greece has been dependent since last year on rescue loans from a 110bn bailout fund set up to prevent eurozone countries from defaulting.

The country was due to receive 8bn euros next month, but the troika suspended a decision on signing off the aid because it was unclear that Greece was meeting the 

austerity conditions attached to the money.

The government will also speed up privatisations, and plans to open up closely regulated professions to more competition.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



US confirms $5bn Taiwan F-16 fighter jet upgrade





The US has confirmed plans to upgrade Taiwan's ageing fleet of F-16 US-built fighter planes.

China considers Taiwan part of its territory and has warned Washington not to proceed with the $5bn (£3bn) deal.

China's foreign ministry expressed his country's "strong indignation" over the move, saying it would damage ties.

But the US is legally bound to help Taiwan defend itself, and the move comes as China's military superiority over Taiwan has steadily increased.

China's Vice-Foreign Minister Zhang Zhijun called the decision "grave interference" in the country's internal affairs which sent a "gravely mistaken signal to pro-

Taiwan independence separatist forces".

In a statement on the ministry's website, Mr Zhang said: "It must be pointed out that this wrongful course by the US side will unavoidably damage Sino-American 

relations and co-operation and exchanges in the military, security and other fields".

Combat capability

However, the announcement suggests the US will not now sell Taiwan a newer generation of F-16, as Taipei had hoped.

US officials said the F-16 A/B fighters will undergo a retrofit which will bring them up to the same standards as the more advanced C/D models.

"After the upgrade, the air force's combat capability will be advanced hugely," Taiwanese Defence Minister Kao Hua-chu said at a late-night press conference in Taipei.

The defence ministry said Taiwan remained under threat from China's military expansion.

"Improving our defence capability is a crucial and only measure to sustain regional security and stable development across the strait," it said in a statement.

But Taiwan also said it would continue its attempts to purchase more than 60 of the C/D planes, which are considered more of a match for China's latest war planes.

Taipei said that decision was still pending in the US and urged officials to agree to it.

Washington's decision will now pass to Congress for approval.

Some analysts say the move is designed to appease Beijing, which had warned that relations would suffer if the sale went ahead.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Unauthorised Julian Assange autobiography due out



An autobiography of Wikileaks founder Julian Assange is being released.

It has been published despite the fact Mr Assange broke off his involvement and tried to cancel the project.

According to the publishers, Mr Assange signed a contract on 20 December 2010 with Canongate Books to write a book "part memoir, part manifesto".

After sitting with a ghost writer for more than 50 hours of taped interviews, he decided he wanted to cancel the contract.

"All memoir is prostitution," the publishers say he declared after reading the first draft.

They say that the money he had been paid as an advance - understood by the BBC to be a substantial six-figure sum - had already been used to settle outstanding legal 

bills, meaning the contract still stood.

They then decided to publish without Mr Assange's consent and without even informing him exactly of when the book would come out, in case he tried to leak it first.

The result is what is described as an "unauthorised first draft" of the autobiography.

The book - a version of which has been seen by the BBC - recounts his early life growing up in Australia and how he became entranced by computers - and by hacking.

Continue reading the main story

“Start Quote

    I may be a chauvinist pig of some sort, but I am no rapist”

Julian Assange As quoted in the autobiography


In parts of the book, Mr Assange - as far as the book actually represents his views, which he may dispute - says he does not oppose privacy but opposes secrecy by 

institutions "to protect themselves against the truth of the evil they have done" and says that "disclosure is my business, but we don't deal in gossip".

The book recounts Mr Assange's battles to get Wikileaks up and running and presents what appears to be Mr Assange's version of events in Sweden and which led to 

charges of sexual assault and the battle over his extradition.

He maintains that the relationship was consensual and that he cannot imagine anything happening to make those involved think it was rape - other than malice, a plan to 

entrap or him or a misunderstanding, according to the text seen by the BBC.

"I may be a chauvinist pig of some sort, but I am no rapist," he says.

The book also includes a vitriolic attack on what is called "the mainstream media" and in particular the Guardian newspaper with whom Mr Assange worked until a falling 

out occurred.

In the book it is claimed they "double-crossed" him.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Palestinian leader: Why our occupation must end now



Editor's note: Dr. Mustafa Barghouthi finished second to Mahmoud Abbas in the 2005 Palestinian Authority presidential election. He served as Minister of Information in 

the Palestinian unity government in 2007. He is the leader of the Palestinian National Initiative -- a democratic movement -- and founder of the online newspaper The 

Palestinian Monitor.



(CNN) -- I have lived my entire adult life under Israeli military occupation. I snatch an approximation of freedom only when I travel and even then I know I am not 

truly free because my homeland remains controlled by a foreign power.



This week Palestinians will apply for United Nations membership in an attempt to secure freedom and statehood. Notably, it is the self-proclaimed democratic leader of 

the world, the United States of America under President Barack Obama, which will veto our aspirations. The vast majority of the world's states and people stand with 

us. The United States and Israel are only isolating themselves in this year of the Arab Spring by rebuffing the hopes of Palestinians.



The objections of the Obama administration and U.S. Congress are a bitter pill. It is morally wrong-headed to tell Palestinians repeatedly -- as has been done for a 

score of years since negotiations began in 1991 in Madrid -- to wait. Alternatively, we are told to wait and to negotiate with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. But 

he has made clear over his career -- and his Knesset allies have too -- that he has no interest in a viable Palestinian state. To expect us to continue to do what has 

failed for two decades is to assume insanity on our part.



What does Palestinian statehood bid mean?


I believe the Israeli government fails to apprehend its current position rationally. This is a splendid chance for it to endorse the two-state solution and back the 

Palestinian effort at the United Nations. Its obstinacy suggests to me that we may not achieve a meaningful Palestinian state. But we will not accept Bantustans (black 

homelands set aside in white-ruled South Africa), segregation and apartheid. Rather than accept such an injustice we will eventually demand equal rights in one 

democratic state.


Obama and Netanyahu fail to recognize that we have no intention of returning year after year to the United Nations to grovel for our rights. Palestinians have 

repeatedly noted that eventually we will give up on the two-state solution and pursue equal rights for all. Increasingly, Palestinian leaders are pushed in this 

direction by young Palestinians disillusioned by failed negotiations and inspired by the success of Americans emerging from the racist outlook of the Jim Crow South 

(racial segregation in the southern United States).



U.S. in tough spot with Palestinian statehood bid

Most of the world will recognize us on paper, but Israel has the power to prevent the recognition from having any meaning on the ground. On this point, the United 

States is right that our U.N. effort will bring no tangible change on the ground. Yet this move can spark a new unified Palestinian strategy that makes the cost of 

Israeli occupation and apartheid larger than the benefits. This can be achieved by using the methods of Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr. Non-violence combined with 

strong international solidarity and sanctions of the Apartheid system can effect real change.


Most people in Palestine are not interested in the legal complications and the diplomatic maneuvers at the United Nations. They want to know whether the occupation 

will end and when. Can they move freely without checkpoints or not? Is free trade with the world pending or will they continue to be hostages to the Israeli economy? 

Will they receive their salary or will the Israeli government illegally withhold our own tax revenue?



Flags before statehood for Palestinians


In short, people want freedom and an end to the longest occupation in modern history and one of the worst forms of apartheid ever. Twenty more years of negotiations 

will not appeal to them and they will not abide a lack of strategic vision from the Palestinian leadership.

September 2011 should be a turning point for the Palestinian cause. Our new momentum can change once and for all the rules of the game. We seek not just U.N. 

recognition, but an improved position the next day. Internally, national reconciliation and Palestinian unity are top priorities. The call for elections for the 

Palestinian National Council, parliament and presidency, where all Palestinians will be represented, are goals we must soon achieve.


Palestinian bid at U.N. distracts from the real crisis

The hysterical Israeli reaction against the United Nations bid only shows that Israel was never prepared to negotiate in good faith. With the same hostility used to 

repress our people demonstrating in Bil'in and Nabi Saleh, Israel has tried to stop Palestinians from reaching out to the rest of the world.

Israeli officials know that Palestine will gain dramatically in the days ahead and that our advances will de-legitimize the Israeli occupation in the eyes of the 

world. They also know that their culture of impunity is being challenged by a new regional reality that no longer tolerates oppression.

A new Middle East is blossoming with the strength and brilliance that freedom and democracy sow. Across the region, people are taking charge of their destiny and 

writing a new one free of despotism, humiliation, and exploitation. Palestine is not a regional exception, but an integral part of the cries of freedom emanating from 

the Middle East.
------------------------------------------------------------------



What does Palestinian statehood bid mean?


(CNN) -- During the course of the United Nations General Assembly the Palestinians have indicated that they will formally ask the world body for recognition of 

"Palestine" as a new member state. Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas has told U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon he will officially submit the statehood 

request on Friday which will ask that the U.N. Security Council take up the issue of Palestinian statehood.


Despite much talk of a U.N. vote on Palestinian statehood this week, neither of the organization's two major organs, the Security Council and the General Assembly are 

expected to take immediate action on the request.



Why is this move happening now?


The Palestinian Authority leadership says they are making the request for statehood now for a few reasons. Firstly, they argue that over the course of the past two 

years the Palestinian Authority has made great progress in building the infrastructure necessary for maintaining a sovereign state. They point to the various 

improvements in governance, security, and physical infrastructure as indicators of their readiness.



Palestinians also point to the September 2011 date that U.S. President Barack Obama laid out over a year ago as the deadline for the successful negotiation with Israel 

for a two-state solution. The Quartet of Middle East peace, made up of the U.N., European Union, Russia, and the U.S. also set this month as the target date for a 

negotiated deal. With that deadline not having been met Palestinian leaders argue that that the best way to enhance the chances for peace moving forward is for 

international recognition of a Palestinian state.


Who is agreeing with the Palestinians' demand, and who is disagreeing?


In the 15-member Security Council, the one body that can confer full U.N. membership, the Palestinians enjoy the support of a majority of the countries. But the United 

States, which as one of the five permanent members holds veto power, has pledged it will vote down the statehood bid, ending the Palestinians' chance to win full 

membership.


In the General Assembly, where a vote would be non-binding, the Palestinians enjoy the support of more than 120 of the 193 members and passage of a statehood 

resolution would be all but assured.


Why do the U.S. and Israel oppose the call?


Both the U.S. and Israel consider the Palestinian strategy a unilateral move that will only hinder the possibility of reaching a peaceful settlement to the Middle East 

conflict. U.N. action, both countries argue, does not take the place of direct negotiations. Speaking recently to reporters, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton 

said: "We believe strongly that the road to peace and two states living side by side does not go through New York, it goes through Jerusalem and Ramallah."


Israel calls for peace talks amid Palestinian statehood push


Surely, if the U.S and Israel don't agree then it won't mean any difference on the ground?


Without the acknowledgement of Israel and the U.S., United Nations recognition of a Palestinian state based on armistice lines that existed before 1967 is largely a 

symbolic move. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has rejected these lines as the basis for a Palestinian state, calling them "indefensible." Therefore the 

borders, airspace, and movement of people in a new "Palestine" would continue to be controlled by the Israeli military and it would be unlikely to change the presence 

of about 300,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank.


If a Palestinian state is recognized, what could that mean for relations/negotiations with Israel?


Many believe recognition of a Palestinian state would exacerbate already poor relations between the Palestinian Authority government and Israel. Some politicians in 

Israel have called for unilateral responses to the Palestinian bid including the outright annexation of territory in the West Bank, the withholding of tax revenue 

collected on behalf of the Palestinians, and the cancellation of various parts of the 1993 Oslo accords that created the Palestinian Authority. Potential moves like 

this and what some believe could be a rising level of Palestinian frustration at unmet expectations could add a great deal of tension on the ground and contribute to 

the possibility of an outbreak of violence. Palestinian Authority leadership maintains that recognition would help put pressure on Israel to be more reasonable in 

future negotiations.


Is there risk in this move for the Palestinian Authority?


Beyond the potential response from Israel, the Palestinian bid at the U.N. is risky. The U.S. is opposed to the move and lawmakers in congress have threatened to pull 

the plug on hundreds of millions of dollars in annual American aid. Others say the move will unrealistically raise expectations of Palestinians and, if little actually 

changes on the ground, could contribute to regional tensions. The Palestinian Authority could also risk losing support from its own people. The Hamas political 

faction, which controls Gaza, does not support the U.N. strategy and there are concerns among the Palestinian refugees in the region that the statehood bid could 

compromise their "right of return" to their homeland.


Would U.N. recognition give the Palestinians anything substantive?

Recognition by the United Nations could potentially give Palestinians greater access to international bodies like the International Criminal Court and the Human Rights 

Council. Venues like these could serve as a place for Palestinians to file legal challenges to Israeli practices and exert more international pressure on Israel.


What's the current state of negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians?


Currently there are no talks going on between Israeli and Palestinians. Talks fell apart a year ago over disagreements on the issue of Israeli West Bank settlements. 

Coming off a self-imposed 10-month halt in settlement construction, Israel said it would not renew the freeze. This led the Palestinians to quit the negotiations. In 

an effort to head off the Palestinian's statehood request at the U.N. the United States and various European countries have been engaged in 11th hour diplomacy to get 

the talks restarted but few expect a breakthrough deal.
-------------------------------------------------------------

U.S. in tough spot with Palestinian statehood bid



(CNN) -- In 2009, a freshly elected U.S. president who campaigned on the themes of hope and change appointed a veteran negotiator to take a crack at the Israel-
Palestinian conflict.


Now, 32 months after President Barack Obama named former Sen. George Mitchell as his chief Middle East envoy, the peace process is stalled and the United States faces 
the diplomatically dangerous possibility of having to veto a United Nations Security Council resolution on Palestinian statehood.


How did it get to this point? The answers are in the intractable nature of the conflict, political pressures faced by the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships, and a 
steady waning of U.S. influence in the region, exacerbated by the Arab Spring protests that erupted last December.


Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas said Monday he intends to submit an application for statehood to the Security Council, according to U.N. spokesman Martin Nesirky, 
setting up a possible vote as soon as Friday.

U.S. officials have made clear they will veto it, affirming the longstanding backing for Israel, the nation's strongest Middle East ally.


Meanwhile, behind-the-scenes negotiations are seeking to avoid a move certain to evoke Arab protests of American bias and even hypocrisy.

A U.S. veto would amount to Washington blocking an outcome it has publicly supported -- the creation of a Palestinian state next to Israel. However, the Obama 
administration insists that result must occur through a negotiated deal with Israel.


"We continue to believe and are pressing the point that the only way to a two-state solution, which is what we support and want to see happen, is through 
negotiations," Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said late Monday.


Addressing the possible Palestinian statehood bid, she added that "no matter what does or doesn't happen, this will not produce the kind of outcome that everyone is 
hoping for, so we are going to stay very much engaged and focused."


Also Monday, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he was willing to meet with Abbas in New York to launch direct talks that would continue back in the Middle 
East after the U.N. General Assembly.


Netanyahu's offer was an obvious attempt to give Abbas a plausible reason to put off the statehood bid, an outcome desired by the United States.

"For President Obama, who came into office speaking about self-determination and promised the Palestinians that it's a new day and a new dawn for them, to go to the 
Security Council and cast a veto against the Palestinian state is politically problematic," Fouad Ajami, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institute think tank, said 
Monday on CNN.


"It's really a catastrophe for him in the Arab world, but he has no choice but to pass the veto if it came to that," Ajami continued. "The hope is (that) between now 

and Friday, some exit, some other formula will be found to spare one and all in this confrontation at the Security Council."

Fran Townsend, a CNN contributor on national security issues, said the potential U.N. vote "puts the United States in a very awkward position."

"It is a veto that will most certainly undermine U.S. credibility as an honest broker in the peace process," at least in the eyes of the Arab world, Townsend said.

The latest developments come five months after Mitchell's resignation. He said he only signed up to tackle the world's toughest diplomatic job for two years, but he was clearly frustrated by the inability to restart direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.

Mitchell, who was 77 when he stepped down, traveled back and forth in the region trying to overcome the decades of hostility and mistrust that bedeviled the peace process. Face-to-face negotiations sought by the United States and its mediating partners from the United Nations, European Union and Russia never materialized.

The Obama administration came into office hoping to seduce the Middle East with a more sensitive and compassionate posture after eight years of the Bush administration that brought war in Iraq and tough posturing against Iran and other enemies of Israel.

In June 2009, Obama used a high-profile speech in Cairo, Egypt, on relations between the United States and the Muslim world to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. He reaffirmed the U.S. endorsement of a two-state solution and urged compromise and understanding between "two peoples with legitimate aspirations."

Addressing two main issues in the dispute, Obama said the U.S. government "does not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements" in the West Bank, and declared that "it is time for (settlement construction) to stop."

He also called America's bond with Israel "unbreakable" and said Palestinian violence such as rocket and mortar attacks on Israel must cease. In particular, Obama said the Hamas movement -- which controls Gaza -- must end violence and recognize past agreements.

Less than a year later, any perception of progress began to shatter. Not only did Obama fail to make good on his Cairo pledges, but his inability to rein in Israel on settlement-building was evidence of how hard jump-starting negotiations would be.

In March 2010, Israel announced a new settlement project in East Jerusalem, maintaining its insistence that the entire city would always be part of its territory.

After years of lukewarm reactions to such statements about new settlements by Israel, the United States chose to push the envelope, turning the incident into a crisis that further hindered the peace process when Netanyahu would not give in.

Then came the Gaza flotilla raid on May 31, 2010, when Israeli commandos stormed a Turkish ship leading an effort to break Israel's blockade of the Palestinian territory.

The incident, in which nine Turks were killed, cast a harsh spotlight on the grave humanitarian situation in Gaza and led to a breakdown in relations between Israel and Turkey, one of its few allies in the region.

Against that backdrop, the Arab Spring of pro-democracy uprisings that started in Tunisia and spread to Egypt, Libya, Syria, Bahrain and other states became an uncontrolled factor in the Middle East equation.

Hesitant U.S. support for protesters, first in Egypt, then in Libya and now in Syria, raised questions in the region about the clarity and commitment of the Obama administration's policy.

In a speech in May, Obama expressed support for pro-democracy aspirations in the Middle East. He also offered specifics on a possible Israel-Palestinian agreement based on pre-1967 borders and including land swaps to reflect current realities on the ground.

The pre-1967 borders refer to Israel's territory before the six-day war that year in which it took control of the Gaza Strip, West Bank, East Jerusalem and other territory from neighboring countries.

Both sides found reason to reject Obama's proposal as a basis for resuming peace talks, and now the successful Arab Spring protests have given Abbas new impetus to challenge Israel and the United States by seeking statehood through the United Nations.

Former U.S. President Bill Clinton said Sunday that the Palestinians were making the U.N. bid out of frustration.

"They have reinforced cooperation with the Israelis," Clinton told the NBC's "Meet the Press." "They have produced a growing economy on the West Bank. They have renounced violence. And all the Arab countries except Syria have offered Israel a political, military and security partnership for the future, including opposition to Iran's nuclear design, if they create a Palestinian state."

And yet, Clinton noted, "there's been no progress."

One reason for a lack of progress has been uncertainty over the status of a Palestinian unity effort involving the Abbas-led authority in the West Bank and Hamas, which rules Gaza.

Israel and the United States consider Hamas a terrorist group and refuse to negotiate with it. The United States also has called on Hamas to renounce violence and recognize Israel's right to exist in order to take part in the peace process.

Hamas does not support President Abbas' bid for statehood. Hamas leader Ismail Haniya has said Fatah does not have the right to sacrifice Palestinian rights, including making concessions on Palestinian land or the right of return for Palestinian refugees. He said Hamas will not recognize Israel's right to a Jewish state.

Townsend said the changing face of the Middle East is worrying to Israel, noting the Muslim Brotherhood strengthening in post-Mubarak Egypt, the possibility of anti-Israel factions gaining a role in post-Gadhafi Libya and the constant threat from Iran.

"So you can understand Israel's concern about their current security," Townsend said. "I think Israel is rightly concerned. This is a very dangerous time."
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Flags before statehood for Palestinians



Hebron, West Bank (CNN) -- Standing under a large poster of Jerusalem's Dome of the Rock, Nabil Saeed lays out large rolls of red, green, white and black cloth on his workshop table. These are the colors of his homeland, one he hopes will soon become a fully recognized state.

The flag-maker marks the cloth in precise shapes before cutting different colored layers as the hum of a sewing machine is heard from a small room next door.

The Saeed family home in the West Bank city of Hebron has been bustling with activity lately, as they seek to meet the increased demand for Palestinian flags ahead of an expected move by the Palestinian Authority to seek statehood at the United Nations next week.

Having cut the cloth, Saeed and his wife, together with his nephew Mahmoud, sit in a small room, filled with textiles, threads of different colors, and three small tables. Perched upon each table is an old sewing machine, like a relic of a bygone era.

Like clockwork, the pieces of cloth here are passed between them. First, Nabil's nephew, Mahmoud, sews the pieces together, passes them to Saeed's wife, who passes the flag-in-making on to him, who quickly adds the finishing touches and lays it on a pile of flags on the table next to him.

During the past few weeks the three of them have sewn over fifteen thousand flags says Nabil, who has been doing this for over 40 years. His profession has even landed him behind bars in an Israeli prison.

"During the first Intifada we were only producing a very small quantity of flags because it was forbidden, but when the Palestinian Authority arrived we started producing huge quantities," he explains.
At a time when business is slow, Saeed welcomes the Palestinian authority's U.N. initiative and the public relations campaign behind it. He says it has brought him fresh business, at a time when the global economy and foreign competition has made his job more difficult than ever.

"During the second Intifada we also produced large quantities of flags, but when people started importing the flags from outside with cheaper prices, it was not that good business," Nabil says, remembering that he used to be able to charge the equivalent of about seven dollars for a flag. He says he would be lucky to get four dollars today.

"We used to do thousands of flags before people start importing the flags from China, it's something that affected the prices dramatically. It caused us to stop producing," he says.

But money is not the driving factor for the flag maker, rather he is driven by the dream of finally having a Palestinian State.

"This flag that we sew and will continue to sew, we hope we will see it raised at the United Nations with the rest of the world. This is our hope, and we are sure that one day our flags will be raised in the United Nations and on every international occasion. It is a dream that is coming true, and we hope that our brothers, the Arabs, will support us," the flag makers say.
We are sure that one day our flags will be raised in the United Nations and on every international occasion
Saeed family, makers of Palestinian flags

Mahmoud, Saeed's nephew, agrees.

"Money is not the issue here, what is important is to have a state where we can live in dignity, where we can go wherever we want, where we can visit our holy places and walk our streets without having soldiers stopping us and asking for ID. This would be much better than any quantity of money. Business is important, but living in freedom and dignity is much more important," Mahmoud says.

Yaeem Al-Heleh has been running a printing business just down the road from Saeed's flag factory since the 1980's. Cardboard boxes full of flyers, posters, and small printed flags are stacked in the corner of the room. Nearby, workers use a hot press to flatten the freshly printed flags and others print large posters adorned with the picture of the late Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat standing next to current Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas.

Like his friend Nabil Saeed, Al-Heleh welcomes the extra income the Palestinian statehood campaign has brought, and he too believes the dream it carries is important. "We have been dreaming of having a state since the beginning of occupation. People were very positive towards this campaign. Here in Palestine everybody is supporting this idea. We hope to have the support from the Arab states and the whole world," he says.

Although he, like many, sees the likelihood of Palestinian Authority success at the United Nations Security Council as very low, AL-Heleh says he is hopeful that the Palestinian push for statehood will bring change.

Read what Israel's prime minister thinks about the Palestinian bid

"The flag today has a special meaning, before we used to fight in order to raise it. The flag used to be raised and then the Israeli soldiers used to take it down and now the flag is in a way of getting sovereignty and recognition. Now 130 countries recognize us and are ready to support us, I think it's a dream that could come true," he says.

Sitting behind his sewing machine Nabil Saeed sighs when asked whether he thinks the Palestinian Authority will succeed with its effort this month.

"If we don't succeed in September, it won't be the end and we will continue the resistance until our flag is raised everywhere. I will continue sewing the flag and I will never get bored of it. This is our flag, this is our pride and we will continue raising it all of our lives," he said.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Palestinian bid at U.N. distracts from the real crisis


Editor's note: Aaron David Miller is a public policy scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and served as a Middle East negotiator in Democratic and Republican administrations. His new book "Can America Have Another Great President?" will be published by Bantam Books in 2012.

(CNN) -- Rarely has so much time, energy and attention been devoted to an issue less consequential than this month's Palestinian bid for statehood at the U.N.—an episode characterized by hyperbole and muddled thinking on the part of just about everyone.

The real crisis -- the one that is really worth worrying about -- is the improbability of a conflict-ending agreement between Israel and the Palestinians.

For some time now, this September has come to represent not a month or unit of time in the calendar year, but a prospective catastrophe, an event of such epic proportion that it has consumed those involved in the peace process in Washington, Ramallah, Jerusalem, as well as in many world capitals.

The impending "crisis" seems to go something like this: Palestinians will seek U.N. membership through the U.N. Security Council or try to upgrade their status through the U.N. General Assembly. That campaign will set into motion a series of consequences which range from a U.S. veto (if it's the Security Council), thereby inflaming the entire Arab world in a fiery frenzy. Iran's position would be strengthened, America's weakened further.

The alternative, which the U.S. cannot block, would be a General Assembly resolution, which upgrades the PLO's status from a non-member entity to a non-member state. This would in turn give the Palestinians access to the International Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court, where they would launch a campaign to delegitimize Israel. This would force Congress to cut off aid to the Palestinians and spark a crisis with the Obama administration.

And there's more. The Palestinian campaign at the U.N. in New York would raise the possibility of demonstrations among Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. Worst case, hundreds of thousands of Palestinians would march against the settlements and checkpoints, triggering the prospect of serious violence with the Israelis. Israel would then withhold badly needed tax revenues from Palestinians; Israeli-Palestinian security cooperation would be undermined and the entire structure of Palestinian Authority state-building, so successful during the past several years, might collapse.

Barring some last-minute U.S. or European efforts to convince the Palestinians to stand down, the U.N. initiative will go forward, most likely in the General Assembly. And there's no doubt that it will not be helpful to an already badly crippled peace process.

At the same time, Palestinians, Israelis, and Americans have clearly contributed to making a bad situation worse. The Palestinian Authority has oversold the impact of their U.N. initiative and laid the groundwork for deep disappointments among Palestinians in the territories. Israelis have over-hyped the threats and downsides of a U.N. initiative, and in doing so, have only convinced the Palestinians that they have good cards to play.

The Americans, frustrated by the failure of the peace process, have chosen to steer clear (at least until lately) of trying to work out some compromise. The president also does not need a fight with the Israelis now, certainly not over a U.N. initiative criticizing a close ally.

Whatever the outcome at the U.N. -- and it's unlikely to be Armageddon, as the sky-is-falling crowd believes -- the day after we will all confront the same dreary problem. Palestinians will be no closer to their state; the Israelis will be bitter about the U.N. action, the administration will be less willing than ever to risk anything to get negotiations under way.

Indeed, what's happening in New York is a symptom of the core problem, which many don't want to face: Right now, and I choose my words very carefully, there's no conflict-ending agreement possible between this Israeli government and the Palestinian Authority. There may be any number of other possibilities, including relaunching interminable negotiations, achieving an interim deal, or an agreement on borders and security. But if you're looking for a peace agreement that includes Jerusalem and refugees, forget about it.

And that's the real issue that should worry everyone. In an enlightened parallel universe (in a galaxy far, far away), Americans, Israelis and the Palestinians would be taking risks and acting wisely and boldly. But we don't live in such a universe.

And so we wait and drift and we watch the forces of history gathering to overwhelm the forces of diplomacy. Without real leadership, slowly but surely the prospects and possibilities for a two-state solution to the problem of the much-too-promised land are being washed away. And Israelis, Palestinians -- and the rest of us -- will suffer the consequences.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Freed American hikers arrive in Oman


Tehran, Iran (CNN) -- American hikers Josh Fattal and Shane Bauer had a joyful reunion with family members in Oman late Wednesday, hours after being released from an Iranian prison.

The pair scampered down the steps from the airplane that carried them from Tehran to Muscat, the capital of Oman.

Families, as well as fellow hiker Sarah Shourd -- who was arrested with them but freed last year on medical grounds -- hugged the freed young men. Shourd is now Bauer's fiancee.

The families earlier expressed their joy, relief and gratitude at the pair's release.

"Today can only be described as the best day of our lives," the families said in a statement. "We have waited for nearly 26 months for this moment and the joy and relief we feel at Shane and Josh's long-awaited freedom knows no bounds.

"We now all want nothing more than to wrap Shane and Josh in our arms, catch up on two lost years and make a new beginning, for them and for all of us."

President Barack Obama also welcomed the "wonderful news," saying he was thrilled and could not feel happier for the two men's families. He thanked Oman, Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and the Swiss government for their assistance.

Fattal and Bauer were released earlier Wednesday on bail of $500,000 each and their sentences for spying convictions were commuted, Iran's judiciary said, according to government-run Press TV. The departure of the two from Iran effectively meant the bail money will be forfeited and kept by Iran.

The lawyer for Fattal and Bauer, Masoud Shafiee, told CNN the $1 million bail had been paid by the Omani government.

Fattal spoke with his brother, Alex, by phone after the release, according to a source familiar with the hikers' release who asked not to be identified.

It's not clear whether Bauer was able to speak with his parents or his fiancee, Shourd, according to the source.

A spokeswoman for the families, Samantha Topping, did not confirm that report but said she had spoken to Alex and to Bauer's mother, Cindy Hickey, and they sounded "great. "

The family has not yet said how long everyone will stay in Oman before heading to the United States.

Shourd is no longer wearing an engagement ring Bauer made from a thread from one of his shirts while they were in prison together, Topping added, because she had lost the ring while traveling round the United States working for the release of her fiance and Fattal.

Oman's envoy to Tehran, Salem al Ismaily, earlier said in a statement the pair were in the custody of the Omani government and would spend a couple of days in Muscat "before heading home."

The pair arrived at Tehran's Mehrabad International Airport late Wednesday in a convoy of diplomatic cars. The convoy had earlier left the country's notorious Evin Prison through the front gates, accompanied by a police escort, but Bauer and Fattal were not visible.

Swiss and Omani officials had waited outside the prison to receive the Americans. Switzerland represents U.S. interests in Iran because there is no American embassy there, and Oman has acted as a broker between Washington and Tehran in the past.

Oman helped secure the release of Shourd, posting her bail last September, a senior Obama administration official said at the time.

The two men's release comes a day before Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad is due to speak at the United Nations General Assembly in New York.

Asked at the United Nations about the news, Ahmadinejad's chief of staff, Esfandiar Mashaei, said: "Yes, we were expecting their release, us and the president."

High-profile American Muslims including boxing legend Muhammad Ali had called for their release, and a high-profile delegation of American Christian and Muslim religious leaders met Ahmadinejad in Iran last week to plead for their freedom.

"We were very happy to learn about their release today," said Nihad Awad, national executive director of the Council on American Islamic Relations (CAIR), who was part of the delegation to Tehran. "We are extremely happy for the hikers, their families and the country."

Bauer and Fattal, both 29, were convicted last month of entering Iran illegally and spying for the United States, and each was sentenced to eight years in prison.

Their attorney, Shafiee, went into the prison earlier Wednesday with paperwork to show that bail had been paid for each of them. A judge had signed the bail papers that morning after several days of delays.

Fattal and Bauer were arrested along with Shourd in July 2009 after apparently straying over an unmarked border between Iraqi Kurdistan and Iran.

Bauer and Shourd told their families in May last year that they had gotten engaged in prison and planned to get married after their release. Fattal plans to be best man at the wedding, the hikers' relatives said in a statement at the time.

Shourd, in an interview with CNN a year ago, showed the improvised engagement ring that Bauer had woven from thread pulled from his shirt, since lost.

Shourd said Bauer had asked her to marry him while they were imprisoned so that they could have something to sustain them through their days in Evin, and give them hope for their future together.

Shourd was freed almost exactly a year ago on medical grounds. Her release came a week before Ahmadinejad addressed the U.N. last year.

One analyst said the timing last year was no coincidence.

"I think President Ahmadinejad really wanted to use this as a way of building up a store of goodwill just before he comes to New York," Columbia University Prof. Gary Sick said last year after Shourd came home.

The Americans say they accidentally crossed into Iran when they veered off a dirt road while hiking near a tourist site in the Kurdish region of northern Iraq. They denied the charges and appealed the sentence while serving time in prison.

Ahmadinejad said last week that the release of Fattal and Bauer was imminent, setting off a roller coaster ride of expectations.

The judiciary shot back that only it could make decisions about their release.

An Omani official flew to Iran on September 14 to help work on any negotiation, a Western diplomat told CNN at the time.
When you have children you need to provide them with love, education and attention. Some parents find it hard to provide all of these to their kids but it is actually much easier than you may think. Usually a toy can provide all of these aspects for a child so it is important to find the right toys and the right games to play with your children.
Toddlers are at their most curious stage. Hence, this is the time that parents should teach their toddlers in a fun and playful way. Aside from toys, toddlers can experience both fun and learning through Fisher-Price toddler games. These games are guaranteed educational yet the approach is in a play format to keep the toddlers' interests. These games are easily accessible via the official website of Fisher-Price. Read on and check some of these games and what they can provide to your children.
The ABC's Zoo - this game teaches the ABC song as it shows the alphabet letters. It helps in the development of letter and sound recognition. It also teaches word recognition, syllables and word parts.
Animal Sounds - this is a fun game where toddlers can match different animals with their corresponding animal sounds. It clearly teaches young kids to recognize different animals.
Count the Score - this is also a fun game that uses animals as part of teaching toddlers on counting and number recognition. In this game, animals score points and counting is introduced.
These are just some of the Fisher-Price toddler games that your young ones will surely enjoy. So many games are still featured on Fisher-Price website. They have games on recognition of different colors, shapes, and sounds. There are also downloadable coloring sheets which can keep your toddlers hands busy.

Fisher-Price toddler games are the most suitable games for your little ones. Unlike other games that carry repetitive images, noisy sounds and bright images, Fisher-Price games are appealing and calming to the toddlers' eyes and ear. It is in a simple format. Hence, toddlers will be able to manage playing these games online.
You can see that there are a lot of games that you can play with your child, many of these games are great because they will help your toddler or child learn more. It is very important for you as a parent to play these types of games with your kid. If you neglect your child everyone knows that they will not develop to their fullest potential. In order to ensure your child learns the most they can you can play toddler games.
If you are shopping for educational toys consider looking for fisher price coupons first, fisher price coupons will help you save money when you are purchasing toys for your children to play with. When you buy toys you are helping engage your children but we all know how much they can cost. This is why I always look online for fisher price coupons before I go shopping, I have shared the links below to my favourite page to check for coupons for diapers, toys and more.