"Cinderella; or, The Little Glass Slipper" (French: Cendrillon ou La petite Pantoufle de Verre, German: Aschenputtel) is a folk tale embodying a myth-element of unjust oppression/triumphant reward. Thousands of variants are known throughout the world.[1] The title character[2] is a young woman living in unfortunate circumstances that are suddenly changed to remarkable fortune. The word "cinderella" has, by analogy, come to mean one whose attributes are unrecognised, or one who unexpectedly achieves recognition or success after a period of obscurity and neglect. The still-popular story of "Cinderella" continues to influence popular culture internationally, lending plot elements, allusions, and tropes to a wide variety of media.
Contents [hide]
1 Early versions
2 Cenerentola, Cinderella and Aschenputtel
3 Plot (Cenerentola)
4 Plot (Aschenputtel)
5 Plot (taken from Perrault)
6 Types
7 Adaptations
7.1 Opera
7.2 Ballet
7.3 Ice Show
7.4 Verse
7.5 Theater
7.5.1 Pantomime
7.5.2 Musical theatre
7.6 Films
7.7 Books
7.7.1 Novels
7.7.2 Short stories
7.7.3 Comic books
7.8 Songs
7.8.1 Cinderella jumprope song
7.9 Video games
7.10 In other languages
8 See also
9 Footnotes
10 External links
[edit]Early versions

The Cinderella theme may well have originated in classical antiquity. The Ancient Greek historian Strabo (Geographica Book 17, 1.33) recorded in the 1st century BC the tale of the Greco-Egyptian girl Rhodopis, "rosy-cheeked", who lived in the Greek colony of Naucratis in Ancient Egypt. It is often considered the oldest known version of the story:
They tell the fabulous story that, when she was bathing, an eagle snatched one of her sandals from her maid and carried it to Memphis. While the king was administering justice in the open air, the eagle, when it arrived above his head, flung the sandal into his lap. The king, having been stirred both by the beautiful shape of the sandal and by the strangeness of the occurrence, sent men in all directions into the country in quest of the woman who wore the sandal. When she was found in the city of Naucratis, she was brought up to Memphis and became the wife of the king...[3][4]
Herodotus, some five centuries before Strabo, supplied further information about Rhodopis in his Histories, writing that Rhodopis came from Thrace, and was the slave of Iadmon of Samos, and a fellow-slave of Aesop. She was taken to Egypt in the time of Pharaoh Amasis, and freed there for a large sum by Charaxus of Mytilene, brother of Sappho, the lyric poet.[5][6]
The story later reappears with Aelian (ca. 175–ca. 235),[7] showing that the Cinderella theme remained popular throughout antiquity.
The magical significance of the pumpkin in the Cinderella story (which has led to a modern expression for a person who desires an early bedtime, 'after midnight, I turn into a pumpkin') might derive from the 1st century comic work of Seneca 'On the Pumpkinification of Claudius', playing on a pun for the word for deification and the word for pumpkin.[8]
Another version of the story, Ye Xian, appeared in Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang by Tuan Ch'eng-Shih around 860. Here, the hardworking and lovely girl befriends a fish, the reincarnation of her mother, who was killed by her stepmother. Ye Xian saves the bones, which are magic, and they help her dress appropriately for a festival. When she loses her slipper after a fast exit, the king finds her slipper and falls in love with her (eventually rescuing her from her cruel stepmother). Another version of the story, which is similar to the Chinese version, exists in the Philippines. The story is known as "Mariang Alimango" (Mary the Crab). In this version, the spirit of her dead mother reincarnates as a crab, hence the title, and serves as her "fairy godmother".
Several different variants of the story appear in the medieval One Thousand and One Nights, also known as the Arabian Nights, including "The Second Shaykh's Story", "The Eldest Lady's Tale" and "Abdallah ibn Fadil and His Brothers", all dealing with the theme of a younger sibling harassed by two jealous elders. In some of these, the siblings are female, while in others, they are male. One of the tales, "Judar and His Brethren", departs from the happy endings of previous variants and reworks the plot to give it a tragic ending instead, with the younger brother being poisoned by his elder brothers.[9]
Aspects of Cinderella may be derived from the story of Cordelia in Geoffrey of Monmouth's The History of the Kings of Britain. Cordelia is the youngest and most virtuous of King Leir of Briton's three daughters, however her virtue is such that it will not allow her to lie in flattering her father when he asks, so that he divides up the kingdom between the elder daughters and leaves Cordelia with nothing. Cordelia marries her love, Aginippus, King of the Franks, and flees to Gaul where she and her husband raise an army and depose her wicked sisters who have been misusing their father. Cordelia is finally crowned Queen of the Britons. However her reign only lasts five years. The story is famously retold by Shakespeare, but given a tragic ending.
[edit]Cenerentola, Cinderella and Aschenputtel



Aschenputtel at her mother's grave, with birds
In 1634, Giambattista Basile, a Neapolitan soldier and government official, wrote Lo cunto de li cunti (The Story of Stories), or Pentamerone. It featured the tale of Cenerentola, which features a wicked step mother and step sisters, magical transformations, a missing slipper, and a hunt by a prince for the owner of the slipper.
[edit]Plot (Cenerentola)

A widowed prince has a daughter which is the subject of envy and anger towards his new wife, and the girl is ensnared by her governess in killing her stepmother and convincing her father to marry her. The governess succeeds, and then brings forward six daughters of her own, who abuse Zesolla (the Cindrella figure), and sending her into the kitchen to work as a servant. The prince goes into the island of Sardinia, meets a fairy who gives presents to his daughter, and brings back for her, a golden spade, a golden bucket, a silken napkin, and a date seedling. The girl cultivates the tree, and when the King gives a ball, Zesolla appears dressed richly by a fairy living in the date tree. The King falls in-love with her, and on the third night, threads one of her overshoes. The King invites all of the maidens in the land to a feast with a shoe-test, identifies Zesolla after the shoe jumps from his hand to her foot, and eventually marries her.
One of the most popular versions of Cinderella was written by Charles Perrault in 1697. The popularity of his tale was due to his additions to the story, including the pumpkin, the fairy-godmother and the introduction of glass slippers.[10]
Another well-known version was recorded by the German brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in the 19th century. The tale is called "Aschenputtel" ("Cinderella" in English translations) and the help comes not from a fairy-godmother but the wishing tree that grows on her mother's grave.
[edit]Plot (Aschenputtel)

A rich gentleman's wife lay dying, and she called her only daughter, the Cinderella figure, to her bedside. She asked the daughter to remain kind and generous, and God will protect her. She then died and was buried. After winter and spring, the widower married another woman, who had two beautiful, yet evil, daughters. The stepsisters stripped the girl with all her possessions and made her to cook and to wash the clothes. Much more of this the girl has to sleep by the cinders and the ashes, thus earning the name, Aschenputtelchen or the "Ashy-Slut". Despite of this the girl remained good and pious, and always went to her mother's grave to cry and to pour her grief.
One day, the gentleman visits the city, promising his stepdaughters gifts of luxury. One asks for beautiful dresses, while the other for pearls and diamonds. His own daughter merely asks for the first twig to knock his hat off on the way. The gentleman goes into his way, and acquires his stepdaughters' wishes. While passing a forest he gets a hazel twig, and gives it to his daughter. She plants the twig over her mother's grave, waters it with her tears and over the years, it grows into a glowing hazel tree. Under it the girl would weep and pray for thrice a day, and a white bird would always come to talk to her and to grant her everything she would ask for.
Now, the king decided to give a festival that will last with all splendor for three nights, in his Son's honor, and invites all of the beautiful maidens in the land to attend, because the Prince is supposed to select from one of them a bride for himself. Now the two sisters and Aschenputtel were also invited, but when Aschenputtel begged them to allow her to go with them into the celebration, the stepmother scoffed her off, telling her that she had no dress nor shoes to wear. When the girl insisted, the woman threw a dish of lentils into the ashes for her to pick up, so that she will be allowed to go with them to the Feast, but the girl accomplished the task in less than an hour with the help of two, white Doves. The stepmother redoubled the task and threw down even a greater quantity of lentils, but again, Cinderella was able to accomplished it in even a greater speed. The angry woman, not wanting to spoil her daughters' chances, hasted away with them to the Dance and left the crying stepdaughter behind.
The girl retreats to the graveyard to ask for help. The dove drops down a gown of gold and silver, and she went to the feast being mistaken as a foreign princess. The king's son danced her all the time, but when the girl heard the first strike of midnight she left the Feast quickly. She returned the clothes into the hazel tree and went home again back in her dirty, working clothes.
The next evening, the girl appeared grander than before, and this time, the crowd in the Dance were very astonished. The king's son danced again with her the whole time, but again at midnight, she left secretly.
The third evening, she appeared riding in a golden coach and wearing a dress of precious stones. This time, the crowd hushed with amazement and wonder. Now the Prince was determined to keep her, and had all the stairway smeared with pitch. When Aschenputtel ran away to leave, one of the golden slippers, on her left foot stuck on the last step of the stairs. The Prince proclaimed that he will marry the maiden whose foot will fit the golden slipper.
The next morning, the Prince went into Aschenputtel's house and tried the slipper on the first sister. The sister cut off her heel in order to fit the slipper, and while riding with the prince, the doves living on the tree alert the Prince to her treachery. So he went back again and tried the slipper to the other sister.
The sister cut off her toe in order to get in her foot in the slipper, and again the Prince was mistaken. While he was riding with her on the way to the king's castle, the doves alerted the Prince again. Dejected and furious, he came back to inquire for another girl.
Now the gentleman told him that they kept an Ashy-Slut in the house, and the Prince asked him to let her try the slipper. The girl appeared clean and modest, and when she had put on the slipper, the Prince recognized her as the Dancing Stranger he met at the Feast.
In the end during Aschenputtel's wedding, as she was walking down the aisle with her stepsisters as her bridesmaids, the birds flew down and struck the two sisters blind, one in the left eye and the other in the right. When the wedding ended, and Cinderella and her Prince was marching out of the church, the doves swooped down and again, struck the two sisters completely blind, for the rest of their lives.
[edit]Plot (taken from Perrault)



Oliver Herford illustrated the fairy godmother inspired from the Perrault version
(See above for many variations)
Once upon a time, there was a widower who married a proud and haughty woman as his second wife. She had two daughters, who were equally vain. By his first wife, he'd had a beautiful young daughter, a girl of unparalleled goodness and sweet temper. The Stepmother and her daughters forced the first daughter into servitude, where she was made to work day and night in menial chores. After the girl's chores were done for the day, she would retire to the barren and cold room given to her, and would curl up near the fireplace in an effort to stay warm. She would often arise covered in cinders, giving rise to the mocking nickname "Cinderella". Cinderella bears the abuse patiently and dares not tell her father, since his wife controls him entirely.
One day, the Prince invites all the young ladies in the land to a ball, planning to choose a wife from amongst them. The two Stepsisters gleefully planned their wardrobes for the ball, and taunted Cinderella by telling her maids were not invited to the ball.
As the sisters depart to the ball, Cinderella cries in despair. Her Fairy Godmother magically appears and immediately begins to transform Cinderella from house servant to the young lady she was by birth, all in the effort to get Cinderella to the ball. She turns a pumpkin into a golden carriage, mice into horses, a rat into a coachman, and lizards into footmen. She then turns Cinderella's rags into a beautiful jeweled gown, complete with a delicate pair of glass slippers. The Godmother tells her to enjoy the ball, but warned that she had to return before midnight, when the spells would be broken.
At the ball, the entire court is entranced by Cinderella, most especially the Prince. At this first ball, Cinderella remembers to leave before midnight. Back home, Cinderella graciously thanks her Godmother. She then greets the stepsisters, who had not recognized her earlier and talked of nothing but the beautiful girl at the ball.
Another ball is held the next evening, and Cinderella again attends with her Godmother's help. The Prince has become even more entranced, and Cinderella in turn becomes so enchanted by him she loses track of time and leaves only at the final stroke of midnight, losing one of her glass slippers on the steps of the palace in her haste. The Prince chases her, but outside the palace, the guards watch only a simple country wench leave. The Prince pockets the slipper and vows to find and marry the girl to whom it belonged. Meanwhile, Cinderella keeps the other slipper, which did not disappear when the spell was broken.
The Prince tries the slipper on all the women in the kingdom. When the Prince arrives at Cinderella's villa, the stepsisters try in vain to win over the prince. Cinderella asks if she might try, while the stepsisters taunt her. Naturally, the slipper fits perfectly, and Cinderella produces the other slipper for good measure. The stepsisters beg for forgiveness, and Cinderella forgives them for their cruelties.
Cinderella marries the Prince, and the stepsisters also marry two lords.
The first moral of the story is that beauty is a treasure, but graciousness is priceless. Without it, nothing is possible; with it, one can do anything.[11]
However, the second moral of the story mitigates the first one and reveals the criticism that Perrault is aiming at: "Another moral: Without doubt it is a great advantage to have intelligence, courage, good breeding, and common sense. These, and similar talents come only from heaven, and it is good to have them. However, even these may fail to bring you success, without the blessing of a godfather or a godmother."[12]
[edit]Types

Folklorists have long studied variants on this tale across cultures.[13] In 1893, Marian Roalfe Cox, commissioned by the Folklore Society of Britain, produced Cinderella: Three Hundred and Forty-Five Variants of Cinderella, Catskin and, Cap o'Rushes, Abstracted and Tabulated with a Discussion of Medieval Analogues and Notes.[13]
Further morphology studies have continued on this seminal work.[13]
Cinderella is classified as Aarne-Thompson type 510A, the persecuted heroine. Others of this type include The Sharp Grey Sheep, The Golden Slipper, The Story of Tam and Cam, Rushen Coatie, Fair, Brown and Trembling and Katie Woodencloak.[14]
[edit]Adaptations



Massenet's opera Cendrillon


Pantomime at the Adelphi


Cinderella Christmas exhibit in Minden, Louisiana
The story of "Cinderella" has formed the basis of many notable works:
[edit]Opera
Cendrillon (1749) by Jean-Louis Laruette
Cendrillon (1810) by Nicolas Isouard, libretto by Charles-Guillaume Étienne
La Cenerentola (1817) by Gioachino Rossini
Aschenbrödel (1878) by Ferdinand Langer
Cendrillon (1894-5) by Jules Massenet, libretto by Henri Caïn
Cinderella (1901-2) by Gustav Holst
La Cenerentola (1902) by Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari
Cendrillon (1904) by Pauline García-Viardot
Aschenbrödel (1905) by Leo Blech, libretto by Richard Batka
La Cenicienta (1966) by Jorge Peña Hen
Cinderella, a "pantomime opera" (1979) by Peter Maxwell Davies
Cendrillon, children's opera (1994) by Vladimir Kojoukharov
[edit]Ballet
Cinderella (1893) by Baron Boris Vietinghoff-Scheel
Aschenbrödel (1901) by Johann Strauss II, adapted and completed by Josef Bayer
Das Märchen vom Aschenbrödel (1941) by Frank Martin
Soluschka or Cinderella (1945) by Sergei Prokofiev
Cinderella (1980) by Paul Reade
Cinderella - A Tragic Tale (2011) by Terence Kohler for Finnish National Ballet, Music by Lera Auerbach
[edit]Ice Show
Cinderella (2008) by Tim A. Duncan and Edward Barnwell
[edit]Verse
Assepoester (1981) by Jan Kal
[edit]Theater
[edit]Pantomime
Cinderella debuted as a pantomime on stage at the Drury Lane Theatre, London in 1904 and at the Adelphi Theatre in London in 1905. Phyllis Dare, aged 14 or 15, starred in the latter. In 1926, Cinderella was caught on film in the London Palladium, starring Lennie Dean in the lead role.
In the traditional pantomime version the opening scene is set in a forest with a hunt in sway and it is here that Cinderella first meets Prince Charming and his "right-hand man" Dandini, whose name and character come from Gioachino Rossini opera (La Cenerentola). Cinderella mistakes Dandini for the Prince and the Prince for Dandini.
Her father, Baron Hardup, is under the thumb of his two stepdaughters, the Ugly sisters, and has a servant named Buttons, who is Cinderella's friend. Throughout the pantomime, the Baron is continually harassed by the Broker's Men (often named after current politicians) for outstanding rent. The Fairy Godmother must magically create a coach (from a pumpkin), footmen (from mice), a coach driver (from a frog), and a beautiful dress (from rags) for Cinderella to go to the ball. However, she must return by midnight, as it is then that the spell ceases.
A version debuted in the USA at the El Portal Theatre, NoHo in 2010. It was produced by Lythgoe Family Productions of So You Think You Can Dance fame and MPI Entertainment.
[edit]Musical theatre
Cinderella: The Musical by Landon Parks (book & lyrics) and Ioannis Kourtis (music) is an English language musical stage show written in 2009, and based on the opera Cendrillon by Jules Massenett.
Cinderella by Rodgers and Hammerstein was produced for television three times:
Cinderella (1957) features Julie Andrews as Cinderella, Jon Cypher, Kaye Ballard, Alice Ghostley and Edie Adams (broadcast in color, but only black-and-white kinescopes exist today).
Cinderella (1965) features Lesley Ann Warren as Cinderella, Stuart Damon as the Prince, Ginger Rogers as the Queen, Walter Pidgeon as the King, Celeste Holm as the Fairy Godmother and Jo Van Fleet as the Stepmother.
Cinderella (1997) features Brandy as Cinderella, Paolo Montalbán, Whitney Houston, Whoopi Goldberg, Victor Garber, Bernadette Peters, and Jason Alexander.
The Rodgers and Hammerstein version has also been staged live at times. A successful version ran in 1958 at the London Coliseum with a cast including Tommy Steele, Yana, Jimmy Edwards, Kenneth Williams and Betty Marsden. This version was augmented with several other Rodgers and Hammerstein's songs plus a song written by Tommy Steele, "You and Me" which he sang with Jimmy Edwards. Bobby Howell was the musical director. A 2005 version featured Paolo Montalbán and an ethnically diverse cast, like the 1997 TV version. Broadway Asia Entertainment produced a staged International Tour starring Lea Salonga and Australian actor Peter Saide in 2008.
Mr. Cinders, a musical which opened at the Adelphi Theatre, London in 1929. Filmed in 1934
Into the Woods by Stephen Sondheim (1988), in which Cinderella is one of many fairy tale characters who take part in the plot. This is partly based on the Grimm Brothers version of "Cinderella," including the enchanted birds, mother's grave, three balls, and mutilation and blinding of the stepsisters.
The Return of The Glass Slipper by Mary Donelly
Cinderella by Kate Hawley is written in the style of British pantos.
Cindy, a 1964 Off-Broadway musical composed by Johnny Brandon
ka (or Zolushka), a 2002 made-for-TV Russian pop musical
Cinderella (2007), a pantomime written by Stephen Fry for the Old Vic Theatre
Cinderella the Musical (2008), features J-Pop group Morning Musume and the Takarazuka Revue
Cinderella Sillyious Musical (2008/09), a musical comedy produced by Ross Petty for the Elgin Theatre Toronto
If the shoe fits (2011) Riverside Theater Guild
[edit]Films
Over the decades, hundreds of films have been made that are either direct adaptations from Cinderella or have plots loosely based on the story. Almost every year at least one, but often several such films are produced and released, resulting in Cinderella becoming a work of literature with one of the largest numbers of film adaptations ascribed to it.
Cinderella (1899), the first ever film version, produced in France by Georges Méliès.
Cinderella (1911), a silent film starring Florence La Badie
Cinderella (1914), a silent film starring Mary Pickford
Aschenputtel (1922) silhouette shadow play short by Lotte Reiniger.
Cinderella, an animated Laugh-O-Gram produced by Walt Disney, first released on December 6, 1922. This film was about 7.5 minutes long.
A Kick for Cinderella (1925), a Bud Fisher animation featuring Mutt and Jeff.
Cinderella (1925), a Walter Lantz animation in the Dinky Doodle series.
Poor Cinderella (1934), a Fleischer Studios animated short film starring Betty Boop
Cinderella Meets Fella, (1938), a Merrie Melodies animated short film
First Love (1939), musical modernization with Deanna Durbin and Robert Stack
Cinderella  (1947), a Soviet musical film by Lenfilm studios, starring Erast Garin and Faina Ranevskaya
Cinderella, (1950) a Disney animated feature released on February 15, 1950, now considered one of Disney's classics. A direct-to-video sequel, Cinderella II: Dreams Come True, was released in 2002. A second direct-to-video sequel Cinderella III: A Twist in Time was released in 2007.
Aschenputtel (1955), West German film, dubbed into English and released in the USA in 1966 as Cinderella.
The Glass Slipper (1955), feature film with Leslie Caron and Michael Wilding
Cinderfella (1960), notable in that the main character is a man, played by Jerry Lewis
Cinderella (1964), Rogers and Hammerstein musical starring Ginger Rogers, Walter Pidgeon, Leslie Ann Warren, and Stuart Damon. Written by Joseph Schrank.
The story also inspired an episode of The Flintstones entitled, Cinderellastone, which originally aired on October 22, 1964. In it, Fred, mad because he was not invited to Mr. Slate's party, dreams he is Cinderella (complete with a Fairy Godmother voiced by June Foray) and goes to the party. The next day, he gets a big promotion and finds that he wasn't invited due to a clerical oversight.
Popelka (Cinderella, 1969), a Czech musical film
Hey, Cinderella! (1970), a 60-minute film produced by the Jim Henson Company. This comedy version features Jim Henson's trademark Muppets (including a small role by Kermit the Frog).
Sinderella Kül Kedisi (1971) Turkish film with Zeynep Deðirmencioðlu
Tri oríšky pro Popelku / Drei Haselnüsse für Aschenbrödel (Three Nuts for Cinderella; known in the UK as Three Gifts for Cinderella), a Czech-German movie released in 1973
The Slipper and the Rose, a 1976 British musical film starring Gemma Craven and Richard Chamberlain.
Cinderella, a 1977 American erotic musical comedy starring Cheryl "Rainbeaux" Smith, Brett Smiley and Sy Richardson, directed by Michael Pataki
Cindy (1978), made for television
Zolushka, a 1979 musical Soviet animated film.
The Tender Tale of Cinderella Penguin (1981), an Oscar-nominated animated short from the National Film Board of Canada[15]
Fresh (1985), a music video for the song by Kool & the Gang features a Cinderella theme.
Working Girl (1988), starring Melanie Griffith, a reworking of the Cinderella story, set in corporate America.
Hello Kitty's Cinderella (1989), an anime short film starring Hello Kitty, was released in Japan.
Hello Kitty - Cinderella was released in the U.S. as part of the Hello Kitty and Friends anime series.
Ashpet: An American Cinderella, a 1990 Southern "Appalachia" version of the story, adapted from the Brothers Grimm, starring Louise Anderson and directed by Tom Davenport.
If the Shoe Fits (1990), modern take on the Cinderella story set in France starring Rob Lowe and Jennifer Grey
Cinderella (1994), produced by Jetlag Productions and distributed by GoodTimes Entertainment, premiered on video.
Cinderella Monogatari (1996) Japanese Anime version of Cinderella. Consisted of 26 episodes.
Ever After (1998), starring Drew Barrymore, a post-feminist take on the Cinderella myth.
Cinderella (2000), a British production set in mid-20th century and starring Kathleen Turner
Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister (2002), A look at the classic "Cinderella" story from the perspective of one of her 'ugly' stepsister adapted from Gregory Maguire's book of the same name[16]
A Cinderella Story (2004), a modernization featuring Hilary Duff and Chad Michael Murray
A segment of the 2005 Turkish anthology film Istanbul Tales made up of five stories based on popular fairy tales is based on this tale in which Cinderella is a prostitute
Cinderelmo, a Cinderella story featuring Sesame Street's Elmo and Keri Russell
Happily N'Ever After (2007)
Year of the Fish (2008)
Another Cinderella Story (2008) starring Selena Gomez and Drew Seeley
Elle: A Modern Cinderella Tale (2010) starring Sterling Knight and Ashlee Hewitt
Grazilda (2010), a Philippine TV series. It tells the story of Cinderella but its focused on what happened after happily ever after.
A Cinderella Story: Once Upon A Song (2011) starring Lucy Hale. A modern day story about Katie (Cinderella), her music, and her Prince Charming.
Cinderella (2013) starring Amanda Seyfried[17]
[edit]Books
Cox M.-R. Cinderella. Three Hundred and Forty-five Variants of Cinderella, Catskin, and Cap 0’ Rushes, abstracted and tabulated, with a discussion of mediaeval analogues, and notes, by Marian Roalfe Cox. L., 1893.
Rooth A.B. The Cinderella cycle. Lund: Gleerup, 1951.
50 Ways To Retell A Story: Cinderella by Alan Peat, Julie Peat and Christopher Storey: Published by Creative Educational Press Ltd 2010. ISBN 978-0-9544755-5-0.
[edit]Novels
Chinese Cinderella by Adeline Yen Mah
Politically Correct Bedtime Stories by James Garner. In this version, Cinderella is dressed in a gown "woven of silk which was stolen from unsuspecting silkworms" and has all the men fighting to death over her. This enables the women to take over the government and pass the law that women should only wear comfortable clothes.
Bound by Donna Jo Napoli
Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister by Gregory Maguire. Maguire's style of writing is to twist fairy tales. In his novel, Cinderella is the spoiled child, whose confinement to the heath is self-imposed after the death of her mother.
Ella Enchanted by Gail Carson Levine Ella was put under a spell at birth that forces her to obey any order given to her. An unusual twist as it features the ball only in the last few chapters, dealing more with Ella's struggle against the curse and because the prince (Charmont) knows Ella before the ball but does not recognize her as she is in disguise.
Cinderellis and the Glass Hill by Gail Carson Levine
I was a Rat! or The Scarlet Slippers by Philip Pullman
Bella at Midnight by Diane Stanley
Just Ella by Margaret Peterson Haddix
Nine Coaches Waiting by Mary Stewart
The Glass Slipper by Eleanor Farjeon
Phoenix and Ashes by Mercedes Lackey
When Cinderella Falls Down Dead by Joshua Gabe and Grayian Phoenix. In this version, Cinderella is reembodied into the 21st Century in the body of a young girl.
Witches Abroad by Terry Pratchett
The Midnight Dancers by Regina Doman makes references to the fairy tale. The heroine Rachel is exploited by her stepmother and stepsisters, and routinely sneaks out to dance.
Godmother, The Secret Cinderella Story by Carolyn Turgeon. Lil is the fairy that was given the task of helping Cinderella get to the ball and the prince, but she is trapped in the body of an aging elderly woman for the huge mistake she made. To redeem her mistake, she tries to get two single New Yorkers together to a ball.
Her Feet Chime by Rumki Chowdhury. In this Bangladeshi version, Asha's evil aunt and cousin turn her into a servant, renaming her Thamsha, and breaking all family relations with her. Asha's servant friends help her wear a ginger garment and meet her Nawabzada, Bengali Prince, at a palace gathering.
Mrs. Beast by Pamela Ditchoff
Cindy Ella by Robin Palmer
The Fairy Godmother by Mercedes Lackey
Jim C. Hines Princess series of book include Danielle Whiteshore (Cinderella) after her marriage to the prince.
[edit]Short stories
Catch the Moon by Judith Ortiz Cofer
Rosie's Dance by Emma Hardesty
[edit]Comic books
Cinderella appears as a character in Bill Willingham's Vertigo series, Fables. Cinderella (or "Cindy", as her fellow Fables call her) is the third and final of Prince Charming's ex-wives and is Fabletown's resident super spy. Her cover is the ownership of her own shoe store, the Glass Slipper, and she maintains a bitter persona in order to throw off the suspicions of the rest of her community. She also appeared in her own spin-off comic, Cinderella: From Fabletown with Love.
Cinderalla by Junko Mizuno
Ludwig Revolution by Kaori Yuki. In this version, Cinderella's feet are too large and the series' protagonist lends her his shoe for the evening, acting as her Fairy Godmother. Also, the Prince doesn't hold the ball to find his wife, but to find the woman with large feet who killed his pet lizard, Isolde.
[edit]Songs
Some popular songs that make reference to the story of Cinderella include:
Half Past Midnight a single by Canadian rock group The Staccatos, that released 1967.
Cinderella Stay Awhile a song by Michael Jackson from his 1975 album Forever, Michael.
Cinderella by Vince Gill, released 1987.
Hey Cinderella (1993) by Suzy Bogguss.
Cinderella Blue (1994) by Robert Lucas of the band Canned Heat.[18]
Cinderella Undercover (1998) by Oingo Boingo.[19]
Snoopfella a song by Snoop Dogg from his album No Limit Top Dogg (1999).
Cinderella a song by Britney Spears from her 2001 album Britney.
Cinderella, a 2001 single by Sweetbox.
Cinderella by Shakaya, released 2002.
Cinderella a 2003 single by The Cheetah Girls.
The Glass Slipper by The Dresden Dolls from debut live album A Is for Accident, that first released in 2003 and leaked on the internet in 2009.
Cinderella by Tata Young from her 2004 album I Believe.
Cinderella song by Steven Curtis Chapman from This Moment (2007).
A Cinderella Story by Mudvayne's fourth album The New Game (2008).
A Dustland Fairytale a single by The Killers from their third album Day & Age (2008).
Fairytale by Sara Bareilles from her album live album Between the Lines: Sara Bareilles Live at the Fillmore (2008).
It's Midnight Cinderella by Garth Brooks
Cinderella Man by Eminem from his album Recovery (2010)
Romeo and Cinderella from Hatsune Miku: Project DIVA, released in 2010.
Cinderella's Curls by Waxing Gibbous.
Mayonaka no Door by Liu Yifei (first ending of Demashita! Powerpuff Girls Z)
Not Your Cinderella by Catherine Britt
One Headlight by The Wallflowers
Stealing Cinderella by Chuck Wicks
Dark Fantasy by Kanye West featuring Nicki Minaj from Kanye's fifth album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010)
There is Music in You by Rodgers & Hammerstein
Umbrella (Remix), originally by Rihanna & Jay-Z but remixed by Chris Brown and retitled "Cinderella"
C\C (Cinderella\Complex) by High-King
Cinderella by Korean pop singer Seo In-Young
Cendrillon (The French name for Cinderella) by French rock group Téléphone
Rindercella by Archie Campbell
Cinderella by Sajjad Ali
21Ji Made no Cinderella by Berryz Koubou
Hadashi no Cinderella Boy by NEWS
Shi no Butou~Romance of the Cendrillon by Malice Mizer
Cinderfella Dana Dane by Dana Dane
Cinderela by the late Portuguese singer Carlos Paião
Barefoot Cinderella by Hannah Montana
Cinderella by Damien Burner Blazé Jackson
[edit]Cinderella jumprope song
There is a jumprope song for children that involves Cinderella[20]:
Cinderella dressed in yellow, went upstairs to kiss her fellow, by mistake she kissed a snake, how many doctors will it take? 1, 2, 3,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 10 etc. (Go to 20 then go down to the next line)
Cinderella dressed in blue, went upstairs to tie her shoe, made a mistake and tied a knot, how many knots will she make? 1, 2, 3, etc.
Cinderella dressed in green, went downtown to buy a ring, made a mistake and bought a fake, how many days before it breaks? 1, 2, 3, etc.
Cinderella dressed in lace, went upstairs to fix her face, oh no oh no, she found a blemish, how many powder puffs till she's finished? 1, 2, 3, etc.
Cinderella dressed in silk, went outside to get some milk, made a mistake and fell in the lake, how many more till she gets a break? 1, 2, 3, etc.
The counting continues as long as the jumper avoids missing a jump. If they do then the counting starts again.
Variations:
Cinderella dressed in yellow, went downtown to meet her fellow (or "to buy some mustard"). On the way, her girdle busted. All the people were disgusted.
(Heard in Jackson Heights, Queens, late 1950s)
Cinderella dressed in yellow, went upstairs to kiss her fellow. how many kisses did she give him?
(Heard in Northern Ireland)
Cinderella dressed in yell'a, went downstairs to kiss a fell'a. Made a mistake and kissed a snake, how many stitches (or "doctors") did it take?"
Cinderella dressed in yell'a, went downtown to kiss her fell'a. How many kisses did he get? 1,2,3 etc. (Heard in Leesburg, Florida, Early 2009)
Cinderella dressed in yell'a, tell me the name of your sweet fella a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,j,k,,l,m,n,o,p,q,r,s,t,u,v,w,x,y,z (The jumper runs out when the first letter of their crush or boyfriend/girlfriend's name is called and shouts their name at the same time)
[edit]Video games
In 2005, Disney released Disney's Cinderella: Magical Dreams for the Nintendo Game Boy Advance. Cinderella was also featured in Disney's / Square's video game Kingdom Hearts[21] where she is one of the seven princesses of heart which are needed to open the door to darkness. She, along with her entire world, also are in Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep.
[edit]In other languages
Language	Name	Romanisation
Arabic		Roodoopis
Bulgarian		Pepelyashka
Catalan	Ventafocs
Chinese		Huiguniang
Croatian	Pepeljuga
Czech	Popelka
Danish	Askepot
Dutch	Assepoester
English	Cinderella
Estonian	Tuhkatriinu
Filipino	Sinderela
Finnish	Tuhkimo
French	Cendrillon
German	Aschenputtel
Greek		Stachtopoúta
Hebrew		Cinderela \Lichlochit"
Hindi		Sindirella
Hungarian	Hamupipoke
Indonesian	Cinderella
Irish	Cinderella
Icelandic	Öskubuska
Italian	Cenerentola
Japanese		Shinderera
Korean		Sindelella
Latvian	
Lithuanian	Pelene
Macedonian		Pepelashka
Norwegian	Askepott
Persian		Sinderela
Polish	Kopciuszek
Portuguese	Cinderela
Romanian	Cenuþareasa
Russian		Zolushka
Serbian		Pepeljuga
Slovak	Popoluška
Slovenian	Pepelka
Swedish	Askungen
Spanish	Cenicienta
Thai		Cinderella
Turkish	Külkedisi
Vietnamese	
Ukrainian		Popelushka



Little Red Riding Hood, also known as Little Red Cap, is a French fairy tale about a young girl and a Big Bad Wolf. The story has been changed considerably in its history and subject to numerous modern adaptations and readings.
This story is number 333 in the Aarne-Thompson classification system for folktales.[1]
Contents [hide]
1 The tale
1.1 Relationship to other tales
2 The tale's history
2.1 Earliest versions
2.2 Charles Perrault
2.3 The Brothers Grimm
2.4 After the Grimms
3 Interpretations
3.1 Wolf attacks
3.2 Natural cycles
3.3 Ritual
3.4 Rebirth
3.5 Sexual awakening
3.6 Norse myth
4 Modern uses and adaptations
5 See also
6 References
7 External links
[edit]The tale



Little Red Riding Hood, illustrated in a 1927 story anthology
The story revolves around a girl called Little Red Riding Hood, after the red hooded cape/cloak (in Perrault's fairytale) or simple cap (in Grimm's fairytale) she wears. The girl walks through the woods to deliver food to her sick grandmother.



A wolf wants to eat the girl but is afraid to do so in public. He approaches Little Red Riding Hood and she naïvely tells him where she is going. He suggests the girl pick some flowers, which she does. In the meantime, he goes to the grandmother's house and gains entry by pretending to be the girl. He swallows the grandmother whole, and waits for the girl, disguised as the grandma.
When the girl arrives, she notices that her grandmother looks very strange. Little Red Riding Hood then says, "What big hands you have!" In most retellings, this colloquy eventually culminates with Little Red Riding Hood saying, "My, what big teeth you have!" to which the wolf replies, "The better to eat you with" and swallows her whole, too.
A hunter, however, comes to the rescue and cuts the wolf open. Little Red Riding Hood and her grandmother emerge unharmed. They fill the wolf's body with heavy stones. The wolf awakens thirsty from his large meal and goes to the well to seek water, where he falls in and drowns. (Sanitized versions of the story have the grandmother shut in the closet instead of eaten, and some have Little Red Riding Hood saved by the hunter as the wolf advances on her, rather than after she is eaten.)
The tale makes the clearest contrast between the safe world of the village and the dangers of the forest, conventional antitheses that are essentially medieval, though no written versions are as old as that. The original was supposed to be a warning to young women about the sexual appetites of men (and the wolf-like qualities that they possess).
[edit]Relationship to other tales
The theme of the ravening wolf and of the creature released unharmed from its belly is also reflected in the Russian tale Peter and the Wolf, and the other Grimm tale The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids, but its general theme of restoration is at least as old as Jonah and the Whale. The theme also appears in the story of the life of Saint Margaret, where the saint emerges unharmed from the belly of a dragon.
The dialog between the wolf and Little Red Riding Hood has its analogies to the Norse  from the Elder Edda; the giant had stolen Mjölner, Thor's hammer, and demanded Freyja as his bride for its return. Instead, the gods dressed Thor as a bride and sent him. When the giants note Thor's unladylike eyes, eating, and drinking, Loki explains them as Freyja not having slept, or eaten, or drunk, out of longing for the wedding.[2]


"The better to see you with": woodcut by Walter Crane
[edit]The tale's history

[edit]Earliest versions
The origins of the Little Red Riding Hood story can be traced to versions from various European countries and more than likely preceding the 17th century, of which several exist, some significantly different from the currently known, Grimms-inspired version. It was told by French peasants in the 14th century as well as in Italy, where a number of versions exist, including La finta nonna (The False Grandmother).[3] It has also been called "The Story of Grandmother". It is also possible that this early tale has roots in very similar Oriental tales (e.g. "Grandaunt Tiger").[4]
These early variations of the tale differ from the currently known version in several ways. The antagonist is not always a wolf, but sometimes an ogre or a ‘bzou’ (werewolf), making these tales relevant to the werewolf-trials (similar to witch trials) of the time (e.g. the trial of Peter Stumpp).[5] The wolf usually leaves the grandmother’s blood and meat for the girl to eat, who then unwittingly cannibalises her own grandmother. Furthermore, the wolf was also known to ask her to remove her clothing and toss it into the fire.[6] In some versions, the wolf eats the girl after she gets into bed with him, and the story ends there.[7] In others, she sees through his disguise and tries to escape, complaining to her "grandmother" that she needs to defecate and would not wish to do so in the bed. The wolf reluctantly lets her go, tied to a piece of string so she does not get away. However, the girl slips the string over something else and runs off.
In these stories she escapes with no help from any male or older female figure, instead using her own cunning. Sometimes, though more rarely, the red hood is even non-existent.[7]
[edit]Charles Perrault


French images, like this 19th century painting, show the much shorter red chaperon being worn
The earliest known printed version[8] was known as Le Petit Chaperon Rouge and had its origins in 17th century French folklore. It was included in the collection Tales and Stories of the Past with Morals. Tales of Mother Goose (Histoires et contes du temps passé, avec des moralités. Contes de ma mère l'Oye), in 1697, by Charles Perrault. As the title implies, this version[9] is both more sinister and more overtly moralized than the later ones. The redness of the hood, which has been given symbolic significance in many interpretations of the tale, was a detail introduced by Perrault.[10]
The story had as its subject an "attractive, well-bred young lady", a village girl of the country being deceived into giving a wolf she encountered the information he needed to find her grandmother's house successfully and eat the old woman while at the same time avoiding being noticed by woodcutters working in the nearby forest. Then he proceeded to lay a trap for the Red Riding Hood. The latter ends up being asked to climb into the bed before being eaten by the wolf, where the story ends. The wolf emerges the victor of the encounter and there is no happy ending.
Charles Perrault explained the 'moral' at the end so that no doubt is left to his intended meaning:
From this story one learns that children, especially young lasses, pretty, courteous and well-bred, do very wrong to listen to strangers, And it is not an unheard thing if the Wolf is thereby provided with his dinner. I say Wolf, for all wolves are not of the same sort; there is one kind with an amenable disposition — neither noisy, nor hateful, nor angry, but tame, obliging and gentle, following the young maids in the streets, even into their homes. Alas! Who does not know that these gentle wolves are of all such creatures the most dangerous!
This, the presumed original, version of the tale was written for late 17th century French court of King Louis XIV. This audience, whom the King entertained with extravagant parties and prostitutes, presumably would take from the story the intended meaning. For example, a common colloquialism of the time was to say that a girl who lost her virginity had "seen the wolf". This story stood as a harsh morality tale warning women of the advances of men.
[edit]The Brothers Grimm


Wilhelm (left) and Jacob Grimm (right) from an 1855 painting by Elisabeth Jerichau-Baumann.
In the 19th century two separate German versions were retold to Jacob Grimm and his younger brother Wilhelm Grimm, known as the Brothers Grimm, the first by Jeanette Hassenpflug (1791–1860) and the second by Marie Hassenpflug (1788–1856). The brothers turned the first version to the main body of the story and the second into a sequel of it. The story as Rotkäppchen was included in the first edition of their collection Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales (1812)).[11]
The earlier parts of the tale agree so closely with Perrault's variant that it is almost certainly the source of the tale.[12] However, they modified the ending; this version had the little girl and her grandmother saved by a huntsman who was after the wolf's skin; this ending is identical to that in the tale The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids, which appears to be the source.[13]
The second part featured the girl and her grandmother trapping and killing another wolf, this time anticipating his moves based on their experience with the previous one. The girl did not leave the path when the wolf spoke to her, her grandmother locked the door to keep it out, and when the wolf lurked, the grandmother had Little Red Riding Hood put a trough under the chimney and fill it with water that sausages had been cooked in; the smell lured the wolf down, and it drowned.[14]
The Brothers further revised the story in later editions and it reached the above mentioned final and better known version in the 1857 edition of their work.[15] It is notably tamer than the older stories which contained darker themes.
[edit]After the Grimms
Numerous authors have rewritten or adapted this tale.


An engraving from the Cyclopedia of Wit and Humor.
Andrew Lang included a variant as "The True History of Little Goldenhood"[16] in The Red Fairy Book; he derived it from the works of Charles Marelles, in Contes of Charles Marelles. This variant explicitly said that the story had been mistold. The girl was saved, but not by the huntsman; when the wolf tried to eat her, its mouth was burned by the golden hood she wore, which was enchanted.
James N. Barker wrote a variation of Little Red Riding Hood in 1827 as an approximately 1000-word story. It was later reprinted in 1858 in a book of collected stories edited by William E Burton, called the Cyclopedia of Wit and Humor. The reprint also features a wood engraving of a clothed wolf on bended knee holding Little Red Riding Hood's hand.
In the 20th century, the popularity of the tale appeared to snowball, with many new versions being written and produced, especially in the wake of Freudian analysis, deconstruction and feminist critical theory. (See "Modern uses and adaptations" below.) This trend has also led to a number of academic texts being written that focus on Little Red Riding Hood, including works by Alan Dundes and Jack Zipes.
[edit]Interpretations



Red Riding Hood by George Frederic Watts
Besides the overt warning about talking to strangers, there are many interpretations of the classic fairy tale, many of them sexual.[17] Some are listed below.
[edit]Wolf attacks
Ethologist Valerius Geist of the University of Calgary, Alberta wrote that the fable was likely based on genuine risk of wolf attacks at the time. He argues that wolves were in fact dangerous predators, and fables served as a valid warning not to enter forests where wolves were known to live, and to be on the look out for such. Both wolves and wilderness were treated as enemies of humanity in that region and time.[18]
[edit]Natural cycles
Folklorists and cultural anthropologists such as P. Saintyves and Edward Burnett Tylor saw "Little Red Riding Hood" in terms of solar myths and other naturally-occurring cycles. Her red hood could represent the bright sun which is ultimately swallowed by the terrible night (the wolf), and the variations in which she is cut out of the wolf's belly represent by it the dawn.[19] In this interpretation, there is a connection between the wolf of this tale and Sköll, the wolf in Norse myth that will swallow the personified Sun at Ragnarök, or Fenrir.[20] Alternatively, the tale could be about the season of spring, or the month of May, escaping the winter.[21]
[edit]Ritual
The tale has been interpreted as a puberty ritual, stemming from a prehistorical origin (sometimes an origin stemming from a previous matriarchal era).[22] The girl, leaving home, enters a liminal state and by going through the acts of the tale, is transformed into an adult woman by the act of coming out of the wolf's belly.[23]
[edit]Rebirth
Bruno Bettelheim, in The Uses of Enchantment, recast the Little Red Riding Hood motif in terms of classic Freudian analysis, that shows how fairy tales educate, support, and liberate the emotions of children. The motif of the huntsman cutting open the wolf, he interpreted as a "rebirth"; the girl who foolishly listened to the wolf has been reborn as a new person.[24]
[edit]Sexual awakening
Red Riding Hood has also been seen as a parable of sexual maturity. In this interpretation, the red cloak symbolizes the blood of menstruation,[25] braving the "dark forest" of womanhood. Or the cloak could symbolize the hymen (earlier versions of the tale generally do not state that the cloak is red). In this case, the wolf threatens the girl's virginity. The anthropomorphic wolf symbolizes a man, who could be a lover, seducer or sexual predator. This differs from the ritual explanation in that the entry into adulthood is biologically, not socially, determined.[26]
[edit]Norse myth
The poem from the Poetic Edda mirrors some elements of Red Riding Hood. Loki's explanations for "Freyja's" (actually Thor disguised as Freya) strange behavior mirror the wolf's explanations for his strange appearance.
The red hood has often been given great importance in many interpretations, with a significance from the dawn to blood.[27]
[edit]Modern uses and adaptations



WPA poster by Kenneth Whitley, 1939.
Main article: Adaptations of Little Red Riding Hood
There have been many modern uses and adaptations of Little Red Riding Hood, generally with a mock-serious reversal of Red Riding Hood's naïveté or some twist of social satire; they range across a number of different media and styles. Multiple variations have been written in the past century, in which authors adapt the Grimms' tale to their own interests.
The tale can be told in terms of Little Red Riding Hood's sexual attractiveness. The song "How Could Red Riding Hood (Have Been So Very Good)?" by A.P. Randolph in 1925 was the first song known to be banned from radio because of its sexual suggestiveness. The 1966 hit song "Lil' Red Riding Hood" by Sam the Sham & the Pharaohs takes the Wolf's point of view, implying that he wants love rather than blood. In the short animated cartoon Red Hot Riding Hood by Tex Avery, the story is recast in an adult-oriented urban setting, with the suave, sharp-dressed Wolf howling after the nightclub singer Red. Avery used the same cast and themes in a subsequent series of cartoons.[28] Allusions to the tale can be more or less overtly sexual, as when the color of a lipstick is advertised as "Riding Hood Red".[29]
This sexual analysis may take the form of rape. In Against Our Will, Susan Brownmiller described the fairy tale as a description of rape.[30] Many revisionist retellings depict Little Red Riding Hood or the grandmother successfully defending herself against the wolf.[31]
The story may also serve as a metaphor for a sexual awakening, as in Angela Carter's story "The Company of Wolves", published in her collection The Bloody Chamber (1979). (Carter's story was adapted into a film by Neil Jordan in 1984.) In the story, the wolf is in fact a werewolf, and comes to newly-menstruating Red Riding Hood in the forest in the form of a charming hunter. He turns into a wolf and eats her grandmother, and is about to devour her as well, when she is equally seductive and ends up lying with the wolf man, her sexual awakening.[32] Such tellings bear some similarity to the "animal bridegroom" tales, such as Beauty and the Beast or The Frog Prince, but where the heroines of those tales transform the hero into a prince, these tellings of Little Red Riding Hood reveal to the heroine that she has a wild nature like the hero's.[33]
Little Red Riding Hood is also one of the central characters in the 1987 Broadway musical Into the Woods by Steven Sondheim and James Lapine. In the song, "I Know Things Now" she speaks of how he made her feel "excited, well, excited and scared," in a reference to the sexual undertones of their relationship. Red Riding Hood's cape is also one of the musical's four quest items that are emblematic of fairy tales.[34]
Publishers like BeeGang and So Out maintained unaltered the original story written by Charles Perrault mainly adding interactivity or educational content to their book apps; Other publishers like BlueQuoll, an Australian publishing group, have pushed further the boundaries of the narration and re-invented the story even in the title, Mr. Wolf and the Ginger Cupcakes that puts the wolf at the center of the narration. In their version the element of good vs evil is removed from the story and the wolf is not portraited as a negative character that deserves to die miserably at the end of the story.

Little Red Riding Hood is a 1997 black and white short movie (12 minutes long). Written and directed by David Kaplan and with cinematography of Scott Ramsey, it features then-teenage Christina Ricci in the title role and is narrated by Quentin Crisp.
The movie was awarded at the Avignon Film Festival 1998 (Prix Panavision award to David Kaplan), at the Avignon/New York Film Festival (Vision Award to Scott Ramsey) and at the Williamsburg Brooklyn Film Festival 1999 (Certificate of Excellence to the Best Cinematography - Scott Ramsey).
Contents [hide]
1 Credits
2 Plot
3 See also
4 External links
Credits

David Kaplan: Director and writer
Rocco Caruso and Jasmine Kosovic: Producers
Scott Ramsey: Cinematographer
Plot

This version of the classical story "Little Red Riding Hood" is a sort of black comedy. The black-and-white scenario shows the forest of the tale and a narrator is the only speaking character.
A wolf — clearly a man in disguise — tries to trick the girl. He successfully eats the grandmother, and then tries to eat the girl. However, the girl tricks him in turn and survives. She is clever enough not to need any huntsman. She does not "rescue" the eaten grandmother at all. In fact she eats her flesh as well, even after being warned by the cat. Combined with the teasing of the wolf after she escaped to make him follow her this short movie presents an image of "Little Red Riding Hood" that is mildly put: "not entirely innocent."
As such the movie is clearly based on one of the earliest version of the Little Red Riding Hood fairytale, known as "The False Grandmother."