"Hansel and Gretel" ( German: Hänsel und Gretel, "Little John and Little Margaret") is a well-known fairy tale of German origin, recorded by the Brothers Grimm and published in 1812. Hansel and Gretel are a young brother and sister threatened by a cannibalistic witch living deep in the forest in a house constructed of cake and confectionery. The two children save their lives by outwitting her. The tale has been adapted to various media, most notably the opera Hänsel und Gretel (1893) by Engelbert Humperdinck and a stop-motion animated feature film made in the 1950s based on the opera. Under the Aarne-Thompson classification system, "Hansel and Gretel" is classified under Class 327, "The Children and the Ogre".
Contents [hide]
1 Plot
2 History and analysis
3 Adaptations
3.1 The opera version
3.2 Other versions
3.2.1 In film and television
3.2.2 In music
3.2.3 In publications
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links
[edit]Plot

The following summary is based on an 1853 anonymous translation in Household Stories Collected by the Brothers Grimm published by Addey and Co. and reprinted in The Classic Fairy Tales by Iona and Peter Opie in 1972.
Hansel and Gretel are the young children of a poor woodcutter. When a great famine settles over the land, the woodcutter's second, abusive wife concocts a plan to take the children into the woods and leave them there to fend for themselves, so that she and her husband, with two fewer mouths to feed, might not starve. The woodcutter opposes the plan but finally, and reluctantly, submits to his wife's scheme. They are unaware that in the children's bedroom, Hansel and Gretel have overheard them. After the parents have gone to bed, Hansel sneaks out of the house and gathers as many white pebbles as he can, then returns to his room, reassuring Gretel that God will not forsake them.
The next day, the family walk deep into the woods and Hansel lays a trail of white pebbles. After their parents abandon them, the children wait for the moon to rise and illuminate the pebbles. They return home safely, much to their stepmother's horror. Once again provisions become scarce and the stepmother angrily orders her husband to take the children further into the woods and leave them there to die. Hansel and Gretel attempt to gather more pebbles, but find the doors locked and find it impossible to escape.


Illustration by Ludwig Richter, 1842
The following morning, the family treks into the woods. Hansel takes a slice of bread and leaves a trail of bread crumbs for them to follow home. However, after they are once again abandoned, they find that the birds have eaten the crumbs and they are lost in the woods. After days of wandering, they follow a beautiful white bird to a clearing in the woods, and discover a cottage built of gingerbread and cakes with window panes of clear sugar. Hungry and tired, the children begin to eat the rooftop of the candy house, when the door opens and a "very old woman" emerges and lures the children inside, with the promise of soft beds and delicious food. Their hostess is a "wicked witch" who waylays children to cook and eat them.
The next morning, the witch locks Hansel in an iron cage in the garden and forces Gretel into becoming a slave. The witch feeds Hansel regularly to fatten him up, but Hansel cleverly offers a bone he found in the cage (presumably a bone from the witch's previous captive) and the witch feels it, thinking it to be his finger. Due to her blindness, she is fooled into thinking Hansel is still too thin to eat. After weeks of this, the witch grows impatient and decides to eat Hansel, "be he fat or lean."
She prepares the oven for Hansel, but decides she is hungry enough to eat Gretel, too. She coaxes Gretel to the open oven and prods her to lean over in front of it to see if the fire is hot enough. Gretel, sensing the witch's intent, pretends she does not understand what she means. Infuriated, the witch demonstrates, and Gretel instantly shoves the witch into the oven, slams and bolts the door shut, leaving "The ungodly witch to be burned to ashes", the witch screaming in pain until she dies. Gretel frees Hansel from the cage and the pair discover a vast treasure and precious stones. Putting the jewels into their clothing, the children set off for home. A swan ferries them across an expanse of water and at home they find only their father; his wife has died from unknown cause. The father has spent all his days lamenting the loss of his children, and is delighted to see them safe and sound. With the witch's wealth, they all live happily ever after.
[edit]History and analysis



Monument to the Grimms in Hanau (Syrius Eberle, 1895)
Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm heard "Hansel and Gretel" from Dortchen Wild,[1] and published it in Kinder- und Hausmärchen in 1812.[2] In the Grimm tale, the woodcutter and his wife are the biological parents of the children and share the blame for abandoning them. In later editions, some slight revisions were made: the wife is stepmother to the children, the woodcutter opposes his wife's scheme to abandon the children, and religious references are made.[3]
Folklorists Iona and Peter Opie indicate in The Classic Fairy Tales (1974) that "Hansel and Gretel" belongs to a group of European tales especially popular in the Baltic regions about children outwitting ogres into whose hands they have involuntarily fallen. The tale bears resemblances to the first half of Charles Perrault's "Hop-o'-My-Thumb" (1697) and Madame d'Aulnoy's "Clever Cinders" (1721). In both tales, the Opies note, abandoned children find their way home by following a trail. In "Clever Cinders", the Opies observe that the heroine incinerates a giant by shoving him into an oven in a manner similar to Gretel, and point out that a ruse involving a twig in a Swedish tale resembles Hansel's trick of the dry bone. Linguist and folklorist Edward Vajda has proposed that these stories represents the remnant of a coming of age rite of passage tale extant in Proto-Indo-European society.[4][5] A house made of confectionery is found in a 14th-century manuscript about the Land of Cockayne.[1]
In The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales, Maria Tatar observes that the witch's end in the oven has been read as portending "the horrors of the Third Reich". Because the witch is often depicted with "stereotypical Jewish features, particularly in twentieth century illustration", the scene of her death becomes "all the more ominous". Tatar observes that poet Anne Sexton in rewriting "Hansel and Gretel" described the abandonment of the children as "the final solution".[6]


Illustration by Theodor Hosemann
Tatar notes that the few birds in the tale are "representatives of nature" and "ensure that the children remain in the woods (eating their breadcrumbs), yet also provide the means for escape (ferrying them across the water)". The children have no second thoughts about taking the witch's riches home to their father, she remarks. "The acquisition of wealth [...] guarantees that the father and the children will live happily ever after."[6] Tatar suggests that in the stepmother's death there is "some kind of inner identity between her and the wicked witch". Tatar observes that while the stepmother gives the children as little to eat as possible, the witch appears to be the soul of generosity with foodstuffs, "[y]et she represents an intensification of the maternal evil at home", for she only feeds the children in order to fatten them up for her next meal.[7]
Max Lüthi observes that the mother or stepmother happens to die when the children have killed the witch has suggested to many commentators that the mother or stepmother and the witch are, in fact, the same woman, or at least that an identity between them is strongly hinted at.[8] A Russian folk tale exists in which the evil stepmother (also the wife of a poor woodcutter) asks her hated stepdaughter to go into the forest to borrow a light from her sister, who turns out to be Baba Yaga, who is also a cannibalistic witch. Besides highlighting the endangerment of children (as well as their own cleverness), the tales have in common a preoccupation with food and with hurting children: the mother or stepmother wants to avoid hunger, while the witch lures children to eat her house of candy so that she can then eat them.[9] Another tale of this type is The Lost Children.[10] The Brothers Grimm identified the French Finette Cendron and Hop o' My Thumb as parallel stories.[9]
[edit]Adaptations

[edit]The opera version
Hänsel und Gretel is an opera by Engelbert Humperdinck, first performed in Weimar on December 23, 1893, and often performed at Christmas today.[citation needed]
In 1954, the opera was adapted into a stop-motion animated film Hansel and Gretel: An Opera Fantasy. The film featured spoken dialogue, but also retained some of Humperdinck's music, sung in English instead of German.
In December 1982, Live from the Met presented a complete production of Humperdinck's opera on television, again sung in English.
In December 1983, the opera's Evening Prayer music was heard as the opening theme of the television episode "Hansel and Gretel" from the anthology series Faerie Tale Theatre.
[edit]Other versions
[edit]In film and television
Bewitched Bunny is the 1954 Looney Tunes animated short retelling the story of Hansel and Gretel, featuring Witch Hazel and starring Bugs Bunny in a novel role, in which he rescues the children before being captured himself.
Tim Burton's 1982 Hansel and Gretel is a live action film short featuring Japanese actors and striking set designs reminiscent of his later work in films such as "Beetlejuice" and "Edward Scissorhands".
Faerie Tale Theatre produced an episode of the story, starring Ricky Schroder, Bridgette Andersen, Joan Collins and Paul Dooley. It aired on December 5, 1983. It was released on VHS in the 1980s through to the mid-1990s, by Playhouse Video, CBS/Fox and later on DVD through Starmaker II and Koch Vision.[11]
The Cannon Group made a live-action film in 1987 starring Hugh Pollard and Nicola Stapleton. It later shown on the Disney Channel in the late 1980s and mid-1990s. MGM released it on VHS and DVD August 9, 2005.
HBO miniseries Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales for Every Child tells the story in a 1995 episode.
The season 3 Buffy the Vampire Slayer episode Gingerbread (1999) explores a new twist to the Hansel and Gretel tale, as a demon that takes the form of two murdered children in order to incite discord into small communities, turning society against itself.
Freeway II: Confessions of a Trickbaby, a film by Matthew Bright made in 1999, is somewhat based on the story of Hansel and Gretel.
In a 1999 episode of Disney's House of Mouse, there is a cartoon version of the story, with Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse as Hansel and Gretel.
The 11th Halloween edition of The Simpsons, titled "Treehouse of Horror XI" (2000), features 'Scary Tales Can Come True', a parody of "Hansel and Gretel" and other fairy tales, with Bart Simpson and Lisa Simpson playing Hansel and Gretel.
Hansel and Gretel is a 2002 live-action film which features new twists to the Hansel and Gretel story. It stars Lynn Redgrave, Howie Mandel, Dakota Fanning and Taylor Momsen.
Hänsel und Gretel is a 2005 German film shot in the forests of Thuringia.[12]
Terror Toons 2: The Sick and Silly Show (released in 2007) is a direct-to-video horror film with Hansel and Gretel lost in the forest. The witch planned to poison them with a rat and a bottle containing nitroglycerine and cook them in the hot oven for her supper, but instead of killing them, it turns them into big-headed, crazy cartoon characters: Hansel becomes a giant demonic anthropomorphic rat, and Gretel becomes a criminally insane girl with ugly teeth. They rip the witch in half and almost immediately they are pulled from their world.
Hansel and Gretel is a South Korean live-action horror film made in 2007, which is a retelling of the story in which the children are the occupants of the house and travelers are the innocents.
In The Suite Life on Deck episode "Once Upon a Suite Life" (March 5, 2010), Hansel and Gretel are played by Zack Martin and Cody Martin.
Hansel and Gretel in 3D (2011), a live-action version of the "Hansel and Gretel" fairytale produced by Michael Bay and Scott Gardenhour's company, The Institute in association with Kalliope Films, is The Institute's first feature film.[13]
Hansel and Gretel: Witch Hunters is an upcoming 2012 action-horror film by Tommy Wirkola, set 15 years after the events of the fairy-tale, in which the adult Hansel and Gretel are a brother-and-sister team of professional witch-slayers.[14]
The German comedian Otto Waalkes used the Hansel and Gretel story for a large collection of musical parodies. He takes the melody and text of various well-known pop songs (in particular of the New German Wave) and intertwines them with parts of the Hansel and Gretel plot.
Walt Disney adapted Hansel and Gretel into a 1932 Silly Symphony called Babes in the Woods, which was the third Technicolor Silly Symphony Disney had made, the first being Flowers and Trees and the second being King Neptune.
[edit]In music
In 1958, a live musical adaptation of the story, starring Red Buttons, Barbara Cook, Rudy Vallee, Hans Conried (in drag as the Witch) and Stubby Kaye was presented on television by NBC. It featured songs by Alec Wilder and William Engvick.
Vocaloid producer, mothy (akuno-P), wrote a song called "Okizari Tsukiyoshou" ("The Tale of Moonlit Abandonment" or "Abandoned on a Moonlit Night") sung by vocaloids, Rin and Len Kagamine, which parodies Hansel and Gretel. The song, released on the 2009 Evils Theater album, is about two children who were tricked by their parents into getting lost in the forest and tried to find their way back home. They later found a home that they believed to be that of the witch from "Hansel and Gretel" and quickly shoved her and the henchmen into a burning oven. After defeating the witch, they felt that something about the house seemed familiar and set out to find their "real" mother and father. Mothy revealed that those who the children thought were the witch and henchmen, whom they killed, were actually their foster parents.
On the album Märchen (2010), by the Japanese fantasy-band Sound Horizon, the second song describes the story of a young nun, who was killed by her own mother. The mother turned out to be a so-called witch, who met her doom by the hands of Hansel and Gretel, thus delivering the nun's revenge to her. In reality the woman wasn't a witch at all, merely someone whose wish was to let the children eat as much as they liked, most likely as a compensation for killing her daughter.
[edit]In publications
Donna Jo Napoli's story The Magic Circle (1993) retells Hansel and Gretel from the witch's perspective. The unnamed witch was once a pious midwife and devoted mother cursed by demons into becoming a hideous witch with a hunger for human flesh. The witch willingly climbs into the oven, knowing Gretel will kill her, thus freeing her from the life she loathes.
In Bill Willingham's Fables comic book series (beginning in 2002), the witch from Hansel and Gretel, here named Frau Totenkinder, is a main character. ("Totenkinder" translates roughly as "dead children", and in this version the witch derives her power from sacrificing children.) Hansel makes a few appearances in an antagonistic role to the main cast.
Louise Murphy's novel in 2003 The True Story of Hansel and Gretel: A Novel of War and Survival is a version of the story set in Poland during the Holocaust, with the two main characters depicted as Jewish children who had to change their names in order to hide from the Nazis.

Hansel and Gretel is a 2002 film adaptation of the Brothers Grimm children's story. It stars Jacob Smith and Taylor Momsen as the eponymous characters. It includes the Sandman, played by Howie Mandel and Sinbad as a raven.
Contents [hide]
1 Plot
2 Cast
3 Reception
4 References
5 External links
[edit]Plot

The film begins in a modern home with two children, Andrew (Thomas Curtis) and Katie (Dakota Fanning), about to go to bed during a thunderstorm. They ask their father to read them a story to help them feel better about the storm. The father finds a dusty, old book and decides to read the story of Hansel and Gretel.
Hansel and Gretel (Jacob Smith and Taylor Momsen) are living with their father (Gerald McRaney) and stepmother (Delta Burke) in a very tiny shack. The children know their stepmother is evil, but the father does not. Since they are very poor, the father decides to sell Hansel and Gretel's biological mother's necklace, but the stepmother substitutes a pebble. The next day the stepmother forces the children into taking a walk in the scary forest. Once they get far enough into the forest, the stepmother abandons them.
Afterward, Hansel and Gretel go looking for food and are tricked into going to a lazy troll's (Bobcat Goldthwait) house. They get caught, but are then saved by the Sandman (Howie Mandel), whom they befriend. They also let Wood Fairy (Alana Austin) free, whom they also befriend. Throughout the story the Sandman and the fairy are always bickering which causes problems at times.
One night when the Sandman goes out to get some food for the kids, and the fairy goes out for one reason or another, Hansel and Gretel wander off to a house made of candy and chocolate. The lady (Lynn Redgrave) that lives there invites them in and they eat some delicious food and then go to bed. They wake up the next morning and find the house is just an empty shack with an old lady in it. A raven (Sinbad) comes to the window to tell them that the old lady is actually a witch. The witch walks into the room, locks Hansel in a box, and makes Gretel cook and Hansel eat. She does this because she is going to eat Hansel and wants him nice and fat. Because of certain principles, Gretel breaks a mirror and the witch becomes ugly. The Sandman and Wood Fairy walk in and help Hansel and Gretel get the witch into her cauldron. Then they put her in the oven, killing her. The father finds them and they do not worry about the stepmother who had gone to the troll's house who then abandoned her after she made him cook and clean for her.
The scene returns to the bedroom of the two kids and their father who say goodnight. The Sandman and the troll drop by, say hello to the children, and take the Hansel and Gretel book. They explain to the children that they are real, which is how the Brothers Grimm were inspired to write the story. The Sandman sprinkles the children with his sleep dust, ending the film.
[edit]Cast

Jacob Smith as Hansel
Taylor Momsen as Gretel
Thomas Curtis as Andrew
Dakota Fanning as Katie
Alana Austin as Wood Fairy
Gerald McRaney as Father
Delta Burke as Stepmother
Lynn Redgrave as Woman / Witch
Howie Mandel as Sandman
Sinbad as Raven
Bobcat Goldthwait as Troll

Jack and the Beanstalk is a folktale said by English historian Francis Palgrave to be an oral legend that arrived in England with the Vikings. The tale is closely associated with the tale of Jack the Giant-killer. It is known under a number of versions. Benjamin Tabart's moralized version of 1807[1] is the first appearance in print, but "Felix Summerly" (Henry Cole) popularized it in The Home Treasury (1842),[2] and Joseph Jacobs rewrote it in English Fairy Tales (1890).[3] Jacobs's version is most commonly reprinted today and is believed to more closely adhere to the oral versions than Tabart's, because it lacks the moralizing of that version.[4]
Contents [hide]
1 Plot summary
2 Origin
3 Variants
4 Controversies
5 Film adaptations
6 Other media
7 References
8 External links
[edit]Plot summary

In the Jacobs version of the story Jack is a young lad living with his widowed mother and struggling in hard times. Jack is in love with the count's daughter and wishes to marry her. In desperation for money Jack is sent by his mother to sell their only cow at the market, but along the way he is apparently swindled by a man who offers him supposedly "magic" beans in exchange for the cow.
Jack took the beans but when he arrived home with no money, only a hand full of beans, his angry mother threw the worthless beans out the window and sent Jack to bed without supper for his foolishness.
As Jack slept, the beans germinated in the soil, and by morning a gigantic beanstalk grew in their place. When Jack saw the huge beanstalk, he immediately decided to climb it. He arrived in a land high up in the clouds that happened to be the home of a giant. When he broke into the giant's castle, the giant quickly sensed a human was near:
Fee-fi-fo-fum!
I smell the blood of an Englishman?
Be he 'live, or be he dead,
I'll grind his bones to make my bread.
However, Jack was saved by the giant's wife and as he escaped from the castle, he took a bag of gold coins with him. However this would not suffice to please the all-powerful count. Jack desired to seek out more treasures from the castle, to gain standing among his fiancees family. He climbed once more up the beanstalk. This time he stole a hen which laid golden eggs. This would be sure to please the all-powerful count.
Jack being nearly caught by the giant twice decided that none must know of where he found this magical item, and the gold coins so he decided to go up the beanstalk. This time, a magical harp that played by itself, caught his eye. He stole it and then proceeded to kill the giant in a murderous rage, for the all-powerful count must never know of his misdeeds. With the blood on his hands he quickly climbed down the beanstalk and cut it. However this was giant's blood and could not be washed off of his hands. The all-powerful count was most pleased with these gifts, and so he disregarded Jacks blood-stained hands. Jack married his beloved, and knew riches for the rest of his days.
[edit]Origin



In Walter Crane's woodcut the harp reaches out to cling to the vine
The origin of Jack and the Beanstalk is unclear. However, Sir Francis Palgrave once wrote that it was most likely that the tale arrived with the Viking boats. The earliest printed edition which has survived is the 1807 book The History of Jack and the Bean Stalk, printed by Benjamin Tabart, although the story was already in existence sometime before this, as a burlesque of the story entitled The Story of Jack Spriggins and the Enchanted Bean was included in the 1734 second edition of Round About Our Coal-Fire.
In the classic version of the tale, the giant is unnamed, but many plays based on the story name him as Blunderbore; a giant of that name also appears in Jack the Giant Killer.
The giant's "Fee! Fie! Foe! Fum!" was included in William Shakespeare's King Lear.[5]
[edit]Variants

It is Aarne-Thompson type 328, though some scholars, such as Goldberg[6] argue that the Aarne Thompson system is inadequate to the tale, a possible reference to the genre anomaly.[7] Other tales of this type include the Italian Thirteenth and the French How the Dragon was Tricked.
The Brothers Grimm drew analogies between this tale and the German The Devil With the Three Golden Hairs, where the devil's mother or grandmother acted much like the wife in this tale: a female figure protecting the child from the evil male figure.[8]
The tale is unusual in that the hero, although grown, does not marry at the end of it but returns to his mother; this is found in few other tales, although some, such as some variants of Vasilisa the Beautiful, do feature it.[9]
The beanstalk is reminiscent of the ancient Northern European belief in a world tree connecting Earth to heaven.
[edit]Controversies

The story portrays a hero unscrupulously hiding in a man's house, playing on his wife's sympathies in order to rob and finally murder the owner of the house. In Tabart's moralized version, a fairy woman explains to Jack that the giant had robbed and killed his father, thus transforming the acts into justified retribution.[10]
Jacobs dropped the justification on the grounds that it had not been in the version he had heard as a child, and because children knew that robbery and murder were wrong without being told so by a fairy tale.[11]
Many modern interpretations have followed Tabart and painted the giant as a villain, terrorizing smaller folk and often stealing items of value, so that Jack becomes a legitimate protagonist. For example, the 1952 film starring Abbott and Costello blames the giant for Jack's ill fortunes and impoverishment, as he has been stealing food and wealth from the smaller folk of the lands below his home, including the hen that lays golden eggs, which in this version originally belonged to Jack's family. In other versions it is implied that the giant had stolen the hen and the harp from Jack's father. However, Brian Henson's 2001 TV miniseries Jack and the Beanstalk: The Real Story is an alternative version of the tale which abandons Tabart's additions and significantly vilifies Jack, due to Henson's disgust with Jack's morally questionable actions in the original story.[12]
[edit]Film adaptations

The first film adaptation was made in 1902 by Edwin S. Porter for the Edison Manufacturing Company.[13]
Walt Disney made a short of the same name in 1922, and a separate adaptation entitled Mickey and the Beanstalk in 1947 as part of Fun and Fancy Free. This adaptation of the story put Mickey Mouse in the role of Jack, and accompanied him with Donald Duck, and Goofy. Mickey, Donald, and Goofy live in "Happy Valley" which is plagued by a severe drought, and they have nothing to eat except one loaf of bread. Mickey trades in the cow (which Donald was going to kill for food) for the magic beans. Donald throws the beans out the window in a fit of rage, and the beanstalk sprouts that night, lifting the three of them into the sky while they sleep. In the magical kingdom, Mickey, Donald, and Goofy help themselves to a sumptuous feast. This rouses the ire of the giant (named "Willie" in this version), who captures Donald and Goofy and locks them in a box with a singing golden harp, and it's up to Mickey to find the keys to unlock the box and rescue them. The story villainizes the giant by blaming Happy Valley's hard times on Willy's theft of the magic harp, whose song kept the land prosperous; unlike the harp of the original tale, this magic harp wants to be rescued from the giant, and the hapless heroes return her to her rightful place and Happy Valley to its former glory. This version of the fairy tale was narrated by Edgar Bergen, and later Sterling Holloway.
Warner Bros. adapted the story into three Merrie Melodies cartoons. Friz Freleng directed Jack-Wabbit and the Beanstalk (1943), Chuck Jones directed Beanstalk Bunny (1955), and Freleng directed Tweety and the Beanstalk (1957). The 1952 Abbott and Costello adaption wasn't the only time a comedy team was involved with the story. The Three Stooges had their own 5 minute animated retelling entitled, Three Jacks and a Beanstalk(1965). In 1966 Hanna-Barbera produced a live action version of Jack and the Beanstalk, with Gene Kelly that won an Emmy Award.[14]
Gisaburo Sugii directed a feature-length anime telling of the story released in 1974, titled Jack to Mame no Ki. The film, a musical, was produced by Group TAC and released by Nippon Herald. The writers introduced a few new characters, including Jack's comic-relief dog, Crosby, and Margaret, a beautiful princess engaged to be married to the giant (named "Tulip" in this version) due to a spell being cast over her by the giant's mother (an evil witch). Jack, however, develops a crush on Margaret, and one of his aims in returning to the magic kingdom is to rescue her. The film was dubbed into English, with legendary voice talent Billie Lou Watt voicing Jack, and received a very limited run in U.S. theaters in 1976. It was later released on VHS (now out of print) and aired several times on HBO in the 1980s. However, it is now available on DVD with both English and Japanese dialogue.
Michael Davis directed the 1994 adaptation entitled Beanstalk, starring J. D. Daniels as Jack and Stuart Pankin as the Giant. The film was released by Moonbeam Entertainment, the children's video division of Full Moon Entertainment.
Another film adaptation was Jack and the Beanstalk: The Real Story (2001), directed by Brian Henson.
The newest film adaptation is Avalon Family Entertainment's Jack and the Beanstalk. The live-action adaptation boasts an all-star cast, led by Christopher Lloyd, Chevy Chase, James Earl Jones, Gilbert Gottfried, Katey Sagal, Wallace Shawn and Chloë Grace Moretz. It was released on home video April 20, 2010.[15]
Announced in 2010, Jack and the Beanstalk was also going to be a upcoming Disney movie directed by Chris Buck but was cancelled because Warner Bros. is making a new version of the fairy tale.[16]
[edit]Other media


This "In popular culture" section may contain minor or trivial references. Please reorganize this content to explain the subject's impact on popular culture rather than simply listing appearances, and remove trivial references. (December 2008)
In Edward Eager's book Knight's Castle, through the use of magic a modern boy named Jack is able to enter a toy castle with his sister and cousins. When he encounters the inhabitants (his toy knight figurine and the girls' dolls who have come to life), upon learning his name they draw back in terror and ask "Not the Giant Killer?"
The story is the basis of the similarly titled traditional British Pantomime, wherein the Giant is certainly a villain, Jack's mother the Dame, and Jack the Principal Boy.
Jack of Jack and the Beanstalk is the protagonist of the comic book Jack of Fables, a spin-off of Fables which also features other elements from the story such as giant beanstalks and giants living in the clouds.
Alejandro Reyes,II has written a story as part of a Buffy/Angel Crossover novel titled,Dream Weaver published online in English and Spanish, which the 22nd chapter is titled, "The Thousand and Fourth Tale of Scheherazade" inspired by the Arabian Nights as well as Poe's and Kiernan's versions, the tale is a variation of Jack and the beanstalk titled within the story as Hiram Abif and the Magic Beans and ends with Scheherazade beheading the king in his sleep and escaping. The famous quote,"Fee Fi Fo Fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman" is quoted by an evil giant king in the story itself.
DI Jack Spratt of the Nursery Crimes Division from the book The Big Over Easy by Jasper Fforde feels a strange impulse to climb the giant beanstalk that was grown in his mother's yard after she threw out the magic beans he had traded for her Stubbs painting of a cow. He is also thought to be a giant killer though out of the four only one was technically a giant, the others were just very tall. All the killings were in self-defense.
The Man Man song, Engrish Bwudd, features the chorus "Fee Fi Fo Fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman."
Roald Dahl rewrote the story in a more modern and gruesome way in his book Revolting Rhymes (1982). The story of Jack and the Beanstalk is also featured in Dahl's The BFG, in which the evil giants are all afraid of the "giant-killer" Jack, who is said to kill giants with his fearsome beanstalk (Although none of the giants appear to know how Jack uses it against them, the context of a nightmare one of the giants has about Jack suggesting that they think he wields the beanstalk as a weapon).
James Still James Still published Jack and the Wonder Beans(1977, republished 1996) an Appalachian variation on the Jack and the Bean Stalk tale. Jack trades his old cow to a gypsy for three beans that are guaranteed to feed him his entire life. It has been adapted as a play for performance by children.[17]
In the Crash Tag Team Racing game, a track is named " Track and the Beanstalk ".
Peter Combe rewrote the story in an upbeat song ('80s '90s?)
An episode of the BBC television series The Big Knights retold the story with the show's human protagonists as the "giants" to a race of tiny people living in their garden.
Spyro: Year of the Dragon features "Jack and the Beanstalk" on the level "Charmed Ridge". The two magic beans grow two different plants which Spyro and Jack use to get higher up the mountain where Jack wants to find the legendary Golden Goose.
An episode of The Super Mario Bros. Super Show!, titled "Mario and the Beanstalk", does a retelling with Bowser as the giant (no explanation as to how he becomes a giant).
Garfield and Friends parodied the story with a U.S. Acres segment titled "Jack II: The Rest of the Story". After Orson reads the original story to them, Booker, Sheldon, Roy, and Wade write up a satirical sequel patching up plot holes they noticed and villainizing Jack (who ends up in prison).
In The Magic School Bus episode "Gets Planted", the class put on a school production of Jack and the Beanstalk, with Phoebe starring as the beanstalk after Ms. Frizzle turned her into a bean plant.
An episode of The Goodies, entitled "The Goodies and the Beanstalk" is a retelling of the tale, containing a spoof of the game show It's a Knockout and Tim, Graeme, and Bill's own rendition of the song "Who Wants To Be a Millionaire?" There are also geese and hens that lay gold eggs and even gold bars, and the giant turns out to be only the same size as the Goodies!
Stephen Sondheim's musical Into the Woods features Jack along with several other fairy tale characters. In the second half of the musical, the Giant's Wife climbs down the stalk to exact revenge for her husband's death, furious at Jack's betrayal of her hospitality. She is eventually killed as well.
The chorus from the song CRUA CHAN of the Argentinian rock Band Sumo (lead by the Scottish-Italian singer Luca Prodan) says "Fee fi fo fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman."
In an episode of Rocko's Modern Life, Rocko & Heffer take turns telling an amalgamated fairy tale to a flu-ridden Filburt. At one point in the story, Hansel & "Debbie" (represented by Heffer & Rocko, respectively) scale the beanstalk where they encounter the giant (Filburt) who exclaimes, "Fee, fie, foe, fum... something stinks!
In the game, Harvest Moon for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, if your farmer (named Jack in other versions of the game) sells a full-grown, happy cow in fall, a peddler will come and trade her for a bean (this makes the live-stock merchant angry, but he forgives you). Plant the bean in the spring (non-rainy day) at the top of the mountain, and it will sprout. Leave the mountain top, then return. The sprout will have become a beanstalk. Climb the beanstalk, and you'll find a castle in the clouds. In the castle is a golden chicken. Talk to the golden chicken, and she'll give you a golden egg. The next scene has you selling the gold egg to the peddler in the town market for a whopping 60,000 gold!
Dunce Upon A Time, an episode of Happy Tree Friends, is a parody of Jack and the Beanstalk. Giggles is Jack and Lumpy is the giant; there are 11 deaths in the episode. Nutty grew a tree in his mouth and the house raised up in the sky and to the giant's castle.
In the game Adventure written by William Crowther & Donald Woods, there is a section of the cave which is themed after the giant: the player has to climb a beanstalk which is growing out of a bottom of a pit to get to a hole in the ceiling, which leads to a room called, appropriately, "the giant room" where there is a nest of golden eggs, and "fee fie foe foo[sic]" written on the wall.
In an episode of the popular BBC sitcom Bottom, the television is taken back to Rumbelow's, and Richie blames Eddie for falling behind with the rent as he had apparently bought five magic beans from a strange and wizened old man which cost exactly the £86.23 they owed in back rent, which is a reference to the story.[original research?]
The Super Why! PBS series focuses on the adventures of four fairy tale friends - the main character, Whyatt Beanstalk, is Jack's younger brother; Red of "Little Red Riding Hood" fame; Littlest Pig from "The Three Little Pigs"; and Princess Pea of the classic "The Princess and the Pea."
Bart Simpson plays the role of the main character in The Simpsons video game Bart & the Beanstalk.
A rock musical called Jack et le Haricot Magique (Jack and the Magic Bean) has been created in France by Georges Dupuis & Philippe Manca .
A recent parody occurred on Suite Life on Deck, with Zack as Jack, Mrs. Tutweiler as Jack's mother, London as the goose, Cody as the harp, Moseby as the giant, Bailey as the cow and Marcus as the person who gave Jack the magic bean.
in a dark crossover webcomic called Everafter, Jack is revealed to be a giant slaying bounty hunter and is somewhat crude and arrogant. he is the only character who is not an inmate of the asylum.

The Brothers Grimm (German: Die Brüder Grimm or Die Gebrüder Grimm), Jacob Grimm (January 4, 1785 – September 20, 1863) and Wilhelm Grimm (February 24, 1786 – December 16, 1859), were German academics, linguists, and cultural researchers who collected folklore and published several collections of it as Grimm's Fairy Tales, which became very popular.[1] Jacob also did academic work in philology, related to how the sounds in words shift over time (Grimm's law); he was also a lawyer whose legal work, German Legal Antiquities (Deutsche Rechtsaltertümer) in 1828, made him a valuable source of testimony about the origin and meaning of much legal historical idiom usage and symbolism.[2] They can be counted along with Karl Lachmann and Georg Friedrich Benecke as founding fathers of Germanic philology and German studies. Late in life they undertook the compilation of the first German dictionary: Wilhelm died in December 1859, having completed the letter D; Jacob survived his brother by nearly four years, completing the letters A, B, C and E, and was working on Frucht (fruit) when he collapsed at his desk.
The first collection of fairy tales Children's and Household Tales (Kinder-und Hausmärchen) was published in 1812 and it contained more than 200 fairy tales. Some collections of the stories had already been written by Charles Perrault in the late 1600s, with somewhat unexpected versions. In the original published forms, the Grimm's fairy tales were dark and violent, in contrast to the lighter, modern "Disney versions" of those tales.
They are among the best-known story tellers of European folk tales, and their work popularized such stories as "Cinderella" (Aschenputtel), "The Frog Prince" (Der Froschkönig), "Hansel and Gretel" (Hänsel und Gretel), "Rapunzel", "Rumpelstiltskin" (Rumpelstilzchen), "Sleeping Beauty" (Dornröschen), and "Snow White" (Schneewittchen).
Contents [hide]
1 Life
1.1 Origin and early life
1.2 Kassel and educational career
1.3 The German Grammar
1.4 German Dictionary
2 Grimms Tales
3 Linguistics
4 Books, film and television
5 Notes
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links
[edit]Life

[edit]Origin and early life


Sculpture of brothers Grimm in Hanau


Grimm Brothers Monument at Hanau (Germany).
Jakob Ludwig Karl Grimm (also Karl) and Wilhelm Karl Grimm[a] were born on 4 January 1785 and 24 February 1786 respectively, in the Wolfgang section of Hanau, Germany near Frankfurt in Hessen, the sons of Philipp Wilhelm Grimm, a jurist and bailiff with offices at Schlüchtern and Steinau, originally from Hanau, and Dorothea Grimm, née Zimmer, a former neighbor and the daughter of an apothecary.[3] They were among a family of nine children, six of whom survived infancy.[4] Their early childhood was spent in the countryside. The Grimm family lived near the magistrate's house between 1790 and 1796 while the father was employed by the Prince of Hessen.
When the eldest brother, Jakob, was 11 years old, their father, Philip Wilhelm, died and the family moved into a cramped urban residence.[4] Two years later, the children's grandfather also died, leaving their mother to struggle to support them in reduced circumstances.[5] "They urged fidelity to the spoken text, without embellishments, and though it has been shown that they did not always practice what they preached, the idealized 'orality' of their style was much closer to reality than the literary retellings previously thought necessary."[6] Others argue that "scholars and psychiatrists have thrown a camouflaging net over the stories with their relentless, albeit fascinating, question of 'What does it mean?'"[7] Another possible environmental influence can be discerned in the selection of stories such as The Twelve Brothers, which mirrors the collectors' family structure of one girl and several brothers overcoming opposition.[8]


Graves of the Brothers Grimm in the St Matthäus Kirchhof Cemetery in Schöneberg, Berlin.


Berlin memorial plaque, Brüder Grimm, Alte Potsdamer Straße 5, Berlin-Tiergarten, Germany
[edit]Kassel and educational career
Both brothers Jacob and Wilhelm were educated at the Friedrichs-Gymnasium in Kassel and later both studied law at the University of Marburg. There they were inspired by their professor Friedrich von Savigny, who awakened an interest in the past. They were in their early twenties when they began the linguistic and philological studies that would culminate in both Grimm's law and their collected editions of fairy and folk tales. Though their collections of tales became immensely popular, they were essentially a by-product of the linguistic research, which was the brothers' primary goal.
In 1808, Jakob Grimm was appointed court librarian to the King of Westphalia. In 1812 the brothers published their first volume of fairy tales, Tales of Children and the Home. They had collected the stories from peasants and villagers; they were also aided by their close friend August von Haxthausen. In their collaboration, Jacob did more of the research, while Wilhelm, less sturdy in stature and intellect, put the work into a literary form that would appeal to children and the masses. They were also interested in folklore and primitive literature. In 1816 Jacob became a librarian in Kassel, where Wilhelm was also employed. Between 1816 and 1818, they published two volumes of German legends and a volume of early literary history.
[edit]The German Grammar
In time, the brothers became interested in older languages and their relation to German. Jakob began to specialize in the history and structure of the Germanic languages, devising a theory that became known as Grimm's law, based on immense amounts of data. In 1825, Wilhelm Grimm married Henriette Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild, (Jakob never married and lived most of his life in his brother's home). In 1830, they moved together to Göttingen, where both secured positions at the University of Göttingen.[9] Jakob was named professor and head librarian in 1830, Wilhelm a professor in 1835.
In 1837, the Brothers Grimm joined five of their colleague professors at the University of Göttingen, later known as the Göttingen Seven, in protesting against the abrogation of the liberal constitution of the Kingdom of Hanover by King Ernest Augustus I, the reactionary son of King George III. They were fired from their university posts and three were deported, including Jakob Grimm, who with Wilhelm settled in Kassel, outside Ernest's realm, at the home of their brother Ludwig. However, the next year brought an invitation to Berlin from the King of Prussia.[10]
[edit]German Dictionary


Title page of the first volume of the German Dictionary.
Jacob and Wilhelm were ignored in the appointment of a chief librarian place in Kassel. A year later, in 1830 the two brothers moved away from Kassel to Göttingen, where they had also a common household. They spent time in writing a definitive dictionary, the German Dictionary, in German: Deutsches Wörterbuch, the first volume being published in 1854. The work was carried on by future generations.[11] Jacob then got a job as a librarian and professor of German Classical Studies. His brother William was also a librarian in Göttingen and a year later, Associate Professor. In his teaching, Wilhelm was often compromised by disease. Around 1832, the first volume of Jacob Grimm's "German Mythology" (Vol. 2: 1844, Volume 3: 1854) was published. This edition had an inspiring effect on many fairy tales and legends collectors.[11] (retrieved 28-03-2011)
Between then and 1837, Jacob published two more volumes of "German Grammar". The two brothers then dealt with animal fables and in the same year, 1834, Jacob Grimm finalized a work he began in 1811, "Reinhart (Reineke) Fox", which was the first publication of this traditional animal epic, and the first coherent documentation of its vernacular versions. Subsequently, in 1835 he published his work on "German Mythology"; in this work Jacob examined pre-Christian beliefs and superstitions. This work had enormous influence on the research of myths. The third edition of the Children's and Household Tales was written in 1837 by Wilhelm alone. In 1838, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm began their joint work on the German dictionary.[11] (retrieved 28-03-2011)
[edit]Grimms Tales

Main article: Grimm's Fairy Tales


Front cover of the Grimms Fairy Tales Book


First page of Grimm's Children's and Household Tales, First part
The Brothers Grimm began collecting folk tales[12] around 1806, in response to a wave of awakened interest in German folklore that followed the publication of Ludwig Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano's folksong collection Des Knaben Wunderhorn ("The Youth's Magic Horn"), 1805–08. By 1810 the Grimms produced a manuscript collection of several dozen tales, which they had recorded by inviting storytellers to their home and transcribing what they heard. Although they were said to have collected tales from peasants, many of their informants were middle-class or aristocratic, recounting tales they had heard from their servants. Several of the informants were of Huguenot ancestry and told tales that were French in origin.[1] Some scholars have theorized that certain elements of the stories were "purified" for the brothers, who were devout Christians.[13]
In 1812, the Brothers published a collection of 86 German fairy tales in a volume titled Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales). They published a second volume of 70 fairy tales in 1814 ("1815" on the title page), which together make up the first edition of the collection, containing 156 stories. They wrote a two-volume work titled Deutsche Sagen, which included 585 German legends; these were published in 1816 and 1818.[14] The legends are organized in the chronological order of historical events to which they were related.[15] The brothers arranged the regional legends thematically for each folktale creature, such as dwarfs, giants, monsters, etc. not in any historical order.[15] These legends were not as popular as the fairytales.[14]
A second edition of the Children's and Household Tales followed in 1819–22, expanded to 170 tales. Five more editions were issued during the Grimms' lifetimes,[16] in which stories were added or subtracted. The seventh edition of 1857 contained 211 tales. Many of the changes were made in light of unfavorable reviews, particularly those that objected that not all the tales were suitable for children, despite the title.[17] The tales were also criticized for being insufficiently German; this not only influenced the tales the brothers included, but their language. They changed "fee" (fairy) to an enchantress or wise woman, every prince to a king's son, every princess to a king's daughter.[18] (It has long been recognized that some of these later-added stories were derived from printed rather than oral sources.)[19] These editions, equipped with scholarly notes, were intended as serious works of folklore. The Brothers also published the Small Edition (German: Kleine Ausgabe), containing a selection of 50 stories expressly designed for children (as opposed to the more formal Large Edition (German: Große Ausgabe). Ten printings of the "small edition" were issued between 1825 and 1858.
The Grimms were not the first to publish collections of folktales. There were others, including a German collection by Johann Karl August Musäus published in 1782–87. The earlier collections, however, made little pretence to strict fidelity to sources. The Brothers Grimm were the first workers in this genre to present their stories as faithful renditions of the kind of direct folkloric materials that underlay the sophistication of an adapter like Perrault. In so doing, the Grimms took a basic and essential step toward modern folklore studies, leading to the work of folklorists like Peter and Iona Opie[20] and others.
The Grimms' method was common in their historical era. Arnim and Brentano edited and adapted the folksongs of Des Knaben Wunderhorn; in the early 19th century Brentano collected folktales in much the same way as the Grimms.[21] The early researchers were working before academic practices for such collections had been codified.
[edit]Linguistics

In the very early 19th century, the time in which the Brothers Grimm lived, the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation had recently dissolved, and the modern nation of Germany did not exist. In its place was a confederacy of 39 small- to medium-size German states, many of which had been newly created by Napoleon as client states. The major unifying factor for the German people of the time was a common language. Part of what motivated the Brothers in their writings and in their lives was the desire to help create a German identity.
Less well known to the general public outside of Germany is the Brothers' work on a German dictionary, the Deutsches Wörterbuch. It was extensive, having 33 volumes and weighing 84 kg (185 lbs). It is still considered the standard reference for German etymology. Work began in 1838, but by the end of their lifetime, only sections from the letter 'A' to part of the letter 'F' were completed. The work was not considered complete until 1960.[22]
Jacob is recognized for enunciating Grimm's law, the Germanic Sound Shift, that was first observed by the Danish philologist Rasmus Christian Rask. Grimm's law was the first non-trivial systematic sound change to be discovered.
[edit]Books, film and television

From the 1930s to the present, there were many Grimms' fairy tales, best known stories have been adapted as animated feature films by Walt Disney Animation Studios and for many other media. Hansel and Gretel is no exception having had numerous opera, movies, and television adaptations such as Snow White[23][24] (1937), Cinderella (1950)in which the evil sisters had their eyes pecked out, Sleeping Beauty (1959), The Princess and the Frog (2009), an adaptation of "The Frog Prince", furthermore also Tangled (2010), an adaptation of "Rapunzel", a live action adaptation of "Snow White", tentatively titled Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, is in development at the Disney Studios, with Francis Lawrence, the director of I Am Legend, at the helm.[25] Henry Levin and George Pal had in the 1962's the United States movie The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm released, with a cast including Barbara Eden, Russ Tamblyn, Yvette Mimieux and other high-profile stars of the time.[26] Directed by Henry Levin, the movie intertwined a fictionalised version of the Grimm brothers' lives as young men with fantasy productions of some of their fairy tales (directed by George Pal). It went on to win the 1963 Oscar for costume design and was nominated in several other categories, there were one of the highest grossing films.
A made-for-TV musical called Once Upon a Brothers Grimm was released in 1977, aired in the United States. It starred Dean Jones as Jakob and Paul Sand as Wilhelm. The basic plot presented the brothers traveling and getting lost in a forest, and encountering various characters from the tales that made them famous. In the late 1980s and early 1990s Nickelodeon aired a cartoon series called "Grimm's Fairy Tale Classics" as a part of its daytime Nick Jr. block. It was originally broadcast in Japan as "Gurimu Meisaku Gekijou". In 1998, in the movie Ever After, the Grimm Brothers visit an elderly woman, the Grande Dame of France, who questions their version of the Cinderella story. The Brothers Grimm reply that there was no way for them to verify the authenticity of their story as there were so many different versions. She proceeds to tell the story of "Danielle De Barbarac".
The Grimme Prize-nominated German TV crime thriller, titled A Murderous Fairytale (Ein mörderisches Märchen) was produced in 2001, used elements of Brothers Grimm fairytales. In the film directed by Manuel Siebenmann, which was written by Daniel Martin Eckhart, the elderly killer challenges the detectives with a series of Brothers Grimm fairytale riddles. Comic book writer Bill Willingham created in 2002 the comic book Fables, which includes characters from fables as the main characters.[27] Many of these characters are among those collected by the Grimm brothers. The author Michael Buckley began a popular young reader's series (geared for age 7–12) titled The Sisters Grimm in 2005, in which the two characters, sisters, are the direct descendants of the Brothers Grimm. They discover the family secret in which the fairy tales told in their ancestor's stories are not fictional, but instead are documentations of fairy-tale encounters. The brothers brought all of the characters to New York to escape prosecution. The sisters solve mysteries inside the town the characters are trapped in. Also in 2005 The Brothers Grimm, a film directed by Terry Gilliam based roughly on the Grimm brothers and their tales, starring Heath Ledger as Jacob Grimm and Matt Damon as Wilhelm Grimm in the title roles, resembles the contents of the sagas from the brothers' collections, much more than the academic nature of their lives. In this version, the Brothers Grimm aren't innocent fairy tale collectors.[28]
Zenescope Entertainment began in 2005 releasing a monthly on-going comic series titled Grimm's Fairy Tales, an horror comic book that presents classic fairy tales, albeit with modern twists or expanded plots. John Conolly, an Irish writer, publishes in 2005 a book named The Book of Lost Things, it is his first non-mystery novel.[29][30] This book includes many darker adaptions of the Grimm's tales; including Little Red Riding Hood, Snow White, Sleeping Beauty and Rumpelstiltskin. The crime novel Brother Grimm, by Craig Russell, was published in 2006. A serial killer stalks Hamburg and uses themes of Brothers Grimm fairytales, to pose his victims and to write riddles about the next one. Chief Detective Jan Fabel has to hunt down the Fairytale Killer, as the press soon calls him. In 2010, the novel was adapted for German television, directed by Urs Egger and written by Daniel Martin Eckhart under the title Wolfsfährte (engl.: wolfs spoor), the German title of Craig Russell's novel. Actor Peter Lohmeyer took on the role of Chief Detective Jan Fabel.
The book The Grimm Legacy was published in 2010 by Polly Shulman, about a girl who starts working at a mysterious museum which holds items from Grimm fairy tales. Lethe Press published A Twist of Grimm by William Holden in 2010, a collection of Grimm's Fairy Tales re-imagined as gay erotica. NBC Universal greenlit pilot entitled in 2010 "Grimm" starring Bitsie Tulloch, Kate Burton, Russell Hornsby and Silas Weir Mitchell. Created by David Greenwalt and Jim Kouf and to be directed by Marc Buckland, Grimm is described as a dark but fantastical cop drama about a world in which characters inspired by Grimm’s Fairy Tales exist.
Mark Miller's Empyrical Tales series is strongly influenced by these works. The Fourth Queen (Comfort Publishing, 2009) and The Lost Queen (Comfort Publishing, 2011) adapt several of the characters and stories into the fantasy world of Empyrean. The stories serve both as an homage and as a new fairytale. As the Empyrical Tales continues, later books will include references to other folklore and mythology from around the world.