he were deprived of certain privileges until he is ready to tell us the whole story. I personally feel he
should be taken off the Gryffindor Quidditch team until he is ready to be honest."

   "Really, Severus," said Professor McGonagall sharply, "I see no reason to stop the boy playing
Quidditch. This cat wasn't hit over the head with a broomstick. There is no evidence at all that Potter has
done anything wrong."

    Dumbledore was giving Harry a searching look. His twinkling light-blue gaze made Harry feel as
though he were being X-rayed.

    "Innocent until proven guilty, Severus," he said firmly.

    Snape looked furious.

    So did Filch.

    "My cat has been Petrified!" he shrieked, his eyes popping. "I want to see some punishment !"

   "We will be able to cure her, Argus," said Dumbledore patiently. "Professer Sprout recently
managed to procure some Mandrakes. As soon as they have reached their full size, I will have a potion
made that will revive Mrs. Norris."

   "I'll make it," Lockhart butted in. "I must have done it a hundred times. I could whip up a Mandrake
Restorative Draught in my sleep --"

    "Excuse me," said Snape icily. "But I believe I am the Potions master at this school."

    There was a very awkward pause.

    "You may go," Dumbledore said to Harry, Ron, and Hermione.

    They went, as quickly as they could without actually running. When they were a floor up from
Lockhart's office, they turned into an empty classroom and closed the door quietly behind them. Harry
squinted at his friends' darkened faces.

    "D'you think I should have told them about that voice I heard?"

    "No," said Ron, without hesitation. "Hearing voices no one else can hear isn't a good sign, even in
the wizarding world."

    Something in Ron's voice made Harry ask, "You do believe me, don't you?"

    "'Course I do," said Ron quickly. "But -- you must admit it's weird..."

   "I know it's weird," said Harry. "The whole thing's weird. What was that writing on the wall about?
The Chamber Has Been Opened ....What's that supposed to mean?"

   "You know, it rings a sort of bell," said Ron slowly. "I think someone told me a story about a secret
chamber at Hogwarts once...might've been Bill...."

    "And what on earth's a Squib?" said Harry.


                                                                                                              Page 84
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    To his surprise, Ron stifled a snigger.

     "Well -- it's not funny really -- but as it's Filch," he said. "A Squib is someone who was born into a
wizarding family but hasn't got any magic powers. Kind of the opposite of Muggle-born wizards, but
Squibs are quite unusual. If Filch's trying to learn magic from a Kwikspell course, I reckon he must be a
Squib. It would explain a lot. Like why he hates students so much." Ron gave a satisfied smile. "He's
bitter."

    A clock chimed somewhere.

   "Midnight," said Harry. "We'd better get to bed before Snape comes along and tries to frame us for
something else."



 For a few days, the school could talk of little else but the attack on Mrs. Norris. Filch kept it fresh in
everyone's minds by pacing the spot where she had been attacked, as though he thought the attacker
might come back. Harry had seen him scrubbing the message on the wall with Mrs. Skower's
All-Purpose Magical Mess Remover, but to no effect; the words still gleamed as brightly as ever on the
stone. When Filch wasn't guarding the scene of the crime, he was skulking red-eyed through the
corridors, lunging out at unsuspecting students and trying to put them in detention for things like
"breathing loudly' and "looking happy."

    Ginny Weasley seemed very disturbed by Mrs. Norris's fate. According to Ron, she was a great cat
lover.

    "But you haven't really got to know Mrs. Norris," Ron told her bracingly. "Honestly, we're much
better off without her." Ginny's lip trembled. "Stuff like this doesn't often happen at Hogwarts," Ron
assured her. "They'll catch the maniac who did it and have him out of here in no time. I just hope he's got
time to Petrify Filch before he's expelled. I'm only joking --" Ron added hastily as Ginny blanched.

    The attack had also had an effect on Hermione. It was quite usual for Hermione to spend a lot of
time reading, but she was now doing almost nothing else. Nor could Harry and Ron get much response
from her when they asked what she was up to, and not until the following Wednesday did they find out.

     Harry had been held back in Potions, where Snape had made him stay behind to scrape tubeworms
off the desks. After a hurried lunch, he went upstairs to meet Ron in the library, and saw Justin
Finch-Fletchley, the Hufflepuff boy from Herbology, coming toward him. Harry had just opened his
mouth to say hello when Justin caught sight of him, turned abruptly, and sped off in the opposite direction.

   Harry found Ron at the back of the library, measuring his History of Magic homework. Professor
Binns had asked for a three foot long composition on "The Medieval Assembly of European Wizards."

    "I don't believe it, I'm still eight inches short said Ron furiously, letting go of his parchment, which
sprang back into a roll. "And Hermione's done four feet seven inches and her writing's tiny."

    "Where is she?" asked Harry, grabbing the tape measure and unrolling his own homework.

    "Somewhere over there," said Ron, pointing along the shelves. "Looking for another book. I think
she's trying to read the whole library before Christmas."


                                                                                                               Page 85
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Harry told Ron about Justin Finch-Fletchley running away from him.

    "Dunno why you care. I thought he was a bit of an idiot," said Ron, scribbling away, making his
writing as large as possible. "All that junk about Lockhart being so great --"

    Hermione emerged from between the bookshelves. She looked irritable and at last seemed ready to
talk to them.

    "All the copies of Hogwarts, A History have been taken out," she said, sitting down next to Harry
and Ron. "And there's a two-week waiting list. I wish I hadn't left my copy at home, but I couldn't fit it
in my trunk with all the Lockhart books."

    "Why do you want it?" said Harry.

    "The same reason everyone else wants it," said Hermione, "to read up on the legend of the Chamber
of Secrets."

    "What's that?" said Harry quickly.

    "That's just it. I can't remember," said Hermione, biting her lip. "And I can't find the story anywhere
else --"

    "Hermione, let me read your composition," said Ron desperately, checking his watch.

    "No, I won't," said Hermione, suddenly severe. "You've had ten days to finish it --"

    "I only need another two inches, come on --"

    The bell rang. Ron and Hermione led the way to History of Magic, bickering.

     History of Magic was the dullest subject on their schedule. Professor Binns, who taught it, was their
only ghost teacher, and the most exciting thing that ever happened in his classes was his entering the room
through the blackboard. Ancient and shriveled, many people said he hadn't noticed he was dead. He had
simply got up to teach one day and left his body behind him in an armchair in front of the staff room fire;
his routine had not varied in the slightest since.

    Today was as boring as ever. Professor Binns opened his notes and began to read in a flat drone like
an old vacuum cleaner until nearly everyone in the class was in a deep stupor, occasionally coming to
long enough to copy down a name or date, then falling asleep again. He had been speaking for half an
hour when something happened that had never happened before. Hermione put up her hand.

   Professor Binns, glancing up in the middle of a deadly dull lecture on the International Warlock
Convention of 1289, looked amazed.

    "Miss -- er --?"

    "Granger, Professor. I was wondering if you could tell us anything about the Chamber of Secrets,"
said Hermione in a clear voice.

    Dean Thomas, who had been sitting with his mouth hanging open, gazing out of the window, jerked


                                                                                                              Page 86
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




out of his trance; Lavender Brown's head came up off her arms and Neville Longbottom's elbow slipped
off his desk.

    Professor Binns blinked.

    "My subject is History of Magic," he said in his dry, wheezy voice. "I deal with facts , Miss Granger,
not myths and legends." He cleared his throat with a small noise like chalk slipping and continued, "In
September of that year, a subcommittee of Sardinian sorcerers --"

    He stuttered to a halt. Hermione's hand was waving in the air again.

    "Miss Grant?"

    "Please, sir, don't legends always have a basis in fact?"

    Professor Binns was looking at her in such amazement, Harry was sure no student had ever
interrupted him before, alive or dead.

    "Well," said Professor Binns slowly, "yes, one could argue that, I suppose." He peered at Hermione
as though he had never seen a student properly before. "However, the legend of which you speak is such
a very sensational , even ludicrous tale --"

    But the whole class was now hanging on Professor Binns's every word. He looked dimly at them all,
every face turned to his. Harry could tell he was completely thrown by such an unusual show of interest.

    "Oh, very well," he said slowly. "Let me see...the Chamber of Secrets...

     "You all know, of course, that Hogwarts was founded over a thousand years ago -- the precise date
is uncertain -- by the four greatest witches and wizards of the age. The four school Houses are named
after them: Godric Gryffindor, Helga Hufflepuff, Rowena Ravenclaw, and Salazar Slytherin. They built
this castle together, far from prying Muggle eyes, for it was an age when magic was feared by common
people, and witches and wizards suffered much persecution."

    He paused, gazed blearily around the room, and continued.

    "For a few years, the founders worked in harmony together, seeking out youngsters who showed
signs of magic and bringing them to the castle to be educated. But then disagreements sprang up between
them. A rift began to grow between Slytherin and the others. Slytherin wished to be more selective
about the students admitted to Hogwarts. He believed that magical learning should be kept within
all-magic families. He disliked taking students of Muggle parentage, believing them to be untrustworthy.
After a while, there was a serious argument on the subject between Slytherin and Gryffindor, and
Slytherin left the school."

    Professor Binns paused again, pursing his lips, looking like a wrinkled old tortoise.

    "Reliable historical sources tell us this much," he said. "But these honest facts have been obscured by
the fanciful legend of the Chamber of Secrets. The story goes that Slytherin had built a hidden chamber in
the castle, of which the other founders knew nothing.

   "Slytherin, according to the legend, sealed the Chamber of Secrets so that none would be able to
open it until his own true heir arrived at the school. The heir alone would be able to unseal the Chamber


                                                                                                              Page 87
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




of Secrets, unleash the horror within, and use it to purge the school of all who were unworthy to study
magic."

    There was silence as he finished telling the story, but it wasn't the usual, sleepy silence that filled
Professor Binns's classes. There was unease in the air as everyone continued to watch him, hoping for
more. Professor Binns looked faintly annoyed.

     "The whole thing is arrant nonsense, of course," he said. "Naturally, the school has been searched for
evidence of such a chamber, many times, by the most learned witches and wizards. It does not exist. A
tale told to frighten the gullible."

    Hermione's hand was back in the air.

    "Sir -- what exactly do you mean by the `horror within' the Chamber?"

    "That is believed to be some sort of monster, which the Heir of Slytherin alone can control," said
Professor Binns in his dry, reedy voice.

    The class exchanged nervous looks.

    "I tell you, the thing does not exist," said Professor Binns, shuffling his notes. "There is no Chamber
and no monster."

    "But, sir," said Seamus Finnigan, "if the Chamber can only be opened by Slytherin's true heir, no one
else would be able to find it, would they?"

   "Nonsense, O'Flaherty," said Professor Binns in an aggravated tone. "If a long succession of
Hogwarts headmasters and headmistresses haven't found the thing --"

    "But, Professor," piped up Parvati Patil, "you'd probably have to use Dark Magic to open it --"

    "Just because a wizard doesn't use Dark Magic doesn't mean he can't , Miss Pennyfeather,"
snapped Professor Binns. "I repeat, if the likes of Dumbledore --"

    "But maybe you've got to be related to Slytherin, so Dumbledore couldn't --" began Dean Thomas,
but Professor Binns had had enough.

    "That will do," he said sharply. "It is a myth! It does not exist! There is not a shred of evidence that
Slytherin ever built so much as a secret broom cupboard! I regret telling you such a foolish story! We will
return, if you please, to history , to solid, believable, verifiable fact !"

    And within five minutes, the class had sunk back into its usual torpor.



 "I always knew Salazar Slytherin was a twisted old loony," Ron told Harry and Hermione as they fought
their way through the teeming corridors at the end of the lesson to drop off their bags before dinner. "But
I never knew he started all this pure-blood stuff. I wouldn't be in his house if you paid me. Honestly, if
the Sorting Hat had tried to put me in Slytherin, I'd've got the train straight back home..."

    Hermione nodded fervently, but Harry didn't say anything. His stomach had just dropped


                                                                                                               Page 88
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




unpleasantly.

    Harry had never told Ron and Hermione that the Sorting Hat had seriously considered putting him in
Slytherin. He could remember, as though it were yesterday, the small voice that had spoken in his ear
when he'd placed the hat on his head a year before : You could be great, you know, it's all here in
your head, and Slytherin would help you on the way to greatness, no doubt about that...

    But Harry, who had already heard of Slytherin House's reputation for turning out Dark wizards, had
thought desperately, Not Slytherin! and the hat had said, Oh, well, if you're sure ... better be
Gryffindor....

    As they were shunted along in the throng, Colin Creevy went past.

    "Hiya, Harry!"

    "Hullo, Colin," said Harry automatically.

    "Harry -- Harry -- a boy in my class has been saying you're --"

    But Colin was so small he couldn't fight against the tide of people bearing him toward the Great Hall;
they heard him squeak, "See you, Harry!" and he was gone.

    "What's a boy in his class saying about you?" Hermione wondered.

   "That I'm Slytherin's heir, I expect," said Harry, his stomach dropping another inch or so as he
suddenly remembered the way Justin Finch-Fletchley had run away from him at lunchtime.

    "People here'll believe anything," said Ron in disgust.

    The crowd thinned and they were able to climb the next staircase without difficulty.

    "D'you really think there's a Chamber of Secrets?" Ron asked Hermione.

    "I don't know," she said, frowning. "Dumbledore couldn't cure Mrs. Norris, and that makes me
think that whatever attacked her might not be -- well -- human."

    As she spoke, they turned a corner and found themselves at the end of the very corridor where the
attack had happened. They stopped and looked. The scene was just as it had been that night, except that
there was no stiff cat hanging from the torch bracket, and an empty chair stood against the wall bearing
the message "The Chamber of Secrets has been Opened."

    "That's where Filch has been keeping guard," Ron muttered.

    They looked at each other. The corridor was deserted.

    "Can't hurt to have a poke around," said Harry, dropping his bag and getting to his hands and knees
so that he could crawl along, searching for clues.

    "Scorch marks!" he said. "Here -- and here --"

    "Come and look at this!" said Hermione. "This is funny..."


                                                                                                             Page 89
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




     Har ry got up and crossed to the window next to the message on the wall. Hermione was pointing
at the topmost pane, where around twenty spiders were scuttling, apparently fighting to get through a
small crack. A long, silvery thread was dangling like a rope, as though they had all climbed it in their hurry
to get outside.

       "Have you ever seen spiders act like that?" said Hermione wonderingly.

       "No," said Harry, "have you, Ron? Ron?"

       He looked over his shoulder. Ron was standing well back and seemed to be fighting the impulse to
run.

       "What's up?" said Harry.

       "I -- don't -- like -- spiders," said Ron tensely.

    "I never knew that," said Hermione, looking at Ron in surprise. "You've used spiders in Potions
loads of times..."

   "I don't mind them dead," said Ron, who was carefully looking anywhere but at the window. "I just
don't like the way they move...."

       Hermione giggled.

    "It's not funny," said Ron, fiercely. "If you must know, when I was three, Fred turned my -- my
teddy bear into a great big filthy spider because I broke his toy broomstick...You wouldn't like them
either if you'd been holding your bear and suddenly it had too many legs and..."

    He broke off, shuddering. Hermione was obviously still trying not to laugh. Feeling they had better
get off the subject, Harry said, "Remember all that water on the floor? Where did that come from?
Someone's mopped it up."

   "It was about here," said Ron, recovering himself to walk a few paces past Filch's chair and pointing.
"Level with this door."

       He reached for the brass doorknob but suddenly withdrew his hand as though he'd been burned.

       "What's the matter?" said Harry.

       "Can't go in there," said Ron gruffly. "That's a girls' toilet."

  "Oh, Ron, there won't be anyone in there," said Hermione standing up and coming over. "That's
Moaning Myrtle's place. Come on, let's have a look."

       And ignoring the large OUT of ORDER sign, she opened the door.

    It was the gloomiest, most depressing bathroom Harry had ever set foot in. Under a large, cracked,
and spotted mirror were a row of chipped sinks. The floor was damp and reflected the dull light given off
by the stubs of a few candles, burning low in their holders; the wooden doors to the stalls were flaking
and scratched and one of them was dangling off its hinges.


                                                                                                                 Page 90
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




   Hermione put her fingers to her lips and set off toward the end stall. When she reached it she said,
"Hello, Myrtle, how are you?"

    Harry and Ron went to look. Moaning Myrtle was floating above the tank of the toilet, picking a spot
on her chin.

    "This is a girls' bathroom," she said, eyeing Ron and Harry suspiciously. " They'renot girls."

    "No," Hermione agreed. "I just wanted to show them how er -- nice it is in here."

    She waved vaguely at the dirty old mirror and the damp floor.

    "Ask her if she saw anything," Harry mouthed at Hermione.

    "What are you whispering?" said Myrtle, staring at him.

    "Nothing," said Harry quickly. "We wanted to ask --"

   "I wish people would stop talking behind my back!" said Myrtle, in a voice choked with tears. "I do
have feelings, you know, even if I am dead --"

    "Myrtle, no one wants to upset you," said Hermione. "Harry only --"

     "No one wants to upset me! That's a good one!" howled Myrtle. "My life was nothing but misery at
this place and now people come along ruining my death!"

   "We wanted to ask you if you've seen anything funny lately," said Hermione quickly. "Because a cat
was attacked right outside your front door on Halloween."

    "Did you see anyone near here that night?" said Harry.

    "I wasn't paying attention," said Myrtle dramatically. "Peeves upset me so much I came in here and
tried to kill myself. Then, of course, I remembered that I'm -- that I'm --"

    "Already dead," said Ron helpfully.

   Myrtle gave a tragic sob, rose up in the air, turned over, and dived headfirst into the toilet, splashing
water all over them and vanishing from sight, although from the direction of her muffled sobs, she had
come to rest somewhere in the U-bend.

    Harry and Ron stood with their mouths open, but Hermione shrugged wearily and said, "Honestly,
that was almost cheerful for Myrtle....Come on, let's go."

   Harry had barely closed the door on Myrtle's gurgling sobs when a loud voice made all three of them
jump.

    "RON!"

   Percy Weasley had stopped dead at the head of the stairs, prefect badge agleam, an expression of
complete shock on his face.


                                                                                                               Page 91
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "That's a girls' bathroom!" he gasped. "What were you --?"

    "Just having a look around," Ron shrugged. "Clues, you know --"

    Percy swelled in a manner that reminded Harry forcefully of Mrs. Weasley.

    "Get -- away -- from -- there --" Perry said, striding toward them and starting to bustle them
along, flapping his arms. "Don't you care what this looks like? Coming back here while everyone's at
dinner --"

    "Why shouldn't we be here?" said Ron hotly, stopping short and glaring at Percy. "Listen, we never
laid a finger on that cat!"

    "That's what I told Ginny," said Percy fiercely, "but she still seems to think you're going to be
expelled, I've never seen her so upset, crying her eyes out, you might think of her , all the first years are
thoroughly overexcited by this business --"

    " Youdon't care about Ginny," said Ron, whose ears were now reddening. " You'rejust worried I'm
going to mess up your chances of being Head Boy --"

   "Five points from Gryffindor!" Percy said tersely, fingering his prefect badge. "And I hope it teaches
you a lesson! No more detective work , or I'll write to Mum!"

    And he strode off, the back of his neck as red as Ron's ears.



 Harry, Ron, and Hermione chose seats as far as possible from Percy in the common room that night.
Ron was still in a very bad temper and kept blotting his Charms homework. When he reached absently
for his wand to remove the smudges, it ignited the parchment. Fuming almost as much as his homework,
Ron slammed The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2 shut. To Harry's surprise, Hermione followed
suit.

   "Who can it be, though?" she said in a quiet voice, as though continuing a conversation they had just
been having. "Who'd want to frighten all the Squibs and Muggle-borns out of Hogwart's?"

   "Let's think," said Ron in mock puzzlement. "Who do we know who thinks Muggle-borns are
scum?"

    He looked at Hermione. Hermione looked back, unconvinced.

    "If you're talking about Malfoy --"

    "Of course I am!" said Ron. "You heard him -- `You'll be next, Mudbloods!'-- come on, you've
only got to look at his foul rat face to know it's him --"

    "Malfoy, the Heir of Slytherin?" said Hermione skeptically.

    "Look at his family," said Harry, closing his books, too. "The whole lot of them have been in
Slytherin; he's always boasting about it. They could easily be Slytherin's descendants. His father's


                                                                                                                Page 92
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




definitely evil enough."

    "They could've had the key to the Chamber of Secrets for centuries!" said Ron. "Handing it down,
father to son ..."

    "Well," said Hermione cautiously, "I suppose it's possible..."

    "But how do we prove it?" said Harry darkly.

    "There might be a way," said Hermione slowly, dropping her voice still further with a quick glance
across the room at Percy. "Of course, it would be difficult. And dangerous, very dangerous. We'd be
breaking about fifty school rules, I expect --"

    "If, in a month or so, you feel like explaining, you will let us know, won't you?" said Ron irritably.

    "All right," said Hermione coldly. "What we'd need to do is to get inside the Slytherin common room
and ask Malfoy a few questions without him realizing it's us."

    "But that's impossible," Harry said as Ron laughed.

    "No, it's not," said Hermione. "All we'd need would be some Polyjuice Potion."

    "What's that?" said Ron and Harry together.

    "Snape mentioned it in class a few weeks ago --"

    "D'you think we've got nothing better to do in Potions than listen to Snape?" muttered Ron.

     "It transforms you into somebody else. Think about it! We could change into three of the Slytherins.
No one would know it was us. Malfoy would probably tell us anything. He's probably boasting about it
in the Slytherin common room right now, if only we could hear him."

     "This Polyjuice stuff sounds a bit dodgy to me," said Ron, frowning. "What if we were stuck looking
like three of the Slytherins forever?"

    "It wears off after a while," said Hermione, waving her hand impatiently. "But getting hold of the
recipe will be very difficult. Snape said it was in a book called Moste Potente Potions and it's bound to
be in the Restricted Section of the library." There was only one way to get out a book from the
Restricted Section: You needed a signed note of permission from a teacher. "Hard to see why we'd want
the book, really," said Ron, "if we weren't going to try and make one of the potions." "I think," said
Hermione, "that if we made it sound as though we were just interested in the theory, we might stand a
chance...

    "Oh, come on, no teacher's going to fall for that," said Ron. "They'd have to be really thick..."




                                              CHAPTER TEN


                                                                                                             Page 93
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




THE ROGUE BLUDGER



 Since the disastrous episode of the pixies, Professor Lockhart had not brought live creatures to class.
Instead, he read passages from his books to them, and sometimes reenacted some of the more dramatic
bits. He usually picked Harry to help him with these reconstructions; so far, Harry had been forced to
play a simple Transylvanian villager whom Lockhart had cured of a Babbling Curse, a yeti with a head
cold, and a vampire who had been unable to eat anything except lettuce since Lockhart had dealt with
him.

    Harry was hauled to the front of the class during their very next Defense Against the Dark Arts
lesson, this time acting a werewolf. If he hadn't had a very good reason for keeping Lockhart in a good
mood, he would have refused to do it.

     "Nice loud howl, Harry -- exactly -- and then, if you'll believe it, I pounced -- like this -- slammed
him to the floor -- thus with one hand, I managed to hold him down -- with my other, I put my wand to
his throat -- I then screwed up my remaining strength and performed the immensely complex
Homorphus Charm- he let out a piteous moan -- go on, Harry -- higher than that -- good -- the fur
vanished -- the fangs shrank -- and he turned back into a man. Simple, yet effective -- and another
village will remember me forever as the hero who delivered them from the monthly terror of werewolf
attacks."

      The bell rang and Lockhart got to his feet.

    "Homework -- compose a poem about my defeat of the Wagga Wagga Werewolf! Signed copies
of Magical Me to the author of the best one!"

    The class began to leave. Harry returned to the back of the room, where Ron and Hermione were
waiting.

      "Ready?" Harry muttered.

      "Wait till everyone's gone," said Hermione nervously. "All right..."

    She approached Lockhart's desk, a piece of paper clutched tightly in her hand, Harry and Ron right
behind her.

     "Er -- Professor Lockhart?" Hermione stammered. "I wanted to -- to get this book out of the
library. Just for background reading." She held out the piece of paper, her hand shaking slightly. "But the
thing is, it's in the Restricted Section of the library, so I need a teacher to sign for it -- I'm sure it would
help me understand what you say in Gadding with Ghouls about slow-acting venoms."

   "Ah, Gadding with Ghouls!" said Lockhart, taking the note from Hermione and smiling widely at her.
"Possibly my very favorite book. You enjoyed it?"

      "Oh, yes," said Hermione eagerly. "So clever, the way you trapped that last one with the tea-strainer
--"


                                                                                                                   Page 94
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Well, I'm sure no one will mind me giving the best student of the year a little extra help," said
Lockhart warmly, and he pulled out an enormous peacock quill. "Yes, nice, isn't it?" he said, misreading
the revolted look on Ron's face. "I usually save it for book-signings."

    He scrawled an enormous loopy signature on the note and handed it back to Hermione.

      "So, Harry," said Lockhart, while Hermione folded the note with fumbling fingers and slipped it into
her bag. "Tomorrow's the first Quidditch match of the season, I believe? Gryffindor against Slytherin, is it
not? I hear you're a useful player. I was a Seeker, too. I was asked to try for the National Squad, but
preferred to dedicate my life to the eradication of the Dark Forces. Still, if ever you feel the need for a
little private training, don't hesitate to ask. Always happy to pass on my expertise to less able players..."

    Harry made an indistinct noise in his throat and then hurried off after Ron and Hermione.

    "I don't believe it," he said as the three of them examined the signature on the note. "He didn't even
look at the book we wanted."

    "That's because he's a brainless git," said Ron. "But who cares, we've got what we needed--"

    "He is not a brainless git," said Hermione shrilly as they half ran toward the library.

    "Just because he said you were the best student of the year --"

     They dropped their voices as they entered the muffled stillness of the library. Madam Pince, the
librarian, was a thin, irritable woman who looked like an underfed vulture.

   "Moste Potente Potions?" she repeated suspiciously, trying to take the note from Hermione; but
Hermione wouldn't let go.

    "I was wondering if I could keep it," she said breathlessly.

   "Oh, come on," said Ron, wrenching it from her grasp and thrusting it at Madam Pince. "We'll get
you another autograph. Lockhart'll sign anything if it stands still long enough."

     Madam Pince held the note up to the light, as though determined to detect a forgery, but it passed the
test. She stalked away between the lofty shelves and returned several minutes later carrying a large and
moldy-looking book. Hermione put it carefully into her bag and they left, trying not to walk too quickly or
look too guilty.

    Five minutes later, they were barricaded in Moaning Myrtle's out-of-order bathroom once again.
Hermione had overridden Ron's objections by pointing out that it was the last place anyone in their right
minds would go, so they were guaranteed some privacy. Moaning Myrtle was crying noisily in her stall,
but they were ignoring her, and she them.

     Hermione opened Moste Potente Potions carefully, and the three of them bent over the
damp-spotted pages. It was clear from a glance why it belonged in the Restricted Section. Some of the
potions had effects almost too gruesome to think about, and there were some very unpleasant
illustrations, which included a man who seemed to have been turned inside out and a witch sprouting
several extra pairs of arms out of her head.




                                                                                                                Page 95
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




   "Here it is," said Hermione excitedly as she found the page headed The Polyjuice Potion. It was
decorated with drawings of people halfway through transforming into other people. Harry sincerely
hoped the artist had imagined the looks of intense pain on their faces.

     "This is the most complicated potion I've ever seen," said Hermione as they scanned the recipe.
"Lacewing flies, leeches, fluxweed, and knotgrass," she murmured, running her finger down the list of
ingredients. "Well, they're easy enough, they're in the student store-cupboard, we can help
ourselves...Oooh, look, powdered horn of a bicorn -- don't know where we're going to get that --
shredded skin of a boomslang --. that'll be tricky, too and of course a bit of whoever we want to change
into."

    "Excuse me?" said Ron sharply. "What d'you mean, a bit of whoever we're changing into? I'm
drinking nothing with Crabbe's toenails in it --"

    Hermione continued as though she hadn't heard him.

    "We don't have to worry about that yet, though, because we add those bits last..."

    Ron turned, speechless, to Harry, who had another worry.

    "D'you realize how much we're going to have to steal, Hermione? Shredded skin of a boomslang,
that's definitely not in the students' cupboard. What're we going to do, break into Snape's private
stores? I don't know if this is a good idea..."

    Hermione shut the book with a snap.

   "Well, if you two are going to chicken out, fine," she said. There were bright pink patches on her
cheeks and her eyes were brighter than usual. "I don't want to break rules, you know. I think threatening
Muggle-borns is far worse than brewing up a difficult potion. But if you don't want to find out if it's
Malfoy, I'll go straight to Madam Pince now and hand the book back in.'

   "I never thought Id see the day when you'd be persuading us to break rules," said Ron. "All right,
we'll do it. But not toenails, okay?"

   "How long will it take to make, anyway?" said Harry as Hermione, looking happier, opened the
book again.

    "Well, since the fluxweed has got to be picked at the full moon and the lacewings have got to be
stewed for twenty-one days...I'd say it'd be ready in about a month, if we can get all the ingredients."

    "A month?" said Ron. "Malfoy could have attacked half the Muggle-borns in the school by then!"
But Hermione's eyes narrowed dangerously again, and he added swiftly, "But it's the best plan we've
got, so full steam ahead, I say."

   However, while Hermione was checking that the coast was clear for them to leave the bathroom,
Ron muttered to Harry, "It'll be a lot less hassle if you can just knock Malfoy off his broom tomorrow."



Harry woke early on Saturday morning and lay for a while thinking about the coming Quidditch match.
He was nervous, mainly at the thought of what Wood would say if Gryffindor lost, but also at the idea of


                                                                                                            Page 96
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




facing a team mounted on the fastest racing brooms gold could buy. He had never wanted to beat
Slytherin so badly. After half an hour of lying there with his insides churning, he got up, dressed, and went
down to breakfast early, where he found the rest of the Gryffindor team huddled at the long, empty table,
all looking uptight and not speaking much.

    As eleven o'clock approached, the whole school started to make its way down to the Quidditch
stadium. It was a muggy sort of day with a hint of thunder in the air. Ron and Hermione came hurrying
over to wish Harry good luck as he entered the locker rooms. The team pulled on their scarlet Gryffindor
robes, then sat down to listen to Wood's usual pre-match pep talk.

    "Slytherin has better brooms than us," he began. "No point denying it. But we've got better people
on our brooms. We've trained harder than they have, we've been flying in all weathers --"("Too true,"
muttered George Weasley. "I haven't been properly dry since August")"-- and we're going to make
them rue the day they let that little bit of slime, Malfoy, buy his way onto their team."

    Chest heaving with emotion, Wood turned to Harry.

     "It'll be down to you, Harry, to show them that a Seeker has to have something more than a rich
father. Get to that Snitch before Malfoy or die trying, Harry, because we've got to win today, we've got
to."

    "So no pressure, Harry" said Fred, winking at him.

    As they walked out onto the pitch, a roar of noise greeted them; mainly cheers, because Ravenclaw
and Hufflepuff were anxious to see Slytherin beaten, but the Slytherins in the crowd made their boos and
hisses heard, too. Madam Hooch, the Quidditch teacher, asked Flint and Wood to shake hands, which
they did, giving each other threatening stares and gripping rather harder than was necessary.

    "On my whistle," said Madam Hooch. "Three...two...one..."

   With a roar from the crowd to speed them upward, the fourteen players rose toward the leaden sky.
Harry flew higher than any of them, squinting around for the Snitch.

    "All right there, Scarhead?" yelled Malfoy, shooting underneath him as though to show off the speed
of his broom.

    Harry had no time to reply. At that very moment, a heavy black Bludger came pelting toward him; he
avoided it so narrowly that he felt it ruffle his hair as it passed.

    "Close one, Harry!" said George, streaking past him with his club in his hand, ready to knock the
Bludger back toward a Slytherin. Harry saw George give the Bludger a powerful whack in the direction
of Adrian Pucey, but the Bludger changed direction in midair and shot straight for Harry again.

    Harry dropped quickly to avoid it, and George managed to hit it hard toward Malfoy. Once again,
the Bludger swerved like a boomerang and shot at Harry's head.

     Harry put on a burst of speed and zoomed toward the other end of the pitch. He could hear the
Bludger whistling along behind him. What was going on? Bludgers never concentrated on one player like
this; it was their job to try and unseat as many people as possible...

    Fred Weasley was waiting for the Bludger at the other end. Harry ducked as Fred swung at the


                                                                                                                Page 97
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Bludger with all his might; the Bludger was knocked off course.

    "Gotcha!" Fred yelled happily, but he was wrong; as though it was magnetically attracted to Harry,
the Bludger pelted after him once more and Harry was forced to fly off at full speed.

    It had started to rain; Harry felt heavy drops fall onto his face, splattering onto his glasses. He didn't
have a clue what was going on in the rest of the game until he heard Lee Jordan, who was commentating,
say, "Slytherin lead, sixty points to zero.'

    The Slytherins' superior brooms were clearly doing their jobs, and meanwhile the mad Bludger was
doing all it could to knock Harry out of the air. Fred and George were now flying so close to him on
either side that Harry could see nothing at all except their flailing arms and had no chance to look for the
Snitch, let alone catch it.

   "Someone's -- tampered -- with -- this -- Bludger --" Fred grunted, swinging his bat with all his
might at it as it launched a new attack on Harry.

   "We need time out," said George, trying to signal to Wood and stop the Bludger breaking Harry's
nose at the same time.

   Wood had obviously got the message. Madam Hooch's whistle rang out and Harry, Fred, and
George dived for the ground, still trying to avoid the mad Bludger.

   "What's going on?" said Wood as the Gryffindor team huddled together, while Slytherins in the
crowd jeered. "We're being flattened. Fred, George, where were you when that Bludger stopped
Angelina scoring?"

   "We were twenty feet above her, stopping the other Bludger from murdering Harry, Oliver," said
George angrily. "Someone's fixed it -- it won't leave Harry alone. It hasn't gone for anyone else all
game. The Slytherins must have done something to it."

    "But the Bludgers have been locked in Madam Hooch's office since our last practice, and there was
nothing wrong with them then..." said Wood, anxiously. Madam Hooch was walking toward them. Over
her shoulder, Harry could see the Slytherin team jeering and pointing in his direction.

    "Listen," said Harry as she came nearer and nearer, "with you two flying around me all the time the
only way I'm going to catch the Snitch is if it flies up my sleeve. Go back to the rest of the team and let
me deal with the rogue one."

    "Don't be thick," said Fred. "It'll take your head off."

    Wood was looking from Harry to the Weasleys.

   "Oliver, this is insane," said Alicia Spinner angrily. "You can't let Harry deal with that thing on his
own. Let's ask for an inquiry..."

   "If we stop now, we'll have to forfeit the match!" said Harry. "And we're not losing to Slytherin just
because of a crazy Bludger! Come on, Oliver, tell them to leave me alone!"

    "This is all your fault," George said angrily to Wood. "`Get the Snitch or die trying,' what a stupid
thing to tell him --"


                                                                                                                 Page 98
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Madam Hooch had joined them.

    "Ready to resume play?" she asked Wood.

    Wood looked at the determined look on Harry's face.

   "All right," he said. "Fred, George, you heard Harry -- leave him alone and let him deal with the
Bludger on his own."

     The rain was falling more heavily now. On Madam Hooch's whistle, Harry kicked hard into the air
and heard the telltale whoosh of the Bludger behind him. Higher and higher Harry climbed; he looped and
swooped, spiraled, zigzagged, and rolled. Slightly dizzy, he nevertheless kept his eyes wide open, rain
was speckling his glasses and ran up his nostrils as he hung upside down, avoiding another fierce dive
from the Bludger. He could hear laughter from the crowd; he knew he must look very stupid, but the
rogue Bludger was heavy and couldn't change direction as quickly as Harry could; he began a kind of
roller-coaster ride around the edges of the stadium, squinting through the silver sheets of rain to the
Gryffindor goal posts, where Adrian Pucey was trying to get past Wood.

   A whistling in Harry's ear told him the Bludger had just missed him again; he turned right over and
sped in the opposite direction.

    "Training for the ballet, Potter?" yelled Malfoy as Harry was forced to do a stupid kind of twirl in
midair to dodge the Bludger, and he fled, the Bludger trailing a few feet behind him; and then, glaring
back at Malfoy in hatred, he saw it -- the Golden Snitch. It was hovering inches above Malfoy's left ear
-- and Malfoy, busy laughing at Harry, hadn't seen it.

    For an agonizing moment, Harry hung in midair, not daring to speed toward Malfoy in case he
looked up and saw the Snitch.

    WHAM.

    He had stayed still a second too long. The Bludger had hit him at last, smashed into his elbow, and
Harry felt his arm break. Dimly, dazed by the searing pain in his arm, he slid sideways on his
rain-drenched broom, one knee still crooked over it, his right arm dangling useless at his side -- the
Bludger came pelting back for a second attack, this time zooming at his face -- Harry swerved out of the
way, one idea firmly lodged in his numb brain: get to Malfoy.

    Through a haze of rain and pain he dived for the shimmering, sneering face below him and saw its
eyes widen with fear: Malfoy thought Harry was attacking him.

    "What the --" he gasped, careening out of Harry's way.

    Harry took his remaining hand off his broom and made a wild snatch; he felt his fingers close on the
cold Snitch but was now only gripping the broom with his legs, and there was a yell from the crowd
below as he headed straight for the ground, trying hard not to pass out.

    With a splattering thud he hit the mud and rolled off his broom. His arm was hanging at a very strange
angle; riddled with pain, he heard, as though from a distance, a good deal of whistling and shouting. He
focused on the Snitch clutched in his good hand.




                                                                                                             Page 99
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Aha," he said vaguely. "We've won."

    And he fainted.

   He came around, rain falling on his face, still lying on the field, with someone leaning over him. He
saw a glitter of teeth.

    "Oh, no, not you," he moaned.

    "Doesn't know what he's saying," said Lockhart loudly to the anxious crowd of Gryffindors pressing
around them. "Not to worry, Harry. I'm about to fix your arm."

    "No!" said Harry. "I'll keep it like this, thanks..."

    He tried to sit up, but the pain was terrible. He heard a familiar clicking noise nearby.

    "I don't want a photo of this, Colin," he said loudly.

    "Lie back, Harry," said Lockhart soothingly. "It's a simple charm I've used countless times --"

    "Why can't I just go to the hospital wing?" said Harry through clenched teeth.

   "He should really, Professor," said a muddy Wood, who couldn't help grinning even though his
Seeker was injured. "Great capture, Harry, really spectacular, your best yet, I'd say --"

   Through the thicket of legs around him, Harry spotted Fred and George Weasley, wrestling the rogue
Bludger into a box. It was still putting up a terrific fight.

    "Stand back," said Lockhart, who was rolling up his jade-green sleeves.

    "No -- don't --" said Harry weakly, but Lockhart was twirling his wand and a second later had
directed it straight at Harry's arm.

    A strange and unpleasant sensation started at Harry's shoulder and spread all the way down to his
fingertips. It felt as though his arm was being deflated. He didn't dare look at what was happening. He
had shut his eyes, his face turned away from his arm, but his worst fears were realized as the people
above him gasped and Colin Creevey began clicking away madly. His arm didn't hurt anymore -- nor
did it feel remotely like an arm.

    "Ah," said Lockhart. "Yes. Well, that can sometimes happen. But the point is, the bones are no
longer broken. That's the thing to bear in mind. So, Harry, just toddle up to the hospital wing -- ah, Mr.
Weasley, Miss Granger, would you escort him? -- and Madam Pomfrey will be able to -- er -- tidy
you up a bit."

    As Harry got to his feet, he felt strangely lopsided. Taking a deep breath he looked down at his right
side. What he saw nearly made him pass out again.

    Poking out of the end of his robes was what looked like a thick, flesh-colored rubber glove. He tried
to move his fingers. Nothing happened.

    Lockhart hadn't mended Harry's bones. He had removed them.


                                                                                                             Page 100
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Madam Pomfrey wasn't at all pleased.

    "You should have come straight to me!" she raged, holding up the sad, limp remainder of what, half
an hour before, had been a working arm. "I can mend bones in a second -- but growing them back --"

    "You will be able to, won't you?" said Harry desperately.

    "I'll be able to, certainly, but it will be painful," said Madam Pomfrey grimly, throwing Harry a pair of
pajamas. "You'll have to stay the night..."

    Hermione waited outside the curtain drawn around Harry's bed while Ron helped him into his
pajamas. It took a while to stuff the rubbery, boneless arm into a sleeve.

    "How can you stick up for Lockhart now, Hermione, eh?" Ron called through the curtain as he
pulled Harry's limp fingers through the cuff. "If Harry had wanted deboning he would have asked."

    "Anyone can make a mistake," said Hermione. "And it doesn't hurt anymore, does it, Harry?"

    "No," said Harry, getting into bed. "But it doesn't do anything else either."

    As he swung himself onto the bed, his arm flapped pointlessly.

    Hermione and Madam Pomfrey came around the curtain. Madam Pomfrey was holding a large bottle
of something labeled Skele-Gro.

   "You're in for a rough night," she said, pouring out a steaming beakerful and handing it to him.
"Regrowing bones is a nasty business."

    So was taking the Skele-Gro. It burned Harry's mouth and throat as it went down, making him
cough and splutter. Still tut-tutting about dangerous sports and inept teachers, Madam Pomfrey retreated,
leaving Ron and Hermione to help Harry gulp down some water. "We won, though," said Ron, a grin
breaking across his face. "That was some catch you made. Malfoy's face...he looked ready to kill..."

     "I want to know how he fixed that Bludger," said Hermione darkly. "We can add that to the list of
questions we'll ask him when we've taken the Polyjuice Potion," said Harry, sinking back onto his
pillows. "I hope it tastes better than this stuff..."

    "If it's got bits of Slytherins in it? You've got to be joking," said Ron.

    The door of the hospital wing burst open at that moment. Filthy and soaking wet, the rest of the
Gryffindor team had arrived to see Harry. "Unbelievable flying, Harry," said George. "I've just seen
Marcus Flint yelling at Malfoy. Something about having the Snitch on top of his head and not noticing.
Malfoy didn't seem too happy." They had brought cakes, sweets, and bottles of pumpkin juice; they
gathered around Harry's bed and were just getting started on what promised to be a good party when
Madam Pomfrey came storming over, shouting, "This boy needs rest, he's got thirty-three bones to
regrow! Out! OUT!" And Harry was left alone, with nothing to distract him from the stabbing pains in his
limp arm.

    Hours and hours later, Harry woke quite suddenly in the pitch blackness and gave a small yelp of
pain: His arm now felt full of large splinters. For a second, he thought that was what had woken him.


                                                                                                                Page 101
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Then, with a thrill of horror, he realized that someone was sponging his forehead in the dark.

    "Get off!" he said loudly, and then, "Dobby!"

   The house-elf's goggling tennis ball eyes were peering at Harry through the darkness. A single tear
was running down his long, pointed nose.

     "Harry Potter came back to school," he whispered miserably. "Dobby warned and warned Harry
Potter. Ah sir, why didn't you heed Dobby? Why didn't Harry Potter go back home when he missed the
train?"

    Harry heaved himself up on his pillows and pushed Dobby's sponge away.

    "What're you doing here?" he said. "And how did you know I missed the train?"

    Dobby's lip trembled and Harry was seized by a sudden suspicion.

    "It was you!" he said slowly. "You stopped the barrier from letting us through!"

    "Indeed yes, sir," said Dobby, nodding his head vigorously, ears flapping. "Dobby hid and watched
for Harry Potter and sealed the gateway and Dobby had to iron his hands afterward" -- he showed
Harry ten long, bandaged fingers -- "but Dobby didn't care, sir, for he thought Harry Potter was safe,
and never did Dobby dream that Harry Potter would get to school another way!"

    He was rocking backward and forward, shaking his ugly head.

    "Dobby was so shocked when he heard Harry Potter was back at Hogwarts, he let his master's
dinner burn! Such a flogging Dobby never had, sir..."

    Harry slumped back onto his pillows.

   "You nearly got Ron and me expelled," he said fiercely. "You'd better get lost before my bones
come back, Dobby, or I might strangle you."

    Dobby smiled weakly.

    "Dobby is used to death threats, sir. Dobby gets them five times a day at home."

   He blew his nose on a corner of the filthy pillowcase he wore, looking so pathetic that Harry felt his
anger ebb away in spite of himself.

    "Why d'you wear that thing, Dobby?" he asked curiously.

   "This, sir?" said Dobby, plucking at the pillowcase. "`Tis a mark of the house-elf's enslavement, sir.
Dobby can only be freed if his masters present him with clothes, sir. The family is careful not to pass
Dobby even a sock, sir, for then he would be free to leave their house forever."

   Dobby mopped his bulging eyes and said suddenly, "Harry Potter must go home! Dobby thought his
Bludger would be enough to make --"

    "Your Bludger?" said Harry, anger rising once more. "What d'you mean, your Bludger? You made


                                                                                                            Page 102
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




that Bludger try and kill me?"

    "Not kill you, sir, never kill you!" said Dobby, shocked. "Dobby wants to save Harry Potter's life!
Better sent home, grievously injured, than remain here sir! Dobby only wanted Harry Potter hurt enough
to be sent home!"

    "Oh, is that all?" said Harry angrily. "I don't suppose you're going to tell me why you wanted me
sent home in pieces?"

    "Ah, if Harry Potter only knew!" Dobby groaned, more tears dripping onto his ragged pillowcase. "If
he knew what he means to us, to the lowly, the enslaved, we dregs of the magical world! Dobby
remembers how it was when He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was at the height of his powers, sir! We
house-elves were treated like vermin, sir! Of course, Dobby is still treated like that, sir," he admitted,
drying his face on the pillowcase. "But mostly, sir, life has improved for my kind since you triumphed
over He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. Harry Potter survived, and the Dark Lord's power was broken,
and it was a new dawn, sir, and Harry Potter shone like a beacon of hope for those of us who thought
the Dark days would never end, sit...And now, at Hogwarts, terrible things are to happen, are perhaps
happening already, and Dobby cannot let Harry Potter stay here now that history is to repeat itself, now
that the Chamber of Secrets is open once more."

   Dobby froze, horrorstruck, then grabbed Harry's water jug from his bedside table and cracked it
over his own head, toppling out of sight. A second later, he crawled back onto the bed, cross-eyed,
muttering, "Bad Dobby, very bad Dobby..."

    "So there is a Chamber of Secrets?" Harry whispered. "And did you say it's been opened before?
Tell me, Dobby!"

  He seized the elf's bony wrist as Dobby's hand inched toward the water jug. "But I'm not
Muggle-born -- how can I be in danger from the Chamber?"

   "Ah, sir, ask no more, ask no more of poor Dobby," stammered the elf, his eyes huge in the dark.
"Dark deeds are planned in this place, but Harry Potter must not be here when they happen -- go home,
Harry Potter, go home. Harry Potter must not meddle in this, sir, `tis too dangerous --"

   "Who is it, Dobby?" Harry said, keeping a firm hold on Dobby's wrist to stop him from hitting
himself with the water jug again. "Who's opened it? Who opened it last time?"

   "Dobby can't, sir, Dobby can't, Dobby mustn't tell!" squealed the elf. "Go home, Harry Potter, go
home!"

     "I'm not going anywhere!" said Harry fiercely. "One of my best friends is Muggle-born; she'll be first
in line if the Chamber really has been opened --"

   "Harry Potter risks his own life for his friends!" moaned Dobby in a kind of miserable ecstasy. "So
noble! So valiant! But he must save himself, he must, Harry Potter must not --"

   Dobby suddenly froze, his bat ears quivering. Harry heard it, too. There were footsteps coming
down the passageway outside.

    "Dobby must go!" breathed the elf, terrified. There was a loud crack, and Harry's fist was suddenly
clenched on thin air. He slumped back into bed, his eyes on the dark doorway to the hospital wing as the


                                                                                                              Page 103
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html