    "-- so we had no choice, Professor, we couldn't get on the train."

    "Why didn't you send us a letter by owl? I believe you have an owl?" Professor McGonagall said
coldly to Harry.

    Harry gaped at her. Now she said it, that seemed the obvious thing to have done.

    "I -- I didn't think --"

    "That," said Professor McGonagall, "is obvious."

    There was a knock on the office door and Snape, now looking happier than ever, opened it. There
stood the headmaster, Professor Dumbledore.

    Harry's whole body went numb. Dumbledore was looking unusually grave. He stared down his very
crooked nose at them, and Harry suddenly found himself wishing he and Ron were still being beaten up
by the Whomping Willow.

    There was a long silence. Then Dumbledore said, "Please explain why you did this."

    It would have been better if he had shouted. Harry hated the disappointment in his voice. For some
reason, he was unable to look Dumbledore in the eyes, and spoke instead to his knees. He told
Dumbledore everything except that Mr. Weasley owned the bewitched car, making it sound as though he
and Ron had happened to find a flying car parked outside the station. He knew Dumbledore would see
through this at once, but Dumbledore asked no questions about the car. When Harry had finished, he
merely continued to peer at them through his spectacles.

    "We'll go and get our stuff," said Ron in a hopeless sort of voice.

    "What are you talking about, Weasley?" barked Professor McGonagall.

    "Well, you're expelling us, aren't you?" said Ron.

    Harry looked quickly at Dumbledore.

    "Not today, Mr. Weasley," said Dumbledore. "But I must impress upon both of you the seriousness
of what you have done. I will be writing to both your families tonight. I must also warn you that if you do
anything like this again, I will have no choice but to expel you."

    Snape looked as though Christmas had been canceled. He cleared his throat and said, "Professor
Dumbledore, these boys have flouted the Decree for the Restriction of Underage Wizardry, caused
serious damage to an old and valuable tree -- surely acts of this nature --"

    "It will be for Professor McGonagall to decide on these boys' punishments, Severus," said
Dumbledore calmly. "They are in her House and are therefore her responsibility." He turned to Professor
McGonagall. "I must go back to the feast, Minerva, I've got to give out a few notices. Come, Severus,
there's a delicious-looking custard tart I want to sample --"

    Snape shot a look of pure venom at Harry and Ron as he allowed himself to be swept out of his
office, leaving them alone with Professor McGonagall, who was still eyeing them like a wrathful eagle.


                                                                                                              Page 47
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "You'd better get along to the hospital wing, Weasley, you're bleeding."

    "Not much," said Ron, hastily wiping the cut over his eye with his sleeve.

    "Professor, I wanted to watch my sister being Sorted --"

    "The Sorting Ceremony is over," said Professor McGonagall. "Your sister is also in Gryffindor."

    "Oh, good," said Ron.

    "And speaking of Gryffindor --" Professor McGonagall said sharply, but Harry cut in: "Professor,
when we took the car, term hadn't started, so -- so Gryffindor shouldn't really have points taken from it
-- should it?" he finished, watching her anxiously.

    Professor McGonagall gave him a piercing look, but he was sure she had almost smiled. Her mouth
looked less thin, anyway.

   "I will not take any points from Gryffindor," she said, and Harry's heart lightened considerably. "But
you will both get a detention." It was better than Harry had expected. As for Dumbledore's writing to the
Dursleys, that was nothing. Harry knew perfectly well they'd just be disappointed that the Whomping
Willow hadn't squashed him flat.

    Professor McGonagall raised her wand again and pointed it at Snape's desk. A large plate of
sandwiches, two silver goblets, and a jug of iced pumpkin juice appeared with a pop.

    "You will eat in here and then go straight up to your dormitory," she said. "I must also return to the
feast."

    When the door had closed behind her, Ron let out a long, low whistle.

    "I thought we'd had it," he said, grabbing a sandwich.

    "So did I," said Harry, taking one, too.

    "Can you believe our luck, though?" said Ron thickly through a mouthful of chicken and ham. "Fred
and George must've flown that car five or six times and no Muggle ever saw them ." He swallowed and
took another huge bite. " Whycouldn't we get through the barrier?"

    Harry shrugged. "We'll have to watch our step from now on, though," he said, taking a grateful swig
of pumpkin juice. "Wish we could've gone up to the feast...."

    "She didn't want us showing off," said Ron sagely. "Doesn't want people to think it's clever, arriving
by flying car."

     When they had eaten as many sandwiches as they could (the plate kept refilling itself) they rose and
left the office, treading the familiar path to Gryffindor Tower. The castle was quiet; it seemed that the
feast was over. They walked past muttering portraits and creaking suits of armor, and climbed narrow
flights of stone stairs, until at last they reached the passage where the secret entrance to Gryffindor Tower
was hidden, behind an oil painting of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress.




                                                                                                                Page 48
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Password?" she said as they approached.

    "Er --" said Harry.

    They didn't know the new year's password, not having met a Gryffindor prefect yet, but help came
almost immediately; they heard hurrying feet behind them and turned to see Hermione dashing toward
them.

   " Thereyou are! Where have you been ? The most ridiculous rumors -- someone said you'd been
expelled for crashing a flying car !"

    "Well, we haven't been expelled," Harry assured her.

  "You're not telling me you did fly here?" said Hermione, sounding almost as severe as Professor
McGonagall.

    "Skip the lecture," said Ron impatiently, "and tell us the new password."

    "It's `wattlebird,'" said Hermione impatiently, "but that's not the point --"

    Her words were cut short, however, as the portrait of the fat lady swung open and there was a
sudden storm of clapping. It looked as though the whole of Gryffindor House was still awake, packed
into the circular common room, standing on the lopsided tables and squashy armchairs, waiting for them
to arrive. Arms reached through the portrait hole to pull Harry and Ron inside, leaving Hermione to
scramble in after them.

   "Brilliant!" yelled Lee Jordan. "Inspired! What an entrance! Flying a car right into the Whomping
Willow, people'll be talking about that one for years --"

    "Good for you," said a fifth year Harry had never spoken to; someone was patting him on the back
as though he'd just won a marathon; Fred and George pushed their way to the front of the crowd and
said together, "Why couldn't we've come in the car, eh?"

    Ron was scarlet in the face, grinning embarrassedly, but Harry could see one person who didn't look
happy at all. Percy was visible over the heads of some excited first years, and he seemed to be trying to
get near enough to start telling them off. Harry nudged Ron in the ribs and nodded in Percy's direction.
Ron got the point at once.

   "Got to get upstairs -- bit tired," he said, and the two of them started pushing their way toward the
door on the other side of the room, which led to a spiral staircase and the dormitories.

    "`Night," Harry called back to Hermione, who was wearing a scowl just like Percy's.

    They managed to get to the other side of the common room, still having their backs slapped, and
gained the peace of the staircase. They hurried up it, right to the top, and at last reached the door of their
old dormitory, which now had a sign on it saying SECOND YEARS. They entered the familiar, circular
room, with its five four-posters hung with red velvet and its high, narrow windows. Their trunks had been
brought up for them and stood at the ends of their beds.

    Ron grinned guiltily at Harry.




                                                                                                                 Page 49
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "I know I shouldn't've enjoyed that or anything, but..."

   The dormitory door flew open and in came the other second year Gryffindor boys, Seamus Finnigan,
Dean Thomas, and Neville Longbottom.

    " Unbelievable!" beamed Seamus.

    "Cool," said Dean.

    "Amazing," said Neville, awestruck.

    Harry couldn't help it. He grinned, too.




                                                CHAPTER SIX



GILDEROY LOCKHART



 The next day, however, Harry barely grinned once. Things started to go downhill from breakfast in the
Great Hall. The four long house tables were laden with tureens of porridge, plates of kippers, mountains
of toast, and dishes of eggs and bacon, beneath the enchanted ceiling (today, a dull, cloudy gray). Harry
and Ron sat down at the Gryffindor table next to Hermione, who had her copy of Voyages with
Vampires propped open against a milk jug. There was a slight stiffness in the way she said "Morning,"
which told Harry that she was still disapproving of the way they had arrived. Neville Longbottom, on the
other hand, greeted them cheerfully. Neville was a round-faced and accident-prone boy with the worst
memory of anyone Harry had ever met.

    "Mail's due any minute -- I think Gran's sending a few things I forgot."

     Harry had only just started his porridge when, sure enough, there was a rushing sound overhead and
a hundred or so owls streamed in, circling the hall and dropping letters and packages into the chattering
crowd. A big, lumpy package bounced off Neville's head and, a second later, something large and gray
fell into Hermione's jug, spraying them all with milk and feathers.

    "Errol!" said Ron, pulling the bedraggled owl out by the feet. Errol slumped, Unconscious, onto the
table, his legs in the air and a damp red envelope in his beak.

    "Oh, no --" Ron gasped.

    "It's all right, he's still alive," said Hermione, prodding Errol gently with the tip of her finger.

    "It's not that -- it's that ."




                                                                                                            Page 50
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Ron was pointing at the red envelope. It looked quite ordinary to Harry, but Ron and Neville were
both looking at it as though they expected it to explode.

    "What's the matter?" said Harry.

    "She's -- she's sent me a Howler," said Ron faintly.

    "You'd better open it, Ron," said Neville in a timid whisper. "It'll be worse if you Don't My gran
sent me one once, and I ignored it and" -- he gulped --"it was horrible."

    Harry looked from their petrified faces to the red envelope.

    "What's a Howler?" he said.

    But Ron's whole attention was fixed on the letter, which had begun to smoke at the corners.

    "Open it," Neville urged. "It'll all be over in a few minutes --"

    Ron stretched out a shaking hand, eased the envelope from Errol's beak, and slit it open. Neville
stuffed his fingers in his ears. A split second later, Harry knew why. He thought for a moment it had
exploded; a roar of sound filled the huge hall, shaking dust from the ceiling.

    "--STEALING THE CAR, I WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN SURPRISED IF THEY'D EXPELLED
YOU, YOU WAIT TILL I GET HOLD OF YOU, I DON'T SUPPOSE YOU STOPPED TO
THINK WHAT YOUR FATHER AND I WENT THROUGH WHEN WE SAW IT WAS GONE
--"

    Mrs. Weasleys yells, a hundred times louder than usual, made the plates and spoons rattle on the
table, and echoed deafeningly off the stone walls. People throughout the hall were swiveling around to
see who had received the Howler, and Ron sank so low in his chair that only his crimson forehead could
be seen.

   "--LETTER FROM DUMBLEDORE LAST NIGHT, I THOUGHT YOUR FATHER WOULD
DIE OF SHAME, WE DIDN'T BRING YOU UP TO BEHAVE LIKE THIS, YOU AND HARRY
COULD BOTH HAVE DIED --"

    Harry had been wondering when his name was going to crop up. He tried very hard to look as
though he couldn't hear the voice that was making his eardrums throb.

   "--ABSOLUTELY DISGUSTED -- YOUR FATHER'S FACING AN INQUIRY AT WORK,
IT'S ENTIRELY YOUR FAULT AND IF YOU PUT ANOTHER TOE OUT OF LINE WE'LL
BRING YOU STRAIGHT BACK HOME."

    A ringing silence fell. The red envelope, which had dropped from Ron's hand, burst into flames and
curled into ashes. Harry and Ron sat stunned, as though a tidal wave had just passed over them. A few
people laughed and, gradually, a babble of talk broke out again.

    Hermione closed Voyages with Vampires and looked down at the top of Ron's head.

    "Well, I don't know what you expected, Ron, but you --"




                                                                                                         Page 51
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Don't tell me I deserved it," snapped Ron.

    Harry pushed his porridge away. His insides were burning with guilt. Mr. Weasley was facing an
inquiry at work. After all Mr. and Mrs. Weasley had done for him over the summer...

   But he had no time to dwell on this; Professor McGonagall was moving along the Gryffindor table,
handing out course schedules. Harry took his and saw that they had double Herbology with the
Hufflepuffs first.

    Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together, crossed the vegetable patch, and made for the
greenhouses, where the magical plants were kept. At least the Howler had done one good thing:
Hermione seemed to think they had now been punished enough and was being perfectly friendly again.

     As they neared the greenhouses they saw the rest of the class standing outside, waiting for Professor
Sprout. Harry, Ron, and Hermione had only just joined them when she came striding into view across the
lawn, accompanied by Gilderoy Lockhart. Professor Sprout's arms were full of bandages, and with
another twinge of guilt, Harry spotted the Whomping Willow in the distance, several of its branches now
in slings.

    Professor Sprout was a squat little witch who wore a patched hat over her flyaway hair; there was
usually a large amount of earth on her clothes and her fingernails would have made Aunt Petunia faint.
Gilderoy Lockhart, however, was immaculate in sweeping robes of turquoise, his golden hair shining
under a perfectly positioned turquoise hat with gold trimming.

    "Oh, hello there!" he called, beaming around at the assembled students. "Just been showing
Professor Sprout the right way to doctor a Whomping Willow! But I don't want you running away with
the idea that I'm better at Herbology than she is! I just happen to have met several of these exotic plants
on my travels..."

     "Greenhouse three today, chaps!" said Professor Sprout, who was looking distinctly disgruntled, not
at all her usual cheerful self.

    There was a murmur of interest. They had only ever worked in greenhouse one before --
greenhouse three housed far more interesting and dangerous plants. Professor Sprout took a large key
from her belt and unlocked the door. Harry caught a whiff of damp earth and fertilizer mingling with the
heavy perfume of some giant, umbrella-sized flowers dangling from the ceiling. He was about to follow
Ron and Hermione inside when Lockhart's hand shot out.

    "Harry! I've been wanting a word -- you don't mind if he's a couple of minutes late, do you,
Professor Sprout?"

    Judging by Professor Sprout's scowl, she did mind, but Lockhart said, "That's the ticket," and
closed the greenhouse door in her face.

   "Harry," said Lockhart, his large white teeth gleaming in the sunlight as he shook his head. "Harry,
Harry, Harry."

    Completely nonplussed, Harry said nothing.

    "When I heard -- well, of course, it was all my fault. Could have kicked myself."




                                                                                                              Page 52
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




   Harry had no idea what he was talking about. He was about to say so when Lockhart went on,
"Don't know when I've been more shocked. Flying a car to Hogwarts! Well, of course, I knew at once
why you'd done it. Stood out a mile. Harry, Harry, Harry ."

    It was remarkable how he could show every one of those brilliant teeth even when he wasn't talking.

   "Gave you a taste for publicity, didn't I?" said Lockhart. "Gave you the bug . You got onto the front
page of the paper with me and you couldn't wait to do it again."

    "Oh, no, Professor, see --"

     "Harry, Harry, Harry," said Lockhart, reaching out and grasping his shoulder. "I understand .
Natural to want a bit more once you've had that first taste -- and I blame myself for giving you that,
because it was bound to go to your head -- but see here, young man, you can't start flying cars to try
and get yourself noticed. Just calm down, all right? Plenty of time for all that when you're older. Yes, yes,
I know what you're thinking! `It's all right for him, he's an internationally famous wizard already!' But
when I was twelve, I was just as much of a nobody as you are now. In fact, I'd say I was even more of a
nobody! I mean, a few people have heard of you, haven't they? All that business with
He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!" He glanced at the lightning scar on Harry's forehead. "I know, I know
-- it's not quite as good as winning Witch Weekly 's Most Charming Smile Award five times in a row,
as I have -- but it's a start , Harry, it's a start ."

   He gave Harry a hearty wink and strode off. Harry stood stunned for a few seconds, then,
remembering he was supposed to be in the greenhouse, he opened the door and slid inside.

    Professor Sprout was standing behind a trestle bench in the center of the greenhouse. About twenty
pairs of different-colored ear muffs were lying on the bench. When Harry had taken his place between
Ron and Hermione, she said, "We'll be repotting Mandrakes today. Now, who can tell me the
properties of the Mandrake?"

    To nobody's surprise, Hermione's hand was first into the air.

    "Mandrake, or Mandragora, is a powerful restorative," said Hermione, sounding as usual as though
she had swallowed the textbook. "It is used to return people who have been transfigured or cursed to
their original state."

    "Excellent. Ten points to Gryffindor," said Professor Sprout. "The Mandrake forms an essential part
of most antidotes. It is also, however, dangerous. Who can tell me why?"

    Hermione's hand narrowly missed Harry's glasses as it shot up again.

    "The cry of the Mandrake is fatal to anyone who hears it," she said promptly.

      "Precisely. Take another ten points," said Professor Sprout. "Now, the Mandrakes we have here are
still very young."

    She pointed to a row of deep trays as she spoke, and everyone shuffled forward for a better look. A
hundred or so tufty little plants, purplish green in color, were growing there in rows. They looked quite
unremarkable to Harry, who didn't have the slightest idea what Hermione meant by the "cry" of the
Mandrake.




                                                                                                                Page 53
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Everyone take a pair of earmuffs," said Professor Sprout.

    There was a scramble as everyone tried to seize a pair that wasn't pink and fluffy.

   "When I tell you to put them on, make sure your ears are completely covered," said Professor
Sprout. "When it is safe to remove them, I will give you the thumbs-up. Right -- earmuffs on ."

    Harry snapped the earmuffs over his ears. They shut out sound completely. Professor Sprout put the
pink, fluffy pair over her own ears, rolled up the sleeves of her robes, grasped one of the tufty plants
firmly, and pulled hard.

    Harry let out a gasp of surprise that no one could hear.

    Instead of roots, a small, muddy, and extremely ugly baby popped out of the earth. The leaves were
growing right out of his head. He had pale green, mottled skin, and was clearly bawling at the top of his
lungs.

    Professor Sprout took a large plant pot from under the table and plunged the Mandrake into it,
burying him in dark, damp compost until only the tufted leaves were visible. Professor Sprout dusted off
her hands, gave them all the thumbs-up, and removed her own earmuffs.

    "As our Mandrakes are only seedlings, their cries won't kill yet," she said calmly as though she'd just
done nothing more exciting than water a begonia. "However, they will knock you out for several hours,
and as I'm sure none of you want to miss your first day back, make sure your earmuffs are securely in
place while you work. I will attract your attention when it is time to pack up.

    "Four to a tray -- there is a large supply of pots here -- compost in the sacks over there -- and be
careful of the Venemous Tentacula, it's teething."

    She gave a sharp slap to a spiky, dark red plant as she spoke, making it draw in the long feelers that
had been inching sneakily over her shoulder.

    Harry, Ron, and Hermione were joined at their tray by a curly-haired Hufflepuff boy Harry knew by
sight but had never spoken to.

    "Justin Finch-Fletchley," he said brightly, shaking Harry by the hand. "Know who you are, of course,
the famous Harry Potter....And you're Hermione Granger -- always top in everything" (Hermione
beamed as she had her hand shaken too) "-- and Ron Weasley. Wasn't that your flying car?"

    Ron didn't smile. The Howler was obviously still on his mind.

    "That Lockhart's something, isn't he?" said Justin happily as they began filling their plant pots with
dragon dung compost. "Awfully brave chap. Have you read his books? I'd have died of fear if Id been
cornered in a telephone booth by a werewolf, but he stayed cool and -- zap -- just fantastic .

   "My name was down for Eton, you know. I can't tell you how glad I am I came here instead. Of
course, Mother was slightly disappointed, but since I made her read Lockhart's books I think she's
begun to see how useful it'll be to have a fully trained wizard in the family...."

   After that they didn't have much chance to talk. Their earmuffs were back on and they needed to
concentrate on the Mandrakes. Professor Sprout had made it look extremely easy, but it wasn't. The


                                                                                                              Page 54
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Mandrakes didn't like coming out of the earth, but didn't seem to want to go back into it either. They
squirmed, kicked, flailed their sharp little fists, and gnashed their teeth; Harry spent ten whole minutes
trying to squash a particularly fat one into a pot.

    By the end of the class, Harry, like everyone else, was sweaty, aching, and covered in earth.
Everyone traipsed back to the castle for a quick wash and then the Gryffindors hurried off to
Transfiguration.

    Professor McGonagall's classes were always hard work, but today was especially difficult.
Everything Harry had learned last year seemed to have leaked out of his head during the summer. He
was supposed to be turning a beetle into a button, but all he managed to do was give his beetle a lot of
exercise as it scuttled over the desktop avoiding his wand.

    Ron was having far worse problems. He had patched up his wand with some borrowed Spellotape,
but it seemed to be damaged beyond repair. It kept crackling and sparking at odd moments, and every
time Ron tried to transfigure his beetle it engulfed him in thick gray smoke that smelled of rotten eggs.
Unable to see what he was doing, Ron accidentally squashed his beetle with his elbow and had to ask for
a new one. Professor McGonagall wasn't pleased.

    Harry was relieved to hear the lunch bell. His brain felt like a wrung sponge. Everyone filed out of the
classroom except him and Ron, who was whacking his wand furiously on the desk.

    "Stupid -- useless -- thing --"

    "Write home for another one," Harry suggested as the wand let off a volley of bangs like a
firecracker.

     "Oh, yeah, and get another Howler back," said Ron, stuffing the now hissing wand into his bag. "
`It's your own fault your wand got snapped -- '"

   They went down to lunch, where Ron's mood was not improved by Hermione's showing them the
handful of perfect coat buttons she had produced in Transfiguration.

    "What've we got this afternoon?" said Harry, hastily changing the subject.

    "Defense Against the Dark Arts," said Hermione at once.

    " Why, "demanded Ron, seizing her schedule, "have you outlined all Lockhart's lessons in little
hearts?"

    Hermione snatched the schedule back, blushing furiously.

     They finished lunch and went outside into the overcast courtyard. Hermione sat down on a stone step
and buried her nose in Voyages with Vampires again. Harry and Ron stood talking about Quidditch for
several minutes before Harry became aware that he was being closely watched. Looking up, he saw the
very small, mousy-haired boy he'd seen trying on the Sorting Hat last night staring at Harry as though
transfixed. He was clutching what looked like an ordinary Muggle camera, and the moment Harry looked
at him, he went bright red.

    "All right, Harry? I'm -- I'm Colin Creevey," he said breathlessly, taking a tentative step forward.
"I'm in Gryffindor, too. D'you think -- would it be all right if -- can I have a picture?" he said, raising


                                                                                                               Page 55
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




the camera hopefully.

    "A picture?" Harry repeated blankly.

    "So I can prove I've met you," said Colin Creevey eagerly, edging further forward. "I know all about
you. Everyone's told me. About how you survived when You-Know-Who tried to kill you and how he
disappeared and everything and how you've still got a lightning scar on your forehead" (his eyes raked
Harry's hairline) "and a boy in my dormitory said if I develop the film in the right potion, the pictures'll
move ." Colin drew a great shuddering breath of excitement and said, "It's amazing here, isn't it? I
never knew all the odd stuff I could do was magic till I got the letter from Hogwarts. My dad's a
milkman, he couldn't believe it either. So I'm taking loads of pictures to send home to him. And it'd be
really good if I had one of you" -- he looked imploringly at Harry -- "maybe your friend could take it
and I could stand next to you? And then, could you sign it?"

    "Signed photos?You're giving out signed photos , Potter?"

    Loud and scathing, Draco Malfoy's voice echoed around the courtyard. He had stopped right behind
Colin, flanked, as he always was at Hogwarts, by his large and thuggish cronies, Crabbe and Goyle.

    "Everyone line up!" Malfoy roared to the crowd. "Harry Potter's giving out signed photos!"

    "No, I'm not," said Harry angrily, his fists clenching. "Shut up, Malfoy."

    "You're just jealous," piped up Colin, whose entire body was about as thick as Crabbe's neck.

   " Jealous?" said Malfoy, who didn't need to shout anymore: half the courtyard was listening in. "Of
what? I don't want a foul scar right across my head, thanks. I don't think getting your head cut open
makes you that special, myself."

    Crabbe and Goyle were sniggering stupidly.

   "Eat slugs, Malfoy," said Ron angrily. Crabbe stopped laughing and started rubbing his knuckles in a
menacing way.

    "Be careful, Weasley," sneered Malfoy. "You don't want to start any trouble or your Mommy'll have
to come and take you away from school." He put on a shrill, piercing voice. " `If you put another toe
out of line'--"

    A knot of Slytherin fifth-years nearby laughed loudly at this.

   "Weasley would like a signed photo, Potter," smirked Malfoy. "It'd be worth more than his family's
whole house --"

    Ron whipped out his Spellotaped wand, but Hermione shut Voyages with Vampires with a snap
and whispered, "Look out!"

    "What's all this, what's all this?" Gilderoy Lockhart was striding toward them, his turquoise robes
swirling behind him. "Who's giving out signed photos?"

    Harry started to speak but he was cut short as Lockhart flung an arm around his shoulders and
thundered jovially, "Shouldn't have asked! We meet again, Harry!"


                                                                                                               Page 56
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Pinned to Lockhart's side and burning with humiliation, Harry saw Malfoy slide smirking back into
the crowd.

    "Come on then, Mr. Creevey," said Lockhart, beaming at Colin. "A double portrait, can't do better
than that, and we'll both sign it for you."

    Colin fumbled for his camera and took the picture as the bell rang behind them, signaling the start of
afternoon classes.

   "Off you go, move along there," Lockhart called to the crowd, and he set off back to the castle with
Harry, who was wishing he knew a good Vanishing Spell, still clasped to his side.

    "A word to the wise, Harry," said Lockhart paternally as they entered the building through a side
door. "I covered up for you back there with young Creevey -- if he was photographing me, too, your
schoolmates won't think you're setting yourself up so much...."

     Deaf to Harry's stammers, Lockhart swept him down a corridor lined with staring students and up a
staircase.

    "Let me just say that handing out signed pictures at this stage of your career isn't sensible -- looks a
tad bigheaded, Harry, to be frank. There may well come a time when, like me, you'll need to keep a
stack handy wherever you go, but" -- he gave a little chortle -- "I don't think you're quite there yet."

    They had reached Lockhart's classroom and he let Harry go at last. Harry yanked his robes straight
and headed for a seat at the very back of the class, where he busied himself with piling all seven of
Lockhart's books in front of him, so that he could avoid looking at the real thing.

    The rest of the class came clattering in, and Ron and Hermione sat down on either side of Harry.

   "You could've fried an egg on your face" said Ron. "You'd better hope Creevey doesn't meet
Ginny, or they'll be starting a Harry Potter fan club."

    "Shut up," snapped Harry. The last thing he needed was for Lockhart to hear the phrase "Harry
Potter fan club"

    When the whole class was seated, Lockhart cleared his throat loudly and silence fell. He reached
forward, picked up Neville Longbottom's copy of Travels with Trolls , and held it up to show his own,
winking portrait on the front.

    "Me," he said, pointing at it and winking as well. "Gilderoy Lockhart, Order of Merlin, Third Class,
Honorary Member of the Dark Force Defense League, and five-time winner of Witch Weekly 's Most
Charming Smile Award but I don't talk about that. I didn't get rid of the Bandon Banshee by smiling at
her!"

    He waited for them to laugh; a few people smiled weakly.

      "I see you've all bought a complete set of my books -- well done. I thought we'd start today with a
little quiz. Nothing to worry about -- just to check how well you've read them, how much you've taken
in --"




                                                                                                               Page 57
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




     When he had handed out the test papers he returned to the front of the class and said, "You have
thirty minutes -- start -- now !"

    Harry looked down at his paper and read:



    1. What is Gilderoy Lockhart `s favorite color?

    2. What is Gilderoy Lockhart's secret ambition?

    3. What, in your opinion, is Gilderoy Lockhart's greatest achievement to date?



On and on it went, over three sides of paper, right down to:



    54. When is Gilderoy Lockhart's birthday, and what would his ideal gift be?



Half an hour later, Lockhart collected the papers and rifled through them in front of the class.

    "Tut, tut -- hardly any of you remembered that my favorite color is lilac. I say so in Year with the
Yeti . And a few of you need to read Wanderings with Werewolves more carefully -- I clearly state in
chapter twelve that my ideal birthday gift would be harmony between all magic and non-magic peoples
-- though I wouldn't say no to a large bottle of Ogdeds Old Firewhisky!"

    He gave them another roguish wink. Ron was now staring at Lockhart with an expression of disbelief
on his face; Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, who were sitting in front, were shaking with silent
laughter. Hermione, on the other hand, was listening to Lockhart with rapt attention and gave a start
when he mentioned her name.

    "...but Miss Hermione Granger knew my secret ambition is to rid the world of evil and market my
own range of hair-care potions -- good girl! In fact" -- he flipped her paper over -- "full marks! Where
is Miss Hermione Granger?"

    Hermione raised a trembling hand.

    "Excellent!" beamed Lockhart. "Quite excellent! Take ten points for Gryffindor! And so -- to
business --"

    He bent down behind his desk and lifted a large, covered cage onto it.

   "Now -- be warned! It is my job to arm you against the foulest creatures known to wizardkind! You
may find yourselves facing your worst fears in this room. Know only that no harm can befall you whilst I
am here. All I ask is that you remain calm."

    In spite of himself, Harry leaned around his pile of books for a better look at the cage. Lockhart


                                                                                                           Page 58
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




placed a hand on the cover. Dean and Seamus had stopped laughing now. Neville was cowering in his
front row seat.

    "I must ask you not to scream," said Lockhart in a low voice. "It might provoke them."

    As the whole class held its breath, Lockhart whipped off the cover.

    "Yes," he said dramatically. "Freshly caught Cornish pixies."

   Seamus Finnigan couldn't control himself. He let out a snort of laughter that even Lockhart couldn't
mistake for a scream of terror.

    "Yes?" He smiled at Seamus.

    "Well, they're not -- they're not very -- dangerous , are they?" Seamus choked.

    "Don't be so sure!" said Lockhart, waggling a finger annoyingly at Seamus. "Devilish tricky little
blighters they can be!"

    The pixies were electric blue and about eight inches high, with pointed faces and voices so shrill it
was like listening to a lot of budgies arguing. The moment the cover had been removed, they had started
jabbering and rocketing around, rattling the bars and making bizarre faces at the people nearest them.

    "Right, then," Lockhart said loudly. "Let's see what you make of them!" And he opened the cage.

    It was pandemonium. The pixies shot in every direction like rockets. Two of them seized Neville by
the ears and lifted him into the air. Several shot straight through the window, showering the back row
with broken glass. The rest proceeded to wreck the classroom more effectively than a rampaging rhino.
They grabbed ink bottles and sprayed the class with them, shredded books and papers, tore pictures
from the walls, up-ended the waste basket, grabbed bags and books and threw them out of the smashed
window; within minutes, half the class was sheltering under desks and Neville was swinging from the iron
chandelier in the ceiling.

    "Come on now -- round them up, round them up, they're only pixies," Lockhart shouted.

    He rolled up his sleeves, brandished his wand, and bellowed, " Peskipiksi Pesternomi!"

    It had absolutely no effect; one of the pixies seized his wand and threw it out of the window, too.
Lockhart gulped and dived under his own desk, narrowly avoiding being squashed by Neville, who fell a
second later as the chandelier gave way.

     The bell rang and there was a mad rush toward the exit. In the relative calm that followed, Lockhart
straightened up, caught sight of Harry, Ron, and Hermione, who were almost at the door, and said,
"Well, I'll ask you three to just nip the rest of them back into their cage." He swept past them and shut
the door quickly behind him.

    "Can you believe him?" roared Ron as one of the remaining pixies bit him painfully on the ear.

   "He just wants to give us some hands-on experience," said Hermione, immobilizing two pixies at
once with a clever Freezing Charm and stuffing them back into their cage.




                                                                                                            Page 59
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




   " Hands on? "said Harry, who was trying to grab a pixie dancing out of reach with its tongue out.
"Hermione, he didn't have a clue what he was doing --"

    "Rubbish," said Hermione. "You've read his books -- look at all those amazing things he's done --"

    "He says he's done," Ron muttered.




                                           CHAPTER SEVEN



MUDBLOODS AND MURMURS



 Harry spent a lot of time over the next few days dodging out of sight whenever he saw Gilderoy
Lockhart coming down a corridor. Harder to avoid was Colin Creevey, who seemed to have memorized
Harry's schedule. Nothing seemed to give Colin a bigger thrill than to say, "All right, Harry?" six or seven
times a day and hear, "Hello, Colin," back, however exasperated Harry sounded when he said it.

    Hedwig was still angry with Harry about the disastrous car journey and Ron's wand was still
malfunctioning, surpassing itself on Friday morning by shooting out of Ron's hand in Charms and hitting
tiny old Professor Flitwick squarely between the eyes, creating a large, throbbing green boil where it had
struck. So with one thing and another, Harry was quite glad to reach the weekend. He, Ron, and
Hermione were planning to visit Hagrid on Saturday morning. Harry, however, was shaken awake
several hours earlier than he would have liked by Oliver Wood, Captain of the Gryffindor Quidditch
team.

    "Whassamatter?" said Harry groggily.

    "Quidditch practice!" said Wood. "Come on!"

    Harry squinted at the window. There was a thin mist hanging across the pink-and-gold sky. Now that
he was awake, he couldn't understand how he could have slept through the racket the birds were
making.

    "Oliver," Harry croaked. "It's the crack of dawn."

    "Exactly," said Wood. He was a tall and burly sixth year and, at the moment, his eyes were gleaming
with a crazed enthusiasm. "It's part of our new training program. Come on, grab your broom, and let's
go," said Wood heartily. "None of the other teams have started training yet; we're going to be first off the
mark this year --"

    Yawning and shivering slightly, Harry climbed out of bed and tried to find his Quidditch robes.

    "Good man," said Wood. "Meet you on the field in fifteen minutes."


                                                                                                               Page 60
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    When he'd found his scarlet team robes and pulled on his cloak for warmth, Harry scribbled a note
to Ron explaining where he'd gone and went down the spiral staircase to the common room, his Nimbus
Two Thousand on his shoulder. He had just reached the portrait hole when there was a clatter behind
him and Colin Creevey came dashing down the spiral staircase, his camera swinging madly around his
neck and something clutched in his hand.

   "I heard someone saying your name on the stairs, Harry! Look what I've got here! I've had it
developed, I wanted to show you --"

    Harry looked bemusedly at the photograph Colin was brandishing under his nose.

    A moving, black-and-white Lockhart was tugging hard on an arm Harry recognized as his own. He
was pleased to see that his photographic self was putting up a good fight and refusing to be dragged into
view. As Harry watched, Lockhart gave up and slumped, Panting, against the white edge of the picture.

    "Will you sign it?" said Colin eagerly.

    "No," said Harry flatly, glancing around to check that the room was really deserted. "Sorry, Colin,
I'm in a hurry -- Quidditch practice --"

    He climbed through the portrait hole.

    "Oh, wow! Wait for me! I've never watched a Quidditch game before!"

    Colin scrambled through the hole after him.

    "It'll be really boring," Harry said quickly, but Colin ignored him, his face shining with excitement.

    "You were the youngest House player in a hundred years, weren't you, Harry? Weren't you?" said
Colin, trotting alongside him. "You must be brilliant. I've never flown. Is it easy? Is that your own
broom? Is that the best one there is?"

    Harry didn't know how to get rid of him. It was like having an extremely talkative shadow.

     "I don't really understand Quidditch," said Colin breathlessly. "Is it true there are four balls? And two
of them fly around trying to knock people off their brooms?"

    "Yes," said Harry heavily, resigned to explaining the complicated rules of Quidditch. "They're called
Bludgers. There are two Beaters on each team who carry clubs to beat the Bludgers away from their
side. Fred and George Weasley are the Gryffindor Beaters."

    "And what are the other balls for?" Colin asked, tripping down a couple of steps because he was
gazing open-mouthed at Harry.

    "Well, the Quaffle -- that's the biggish red one -- is the one that scores goals. Three Chasers on
each team throw the Quaffle to each other and try and get it through the goal posts at the end of the pitch
-- they're three long poles with hoops on the end."

    "And the fourth ball --"




                                                                                                                 Page 61
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




   "-- is the Golden Snitch," said Harry, "and it's very small, very fast, and difficult to catch. But that's
what the Seeker's got to do, because a game of Quidditch doesn't end until the Snitch has been caught.
And whichever team's Seeker gets the Snitch earns his team an extra hundred and fifty points."

    "And you're the Gryffindor Seeker, aren't you?" said Colin in awe.

   "Yes," said Harry as they left the castle and started across the dew-drenched grass. "And there's the
Keeper, too. He guards the goal posts. That's it, really."

    But Colin didn't stop questioning Harry all the way down the sloping lawns to the Quidditch field,
and Harry only shook him off when he reached the changing rooms; Colin called after him in a piping
voice, "I'll go and get a good seat, Harry!" and hurried off to the stands.

    The rest of the Gryffindor team were already in the changing room. Wood was the only person who
looked truly awake. Fred and George Weasley were sitting, puffy-eyed and touslehaired, next to fourth
year Alicia Spinnet, who seemed to be nodding off against the wall behind her. Her fellow Chasers, Katie
Bell and Angelina Johnson, were yawning side by side opposite them.

    "There you are, Harry, what kept you?" said Wood briskly."Now, I wanted a quick talk with you all
before we actually get onto the field, because I spent the summer devising a whole new training program,
which I really think will make all the difference...."

   Wood was holding up a large diagram of a Quidditch field, on which were drawn many lines, arrows,
and crosses in different colored inks. He took out his wand, tapped the board, and the arrows began to
wiggle over the diagram like caterpillars. As Wood launched into a speech about his new tactics, Fred
Weasley's head drooped right onto Alicia Spinnet's shoulder and he began to snore.

    The first board took nearly twenty minutes to explain, but there was another board under that, and a
third under that one. Harry sank into a stupor as Wood droned on and on.

    "So," said Wood, at long last, jerking Harry from a wistful fantasy about what he could be eating for
breakfast at this very moment up at the castle. "Is that clear? Any questions?"

    "I've got a question, Oliver," said George, who had woken with a start. "Why couldn't you have told
us all this yesterday when we were awake?"

    Wood wasn't pleased.

     "Now, listen here, you lot," he said, glowering at them all. "We should have won the Quidditch cup
last year. We're easily the best team. But unfortunately -- owing to circumstances beyond our control
--"

    Harry shifted guiltily in his seat. He had been unconscious in the hospital wing for the final match of
the previous year, meaning that Gryffindor had been a player short and had suffered their worst defeat in
three hundred years.

    Wood took a moment to regain control of himself. Their last defeat was clearly still torturing him.

     "So this year, we train harder than ever before....Okay, let's go and put our new theories into
practice!" Wood shouted, seizing his broomstick and leading the way out of the locker rooms.
Stiff-legged and still yawning, his team followed.


                                                                                                                Page 62
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




     They had been in the locker room so long that the sun was up completely now, although remnants of
mist hung over the grass in the stadium. As Harry walked onto the field, he saw Ron and Hermione sitting
in the stands.

    "Aren't you finished yet?" called Ron incredulously.

    "Haven't even started," said Harry, looking jealously at the toast and marmalade Ron and Hermione
had brought out of the Great Hall. "Wood's been teaching us new moves."

    He mounted his broomstick and kicked at the ground, soaring up into the air. The cool morning air
whipped his face, waking him far more effectively than Wood's long talk. It felt wonderful to be back on
the Quidditch field. He soared right around the stadium at full speed, racing Fred and George.

    "What's that funny clicking noise?" called Fred as they hurtled around the corner.

    Harry looked into the stands. Colin was sitting in one of the highest seats, his camera raised, taking
picture after picture, the sound strangely magnified in the deserted stadium.

    "Look this way, Harry! This way!" he cried shrilly.

    "Who's that?" said Fred.

    "No idea," Harry lied, putting on a spurt of speed that took him as far away as possible from Colin.

     "What's going on?" said Wood, frowning, as he skimmed through the air toward them. "Why's that
first year taking pictures? I don't like it. He could be a Slytherin spy, trying to find out about our new
training program."

    "He's in Gryffindor," said Harry quickly.

    "And the Slytherins don't need a spy, Oliver," said George.

    "What makes you say that?" said Wood testily.

    "Because they're here in person," said George, pointing.

    Several people in green robes were walking onto the field, broomsticks in their hands.

    "I don't believe it!" Wood hissed in outrage. "I booked the field for today! We'll see about this!"

    Wood shot toward the ground, landing rather harder than he meant to in his anger, staggering slightly
as he dismounted. Harry, Fred, and George followed.

   "Flint!" Wood bellowed at the Slytherin Captain. "This is our practice time! We got up specially!
You can clear off now!"

    Marcus Flint was even larger than Wood. He had a look of trollish cunning on his face as he replied,
"Plenty of room for all of us, Wood."

    Angelina, Alicia, and Katie had come over, too. There were no girls on the Slytherin team, who


                                                                                                             Page 63
When you have children you need to provide them with love, education and attention. Some parents find it hard to provide all of these to their kids but it is actually much easier than you may think. Usually a toy can provide all of these aspects for a child so it is important to find the right toys and the right games to play with your children.
Toddlers are at their most curious stage. Hence, this is the time that parents should teach their toddlers in a fun and playful way. Aside from toys, toddlers can experience both fun and learning through Fisher-Price toddler games. These games are guaranteed educational yet the approach is in a play format to keep the toddlers' interests. These games are easily accessible via the official website of Fisher-Price. Read on and check some of these games and what they can provide to your children.
The ABC's Zoo - this game teaches the ABC song as it shows the alphabet letters. It helps in the development of letter and sound recognition. It also teaches word recognition, syllables and word parts.
Animal Sounds - this is a fun game where toddlers can match different animals with their corresponding animal sounds. It clearly teaches young kids to recognize different animals.
Count the Score - this is also a fun game that uses animals as part of teaching toddlers on counting and number recognition. In this game, animals score points and counting is introduced.
These are just some of the Fisher-Price toddler games that your young ones will surely enjoy. So many games are still featured on Fisher-Price website. They have games on recognition of different colors, shapes, and sounds. There are also downloadable coloring sheets which can keep your toddlers hands busy.

Fisher-Price toddler games are the most suitable games for your little ones. Unlike other games that carry repetitive images, noisy sounds and bright images, Fisher-Price games are appealing and calming to the toddlers' eyes and ear. It is in a simple format. Hence, toddlers will be able to manage playing these games online.
You can see that there are a lot of games that you can play with your child, many of these games are great because they will help your toddler or child learn more. It is very important for you as a parent to play these types of games with your kid. If you neglect your child everyone knows that they will not develop to their fullest potential. In order to ensure your child learns the most they can you can play toddler games.
If you are shopping for educational toys consider looking for fisher price coupons first, fisher price coupons will help you save money when you are purchasing toys for your children to play with. When you buy toys you are helping engage your children but we all know how much they can cost. This is why I always look online for fisher price coupons before I go shopping, I have shared the links below to my favourite page to check for coupons for diapers, toys and more.