    "And you...you didn't come from the Chamber of Secrets?" said Harry, who could feel cold sweat
on his forehead.

    "I!" said Aragog, clicking angrily. "I was not born in the castle. I come from a distant land. A traveler
gave me to Hagrid when I was an egg. Hagrid was only a boy, but he cared for me, hidden in a
cupboard in the castle, feeding me on scraps from the table. Hagrid is my good friend, and a good man.
When I was discovered, and blamed for the death of a girl, he protected me. I have lived here in the
forest ever since, where Hagrid still visits me. He even found me a wife, Mosag, and you see how our
family has grown, all through Hagrid's goodness...."

    Harry summoned what remained of his courage.

    "So you never -- never attacked anyone?"

    "Never," croaked the old spider. "It would have been my instinct, but out of respect for Hagrid, I
never harmed a human. The body of the girl who was killed was discovered in a bathroom. I never saw
any part of the castle but the cupboard in which I grew up. Our kind like the dark and the quiet...."

    "But then...Do you know what did kill that girl?" said Harry. "Because whatever it is, it's back and
attacking people again --"

    His words were drowned by a loud outbreak of clicking and the rustling of many long legs shifting
angrily; large black shapes shifted all around him.

    "The thing that lives in the castle," said Aragog, "is an ancient creature we spiders fear above all
others. Well do I remember how I pleaded with Hagrid to let me go, when I sensed the beast moving
about the school."

    "What is it?" said Harry urgently.

    More loud clicking, more rustling; the spiders seemed to be closing in.

   "We do not speak of it!" said Aragog fiercely. "We do not name it! I never even told Hagrid the
name of that dread creature, though he asked me, many times."

    Harry didn't want to press the subject, not with the spiders pressing closer on all sides. Aragog
seemed to be tired of talking. He was backing slowly into his domed web, but his fellow spiders
continued to inch slowly toward Harry and Ron.

    "We'll just go, then," Harry called desperately to Aragog, hearing leaves rustling behind him.

    "Go?" said Aragog slowly. "I think not..."

    "But -- but --"

   "My sons and daughters do not harm Hagrid, on my command. But I cannot deny them fresh meat,
when it wanders so willingly into our midst. Good-bye, friend of Hagrid."

    Harry spun around. Feet away, towering above him, was a solid wall of spiders, clicking, their many


                                                                                                                Page 160
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




eyes gleaming in their ugly black heads.

    Even as he reached for his wand, Harry knew it was no good, there were too many of them, but as
he tried to stand, ready to die fighting, a loud, long note sounded, and a blaze of light flamed through the
hollow.

    Mr. Weasley's car was thundering down the slope, headlights glaring, its horn screeching, knocking
spiders aside; several were thrown onto their backs, their endless legs waving in the air. The car
screeched to a halt in front of Harry and Ron and the doors flew open.

    "Get Fang!" Harry yelled, diving into the front seat; Ron seized the boarhound around the middle and
threw him, yelping, into the back of the car -- the doors slammed shut -- Ron didn't touch the
accelerator but the car didn't need him; the engine roared and they were off, hitting more spiders. They
sped up the slope, out of the hollow, and they were soon crashing through the forest, branches whipping
the windows as the car wound its way cleverly through the widest gaps, following a path it obviously
knew.

   Harry looked sideways at Ron. His mouth was still open in the silent scream, but his eyes weren't
popping anymore.

    "Are you okay?"

    Ron stared straight ahead, unable to speak.

    They smashed their way through the undergrowth, Fang howling loudly in the back seat, and Harry
saw the side mirror snap off as they squeezed past a large oak. After ten noisy, rocky minutes, the trees
thinned, and Harry could again see patches of sky.

   The car stopped so suddenly that they were nearly thrown into the windshield. They had reached the
edge of the forest. Fang flung himself at the window in his anxiety to get out, and when Harry opened the
door, he shot off through the trees to Hagrid's house, tail between his legs. Harry got out too, and after a
minute or so, Ron seemed to regain the feeling in his limbs and followed, still stiff-necked and staring.
Harry gave the car a grateful pat as it reversed back into the forest and disappeared from view.

    Harry went back into Hagrid's cabin to get the Invisibility Cloak. Fang was trembling under a blanket
in his basket. When Harry got outside again, he found Ron being violent sick in the pumpkin patch.

   "Follow the spiders," said Ron weakly, wiping his mouth on his sleeve. "I'll never forgive Hagrid.
We're lucky to be alive."

    "I bet he thought Aragog wouldn't hurt friends of his," said Harry.

    "That's exactly Hagrid's problem!" said Ron, thumping the wall of the cabin. "He always thinks
monsters aren't as bad as they're made out, and look where it's got him! A cell in Azkaban!" He was
shivering uncontrollably now. "What was the point of sending us in there? What have we found out, I'd
like to know?"

    "That Hagrid never opened the Chamber of Secrets," said Harry, throwing the cloak over Ron and
prodding him in the arm to make him walk. "He was innocent."

    Ron gave a loud snort. Evidently, hatching Aragog in a cupboard wasn't his idea of being innocent.


                                                                                                               Page 161
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




     As the castle loomed nearer Harry twitched the cloak to make sure their feet were hidden, then
pushed the creaking front doors ajar. They walked carefully back across the entrance hall and up the
marble staircase, holding their breath as they passed corridors where watchful sentries were walking. At
last they reached the safety of the Gryffindor common room, where the fire had burned itself into glowing
ash. They took off the cloak and climbed the winding stair to their dormitory.

     Ron fell onto his bed without bothering to get undressed. Harry, however, didn't feel very sleepy. He
sat on the edge of his fourposter, thinking hard about everything Aragog had said.

   The creature that was lurking somewhere in the castle, he thought, sounded like a sort of monster
Voldemort --even other monsters didn't want to name it. But he and Ron were no closer to finding out
what it was, or how it petrified its victims. Even Hagrid had never known what was in the Chamber of
Secrets.

     Harry swung his legs up onto his bed and leaned back against his pillows, watching the moon glinting
at him through the tower window.

      He couldn't see what else they could do. They had hit dead ends everywhere. Riddle had caught the
wrong person, the Heir of Slytherin had got off, and no one could tell whether it was the same person, or
a different one, who had opened the Chamber this time. There was nobody else to ask. Harry lay down,
still thinking about what Aragog had said.

   He was becoming drowsy when what seemed like their very last hope occurred to him, and he
suddenly sat bolt upright.

    "Ron," he hissed through the dark, "Ron --"

    Ron woke with a yelp like Fang's, stared wildly around, and saw Harry.

    "Ron -- that girl who died. Aragog said she was found in a bathroom," said Harry, ignoring Neville's
snuffling snores from the corner. "What if she never left the bathroom? What if she's still there?"

    Ron rubbed his eyes, frowning through the moonlight. And then he understood, too.

    "You don't think -- not Moaning Myrtle ?"




                                          CHAPTER SIXTEEN



THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS



    "All those times we were in that bathroom, and she was just three toilets away," said Ron bitterly at


                                                                                                             Page 162
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




breakfast next day, "and we could've asked her, and now..."

    It had been hard enough trying to look for spiders. Escaping their teachers long enough to sneak into
a girls' bathroom, the girls' bathroom, moreover, right next to the scene of the first attack, was going to
be almost impossible.

     But something happened in their first lesson, Transfiguration, that drove the Chamber of Secrets out
of their minds for the first time in weeks. Ten minutes into the class, Professor McGonagall told them that
their exams would start on the first of June, one week from today.

    " Exams?"howled Seamus Finnigan. "We're still getting exams?"

    There was a loud bang behind Harry as Neville Longbottom's wand slipped, vanishing one of the
legs on his desk.Professor McGonagall restored it with a wave of her own wand, and turned, frowning,
to Seamus.

    "The whole point of keeping the school open at this time is for you to receive your education," she
said sternly. "The exams will therefore take place as usual, and I trust you are all studying hard."

   Studying hard! It had never occurred to Harry that there would be exams with the castle in this state.
There was a great deal of mutinous muttering around the room, which made Professor McGonagall
scowl even more darkly.

    "Professor Dumbledore's instructions were to keep the school running as normally as possible, she
said. "And that, I need hardly point out, means finding out how much you have learned this year."

    Harry looked down at the pair of white rabbits he was supposed to be turning into slippers. What
had he learned so far this year? He couldn't seem to think of anything that would be useful in an exam.

    Ron looked as though he'd just been told he had to go and live in the Forbidden Forest.

     "Can you imagine me taking exams with this?" he asked Harry, holding up his wand, which had just
started whistling loudly.



    Three days before their first exam, Professor McGonagall made another announcement at breakfast.

    "I have good news," she said, and the Great Hall, instead of falling silent, erupted.

    "Dumbledore's coming back!" several people yelled joyfully.

    "You've caught the Heir of Slytherin!" squealed a girl at the Ravenclaw table.

    "Quidditch matches are back on!" roared Wood excitedly.

    When the hubbub had subsided, Professor McGonagall said, "Professor Sprout has informed me
that the Mandrakes are ready for cutting at last. Tonight, we will be able to revive those people who have
been Petrified. I need hardly remind you all that one of them may well be able to tell us who, or what,
attacked them. I am hopeful that this dreadful year will end with our catching the culprit."




                                                                                                              Page 163
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    There was an explosion of cheering. Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and wasn't at all
surprised to see that Draco Malfoy hadn't joined in. Ron, however, was looking happier than he'd
looked in days.

    "It won't matter that we never asked Myrtle, then!" he said to Harry. "Hermione'll probably have all
the answers when they wake her up! Mind you, she'll go crazy when she finds out we've got exams in
three days' time. She hasn't studied. It might be kinder to leave her where she is till they're over."

   Just then, Ginny Weasley came over and sat down next to Ron. She looked tense and nervous, and
Harry noticed that her hands were twisting in her lap.

    "What's up?" said Ron, helping himself to more porridge.

    Ginny didn't say anything, but glanced up and down the Gryffindor table with a scared look on her
face that reminded Harry of someone, though he couldn't think who.

    "Spit it out," said Ron, watching her.

    Harry suddenly realized who Ginny looked like. She was rocking backward and forward slightly in
her chair, exactly like Dobby did when he was teetering on the edge of revealing forbidden information.

    "I've got to tell you something," Ginny mumbled, carefully not looking at Harry.

    "What is it?" said Harry.

    Ginny looked as though she couldn't find the right words.

    "What?"said Ron.

    Ginny opened her mouth, but no sound came out. Harry leaned forward and spoke quietly, so that
only Ginny and Ron could hear him.

    "Is it something about the Chamber of Secrets? Have you seen something? Someone acting oddly?"

   Ginny drew a deep breath and, at that precise moment, Percy Weasley appeared, looking tired and
wan.

    "If you've finished eating, I'll take that seat, Ginny. I'm starving, I've only just come off patrol duty."

   Ginny jumped up as though her chair had just been electrified, gave Percy a fleeting, frightened look,
and scampered away. Percy sat down and grabbed a mug from the center of the table.

    "Percy!" said Ron angrily. "She was just about to tell us something important!"

    Halfway through a gulp of tea, Percy choked.

    "What sort of thing?" he said, coughing.

    "I just asked her if she'd seen anything odd, and she started to say

    "Oh -- that -- that's nothing to do with the Chamber of Secrets," said Percy at once.


                                                                                                                  Page 164
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




      "How do you know?" said Ron, his eyebrows raised.

   "Well, er, if you must know, Ginny, er, walked in on me the other day when I was -- well, never
mind -- the point is, she spotted me doing something and I, um, I asked her not to mention it to
anybody. I must say, I did think she'd keep her word. It's nothing, really, I'd just rather --"

      Harry had never seen Percy look so uncomfortable.

      "What were you doing, Percy?" said Ron, grinning. "Go on, tell us, we won't laugh."

      Percy didn't smile back.

      "Pass me those rolls, Harry, I'm starving."



Harry knew the whole mystery might be solved tomorrow without their help, but he wasn't about to
pass up a chance to speak to Myrtle if it turned up -- and to his delight it did, midmorning, when they
were being led to History of Magic by Gilderoy Lockhart.

    Lockhart, who had so often assured them that all danger had passed, only to be proved wrong right
away, was now wholeheartedly convinced that it was hardly worth the trouble to see them safely down
the corridors. His hair wasn't as sleek as usual; it seemed he had been up most of the night, patrolling the
fourth floor.

     "Mark my words," he said, ushering them around a corner. "The first words out of those poor
Petrified people's mouths will be ` It was Hagrid.' Frankly, I'm astounded Professor McGonagall thinks
all these security measures are necessary."

      "I agree, sir," said Harry, making Ron drop his books in surprise.

    "Thank you, Harry, said Lockhart graciously while they waited for a long line of Hufflepuffs to pass.
"I mean, we teachers have quite enough to be getting on with, without walking students to classes and
standing guard all night...."

    "That's right," said Ron, catching on. "Why don't you leave us here, sir, we've only got one more
corridor to go --"

      "You know, Weasley, I think I will," said Lockhart. "I really should go and prepare my next class
--"

      And he hurried off.

      "Prepare his class," Ron sneered after him. "Gone to curl his hair, more like."

     They let the rest of the Gryffindors draw ahead of them, then darted down a side passage and hurried
off toward Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. But just as they were congratulating each other on their brilliant
scheme.

      "Potter! Weasley! What are you doing?"


                                                                                                               Page 165
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    It was Professor McGonagall, and her mouth was the thinnest of thin lines.

    "We were -- we were --" Ron stammered. "We were going to -- to go and see --"

    "Hermione," said Harry. Ron and Professor McGonagall both looked at him.

     "We haven't seen her for ages, Professor," Harry went on hurriedly, treading on Ron's foot, "and we
thought we'd sneak into the hospital wing, you know, and tell her the Mandrakes are nearly ready and,
er, not to worry --"

   Professor McGonagall was still staring at him, and for a moment, Harry thought she was going to
explode, but when she spoke, it was in a strangely croaky voice.

    "Of course," she said, and Harry, amazed, saw a tear glistening in her beady eye. "Of course, I
realize this has all been hardest on the friends of those who have been...I quite understand. Yes, Potter,
of course you may visit Miss Granger. I will inform Professor Binns where you've gone. Tell Madam
Pomfrey I have given my permission."

    Harry and Ron walked away, hardly daring to believe that they'd avoided detention. As they turned
the corner, they distinctly heard Professor McGonagall blow her nose.

    "That," said Ron fervently, "was the best story you've ever come up with."

    They had no choice now but to go to the hospital wing and tell Madam Pomfrey that they had
Professor McGonagall's permission to visit Hermione.

    Madam Pomfrey let them in, but reluctantly.

    "There's just no point talking to a Petrified. person," she said, and they had to admit she had a point
when they'd taken their seats next to Hermione. It was plain that Hermione didn't have the faintest inkling
that she had visitors, and that they might just as well tell her bedside cabinet not to worry for all the good
it would do.

   "Wonder if she did see the attacker, though?" said Ron, looking sadly at Hermione's rigid face.
"Because if he sneaked up on them all, no one'll ever know..."

    But Harry wasn't looking at Hermione's face. He was more interested in her right hand. It lay
clenched on top of her blankets, and bending closer, he saw that a piece of paper was scrunched inside
her fist.

    Making sure that Madam Pomfrey was nowhere near, he pointed this out to Ron.

   "Go on and get it out," Ron whispered, shifting his chair so that he blocked Harry from Madam
Pomfrey's view.

    It was no easy task. Hermione's hand was clamped so tightly around the paper that Harry was sure
he was going to tear it. While Ron kept watch he tugged and twisted, and at last, after several tense
minutes, the paper came free.

    It was a page torn from a very old library book. Harry smoothed it out eagerly and Ron leaned close


                                                                                                                 Page 166
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




to read it, too.



 "Of the many fearsome beasts and monsters that roam our land, there is none more curious or more
deadly than the Basilisk, known also as the King of Serpents. This snake, which may reach gigantic size
and live many hundreds of years, is born from a chicken's egg, hatched beneath a toad. Its methods of
killing are most wondrous, for aside from its deadly and venomous fangs, the Basilisk has a murderous
stare, and all who are fixed with the beam of its eye shall suffer instant death. Spiders flee before the
Basilisk, for it is their mortal enemy, and the Basilisk flees only from the crowing of the rooster, which is
fatal to it."



And beneath this, a single word had been written, in a hand Harry recognized as Hermione's. Pipes .

    It was as though somebody had just flicked a light on in his brain.

     "Ron," he breathed. "This is it. This is the answer. The monster in the Chamber's a basilisk -- a
giant serpent! That's why I've been hearing that voice all over the place, and nobody else has heard it.
It's because I understand Parseltongue...."

    Harry looked up at the beds around him.

     "The basilisk kills people by looking at them. But no one's died -- because no one looked it straight
in the eye. Colin saw it through his camera. The basilisk burned up all the film inside it, but Colin just got
Petrified. Justin... Justin must've seen the basilisk through Nearly Headless Nick! Nick got the full blast
of it, but he couldn't die again.. and Hermione and that Ravenclaw prefect were found with a mirror next
to them. Hermione had just realized the monster was a basilisk. I bet you anything she warned the first
person she met to look around corners with a mirror first! And that girl pulled out her mirror -- and --"

    Rods jaw had dropped.

    "And Mrs. Norris?" he whispered eagerly.

    Harry thought hard, picturing the scene on the night of Halloween.

    "The water..." he said slowly. "The flood from Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. I bet you Mrs. Norris
only saw the reflection..."

    He scanned the page in his hand eagerly. The more he looked at it, the more it made sense.

    " ...The crowing of the rooster...is fatal to it"!he read aloud. "Hagrid's roosters were killed! The
Heir of Slytherin didn't want one anywhere near the castle once the Chamber was opened! Spiders flee
before it.! It all fits!"

   "But how's the basilisk been getting around the place?" said Ron. "A giant snake...Someone
would've seen..."

    Harry, however, pointed at the word Hermione had scribbled at the foot of the page.




                                                                                                                 Page 167
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Pipes," he said. "Pipes...Ron, it's been using the plumbing. I've been hearing that voice inside the
walls..."

      Ron suddenly grabbed Harry's arm.

      "The entrance to the Chamber of Secrets!" he said hoarsely. "What if it's a bathroom? What if it's in
--"

      "Moaning Myrtle's bathroom,"said Harry.

      They sat there, excitement coursing through them, hardly able to believe it.

    "This means," said Harry, "I can't be the only Parselmouth in the school. The Heir of Slytherin's one,
too. That's how he's been controlling the basilisk."

  "What're we going to do?" said Ron, whose eyes were flashing. "Should we go straight to
McGonagall?"

    "Let's go to the staff room," said Harry, jumping up. "She'll be there in ten minutes. It's nearly
break."

     They ran downstairs. Not wanting to be discovered hanging around in another corridor, they went
straight into the deserted staff room. It was a large, paneled room full of dark, wooden chairs. Harry and
Ron paced around it, too excited to sit down.

      But the bell to signal break never came.

      Instead, echoing through the corridors came Professor McGonagall's voice, magically magnified.

   "All students to return to their House dormitories at once. All teachers return to the staff room.
Immediately, please."

      Harry wheeled around to stare at Ron. "Not another attack? Not now?"

     "What'll we do?" said Ron, aghast. "Go back to the dormitory?" "No," said Harry, glancing around.
There was an ugly sort of wardrobe to his left, full of the teachers' cloaks. "In here. Let's hear what it's
all about. Then we can tell them what we've found out."

    They hid themselves inside it, listening to the rumbling of hundreds of people moving overhead, and
the staff room door banging open. From between the musty folds of the cloaks, they watched the
teachers filtering into the room. Some of them were looking puzzled, others downright scared. Then
Professor McGonagall arrived.

    "It has happened," she told the silent staff room. "A student has been taken by the monster. Right
into the Chamber itself."

    Professor Flitwick let out a squeal. Professor Sprout clapped her hands over her mouth. Snape
gripped the back of a chair very hard and said, "How can you be sure?"

   "The Heir of Slytherin," said Professor McGonagall, who was very white, "left another message.
Right underneath the first one. `Her skeleton will lie in the Chamber forever.' "


                                                                                                               Page 168
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Professor Flitwick burst into tears.

    "Who is it?" said Madam Hooch, who had sunk, weak-kneed, into a chair. "Which student?"

    "Ginny Weasley," said Professor McGonagall.

    Harry felt Ron slide silently down onto the wardrobe floor beside him.

    "We shall have to send all the students home tomorrow," said Professor McGonagall. "This is the
end of Hogwarts. Dumbledore always said..."

  The staffroom door banged open again. For one wild moment, Harry was sure it would be
Dumbledore. But it was Lockhart, and he was beaming.

    "So sorry -- dozed off -- what have I missed?"

    He didn't seem to notice that the other teachers were looking at him with something remarkably like
hatred. Snape stepped forward.

    "Just the man," he said. "The very man. A girl has been snatched by the monster, Lockhart. Taken
into the Chamber of Secrets itself. Your moment has come at last."

    Lockhart blanched.

   "That's right, Gilderoy," chipped in Professor Sprout. "Weren't you saying just last night that you've
known all along where the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets is?"

    "I -- well, I --"sputtered Lockhart.

    "Yes, didn't you tell me you were sure you knew what was inside it?" piped up Professor Flitwick.

    "D-did I? I don't recall --"

   "I certainly remember you saying you were sorry you hadn't had a crack at the monster before
Hagrid was arrested," said Snape. "Didn't you say that the whole affair had been bungled, and that you
should have been given a free rein from the first?"

    Lockhart stared around at his stony-faced colleagues.

    "I -- I really never -- you may have misunderstood --"

    "We'll leave it to you, then, Gilderoy," said Professor McGonagall. "Tonight will be an excellent time
to do it. We'll make sure everyone's out of your way. You'll be able to tackle the monster all by youself.
A free rein at last."

   Lockhart gazed desperately around him, but nobody came to the rescue. He didn't look remotely
handsome anymore. His lip was trembling, and in the absence of his usually toothy grin, he looked
weak-chinned and feeble.

    "V-very well," he said. "I'll -- I'll be in my office, getting -- getting ready."


                                                                                                             Page 169
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    And he left the room.

    "Right," said Professor McGonagall, whose nostrils were flared, "that's got him out from under our
feet. The Heads of Houses should go and inform their students what has happened. Tell them the
Hogwarts Express will take them home first thing tomorrow. Will the rest of you please make sure no
students have been left outside their dormitories."

    The teachers rose and left, one by one.



 It was probably the worst day of Harry's entire life. He, Ron, Fred, and George sat together in a corner
of the Gryffindor common room, unable to say anything to each other. Percy wasn't there. He had gone
to send an owl to Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, then shut himself up in his dormitory.

    No afternoon ever lasted as long as that one, nor had Gryffindor Tower ever been so crowded, yet
so quiet. Near sunset, Fred and George went up to bed, unable to sit there any longer.

    "She knew something, Harry," said Ron, speaking for the first time since they had entered the
wardrobe in the staff room. "That's why she was taken. It wasn't some stupid thing about Percy at all.,
She'd found out something about the Chamber of Secrets. That must be why she was --" Ron rubbed
his eyes frantically. "I mean, she was a pure-blood. There can't be any other reason."

    Harry could see the sun sinking, blood-red, below the skyline. This was the worst he had ever felt. If
only there was something they could do. Anything.

    "Harry" said Ron. "D'you think there's any chance at all she's not -- you know --"

    Harry didn't know what to say. He couldn't see how Ginny could still be alive.

    "D'you know what?" said Ron. "I think we should go and see Lockhart. Tell him what we know.
He's going to try and get into the Chamber. We can tell him where we think it is, and tell him it's a
basilisk in there."

    Because Harry couldn't think of anything else to do, and because he wanted to be doing something,
he agreed. The Gryffindors around them were so miserable, and felt so sorry for the Weasleys, that
nobody tried to stop them as they got up, crossed the room, and left through the portrait hole.

    Darkness was falling as they walked down to Lockhart's office. There seemed to be a lot of activity
going on inside it. They could hear scraping, thumps, and hurried footsteps.

    Harry knocked and there was a sudden silence from inside. Then the door opened the tiniest crack
and they saw one of Lockhart's eyes peering through it.

    "Oh -- Mr. Potter -- Mr. Weasley --" he said, opening the door a bit wider. "I'm rather busy at
the moment --if you would be quick --"

    "Professor, we've got some information for you," said Harry. "We think it'll help you."

    "Er -- well -- it's not terribly --" The side of Lockhart's face that they could see looked very


                                                                                                             Page 170
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




uncomfortable. "I mean -- well -- all right --"

    He opened the door and they entered.

    His office had been almost completely stripped. Two large trunks stood open on the floor. Robes,
jade-green, lilac, midnight blue, had been hastily folded into one of them; books were jumbled untidily
into the other. The photographs that had covered the walls were now crammed into boxes on the desk.

    "Are you going somewhere?" said Harry.

   "Er, well, yes," said Lockhart, ripping a life-size poster of himself from the back of the door as he
spoke and starting to roll it up. "Urgent call -- unavoidable -- got to go --"

    "What about my sister?" said Ron jerkily.

   "Well, as to that -- most unfortunate --" said Lockhart, avoiding their eyes as he wrenched open a
drawer and started emptying the contents into a bag. "No one regrets more than I --"

    "You're the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher!" said Harry. "You can't go now! Not with all
the Dark stuff going on here!"

    "Well -- I must say -- when I took the job --" Lockhart muttered, now piling socks on top of his
robes. "nothing in the job description -- didn't expect --"

   "You mean you're running away ?" said Harry disbelievingly. "After all that stuff you did in your
books --"

    "Books can be misleading," said Lockhart delicately.

    "You wrote them!" Harry shouted.

     "My dear boy," said Lockhart, straightening up and frowning at Harry. "Do use your common sense.
My books wouldn't have sold half as well if people didn't think I'd done all those things. No one wants
to read about some ugly old Armenian warlock, even if he did save a village from werewolves. He'd
look dreadful on the front cover. No dress sense at all. And the witch who banished the Bandon Banshee
had a harelip. I mean, come on --"

    "So you've just been taking credit for what a load of other people have done?" said Harry
incredulously.

    "Harry, Harry," said Lockhart, shaking his head impatiently, "it's not nearly as simple as that. There
was work involved. I had to track these people down. Ask them exactly how they managed to do what
they did. Then I had to put a Memory Charm on them so they wouldn't remember doing it. If there's one
thing I pride myself on, it's my Memory Charms. No, it's been a lot of work, Harry. It's not all book
signings and publicity photos, you know. You want fame, you have to be prepared for a long hard slog."

    He banged the lids of his trunks shut and locked them.

    "Let's see," he said. "I think that's everything. Yes. Only one thing left."

    He pulled out his wand and turned to them.


                                                                                                             Page 171
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Awfully sorry, boys, but I'll have to put a Memory Charm on you now. Can't have you blabbing my
secrets all over the place. I'd never sell another book --"

   Harry reached his wand just in time. Lockhart had barely raised his, when Harry bellowed, "
Expelliarmus!"

        Lockhart was blasted backward, falling over his trunk; his wand flew high into the air; Ron
caught it, and flung it out of the open window.

    "Shouldn't have let Professor Snape teach us that one," said Harry furiously, kicking Lockhart's
trunk aside. Lockhart was looking up at him, feeble once more. Harry was still pointing his wand at him.

     "What d'you want me to do?" said Lockhart weakly. "I don't know where the Chamber of Secrets
is. There's nothing I can do."

     "You're in luck," said Harry, forcing Lockhart to his feet at wandpoint. "We think we know where it
is. And what's inside it. Let's go."

    They marched Lockhart out of his office and down the nearest stairs, along the dark corridor where
the messages shone on the wall, to the door of Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.

    They sent Lockhart in first. Harry was pleased to see that he was shaking.

    Moaning Myrtle was sitting on the tank of the end toilet.

    "Oh, it's you," she said when she saw Harry. "What do you want this time?"

    "To ask you how you died," said Harry.

     Myrtle's whole aspect changed at once. She looked as though she had never been asked such a
flattering question.

    "Ooooh, it was dreadful," she said with relish. "It happened right in here. I died in this very stall. I
remember it so well. I'd hidden because Olive Hornby was teasing me about my glasses. The door was
locked, and I was crying, and then I heard somebody come in. They said something funny. A different
language, I think it must have been. Anyway, what really got me was that it was a boy speaking. So I
unlocked the door, to tell him to go and use his own toilet, and then --" Myrtle swelled importantly, her
face shining. "I died ."

    "How?" said Harry.

    "No idea," said Myrtle in hushed tones. "I just remember seeing a pair of great, big, yellow eyes. My
whole body sort of seized up, and then I was floating away...." She looked dreamily at Harry. "And then
I came back again. I was determined to haunt Olive Hornby, you see. Oh, she was sorry she'd ever
laughed at my glasses."

    "Where exactly did you see the eyes?" said Harry.

    "Somewhere there," said Myrtle, pointing vaguely toward the sink in front of her toilet.




                                                                                                               Page 172
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Harry and Ron hurried over to it. Lockhart was standing well back, a look of utter terror on his face.

    It looked like an ordinary sink. They examined every inch of it, inside and out, including the pipes
below. And then Harry saw it: Scratched on the side of one of the copper taps was a tiny snake.

    "That tap's never worked," said Myrtle brightly as he tried to turn it.

    "Harry," said Ron. "Say something. Something in Parseltongue."

    "But --" Harry thought hard. The only times he'd ever managed to speak Parseltongue were when
he'd been faced with a real snake. He stared hard at the tiny engraving, trying to imagine it was real.

    "Open up," he said.

    He looked at Ron, who shook his head.

    "English," he said.

   Harry looked back at the snake, willing himself to believe it was alive. If he moved his head, the
candlelight made it look as though it were moving.

    "Open up," he said.

    Except that the words weren't what he heard; a strange hissing had escaped him, and at once the tap
glowed with a brilliant white light and began to spin. Next second, the sink began to move; the sink, in
fact, sank, right out of sight, leaving a large pipe exposed, a pipe wide enough for a man to slide into.

    Harry heard Ron gasp and looked up again. He had made up his mind what he was going to do.

    "I'm going down there," he said.

    He couldn't not go, not now they had found the entrance to the Chamber, not if there was even the
faintest, slimmest, wildest chance that Ginny might be alive.

    "Me too," said Ron.

    There was a pause.

    "Well, you hardly seem to need me," said Lockhart, with a shadow of his old smile. "I'll just --"

    He put his hand on the door knob, but Ron and Harry both pointed their wands at him.

    "You can go first," Ron snarled.

    White-faced and wandless, Lockhart approached the opening.

    "Boys," he said, his voice feeble. "Boys, what good will it do?"

    Harry jabbed him in the back with his wand. Lockhart slid his legs into the pipe.

    "I really don't think --" he started to say, but Ron gave him a push, and he slid out of sight. Harry


                                                                                                             Page 173
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




followed quickly. He lowered himself slowly into the pipe, then let go.

    It was like rushing down an endless, slimy, dark slide. He could see more pipes branching off in all
directions, but none as large as theirs, which twisted and turned, sloping steeply downward, and he knew
that he was falling deeper below the school than even the dungeons. Behind him he could hear Ron,
thudding slightly at the curves.

    And then, just as he had begun to worry about what would happen when he hit the ground, the pipe
leveled out, and he shot out of the end with a wet thud, landing on the damp floor of a dark stone tunnel
large enough to stand in. Lockhart was getting to his feet a little ways away, covered in slime and white
as a ghost. Harry stood aside as Ron came whizzing out of the pipe, too.

    "We must be miles under the school," said Harry, his voice echoing in the black tunnel.

    "Under the lake, probably," said Ron, squinting around at the dark, slimy walls.

    All three of them turned to stare into the darkness ahead.

     " Lumos!" Harry muttered to his wand and it lit again. "C'mon," he said to Ron and Lockhart, and
off they went, their footsteps slapping loudly on the wet floor.

    The tunnel was so dark that they could only see a little distance ahead. Their shadows on the wet
walls looked monstrous in the wandlight.

   "Remember," Harry said quietly as they walked cautiously forward, "any sign of movement, close
your eyes right away...."

    But the tunnel was quiet as the grave, and the first unexpected sound they heard was a loud crunch
as Ron stepped on what turned out to be a rat's skull. Harry lowered his wand to look at the floor and
saw that it was littered with small animal bones. Trying very hard not to imagine what Ginny might look
like if they found her, Harry led the way forward, around a dark bend in the tunnel.

    "Harry -- there's something up there --" said Ron hoarsely, grabbing Harry's shoulder.

    They froze, watching. Harry could just see the outline of something huge and curved, lying right
across the tunnel. It wasn't moving.

   "Maybe it's asleep," he breathed, glancing back at the other two. Lockhart's hands were pressed
over his eyes. Harry turned back to look at the thing, his heart beating so fast it hurt.

    Very slowly, his eyes as narrow as he could make them and still see, Harry edged forward, his wand
held high.

     The light slid over a gigantic snake skin, of a vivid, poisonous green, lying curled and empty across
the tunnel floor. The creature that had shed it must have been twenty feet long at least.

    "Blimey," said Ron weakly.

    There was a sudden movement behind them. Gilderoy Lockhart's knees had given way.

    "Get up," said Ron sharply, pointing his wand at Lockhart.


                                                                                                             Page 174
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Lockhart got to his feet -- then he dived at Ron, knocking him to the ground.

   Harry jumped forward, but too late -- Lockhart was straightening up, panting, Ron's wand in his
hand and a gleaming smile back on his face.

   "The adventure ends here, boys!" he said. "I shall take a bit of this skin back up to the school, tell
them I was too late to save the girl, and that you two tragically lost your minds at the sight of her
mangled body -- say good-bye to your memories!"

    He raised Ron's Spellotaped wand high over his head and yelled , "Obliviate!"

     The wand exploded with the force of a small bomb. Harry flung his arms over his head and ran,
slipping over the coils of snake skin, out of the way of great chunks of tunnel ceiling that were thundering
to the floor. Next moment, he was standing alone, gazing at a solid wall of broken rock.

    "Ron!" he shouted. "Are you okay? Ron!"

    "I'm here!" came Ron's muffled voice from behind the rockfall. "I'm okay -- this git's not, though
-- he got blasted by the wand --"

    There was a dull thud and a loud "ow!" It sounded as though Ron had just kicked Lockhart in the
shins.

    "What now?" Ron's voice said, sounding desperate. "We can't get through -- it'll take ages...."

    Harry looked up at the tunnel ceiling. Huge cracks had appeared in it. He had never tried to break
apart anything as large as these rocks by magic, and now didn't seem a good moment to try -- what if
the whole tunnel caved in?

    There was another thud and another "ow!" from behind the rocks. They were wasting time. Ginny
had already been in the Chamber of Secrets for hours....Harry knew there was only one thing to do.

    "Wait there," he called to Ron. "Wait with Lockhart. I'll go on...If I'm not back in an hour..."

    There was a very pregnant pause, "I'll try and shift some of this rock," said Ron, who seemed to be
trying to keep his voice steady. "So you can -- can get back through. And, Harry --"

    "See you in a bit," said Harry, trying to inject some confidence into his shaking voice.

    And he set off alone past the giant snake skin.

    Soon the distant noise of Ron straining to shift the rocks was gone. The tunnel turned and turned
again. Every nerve in Harry's body was tingling unpleasantly. He wanted the tunnel to end, yet dreaded
what he'd find when it did. And then, at last, as he crept around yet another bend, he saw a solid wall
ahead on which two entwined serpents were carved, their eyes set with great, glinting emeralds.

    Harry approached, his throat very dry. There was no need to pretend these stone snakes were real;
their eyes looked strangely alive.

    He could guess what he had to do. He cleared his throat, and the emerald eyes seemed to flicker.


                                                                                                               Page 175
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Open,"said Harry, in a low, faint hiss.

    The serpents parted as the wall cracked open, the halves slid smoothly out of sight, and Harry,
shaking from head to foot, walked inside.




                                         CHAPTER SEVENTEEN



THE HEIR OF SLYTHERIN



 He was standing at the end of a very long, dimly lit chamber. Towering stone pillars entwined with more
carved serpents rose to support a ceiling lost in darkness, casting long, black shadows through the odd,
greenish gloom that filled the place. His heart beating very fast, Harry stood listening to the chill silence.
Could the basilisk be lurking in a shadowy corner, behind a pillar? And where was Ginny?

   He pulled out his wand and moved forward between the serpentine columns. Every careful footstep
echoed loudly off the shadowy walls. He kept his eyes narrowed, ready to clamp them shut at the
smallest sign of movement. The hollow eye sockets of the stone snakes seemed to be following him.
More than once, with a jolt of the stomach, he thought he saw one stir.

    Then, as he drew level with the last pair of pillars, a statue high as the Chamber itself loomed into
view, standing against the back wall.

    Harry had to crane his neck to look up into the giant face above: It was ancient and monkeyish, with
a long, thin beard that fell almost to the bottom of the wizard's sweeping stone robes, where two
enormous gray feet stood on the smooth Chamber floor. And between the feet, facedown, lay a small,
black-robed figure with flaming-red hair.

    "Ginny!" Harry muttered, sprinting to her and dropping to his knees. "Ginny -- don't be dead --
please don't be dead --" He flung his wand aside, grabbed Ginny's shoulders, and turned her over. Her
face was white as marble, and as cold, yet her eyes were closed, so she wasn't Petrified. But then she
must be...

    "Ginny, please wake up," Harry muttered desperately, shaking her. Ginny's head lolled hopelessly
from side to side.

    "She won't wake," said a soft voice.

    Harry jumped and spun around on his knees.

    A tall, black-haired boy was leaning against the nearest pillar, watching. He was strangely blurred
around the edges, as though Harry were looking at him through a misted window. But there was no


                                                                                                                 Page 176
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




mistaking him.

    "Tom -- Tom Riddle?"

    Riddle nodded, not taking his eyes off Harry's face.

    "What d'you mean, she won't wake?" Harry said desperately. "She's not -- she's not --?"

    "She's still alive," said Riddle. "But only just."

    Harry stared at him. Tom Riddle had been at Hogwarts fifty years ago, yet here he stood, a weird,
misty light shining about him, not a day older than sixteen.

    "Are you a ghost?" Harry said uncertainly.

    "A memory," said Riddle quietly. "Preserved in a diary for fifty years."

    He pointed toward the floor near the statue's giant toes. Lying open there was the little black diary
Harry had found in Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. For a second, Harry wondered how it had got there --
but there were more pressing matters to deal with.

    "You've got to help me, Tom," Harry said, raising Ginny's head again. "We've got to get her out of
here. There's a basilisk...I don't know where it is, but it could be along any moment...Please, help me."

    Riddle didn't move. Harry, sweating, managed to hoist Ginny half off the floor, and bent to pick up
his wand again.

    But his wand had gone.

    "Did you see --?"

    He looked up. Riddle was still watching him -- twirling Harry's wand between his long fingers.

    "Thanks," said Harry, stretching out his hand for it.

    A smile curled the corners of Riddle's mouth. He continued to stare at Harry, twirling the wand idly.

    "Listen," said Harry urgently, his knees sagging with Ginny's dead weight. "We've got to go! If the
basilisk comes --"

    "It won't come until it is called," said Riddle calmly.

    Harry lowered Ginny back onto the floor, unable to hold her up any longer.

    "What d'you mean?" he said. "Look, give me my wand, I might need it --"

    Riddle's smile broadened.

    "You won't be needing it," he said.

    Harry stared at him.


                                                                                                            Page 177
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "What d'you mean, I won't be --?"

    "I've waited a long time for this, Harry Potter," said Riddle. "For the chance to see you. To speak to
you."

    "Look," said Harry, losing patience, "I don't think you get it. We're in the Chamber of Secrets. We
can talk later --"

    "We're going to talk now," said Riddle, still smiling broadly, and he pocketed Harry's wand.

    Harry stared at him. There was something very funny going on here ....

    "How did Ginny get like this?" he asked slowly.

    "Well, that's an interesting question," said Riddle pleasantly. "And quite a long story. I suppose the
real reason Ginny Weasley's like this is because she opened her heart and spilled all her secrets to an
invisible stranger."

    "What are you talking about?" said Harry.

     "The diary," said Riddle. `My diary. Little Ginny's been writing in it for months and months, telling me
all her pitiful worries and woes -- how her brothers tease her, how she had to come to school with
secondhand robes and books, how --" Riddle's eyes glinted "-- how she didn't think famous, good,
great Harry Potter would ever like her..."

    All the time he spoke, Riddle's eyes never left Harry's face. There was an almost hungry look in
them.

    "It's very boring, having to listen to the silly little troubles of an eleven-year-old girl," he went on.
"But I was patient. I wrote back. I was sympathetic, I was kind. Ginny simply loved me. No one's ever
understood me like you,Tom ... I'm so glad I've got this diary to confide in ... It's like having a friend I
can carry around in my pocket ..."

   Riddle laughed, a high, cold laugh that didn't suit him. It made the hairs stand up on the back of
Harry's neck.

    "If I say it myself, Harry, I've always been able to charm the people I needed. So Ginny poured out
her soul to me, and her soul happened to be exactly what I wanted... I grew stronger and stronger on a
diet of her deepest fears, her darkest secrets. I grew powerful, far more powerful than little Miss
Weasley. Powerful enough to start feeding Miss Weasley a few of my secrets, to start pouring a little of
my soul back into her..."

    "What d'you mean?" said Harry, whose mouth had gone very dry.

    "Haven't you guessed yet, Harry Potter?" said Riddle softly. "Ginny Weasley opened the Chamber
of Secrets. She strangled the school roosters and daubed threatening messages on the walls. She set the
Serpent of Slytherin on four Mudbloods, and the Squib's cat."

    "No," Harry whispered.




                                                                                                                Page 178