"Rapunzel" (German pronunciation: /) is a German fairy tale in the collection assembled by the Brothers Grimm, and first published in 1812 as part of Children's and Household Tales.[1] The Grimm Brothers' story is an adaptation of the fairy tale Persinette by Charlotte-Rose de Caumont de La Force originally published in 1698.[2] Its plot has been used and parodied in various media and its best known line ("Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair") is an idiom of popular culture.
In the Aarne–Thompson classification system for folktales it is type 310, "The Maiden in The Tower".[3]
Andrew Lang included it in The Red Fairy Book.[4] Other versions of the tale also appear in A Book of Witches by Ruth Manning-Sanders and in Paul O. Zelinsky's 1998 Caldecott Medal-winning picture book, Rapunzel.
Rapunzel's story has striking similarities to the 10th century AD Persian tale of Rudaba, included in the epic poem Shahnameh by Ferdowsi. Rudaba offers to let down her hair from her tower so that her lover Zal can climb up to her.[5] Some elements of the fairy tale might also have originally been based upon the tale of Saint Barbara, who was said to have been locked in a tower by her father.[6]
Contents [hide]
1 Synopsis
2 Commentary
3 Variants
4 Rapunzel in music
5 Film adaptations
6 Name origin
7 See also
8 References
9 External links
[edit]Synopsis

A lonely couple that wants a child live next to a walled garden belonging to an enchantress. The wife, experiencing the cravings associated with the arrival of her long-awaited pregnancy, notices a rapunzel plant (or, in some versions[7] of the story, rampion radishes or lamb's lettuce) planted in the garden and longs for it, desperate to the point of death. On each of two nights, the husband breaks into the garden to gather some for her; on a third night, as he scales the wall to return home, the enchantress, "Dame Gothel," catches him and accuses him of theft. He begs for mercy, and the old woman agrees to be lenient, on condition that the then-unborn child be surrendered to her at birth. Desperate, the man agrees. When the baby girl is born, the enchantress takes the child to raise as her own, and names the baby Rapunzel. Rapunzel grows up to be the most beautiful child in the world with long golden hair. When Rapunzel reaches her twelfth year, the enchantress shuts her away in a tower in the middle of the woods, with neither stairs nor door, and only one room and one window. When the witch visits Rapunzel, she stands beneath the tower and calls out:
Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair, so that I may climb the golden stair.


Rapunzel in the fairy tale garden in Ludwigsburg, Germany
Upon hearing these words, Rapunzel would wrap her long, fair hair around a hook beside the window, dropping it down to the enchantress, who would then climb up the hair to Rapunzel's tower room. (A variation on the story also has the enchantress imbued with the power of flight and/or levitation and the young girl unaware of her hair's length.)
One day, a prince rides through the forest and hears Rapunzel singing from the tower. Entranced by her ethereal voice, he searches for the girl and discovers the tower, but is naturally unable to enter. He returns often, listening to her beautiful singing, and one day sees Dame Gothel visit, and thus learns how to gain access to Rapunzel. When Dame Gothel is gone, he bids Rapunzel let her hair down. When she does so, he climbs up, makes her acquaintance, and eventually asks her to marry him. Rapunzel agrees.
Together they plan a means of escape, wherein he will come each night (thus avoiding the enchantress who visited her by day), and bring her silk, which Rapunzel will gradually weave into a ladder. Before the plan can come to fruition, however, Rapunzel foolishly gives the prince away. In the first edition of Grimm's Fairy Tales, Rapunzel innocently says that her dress is getting tight around her belly (indicating pregnancy); in subsequent editions, she asks the witch (in a moment of forgetfulness) why it is easier for her to draw up the prince than her.[8] In anger, Dame Gothel cuts short Rapunzel's braided hair and casts her out into the wilderness to fend for herself. When the prince calls that night, the enchantress lets the severed braids down to haul him up. To his horror, he finds himself staring at the witch instead of Rapunzel, nowhere to be found. When she tells him in anger that he will never see Rapunzel again, he leaps from the tower in despair and is blinded by the thorns below. In another version, the witch pushes him and he falls on the thorns, thus becoming blind.
For months he wanders through the wastelands of the country. One day, as Rapunzel sings while she fetches water, the prince hears Rapunzel's voice again, and they are reunited. When they fall into each others' arms, her tears immediately restore his sight. In another variation, it is said that Rapunzel eventually gives birth to twin boys (in some variations, a girl and a boy). The prince leads her to his kingdom, where they live happily ever after.
In another version of the story, the story ends with the revelation that the witch had untied Rapunzel's braid after the prince leapt from the tower, and the braid slipped from her hands and landed far below, leaving her trapped in the tower.
[edit]Commentary



Rapunzel – Rapunzel statue at the Old Market of Dresden in Saxony, Germany.
The witch is called "Mother Gothel", a common term for a godmother in German.[9] She features as the overprotective parent, and interpretations often differ on how negatively she is to be regarded.[10]
Folkloric beliefs often regarded it as quite dangerous to deny a pregnant woman any food she craved. Family members would often go to great lengths to secure such cravings.[11] Such desires for lettuce and like vegetables may indicate a need on her part for vitamins.[12]
The uneven bargain with which it opens is quite common in fairy tales having little else in common with this one: in Jack and the Beanstalk, Jack trades a cow for beans, and in Beauty and the Beast, Beauty comes to the Beast in return for a rose.[13]
An influence on Grimm's Rapunzel was Petrosinella or Parsley, written by Giambattista Basile in his collection of fairy tales in 1634, Lo cunto de li cunti (The Story of Stories), or Pentamerone. This tells a similar tale of a pregnant woman desiring some parsley from the garden of an ogress, getting caught, and having to promise the ogress her baby. The encounters between the prince and the maiden in the tower are described in quite bawdy language.[14]
About a century earlier in France, a similar story was published by Mademoiselle de la Force, called "Persinette". As Rapunzel did in the first edition of the Brothers Grimm, Persinette becomes pregnant during the course of the prince's visits.[14]
[edit]Variants

Rapunzel is blonde in the original Brothers Grimm tale, so in every medium since she is featured with her long golden hair.
Likely, the oldest European variant of this tale is Petrosinella, one of the Neapolitan tales in the Pentamerone (1634) by Giambattista Basile.
Italo Calvino included in his Italian Folktales a similar tale of a princess imprisoned in a tower, "The Canary Prince", though the imprisonment was caused by her stepmother's jealousy.
A German tale Puddocky also opens with a girl falling into the hands of a witch because of stolen food, but the person who craves it is the girl herself, and the person who steals it her mother. Another Italian tale, Prunella, has the girl steal the food and be captured by a witch.
Snow-White-Fire-Red, another Italian tale of this type, and Anthousa, Xanthousa, Chrisomalousa, a Greek one, tell the story from the hero's point of view; he and the heroine escape the ogress, but have to deal with a curse after.
In some newer versions Rapunzel is portrayed as a painter, such as the Barbie and Disney version.
In the novel Golden by Cameron Dokey, Rapunzel is given to the witch (named Melisande) as a result of a deal between her and Rapunzel's mother - if her mother cannot love Rapunzel no matter her appearance, she must surrender Rapunzel to the witch. Rapunzel is born bald without hope of ever growing hair, and is therefore given into the witch's care.
Grimm Fairy Tales comic series issue #19 is entitled Rapunzel. When Sela encounters a couple who makes their living hustling people out of their life savings, it's time for her to step in and teach them a lesson. The beautiful Rapunzel doesn't let her hair down just for any man; she lets it down for every man! And she's leading the love-struck fools directly into a horrible trap. But like the old saying goes 'Love is Blind' and sometimes the people you care about the most are the ones you can trust the least.
[edit]Rapunzel in music

The first two movements of Märchenbilder (Schumann) depict scenes from the story (source: section of Schumann's journals "hard to find and not translated into English".[15] Gerhard Schmidt, who taught at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama and at the City of London School for Girls, had access to a copy of this section before he left Austria for the UK).
[edit]Film adaptations

An adaptation featuring Barbie, entitled Barbie as Rapunzel, was released in 2002. In this version, Rapunzel is not trapped inside her tower until she explores the outside world. Gothel also keeps Rapunzel in a tower not because of a vegetable but because she wants revenge on an old boyfriend. The main concept of hair in this version is also not extremely important. Rather, it focuses more on a magic paintbrush.[citation needed]
Disney released a 2010 version of the tale, Tangled, originally titled Rapunzel.[16] In this version, Rapunzel, while still innocent, is far more assertive in character and has magical hair, 70 feet (21 m) in length, that can be used to heal or restore youth in others (notably Mother Gothel, which is why she locked Rapunzel in the tower in the first place). To activate her golden hair's healing properties, Rapunzel must sing an incantation. As with many variations of the fairy tale, Rapunzel's tears are also shown to possess healing powers.
There was also an earlier animated film adaptation with Olivia Newton-John narrating the story. The major difference between the film and the Grimm tale is that instead of making the prince blind, the witch transforms him into a bird, possibly a reference to The Blue Bird, a French variant of the story.
A live action version was filmed for television as part of Shelley Duvall's series Faerie Tale Theatre, airing on Showtime. It aired on February 5, 1983. In it, the main character (played by Shelley Duvall) is taken from her parents by a witch (Gena Rowlands), and is brought up in an isolated tower that can only be accessed by climbing her unnaturally long hair. Jeff Bridges played the prince, and Roddy McDowall narrated.
[edit]Name origin



Campanula rapunculus, one candidate
It is difficult to be certain which plant species the Brothers Grimm meant by the word Rapunzel, but the following, listed in their own dictionary,[17] are candidates.
Valerianella locusta, common names: Corn salad, mache, lamb's lettuce, field salad. Rapunzel is called Feldsalat in Germany, Nuesslisalat in Switzerland and Vogerlsalat in Austria. In cultivated form it has a low growing rosette of succulent green rounded leaves when young, when they are picked whole, washed of grit and eaten with oil and vinegar. When it bolts to seed it shows clusters of small white flowers.[18] Etty's seed catalogue[19] states Corn Salad (Verte de Cambrai) was in use by 1810.
Campanula rapunculus is known as Rapunzel-Glockenblume in German, and as Rampion[20] in Etty's seed catalogue, and although classified under a different family, Campanulaceae, has a similar rosette when young, although with pointed leaves. Some English translations of Rapunzel used the word Rampion. Etty's catalogue states that it was noted in 1633, an esteemed root in salads, and to be sown in April or May. The herb catalogue Sand Mountain Herbs[21] describes the root as extremely tasty, and the rosette leaves as edible, and that its blue bell-flowers[22] appear in June or July.
Phyteuma spicata,[23] known as Ährige Teufelskralle in German.

Tangled is a 2010 American computer animated fantasy musical/comedy film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios. It is the 50th animated feature in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series. The film features the voices of Mandy Moore, Zachary Levi and Donna Murphy and is loosely based on the German fairy tale "Rapunzel" by the Brothers Grimm.[4]
The film was originally titled and marketed as Rapunzel until it was changed to Tangled shortly before its release. It premiered in theatres and in 3D cinemas on November 24, 2010,[5] after six years of production and a cost that has been estimated at $260 million[2] which, if accurate, would make it the most expensive animated film ever made.
Contents [hide]
1 Plot
2 Cast
3 Production
3.1 Schedule
3.2 Title change
3.3 Animation
3.4 3D
4 Soundtrack
5 Release
5.1 Critical response
5.2 Box-office performance
5.2.1 North America
5.2.2 International market
5.3 Merchandising
5.4 Home media
6 Tangled Ever After
7 Accolades
8 See also
9 References
10 External links
[edit]Plot

A drop of sunlight falls to the ground and grows into a magical flower with the power to heal the sick and injured. An old woman named Gothel finds it and uses it to keep herself young by singing an incantation. Centuries later, the Queen becomes ill during childbirth, and so the flower is found. She is healed and gives birth to a daughter whom they name Rapunzel, whose golden hair is now the source of the magical power. Gothel kidnaps Rapunzel and hides her in a tall tower, raising her as her own child. Gothel knows that if Rapunzel's hair is cut, it will turn brown and lose its magic, so Rapunzel's hair is left to grow. Every year on Rapunzel's birthday, her kingdom releases thousands of sky lanterns in hopes that the lost princess will return. On the eve of her eighteenth birthday, Rapunzel asks Gothel to let her see the floating lights, but Gothel refuses.
Meanwhile, a group of thieves led by charismatic Flynn Rider steal the tiara of the lost princess from the castle. During the ensuing chase, a horse named Maximus is separated from his rider, the Captain of the Guards, and continues the search for Flynn on his own. Flynn outwits his accomplices and takes the tiara; he abandons them and stumbles upon Rapunzel's tower. Once inside the tower, Flynn is knocked unconscious by Rapunzel with a frying pan. She hides Flynn inside her closet and confiscates the tiara. When Gothel returns, Rapunzel requests a special paint made from some white shells on a beach, three days away, as a birthday present. Gothel leaves for a three-day journey to bring the gift. Rapunzel makes a deal with Flynn: a journey to the "lights" in exchange for the tiara. Flynn attempts to make Rapunzel end their journey by taking her to the Snuggly Duckling, which is full of Gaul thugs, but the thugs are charmed by Rapunzel, who encourages them to follow their dreams.
Mother Gothel sees Maximus riderless and worries someone will find Rapunzel. She returns to the tower to find Rapunzel gone. Meanwhile, the guards invade the tavern, but Rapunzel and Flynn have escaped. The pursuit ends at a dam, which Maximus causes to collapse. Flynn and Rapunzel are trapped in a flooding cave. Believing he's about to die, Flynn admits his true name: Eugene Fitzherbert. Rapunzel admits she has magic hair that glows when she sings. Using her power, they find a way out. Later, when Flynn goes to gather firewood, Gothel secretly meets Rapunzel. Gothel tells Rapunzel that Flynn doesn't care for her and merely wants the tiara. Gothel gives Rapunzel the tiara insists that she test Flynn by giving it to him.
The next morning, Maximus confronts Flynn, but to Flynn's dismay Rapunzel befriends the horse. The three arrive at the kingdom and that night Flynn takes Rapunzel to see the lanterns. There, Rapunzel gives Flynn back the tiara. Flynn spies the Stabbington brothers and leaves Rapunzel waiting as he gives them the tiara back. However, the brothers tie him on a boat and sail him across the lake. They reveal Flynn's "betrayal" to Rapunzel as they attempt to kidnap her for her hair's power, but Gothel "rescues" her and they return to the tower. Later, Flynn is arrested and sentenced to death. Gothel tries to use Rapunzel's hair but Rapunzel refuses. Maximus brings the Pub Thugs to rescue Flynn, and Maximus and Flynn race back to the tower. From various clues she found during her adventure, Rapunzel realizes she is the lost princess and attempts to flee the tower. Gothel binds her, and when Flynn arrives, Gothel stabs him. Rapunzel swears to keep fighting Gothel unless she is allowed to heal Flynn's wound. Knowing that Rapunzel keeps her word, Gothel agrees, but before Rapunzel heals him, Flynn cuts her hair with a shard of broken mirror. Rapunzel's hair turns brown and loses its power and Gothel rapidly begins to age. Disoriented, Gothel trips and falls from the tower, turning into dust before she hits the ground.
Flynn slowly dies in Rapunzel's arms. Heartbroken, she cries, and tearfully sings the incantation. One teardrop filled with her power lands on his cheek and revives him. The two embrace and kiss. Back at the kingdom, the royal family has a tearful reunion. Years later, Flynn and Rapunzel are married. Along the way, the Gaul thugs fulfill their individual dreams, and Maximus becomes a respected official on the Royal Guard.
[edit]Cast

Mandy Moore as Rapunzel (Delaney Rose Stein voiced a young Rapunzel)
Zachary Levi as Eugene Fitzherbert/Flynn Rider
Donna Murphy as Mother Gothel
Brad Garrett as Hook-Hand Thug
Ron Perlman as the Stabbington Brothers
Jeffrey Tambor as Big Nose Thug
Richard Kiel as Vladamir
M. C. Gainey as Captain of the Guard
Paul F. Tompkins as Short Thug
Tom Kenny as Guard
Tim Brooke-Taylor as Old Man
Frank Welker as Pascal and Maximus
Non-speaking animal characters include Pascal, Rapunzel's chameleon friend, and Maximus, the horse of the head of the palace guard. Also featured in non-speaking roles are Rapunzel's parents, the King and Queen, and Ulf, the Mime Thug.
Following a revision in the script, the thief's original name, "Bastion," was changed to "Flynn," paying homage to early Hollywood actor Errol Flynn, to whom the character is similar.[citation needed]
Moore, Levi and Murphy respectively replaced the originally-announced voice actors Kristin Chenoweth, Dan Fogler and Grey DeLisle.
[edit]Production

According to the Los Angeles Times, Tangled was in development for six years and cost more than $260 million to produce.[2]
[edit]Schedule
It had originally been announced in April 2007 that Annie-nominated animator and story artist Dean Wellins would be co-directing the film alongside Glen Keane.[6]
On October 9, 2008, it was reported that Keane and Wellins had stepped down as directors, and were replaced by the team of Byron Howard and Nathan Greno, director and storyboard director, respectively, of Disney's 2008 animated feature Bolt. Keane stayed on as an executive producer and animation supervisor, while Wellins moved on to developing other short and feature films.[7]
[edit]Title change


Official logo of Rapunzel, before it was changed to Tangled.
When first put into production, the film was promoted as having the title Rapunzel Unbraided, which was later changed to Rapunzel.[8]
Disney's previous animated feature The Princess and the Frog in 2009, while being well-received by various critics[9] and taking in nearly $270 million worldwide, was not as successful as Disney had hoped.[10] Disney expressed the belief that the film's emphasis on princesses may have discouraged young boys from seeing the film.[10]
In order to market the film to both genders, Disney changed the film's name from Rapunzel to Tangled (though some countries did not make the change),[citation needed] while also emphasizing Flynn Rider, the film's prominent male character.[10] Disney was criticized for altering the classic title as a marketing strategy. Floyd Norman, a former Disney and Pixar animator and story artist, said, "The idea of changing the title of a classic like Rapunzel to Tangled is beyond stupid. I'm convinced they'll gain nothing from this except the public seeing Disney as desperately trying to find an audience."[11] Justin Chang of Variety compared it to changing the title of The Little Mermaid to Beached.[12]
On November 24, 2010, the day of the film's release, directors Nathan Greno and Byron Howard disputed reports that the title change was a marketing decision. They said they changed the title from Rapunzel to Tangled because Rapunzel is not the only main character in the film. They went on to say that you can't call Toy Story "Buzz Lightyear," and they really needed a title that represented what the film is, and that it’s a duo, and it stars Rapunzel and Flynn Rider.[13] However, observers have noted that if that were the case, the film would not have been distributed as "Rapunzel" in international markets.[citation needed]
[edit]Animation


A concept rendering of Rapunzel, demonstrating the "luscious hair" Keane wanted.
The film was made using computer-generated imagery (CGI), although Tangled was modeled on the traditional look of oil paintings on canvas. The Rococo paintings of French artist Jean-Honoré Fragonard, particularly The Swing, were used as references for the film's artistic style, a style described by Keane as "romantic and lush."[14] To create the impression of a painting, non-photorealistic rendering has been used.
Glen Keane wanted the film to look and feel like a traditional hand-drawn Disney film in 3D, and held a seminar called "The Best of Both Worlds", where he, with 50 Disney CGI artists and traditional artists, focused on the pros and cons of each style.[15] Due to limitations in computer technology, many basic principles of animation used in traditionally animated movies had been absent from earlier CGI films; but technological advancements have made it easier to blend the two, combining the strengths of each style. Keane stated repeatedly he was trying to make the computer "bend its knee to the artist" instead of having the computer dictate the artistic style and look of the film. By making the computer become as "pliable as the pencil," Keane's vision of a "three dimensional drawing" seemed within reach, with the artist controlling the technology. Many of the techniques and tools that were required to give the film the quality Keane demanded did not exist when the project was started, and Disney Animation Studios had to create them on their own.[14] Keane said, "There’s no photoreal hair. I want luscious hair, and we are inventing new ways of doing that. I want to bring the warmth and intuitive feel of hand-drawn to CGI."[16]
One of the main goals of the animators was to create movement that mimicked the soft fluidity of the hand-drawn art found in older Disney animated films. Keane credited Disney 3D animator Kyle Strawitz with helping to combine CGI with the traditional hand-drawn style. "He took the house from Snow White and built it and painted it so that it looked like a flat painting that suddenly started to move, and it had dimension and kept all of the soft, round curves of the brushstrokes of watercolor. Kyle helped us get that Fragonard look of that girl on the swing… We are using subsurface scattering and global illumination and all of the latest techniques to pull off convincing human characters and rich environments."[14]
Existing CGI technology continued to present difficulties: in particular, animating hair turned out to be a challenge. Senior software engineer Kelly Ward spent six years writing programs to make it move the way they wanted.[17] As late as January 2010, the directors were still not sure if the Rapunzel character's length of hair was going to work. These problems were finally solved in March:[18] An improved version of a hair simulation program named Dynamic Wires, originally developed for Bolt, was eventually used. To make hair float believably in water, and to surmount other similar challenges, discrete differential geometry was used to produce the desired effects, freeing the animators from executing these specific tasks directly, which would have taken days instead of minutes.[19]
[edit]3D
Rather than focusing on realism, the 3D team used an aesthetic approach. Robert Newman, the film’s stereoscopic supervisor said that "We’re using depth more artistically than ever before, and we’re not as concerned with the literal transcription of depth between camera and projector as we are the interpretation of it." To do this, they used a new technique called multi-rigging, which is made up by multiple pairs of virtual cameras. Each pair is used individually on each separate element that adds depth to a scene, like background, foreground and characters, without adjusting for the relation with the other pairs. When sandwiched together later in production, the result was something that would be visually impossible in the real world, but which created an appealing look to the movie.[20]
[edit]Soundtrack

Tangled: Original Soundtrack

Soundtrack album by Alan Menken
Released	November 16, 2010
Recorded	2010
Genre	Folk rock, medieval, soundtrack
Label	Walt Disney
Original music was composed for the movie by 8-time Academy Award winner Composer Alan Menken with lyrics written by Glenn Slater.[21] Menken said he attempted to blend medieval music with 1960s folk rock to create the new songs.[22]
No.	Title	Performer(s)	Length
1.	"When Will My Life Begin?"  	Mandy Moore	2:32
2.	"When Will My Life Begin? (Reprise 1)"  	Moore	1:03
3.	"Mother Knows Best"  	Donna Murphy	3:10
4.	"When Will My Life Begin? (Reprise 2)"  	Moore	2:06
5.	"I've Got a Dream"  	Brad Garrett, Jeffrey Tambor, Moore, Zachary Levi, Company	3:11
6.	"Mother Knows Best (Reprise)"  	Murphy	1:38
7.	"I See the Light"  	Moore, Levi	3:44
8.	"Healing Incantation"  	Moore	0:54
9.	"Flynn Wanted"  	Alan Menken	2:51
10.	"Prologue"  	Murphy, Delaney Stein	2:02
11.	"Horse with No Rider"  	Menken	1:57
12.	"Escape Route"  	Menken	1:57
13.	"Campfire"  	Menken	3:21
14.	"Kingdom Dance"  	Menken	2:20
15.	"Waiting For the Lights"  	Menken	2:47
16.	"Return to Mother"  	Menken	2:06
17.	"Realization and Escape"  	Menken	5:50
18.	"The Tear Heals"  	Menken, Moore	7:37
19.	"Kingdom Celebration"  	Menken	1:50
20.	"Something That I Want"  	Grace Potter	2:43
Several songs were written but eventually cut from the final film; "When Will My Life Begin?" replaced an earlier version called "What More Could I Ever Need?". Menken reported that that opening number went through five or six different versions.[23]
Elsewhere, Menken reported that there was originally a love song called "You Are My Forever" that Mother Gothel sang to Rapunzel in a motherly way but was reprised later in the film by Flynn in a romantic way. This idea was apparently replaced with the two songs "Mother Knows Best" and "I See the Light".[24]
The song "Something That I Want" performed by Grace Potter from Grace Potter and the Nocturnals is featured in the closing credits. This version features some of the lyrics that were re-written and sung by Potter herself. The Spanish version of the song, titled "Algo Quiero Querer", was recorded by Colombian pop-singer, Fanny Lú.[25]
The album has peaked at No. 44 on the Billboard 200, No. 7 on the Soundtrack chart, and No. 3 on the Top Kids Albums chart.[26][27][28]
[edit]Release

[edit]Critical response
Tangled received positive responses from critics. Rotten Tomatoes reports that 89% of critics have given Tangled a positive review based on 170 reviews, with an average score of 7.5/10.[29] Among Rotten Tomatoes Top Critics, which consists of popular and notable critics from the top newspapers, websites, television and radio programs, the film holds an overall approval rating of 93%, based on a sample of 29 reviews.[30] The site's consensus is: "While far from Disney's greatest film, Tangled is a visually stunning, thoroughly entertaining addition to the studio's classic animated canon."[29] Another review aggregator Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score from 0–100 out of reviews from mainstream film critics, calculated a score of 71 based on 33 reviews.[31] CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed the average grade cinemagoers gave Tangled was A+ on an A+ to F scale.[32]
A. O. Scott of The New York Times positively reviewed the film as "the 50th animated feature from Disney, and its look and spirit convey a modified, updated but nonetheless sincere and unmistakable quality of old-fashioned Disneyness."[33] Time film critic Richard Corliss noted that the film "wades into the DreamWorks style of sitcom gags and anachronistic sass" while praising the film for achieving "the complex mix of romance, comedy, adventure and heart that defines the best Disney features."[34] Kenneth Turan from The Los Angeles Times awarded the film four stars out of five; he described the film as a "gorgeous computer-animated look that features rich landscapes and characters that look fuller and more lifelike than they have in the past."[35]
James Berardinelli commented on his review website ReelViews that the film is "entertaining and enjoyable, but not groundbreaking."[36] Berardinelli also stated Rapunzel is "not as memorable as Snow White, Princess Ariel, or Belle" as well as stating "the songs are neither catchy nor memorable."[36] Todd McCarthy, film reviewer for The Hollywood Reporter opened his review with, "It would have been nice if Disney's self-touted 50th animated feature were one of its best, a film that could stand with the studio's classics, but the world will have to make do with Tangled, a passably entertaining hodgepodge of old and new animation techniques, mixed sensibilities and hedged commercial calculations."[37] Most reviews have praised the animation, notably the sky lantern sequence ("I See The Light") in the film, some comparing it to the ballroom scene in Beauty and the Beast.
Quentin Tarantino named Tangled as his fifth favorite film of 2010.[38]
[edit]Box-office performance

This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a specific audience. Please relocate any relevant information, and remove excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia inclusion policy. (April 2011)
Tangled earned $200,821,936 in the USA and Canada and an estimated $389,900,000 in other countries for a worldwide total of $590,721,936.[3] Worldwide, it is the 15th highest-grossing animated feature ever released,[39] the eighth highest-grossing film of 2010 and the third largest animated title on that list behind Toy Story 3 ($1.063 billion) and Shrek Forever After ($752.6 million). It is also the third Disney film appearing in 2010's Top Ten.[40] Finally, it is the second highest-grossing film worldwide produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios, trailing only The Lion King ($783.8 million).[41]
It premiered in Paris on November 17, exclusively screening at the Grand Rex theatre two weeks in advance of its French wide release.[42] With over 3,800 tickets sold on its opening day, it set a new record for films showing in a single theatre.[43] It had a worldwide opening weekend of $86,079,983.[44][45] Due to a gradual worldwide roll-out and many other blockbuster movies playing at the same time, it reached the summit of the worldwide box office only once, on its 11th weekend (Feb 4-6, 2011), with $24,884,871 from 49 territories.[46][47]
[edit]North America
In the United States, México and Canada, Tangled picked up $11.9 million on its opening Wednesday,[48] breaking the record for the largest pre-thanksgiving Wednesday opening of all time, a record previously held by Disney·Pixar's Toy Story 2.[49] In its first weekend of release, it earned $48.8 million, placing second for the period behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1, which earned $49.1 million.[50] Tangled had the fifth highest opening weekend for a film that did not debut at #1.[51] Over the traditional Wednesday-Sunday Thanksgiving holiday period, it tallied $68.7 million, again finishing in second place.[50] Tangled also marked the second-largest 3-day and 5-day Thanksgiving opening after Toy Story 2.[50] During its second weekend (post-Thanksgiving weekend), which was one of the lowest-grossing of 2010, Tangled declined 56% although it jumped to first place at the box office with $21.6 million, ahead of the new release The Warrior's Way and surpassing Deathly Hallows Part 1's weekend gross by a wide margin.[52] On its third weekend, it fell only 34% with a $14.3 million gross, having the smallest decline among films playing nationwide, but dropping to third place behind The Voyage of the Dawn Treader ($24.0 million) and The Tourist ($16.5 million).[53] On its fiftieth day of release, with $176,697,860, it out-grossed The Karate Kid to become the 10th highest-grossing film of 2010 in these regions.[54] Additionally, on the weekend May 20–22, 2011, it became the 10th 2010 film to pass the $200-million-mark.[55] However, it was the fourth slowest film to pass this mark behind Back to the Future, My Big Fat Greek Wedding, and Saving Private Ryan.[56] In the USA and Canada, (unadjusted for inflation) it is the third highest-grossing film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios, behind The Lion King ($328.5 million) and Aladdin ($217.4 million).[57]
[edit]International market
Overseas, on its opening weekend it earned $17,373,685 in 8 territories and ranked second for the weekend behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1 ($117.3 million).[58] After an eventual rollout in markets around the world and varying rankings among the Top Ten in subsequent weekends overseas, it finally reached first place at the overseas box office on the first weekend of 2011 (January 7–9) with $25.9 million.[58] It fell to second place with $14.9 million overseas on the Martin-Luther-King weekend, out-grossed by Tron: Legacy ($17.2 million).[58] On January 28–30, it regained first place with $17.1 million mainly due to a strong opening in the UK, Ireland and Malta.[58] On the following weekend (Feb. 4-6 2011), it continued to dominate on the summit of the overseas box office with $23.0 million, a feat the UK, Spain, Sweden and Norway mainly contributed to.[58] In cumulative overseas grosses, it marked the seventh largest 2010 picture, the third largest 2010 animated feature.[59]
Europe
Eastern Europe
After a strong opening weekend ($8.9 million) in Russia and the C.I.S, it ultimately earned $23,380,205, marking the largest Disney animated feature of all time in the country.[60] In Bulgaria, it scored $142,644 during its opening (the third largest one for an animated title) and reached $909,129 in total, marking the largest animated feature of 2010, the second best of all time after Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs ($1.9 million) and the sixth highest-grossing film ever.[61] In Romania, it started with $246,542 and had earnings summing up to $1,332,984. It is the second highest-grossing animated title of all time after Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs ($2.3 million). On the all-time list of highest-grossing movies it ranks 7th.[62]
Northern Europe
It topped the U.K., Ireland and Malta box office on its first weekend with £5,106,612 ($8,099,434 from 445 theaters). It stayed on top during its second weekend, falling only 9% to £4,569,135 ($7,363,278) and has grossed £20,258,719 ($32,871,348) by July 10, 2011.[63] In Sweden, it earned $1,828,543 during its opening, marking the second-biggest 3-day weekend gross for an animated movie ($1,902,690 with weekday previews) behind Cars 2's $2,006,735; it dominated for five weekends at the box office and has accumulated $8,136,288 by May 15, 2011, marking the second highest-grossing animated feature in the country just after Ratatouille.[64]
Southern Europe
In Spain, it had a huge debut; it earned €4.12 million ($5,705,845) breaking the largest opening-weekend record among animated titles, in local currency, previously held by Finding Nemo and Toy Story 3.[65] In Greece, it opened with $1,006,184, marking the largest 3-day opening weekend for an animated feature and reached $2,787,668 by the end of its run, becoming the fifth highest-grossing animated film ever after Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs ($4,705,076), Ice Age: The Meltdown ($3,573,780), Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa ($3,332,259) and Ratatouille ($3,189,263).[66]
Western Europe
In Germany, its highest-grossing territory after the USA and Canada, it earned $6,662,642 on its opening weekend, including weekday previews. It therefore marked the biggest opening weekend in 2010 for an animated film.[67] It dominated the box office during the whole holiday period and it earned $44,204,134 in total.[68] This made Tangled the largest animated movie of 2010, out-grossing Despicable Me ($27,043,442), and among all 2010 releases it ranks second behind Deathly Hallows: Part 1.[69] In Austria, it debuted with $1,070,836 (including weekday previews), marking the largest opening of 2010 for an animated feature. It earned $6,286,813 in total, not only becoming 2010's largest animated film but even surpassing Deathly Hallows: Part 1 to rank #1 among all 2010 releases. Additionally, it currently places 5th on the all-time list of animated movies.[70]
South America
In Brazil it grossed $24,341,705 in total, marking the fifth highest-grossing animated featureof all time after Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, Shrek Forever After, Rio and Toy Story 3.[71][72] In Argentina, it debuted on top of the box office with $1,621,613; it dominated for four weeks and has earned $8,228,969, marking the eighth-highest grossing film of all time in the country and the fourth largest animated feature ever.[73] In Bolivia, it made $177,210 during its opening and $744,876 in total, marking the fourth largest animated movie ever behind Toy Story 3, Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs and Rio.[74] In Venezuela, it out-grossed Toy Story 3 by earning $6,863,748 to become the highest-grossing movie of 2010, the fourth highest-grossing animated feature of all time behind Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs ($11,644,527), Up ($7,249,646) and Rio ($7,884,921) and the fifth highest-grossing film of all time.[75] In Colombia, it debuted with $1,219,266 and reached a total of $5,315,615, marking the fifth largest animated feature of all time after Toy Story 3, Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, Rio and Shrek Forever After.[76]
Oceania
In Australia, it earned $6.1 million during its opening, marking the highest-grossing opening weekend for a non-sequel animated movie.[77]
Asia
In Malaysia, it opened with $808,579 and earned $3,000,230 in total. It therefore surpassed Toy Story 3 ($2,812,540) not only to become the highest-grossing animated feature of 2010 but the first to cross the $3 million mark and the second-largest of all time after Kung Fu Panda 2.[78] In Singapore, it made a mere $483,756 during its opening only to expand widely the next weekend. It finished with $3,031,106 being the fourth highest-grossing animated feature of all time after Kung Fu Panda 2, Kung Fu Panda ($4,307,978) and Toy Story 3 ($3,155,072).[79] In Lebanon, it earned $466,966 in total to top the 2010 animated-movie list and become the second highest-grossing animated feature of all time after Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs ($607,651).[80] In Japan, Tangled was released amidst "tragic conditions" caused by earthquakes, tsunamis and explosions at nuclear sites, on March 12, 2011, in 370 screens - a limited number compared to other blockbuster movies. It had a poor $1,743,372 opening-weekend gross and a third-place rank at the box office.[81] However, it earned $31,081,461 in total marking the 8th largest animated film of all time.[82]
[edit]Merchandising
Like other recent Disney animated features, Tangled is supported in retail stores by a line of toys and other merchandise.[83] Many of the Rapunzel dolls emphasize her hair, while some also include sound clips from the film. Toys based on other characters, including Flynn Rider, Pascal and Maximus, have also been released. Rapunzel is yet to be included as an official Disney Princess. However, she already appears in numerous books and doll sets, but is set to become an Offical Disney Princess on October 2, 2011.[84]
A video game based on the film, titled Tangled: The Video Game was released on November 23, 2010 for the two Nintendo consoles Nintendo DS and Wii as well as for the PC platform by Disney Interactive Studios.[85]
[edit]Home media
Tangled was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment as a four-disc combo pack on March 29, 2011. The combo pack includes a Blu-ray 3D, standard Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy. A two-disc Blu-ray/DVD combo pack and single DVD are also available. Bonus features for the Blu-ray include deleted scenes, two alternate opening sequences, two extended songs, and an inside look at how the film was made. The DVD includes only the two Original Storybook Openings and the 50th Animated Feature Countdown.
Sales of Tangled in the US and Canada exceeded $80 million in DVD and Blu-ray sales, the highest grossing DVD of the year to date; its home video sales exceeded the film's earnings in its first week in theaters.[86] The film sold a record 3,060,206 units (the equivalent of $45,872,488) in its first week in North America, the largest opening for a 2011 DVD. It dominated for two weeks on the DVD sales chart and sold 6,029,566 units ($92,467,945) as of June 5, 2011.[87] It has also sold 2,518,522 Blu-ray units ($59,220,275) by May 29, 2011.[88]
[edit]Tangled Ever After

Tangled Ever After is an upcoming short animated film, set to air in Spring 2012 on Disney Channel.[89] It is being directed by Nathan Greno and Byron Howard, the directors of Tangled, and it will show Rapunzel marrying Flynn Rider.[90]
[edit]Accolades

The film has been nominated for ten awards. Hollywood Foreign Press Association nominated Tangled for two Golden Globe Awards, for Best Animated Feature Film and Best Original Song for "I See the Light", but lost to Toy Story 3 and Burlesque respectively. The film also received two nominations for the Broadcast Film Critics Association in the same categories, but lost to Toy Story 3 and 127 Hours, as well as nominations for two Annie Awards, for Best Animated Feature Film and for Writing in a Feature Production.
Tangled was also nominated for two Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards, Best Animated Film and Best Original Song for "I've Got a Dream", which it lost to Toy Story 3 and Burlesque. "I See the Light" has been nominated for Best Original Song at the 83rd Academy Awards, but lost to "We Belong Together" from Toy Story 3. It has also been nominated for 37th Saturn Award for Best Animated Film.
Tangled won best 3D scene of the year at the second annual International 3D Society Creative Arts Awards.[91]
Group	Category	Result
83rd Academy Awards[92]	Best Original Song ("I See the Light")	Nominated
38th Annie Awards[93]	Best Animated Feature Film	Nominated
Writing in a Feature Production (Dan Fogelman)	Nominated
Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards 2010[94]	Best Animated Feature Film	Nominated
Best Song ("I See the Light")	Nominated
68th Golden Globe Awards[95]	Best Animated Feature Film	Nominated
Best Song ("I See the Light")	Nominated
National Movie Awards	Animation	Won
Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards[96]	Best Animated Film	Nominated
Best Original Song ("I’ve Got a Dream")	Nominated
37th Saturn Awards	Best Animated Film	Nominated
2011 Teen Choice Awards[97]	Choice Animated Movie Voice (Zachary Levi)	Nominated

Rapunzel is a book by Paul O. Zelinsky retelling the Brothers Grimm "Rapunzel" story. Released by Dutton Press, it was the recipient of the Caldecott Medal for illustration in 1998.[1]

(CNN) -- World leaders have paid tribute to Nobel Laureate Wangari Maathai who passed away while having treatment for ovarian cancer on Monday.
Archbishop Desmond Tutu praised Maathai as a true "visionary African woman" and called her a "leading voice on the continent."
He said: "Professor Maathai introduced the idea of women planting trees in Kenya to reduce poverty and conserve the environment," in a statement released via his office.
"At last count, the Green Belt Movement she helped to found had assisted women to plant more than 40 million trees. She understood and acted on the inextricable links between poverty, rights and environmental sustainability. One can but marvel at her foresight and the scope of her success. She was a true African heroine," the statement continued.
"Our condolences go to Professor Maathai's family, to the people of Kenya, and to the countless women (and men) across Africa and the world to whom she was an inspiration."
His views were echoed by former U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan who said he was "deeply saddened" to learn of her death.
 Wangari Maathai campaigning in Japan
"She will be remembered as a committed champion of the environment, sustainable development, womens' rights, and democracy. Her contribution to all these causes will forever be celebrated and honored," he said.
 Maathai launches Congo Basin Forest Fund
"Wangari was a courageous leader. Her energy and life-long dedication to improve the lives and livelihoods of people will continue to inspire generations of young.
"Her award of the Nobel Peace Prize in 2004, the first to be bestowed upon an African woman, rightly underscored the important nexus in her work between sustainable development, peace and human security."
Tanzania's President Jakaya Kikwete was among the first world leaders to celebrate the professor's life.
"Rest in peace Dr Wangari Maathai. A great woman, an inspiration for many women across Africa, a magnificent visionary and embodiment of courage," President Kikwete said on Twitter.
Former U.S. vice president Al Gore also paid tribute to Maathai who he said "overcame incredible obstacles to devote her life to service—service to her children, to her constituents, to the women, and indeed all the people of Kenya-- and to the world as a whole."
In a statement, he said: "Wangari was a warm and devoted mother and I send my condolences to her family.  She worked tirelessly both as an elected Member of Parliament and an Assistant Minister for Environment and Natural Resources.  She forged new ground for women in Kenya helping shatter what we would call the 'glass ceiling' in the United States."
A spokesman for the Nelson Mandela Foundation said in a statement that Maathai has left a "lasting legacy in greater awareness and work in protecting our environment and the world."
Wangari Maathai: A life in pictures
The statement praised Maathai for a speech she delivered in 2005 at the Third Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture, while she was Deputy Minister of Environment in Kenya.
She will be remembered as a committed champion of the environment, sustainable development, women's rights, and democracy
Kofi Annan, former UN Secretary General
"We need people who love Africa so much that they want to protect her from destructive processes," she said in her address.
"There are simple actions we can take. Start by planting 10 trees we each need to absorb the carbon dioxide we exhale. Get involved in local initiatives and volunteer your time for services in your community," she continued.
A spokesman for the Kenyan government said the death of Maathai was "a huge loss to the country, Africa and the whole world" and had left a "gaping hole that will be difficult to fill."
He said Maathai had been receiving treatment for ovarian cancer at the Nairobi Hospital for the past year.
He added: "Prof. Wangari Maathai brought meaning to the words peace and environment. She made the world understand that water, trees, and protection of the environment helps us achieve real peace.
He continued: "She was deserving of the Nobel Peace Prize because she taught all of us the importance of respecting our planet and each other. Her passion, dedication and focus became a beacon to be emulated by millions."
Bineta Diop, Founder of Femmes Africa Solidarite, an organization working on issues of gender, peace and development, remembered Maathai as someone who risked her life for ordinary people.
We need people who love Africa so much that they want to protect her from destructive processes
Wangari Maathai
"Africa has lost today one of its greatest daughters. Wangari was the champion of the environmental cause, to which she brought the attention of the Continent when nobody was talking about this great challenge. She worked tirelessly for the rural women, demanding African leaders to address climate change," she said.
Diop said she would continue to inspire generations to come: "We are sure that the young women and men she mentored are ready to continue her fight for climate justice."
Meanwhile, tributes flooded in on social networking sites Facebook and Twitter. Maathai was trending worldwide on the micro blogging website as people from around the world remembered how she had touched their lives.
Ann Pettifor, from the New Economics Foundation tweeted: "Wangari was my heroine. Jubilee 2000's African leader and did great work for Kenya's debt."
Another tweeter, Lorde Sirm, wrote: "A symbol of hope, dreams in a world full of green rest in peace."
There were also calls for her to receive a state burial on Twitter with user, KGitonga, tweeting: "We failed to honor her when it mattered. Let her rest in humility like she lived."
There were also calls on Facebook for her work to continue, one user, Catherine Gitonga wrote: "May we honor her by planting as many trees as we can so that her legacy may live on and we may fulfill all that she fought for. Rest in peace knowing that your contribution to Kenya will forever be remembered."
On Facebook, Lorot Saleml wrote: "I refuse to believe that Mama is dead. She lives among us. She lives in my poems. She lives in the trees. She is the air I breath. Her soul is in Uhuru park. Her soul is roaming all over the world. My mama still lives on."