     At last the term ended, and a silence deep as the snow on the grounds descended on the castle.
Harry found it peaceful, rather than gloomy, and enjoyed the fact that he, Hermione, and the Weasleys
had the run of Gryffindor Tower, which meant they could play Exploding Snap loudly without bothering
anyone, and practice dueling in private. Fred, George, and Ginny had chosen to stay at school rather than
visit Bill in Egypt with Mr. and Mrs. Weasley. Percy, who disapproved of what he termed their childish
behavior, didn't spend much time in the Gryffindor common room. He had already told them pompously
that he was only staying over Christmas because it was his duty as a prefect to support the teachers
during this troubled time.

   Christmas morning dawned, cold and white. Harry and Ron, the only ones left in their dormitory,
were woken very early by Hermione, who burst in, fully dressed and carrying presents for them both.

    "Wake up," she said loudly, pulling back the curtains at the window.

    "Hermione -- you're not supposed to be in here --" said Ron, shielding his eyes against the light.

   "Merry Christmas to you, too," said Hermione, throwing him his present. "I've been up for nearly an
hour, adding more lacewings to the potion. It's ready."

    Harry sat up, suddenly wide awake.

    "Are you sure?"

    "Positive," said Hermione, shifting Scabbers the rat so that she could sit down on the end of Ron's
four-poster. "If we're going to do it, I say it should be tonight."

    At that moment, Hedwig swooped into the room, carrying a very small package in her beak.

    "Hello," said Harry happily as she landed on his bed. "Are you speaking to me again?"

     She nibbled his ear in an affectionate sort of way, which was a far better present than the one that she
had brought him, which turned out to be from the Dursleys. They had sent Harry a toothpick and a note
telling him to find out whether he'd be able to stay at Hogwarts for the summer vacation, too.

    The rest of Harry's Christmas presents were far more satisfactory. Hagrid had sent him a large tin of
treacle fudge, which Harry decided to soften by the fire before eating; Ron had given him a book called
Flying with the Cannons, a book of interesting facts about his favorite Quidditch team, and Hermione had
bought him a luxurious eagle-feather quill. Harry opened the last present to find a new, hand-knitted
sweater from Mrs. Weasley and a large plum cake. He read her card with a fresh surge of guilt, thinking
about Mr. Weasley's car (which hadn't been seen since its crash with the Whomping Willow), and the
bout of rule-breaking he and Ron were planning next.

    No one, not even someone dreading taking Polyjuice Potion later, could fail to enjoy Christmas
dinner at Hogwarts.

    The Great Hall looked magnificent. Not only were there a dozen frost-covered Christmas trees and


                                                                                                                Page 121
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




thick streamers of holly and mistletoe crisscrossing the ceiling, but enchanted snow was falling, warm and
dry, from the ceiling. Dumbledore led them in a few of his favorite carols, Hagrid booming more and
more loudly with every goblet of eggnog he consumed. Percy, who hadn't noticed that Fred had
bewitched his prefect badge so that it now read "Pinhead," kept asking them all what they were
sniggering at. Harry didn't even care that Draco Malfoy was making loud, snide remark about his new
sweater from the Slytherin table. With a bit of luck, Malfoy would be getting his comeuppance in a few
hours' time.

   Harry and Ron had barely finished their third helpings of Christmas pudding when Hermione ushered
them out of the hall to finalize their plans for the evening.

    "We still need a bit of the people you're changing into," said Hermione matter-of-factly, as though
she were sending them to the supermarket for laundry detergent. "And obviously, it'll be best if you can
get something of Crabbe's and Goyle's; they're Malfoys best friends, he'll tell them anything. And we
also need to make sure the real Crabbe and Goyle can't burst in on us while we're interrogating him.

    "I've got it all worked out," she went on smoothly, ignoring Harry's and Ron's stupefied faces. She
held up two plump chocolate cakes. "I've filled these with a simple Sleeping Draught. All you have to do
is make sure Crabbe and Goyle find them. You know how greedy they are, they're bound to eat them.
Once they're asleep, pull out a few of their hairs and hide them in a broom closet."

    Harry and Ron looked incredulously at each other.

    "Hermione, I don't think --"

    "That could go seriously wrong --"

    But Hermione had a steely glint in her eye not unlike the one Professor McGonagall sometimes had.

    "The potion will be useless without Crabbe's and Goyle's hair," she said sternly. "You do want to
investigate Malfoy, don't you?"

    "Oh, all right, all right," said Harry. "But what about you? Whose hair are you ripping out?"

     "I've already got mine!" said Hermione brightly, pulling a tiny bottle out of her pocket and showing
them the single hair inside it. "Remember Millicent Bulstrode wrestling with me at the Dueling Club? She
left this on my robes when she was trying to strangle me! And she's gone home for Christmas -- so I'll
just have to tell the Slytherins I've decided to come back."

   When Hermione had bustled off to check on the Polyjuice Potion again, Ron turned to Harry with a
doom-laden expression.

    "Have you ever heard of a plan where so many things could go wrong?"

    But to Harry's and Ron's utter amazement, stage one of the operation went just as smoothly as
Hermione had said. They lurked in the deserted entrance hall after Christmas tea, waiting for Crabbe and
Goyle who had remained alone at the Slytherin table, shoveling down fourth helpings of trifle. Harry had
perched the chocolate cakes on the end of the banisters. When they spotted Crabbe and Goyle coming
out of the Great Hall, Harry and Ron hid quickly behind a suit of armor next to the front door.

    "How thick can you get?" Ron whispered ecstatically as Crabbe gleefully pointed out the cakes to


                                                                                                             Page 122
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Goyle and grabbed them. Grinning stupidly, they stuffed the cakes whole into their large mouths. For a
moment, both of them chewed greedily, looks of triumph on their faces. Then, without the smallest
change of expression, they both keeled over backward onto the floor.

   By far the hardest part was hiding them in the closet across the hall. Once they were safely stowed
among the buckets and mops, Harry yanked out a couple of the bristles that covered Goyle's forehead
and Ron pulled out several of Crabbe's hairs. They also stole their shoes, because their own were far too
small for Crabbe- and Goyle-size feet. Then, still stunned at what they had just done, they sprinted up to
Moaning Myrtle's bathroom.

    They could hardly see for the thick black smoke issuing from the stall in which Hermione was stirring
the cauldron. Pulling their robes up over their faces, Harry and Ron knocked softly on the door.

    "Hermione?"

     They heard the scrape of the lock and Hermione emerged, shiny-faced and looking anxious. Behind
her they heard the gloop gloop of the bubbling, glutinous potion. Three glass tumblers stood ready on the
toilet seat.

    "Did you get them?" Hermione asked breathlessly.

    Harry showed her Goyle's hair.

    "Good. And I sneaked these spare robes out of the laundry," Hermione said, holding up a small
sack. "You'll need bigger sizes once you're Crabbe and Goyle."

   The three of them stared into the cauldron. Close up, the potion looked like thick, dark mud,
bubbling sluggishly.

    "I'm sure I've done everything right," said Hermione, nervously rereading the splotched page of
Moste Potente Potions. "It looks like the book says it should ... once we've drunk it, we'll have exactly
an hour before we change back into ourselves."

    "Now what?" Ron whispered.

    "We separate it into three glasses and add the hairs."

   Hermione ladled large dollops of the potion into each of the glasses. Then, her hand trembling, she
shook Millicent Bulstrode's hair out of its bottle into the first glass.

    The potion hissed loudly like a boiling kettle and frothed madly. A second later, it had turned a sick
sort of yellow.

    "Urgh -- essence of Millicent Bulstrode," said Ron, eyeing it with loathing. "Bet it tastes disgusting."

    "Add yours, then," said Hermione.

    Harry dropped Goyle's hair into the middle glass and Ron put Crabbe's into the last one. Both
glasses hissed and frothed: Goyle's turned the khaki color of a booger, Crabbe's a dark, murky brown.

    "Hang on," said Harry as Ron and Hermione reached for their glasses. "We'd better not all drink


                                                                                                               Page 123
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




them in here .... Once we turn into Crabbe and Goyle we won't fit. And Millicent Bulstrode's no pixie."

    "Good thinking," said Ron, unlocking the door. "We'll take separate stalls."

    Careful not to spill a drop of his Polyjuice Potion, Harry slipped into the middle stall.

    "Ready?" he called.

    "Ready," came Ron's and Hermione's voices.

    "One -- two -- three --"

   Pinching his nose, Harry drank the potion down in two large gulps. It tasted like overcooked
cabbage.

     Immediately, his insides started writhing as though he'd just swallowed live snakes -- doubled up, he
wondered whether he was going to be sick -- then a burning sensation spread rapidly from his stomach
to the very ends of his fingers and toes -- next, bringing him gasping to all fours, came a horrible melting
feeling, as the skin all over his body bubbled like hot wax -- and before his eyes, his hands began to
grow, the fingers thickened, the nails broadened, the knuckles were bulging like bolts -- his shoulders
stretched painfully and a prickling on his forehead told him that hair was creeping down toward his
eyebrows -- his robes ripped as his chest expanded like a barrel bursting its hoops -- his feet were
agony in shoes four sizes too small.

     As suddenly as it had started, everything stopped. Harry lay facedown on the stone-cold floor,
listening to Myrtle gurgling morosely in the end toilet. With difficulty, he kicked off his shoes and stood
up. So this was what it felt like, being Goyle. His large hand trembling, he pulled off his old robes, which
were hanging a foot above his ankles, pulled on the spare ones, and laced up Goyle's boatlike shoes. He
reached up to brush his hair out of his eyes and met only the short growth of wiry bristles, low on his
forehead. Then he realized that his glasses were clouding his eyes because Goyle obviously didn't need
them -- he took them off and called, "Are you two okay?" Goyle's low rasp of a voice issued from his
mouth.

    "Yeah," came the deep grunt of Crabbe from his right.

    Harry unlocked his door and stepped in front of the cracked mirror. Goyle stared back at him out of
dull, deepset eyes. Harry scratched his ear. So did Goyle.

    Ron's door opened. They stared at each other. Except that he looked pale and shocked, Ron was
indistinguishable from Crabbe, from the pudding-bowl haircut to the long, gorilla arms.

   "This is unbelievable," said Ron, approaching the mirror and prodding Crabbe's flat nose.
"Unbelievable."

     "We'd better get going," said Harry, loosening the watch that was cutting into Goyle's thick wrist.
"We've still got to find out where the Slytherin common room is. I only hope we can find someone to
follow..."

   Ron, who had been gazing at Harry, said, "You don't know how bizarre it is to see Goyle thinking."
He banged on Hermione's door. "C'mon, we need to go --"




                                                                                                               Page 124
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




       A high-pitched voice answered him.

       "I -- I don't think I'm going to come after all. You go on without me."

       "Hermione, we know Millicent Bulstrode's ugly, no one's going to know it's you --"

       "No -- really -- I don't think I'll come. You two hurry up, you're wasting time --"

       Harry looked at Ron, bewildered.

   "That looks more like Goyle," said Ron. "That's how he looks every time a teacher asks him a
question."

       "Hermione, are you okay?" said Harry through the door.

       "Fine -- I'm fine -- go on --"

       Harry looked at his watch. Five of their precious sixty minutes had already passed.

       "We'll meet you back here, all right?" he said.

       Harry and Ron opened the door of the bathroom carefully, checked that the coast was clear, and set
off.

       "Don't swing your arms like that," Harry muttered to Ron.

       "Eh?"

       "Crabbe holds them sort of stiff..."

       "How's this?"

       "Yeah, that's better..."

    They went down the marble staircase. All they needed now was a Slytherin that they could follow to
the Slytherin common room, but there was nobody around.

       "Any ideas?" muttered Harry.

    "The Slytherins always come up to breakfast from over there," said Ron, nodding at the entrance to
the dungeons. The words had barely left his mouth when a girl with long, curly hair emerged from the
entrance.

       "Excuse me," said Ron, hurrying up to her. "We've forgotten the way to our common room."

       "I beg your pardon?" said the girl stiffly. "Our common room? I'm a Ravenclaw."

       She walked away, looking suspiciously back at them.

    Harry and Ron hurried down the stone steps into the darkness, their footsteps echoing particularly
loudly as Crabbe's and Goyle's huge feet hit the floor, feeling that this wasn't going to be as easy as they


                                                                                                               Page 125
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




had hoped.

   The labyrinthine passages were deserted. They walked deeper and deeper under the school,
constantly checking their watches to see how much time they had left. After a quarter of an hour, just
when they were getting desperate, they heard a sudden movement ahead.

    "Ha!" said Ron excitedly. "There's one of them now!"

   The figure was emerging from a side room. As they hurried nearer, however, their hearts sank. It
wasn't a Slytherin, it was Percy.

    "What're you doing down here?" said Ron in surprise.

    Percy looked affronted.

    "That," he said stiffly, "is none of your business. It's Crabbe, isn't it?"

    "Wh -- oh, yeah," said Ron.

    "Well, get off to your dormitories," said Percy sternly. "It's not safe to go wandering around dark
corridors these days."

    "You are," Ron pointed out.

    "I," said Percy, drawing himself up, "am a prefect. Nothing's about to attack me."

     A voice suddenly echoed behind Harry and Ron. Draco Malfoy was strolling toward them, and for
the first time in his life, Harry was pleased to see him.

     "There you are," he drawled, looking at them. "Have you two been pigging out in the Great Hall all
this time? I've been looking for you; I want to show you something really funny."

    Malfoy glanced witheringly at Percy.

    "And what're you doing down here, Weasley?" he sneered.

    Percy looked outraged.

    "You want to show a bit more respect to a school prefect!" he said. "I don't like your attitude!"

    Malfoy sneered and motioned for Harry and Ron to follow him. Harry almost said something
apologetic to Percy but caught himself just in time. He and Ron hurried after Malfoy, who said as they
turned into the next passage, "That Peter Weasley --"

    "Percy," Ron corrected him automatically.

    "Whatever," said Malfoy. "I've noticed him sneaking around a lot lately. And I bet I know what he's
up to. He thinks he's going to catch Slytherin's heir single-handed."

    He gave a short, derisive laugh. Harry and Ron exchanged excited looks.




                                                                                                          Page 126
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Malfoy paused by a stretch of bare, damp stone wall.

    "What's the new password again?" he said to Harry.

    "Er --" said Harry.

   "Oh, yeah -- pure-blood!" said Malfoy, not listening, and a stone door concealed in the wall slid
open. Malfoy marched through it, and Harry and Ron followed him.

    The Slytherin common room was a long, low underground room with rough stone walls and ceiling
from which round, greenish lamps were hanging on chains. A fire was crackling under an elaborately
carved mantelpiece ahead of them, and several Slytherins were silhouetted around it in high-backed
chairs.

    "Wait here," said Malfoy to Harry and Ron, motioning them to a pair of empty chairs set back from
the fire. "I'll go and get it my father's just sent it to me --"

    Wondering what Malfoy was going to show them, Harry and Ron sat down, doing their best to look
at home.

   Malfoy came back a minute later, holding what looked like a newspaper clipping. He thrust it under
Ron's nose.

    "That'll give you a laugh," he said.

   Harry saw Ron's eyes widen in shock. He read the clipping quickly, gave a very forced laugh, and
handed it to Harry.



It had been clipped out of the Daily Prophet , and it said:



                              INQUIRY AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

   Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office, was today fined fifty Galleons for
bewitching a Muggle car.

    Mr. Lucius Malfoy, a governor of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, where the
enchanted car crashed earlier this year, called today for Mr. Weasley's resignation. "Weasley has
brought the Ministry into disrepute," Mr. Malfoy told our reporter. "He is clearly unfit to draw up our
laws and his ridiculous Muggle Protection Act should be scrapped immediately."

     Mr. Weasley was unavailable for comment, although his wife told reporters to clear off or she'd set
the family ghoul on them.



    "Well?" said Malfoy impatiently as Harry handed the clipping back to him. "Don't you think it's
funny?"


                                                                                                           Page 127
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Ha, ha," said Harry bleakly.

   "Arthur Weasley loves Muggles so much he should snap his wand in half and go and join them," said
Malfoy scornfully. "You'd never know the Weasleys were pure-bloods, the way they behave."

    Ron's -- or rather, Crabbe's -- face was contorted with fury.

    "What's up with you, Crabbe?" snapped Malfoy.

    "Stomachache," Ron grunted.

    "Well, go up to the hospital wing and give all those Mudbloods a kick from me," said Malfoy,
snickering. "You know, I'm surprised the Daily Prophet hasn't reported all these attacks yet," he went
on thoughtfully. "I suppose Dumbledore's trying to hush it all up. He'll be sacked if it doesn't stop soon.
Father's always said old Dumbledore's the worst thing that's ever happened to this place. He loves
Muggle-borns. A decent headmaster would never've let slime like that Creevey in."

    Malfoy started taking pictures with an imaginary camera and did a cruel but accurate impression of
Colin: "`Potter, can I have your picture, Potter? Can I have your autograph? Can I lick your shoes,
please, Potter?"'

    He dropped his hands and looked at Harry and Ron.

    "What's the matter with you two?"

   Far too late, Harry and Ron forced themselves to laugh, but Malfoy seemed satisfied; perhaps
Crabbe and Goyle were always slow on the uptake.

    "Saint Potter, the Mudbloods' friend," said Malfoy slowly. "He's another one with no proper wizard
feeling, or he wouldn't go around with that jumped up Granger Mudblood. And people think he's
Slytherin's heir!"

   Harry and Ron waited with bated breath: Malfoy was surely seconds away from telling them it was
him -- but then "I wish I knew who it is," said Malfoy petulantly. "I could help them."

    Ron's jaw dropped so that Crabbe looked even more clueless than usual. Fortunately, Malfoy didn't
notice, and Harry, thinking fast, said, "You must have some idea who's behind it all..."

    "You know I haven't, Goyle, how many times do I have to tell you?" snapped Malfoy. "And Father
won't tell me anything about the last time the Chamber was opened either. Of course, it was fifty years
ago, so it was before his time, but he knows all about it, and he says that it was all kept quiet and it'll
look suspicious if I know too much about it. But I know one thing -- last time the Chamber of Secrets
was opened, a Mudblood died. So I bet it's a matter of time before one of them's killed this time...I
hope it's Granger," he said with relish.

   Ron was clenching Crabbe's gigantic fists. Feeling that it would be a bit of a giveaway if Ron
punched Malfoy, Harry shot him a warning look and said, "D'you know if the person who opened the
Chamber last time was caught?"

    "Oh, yeah...whoever it was was expelled," said Malfoy. "They're probably still in Azkaban."


                                                                                                              Page 128
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Azkaban?" said Harry, puzzled.

   "Azkaban -- the wizard prison, Goyle," said Malfoy, looking at him in disbelief "Honestly, if you
were any slower, you'd be going backward."

    He shifted restlessly in his chair and said, "Father says to keep my head down and let the Heir of
Slytherin get on with it. He says the school needs ridding of all the Mudblood filth, but not to get mixed
up in it. Of course, he's got a lot on his plate at the moment. You know the Ministry of Magic raided our
manor last week?"

    Harry tried to force Goyle's dull face into a look of concern.

    "Yeah..." said Malfoy. "Luckily, they didn't find much. Father's got some very valuable Dark Arts
stuff. But luckily, we've got our own secret chamber under the drawing-room floor --"

    "Ho!" said Ron.

    Malfoy looked at him. So did Harry. Ron blushed. Even his hair was turning red. His nose was also
slowly lengthening -- their hour was up, Ron was turning back into himself, and from the look of horror
he was suddenly giving Harry, he must be, too.

    They both jumped to their feet.

    "Medicine for my stomach," Ron grunted, and without further ado they sprinted the length of the
Slytherin common room, hurled themselves at the stone wall, and dashed up the passage, hoping against
hope that Malfoy hadn't noticed anything. Harry could feel his feet slipping around in Goyle's huge shoes
and had to hoist up his robes as he shrank; they crashed up the steps into the dark entrance hall, which
was full of a muffled pounding coming from the closet where they'd locked Crabbe and Goyle. Leaving
their shoes outside the closet door, they sprinted in their socks up the marble staircase toward Moaning
Myrtle's bathroom.

   "Well, it wasn't a complete waste of time," Ron panted, closing the bathroom door behind them. "I
know we still haven't found out who's doing the attacks, but I'm going to write to Dad tomorrow and tell
him to check under the Malfoys' drawing room."

   Harry checked his face in the cracked mirror. He was back to normal. He put his glasses on as Ron
hammered on the door of Hermione's stall.

    "Hermione, come out, we've got loads to tell you --"

    "Go away!" Hermione squeaked.

    Harry and Ron looked at each other.

    "What's the matter?" said Ron. "You must be back to normal by now, we are."

   But Moaning Myrtle glided suddenly through the stall door. Harry had never seen her looking so
happy.

    "Ooooooh, wait till you see," she said. "It's awful --"


                                                                                                             Page 129
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    They heard the lock slide back and Hermione emerged, sobbing, her robes pulled up over her head.

    "What's up?" said Ron uncertainly. "Have you still got Millicent's nose or something?"

    Hermione let her robes fall and Ron backed into the sink.

   Her face was covered in black fur. Her eyes had turned yellow and there were long, pointed ears
poking through her hair.

   "It was a c-cat hair!" she howled. "M-Millicent Bulstrode m-must have a cat! And the p-potion isn't
supposed to be used for animal transformations!"

    "Uh-oh," said Ron.

    "You'll be teased something dreadful," said Myrtle happily.

   "It's okay, Hermione," said Harry quickly. "We'll take you up to the hospital wing. Madam Pomfrey
never asks too many questions..."

   It took a long time to persuade Hermione to leave the bathroom. Moaning Myrtle sped them on their
way with a hearty guffaw. "Wait till everyone finds out you've got a tail!"




                                         CHAPTER THIRTEEN



                                      THE VERY SECRET DIARY



 Hermione remained in the hospital wing for several weeks. There was a flurry of rumor about her
disappearance when the rest of the school arrived back from their Christmas holidays, because of course
everyone thought that she had been attacked. So many students filed past the hospital wing trying to
catch a glimpse of her that Madam Pomfrey took out her curtains again and placed them around
Hermione's bed, to spare her the shame of being seen with a furry face.

   Harry and Ron went to visit her every evening. When the new term started, they brought her each
day's homework.

   "If I'd sprouted whiskers, I'd take a break from work," said Ron, tipping a stack of books onto
Hermione's bedside table one evening.

    "Don't be silly, Ron, I've got to keep up," said Hermione briskly. Her spirits were greatly improved
by the fact that all the hair had gone from her face and her eyes were turning slowly back to brown. "I
don't suppose you've got any new leads?" she added in a whisper, so that Madam Pomfrey couldn't


                                                                                                           Page 130
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




hear her.

    "Nothing," said Harry gloomily.

    "I was so sure it was Malfoy," said Ron, for about the hundredth time.

    "What's that?" asked Harry, pointing to something gold sticking out from under Hermione's pillow.

    "Just a get well card," said Hermione hastily, trying to poke it out of sight, but Ron was too quick for
her. He pulled it out, flicked it open, and read aloud:



 "To Miss Granger, wishing you a speedy recovery, from your concerned teacher, Professor Gilderoy
Lockhart, Order of Merlin, Third Class, Honorary Member of the Dark Force Defense League, and
five-time winner of Witch Weekly's Most Charming Smile Award."



    Ron looked up at Hermione, disgusted.

    "You sleep with this under your pillow?"

   But Hermione was spared answering by Madam Pomfrey sweeping over with her evening dose of
medicine.

     "Is Lockhart the smarmiest bloke you've ever met, or what?" Ron said to Harry as they left the
infirmary and started up the stairs toward Gryffindor Tower.

    Snape had given them so much homework, Harry thought he was likely to be in the sixth year before
he finished it. Ron was just saying he wished he had asked Hermione how many rat tails you were
supposed to add to a Hair Raising Potion when an angry outburst from the floor above reached their
ears.

    "That's Filch," Harry muttered as they hurried up the stairs and paused, out of sight, listening hard.

    "You don't think someone else's been attacked?" said Ron tensely.

    They stood still, their heads inclined toward Flich's voice, which sounded quite hysterical.

    "even more work for me! Mopping all night, like I haven't got enough to do! No, this is the final
straw, I'm going to Dumbledore --"

    His footsteps receded along the out-of-sight corridor and they heard a distant door slam.

    They poked their heads around the corner. Filch had clearly been manning his usual lookout post:
They were once again on the spot where Mrs. Norris had been attacked. They saw at a glance what
Filch had been shouting about. A great flood of water stretched over half the corridor, and it looked as
though it was still seeping from under the door of Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. Now that Filch had
stopped shouting, they could hear Myrtle's wails echoing off the bathroom walls.




                                                                                                               Page 131
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Now what's up with her?" said Ron.

    "Let's go and see," said Harry, and holding their robes over their ankles they stepped through the
great wash of water to the door bearing its OUT OF ORDER sign, ignored it as always, and entered.

    Moaning Myrtle was crying, if possible, louder and harder than ever before. She seemed to be hiding
down her usual toilet. It was dark in the bathroom because the candles had been extinguished in the great
rush of water that had left both walls and floor soaking wet.

    "What's up, Myrtle?" said Harry.

    "Who's that?" glugged Myrtle miserably. "Come to throw something else at me?"

    Harry waded across to her stall and said, "Why would I throw something at you?"

    "Don't ask me," Myrtle shouted, emerging with a wave of yet more water, which splashed onto the
already sopping floor. "Here I am, minding my own business, and someone thinks it's funny to throw a
book at me..."

    "But it can't hurt you if someone throws something at you," said Harry, reasonably. "I mean, it'd just
go right through you, wouldn't it?"

    He had said the wrong thing. Myrtle puffed herself up and shrieked, "Let's all throw books at Myrtle,
because she can't feel it! Ten points if you can get it through her stomach! Fifty points if it goes through
her head! Well, ha, ha, ha! What a lovely game, I don't think!"

    "Who threw it at you, anyway?" asked Harry.

    "I don't know... I was just sitting in the U-bend, thinking about death, and it fell right through the top
of my head," said Myrtle, glaring at them. "It's over there, it got washed out..."

     Harry and Ron looked under the sink where Myrtle was pointing. A small, thin book lay there. It had
a shabby black cover and was as wet as everything else in the bathroom. Harry stepped forward to pick
it up, but Ron suddenly flung out an arm to hold him back.

    "What?" said Harry.

    "Are you crazy?" said Ron. "It could be dangerous."

    "Dangerous?"said Harry, laughing. "Come off it, how could it be dangerous?"

    "You'd be surprised," said Ron, who was looking apprehensively at the book. "Some of the books
the Ministry's confiscated Dad's told me -- there was one that burned your eyes out. And everyone
who read Sonnets of a Sorcerer spoke in limericks for the rest of their lives. And some old witch in Bath
had a book that you could never stop reading! You just had to wander around with your nose in it, trying
to do everything one-handed. And --"

    "All right, I've got the point," said Harry.

    The little book lay on the floor, nondescript and soggy.




                                                                                                                 Page 132
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




     "Well, we won't find out unless we look at it," he said, and he ducked around Ron and picked it up
off the floor.

   Harry saw at once that it was a diary, and the faded year on the cover told him it was fifty years old.
He opened it eagerly. On the first page he could just make out the name "T M. Riddle" in smudged ink.

   "Hang on," said Ron, who had approached cautiously and was looking over Harry's shoulder. "I
know that name...T. M. Riddle got an award for special services to the school fifty years ago."

    "How on earth d'you know that?" said Harry in amazement.

    "Because Filch made me polish his shield about fifty times in detention," said Ron resentfully. "That
was the one I burped slugs all over. If you'd wiped slime off a name for an hour, you'd remember it,
too."

    Harry peeled the wet pages apart. They were completely blank. There wasn't the faintest trace of
writing on any of them, not even Auntie Mabel's birthday, or dentist, half-past three.

    "He never wrote in it," said Harry, disappointed.

    "I wonder why someone wanted to flush it away?" said Ron curiously.

   Harry turned to the back cover of the book and saw the printed name of a variety store on Vauxhall
Road, London.

   "He must've been Muggle-born," said Harry thoughtfully. "To have bought a diary from Vauxhall
Road..."

    "Well, it's not much use to you," said Ron. He dropped his voice. "Fifty points if you can get it
through Myrtle's nose."

    Harry, however, pocketed it.

    Hermione left the hospital wing, de-whiskered, tail-less, and furfree, at the beginning of February. On
her first evening back in Gryffindor Tower, Harry showed her T. M. Riddle's diary and told her the story
of how they had found it.

     "Oooh, it might have hidden powers," said Hermione enthusiastically, taking the diary and looking at
it closely.

     "If it has, it's hiding them very well," said Ron. "Maybe it's shy. I don't know why you don't chuck
it, Harry."

    "I wish I knew why someone did try to chuck it," said Harry. "I wouldn't mind knowing how Riddle
got an award for special services to Hogwarts either."

    "Could've been anything," said Ron. "Maybe he got thirty O.W.L.s or saved a teacher from the giant
squid. Maybe he murdered Myrtle; that would've done everyone a favor ..."

    But Harry could tell from the arrested look on Hermione's face that she was thinking what he was
thinking.


                                                                                                              Page 133
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "What?" said Ron, looking from one to the other.

    "Well, the Chamber of Secrets was opened fifty years ago, wasn't it?" he said. "That's what Malfoy
said."

    "Yeah..." said Ron slowly.

    "And this diary is fifty years old," said Hermione, tapping it excitedly.

    "So?"

     "Oh, Ron, wake up," snapped Hermione. "We know the person who opened the Chamber last time
was expelled fifty years ago. We know T. M. Riddle got an award for special services to the school fifty
years ago. Well, what if Riddle got his special award for catching the Heir of Slytherin? His diary would
probably tell us everything -- where the Chamber is, and how to open it, and what sort of creature lives
in it -- the person who's behind the attacks this time wouldn't want that lying around, would they?"

     "That's a brilliant theory, Hermione," said Ron, "with just one tiny little flaw. There's nothing written
in his diary."

    But Hermione was pulling her wand out of her bag.

    "It might be invisible ink!" she whispered.

    She tapped the diary three times and said, "Aparecium!"

   Nothing happened. Undaunted, Hermione shoved her hand back into her bag and pulled out what
appeared to be a bright red eraser.

    "It's a Revealer, I got it in Diagon Alley," she said.

    She rubbed hard on January first. Nothing happened.

    "I'm telling you, there's nothing to find in there," said Ron. "Riddle just got a diary for Christmas and
couldn't be bothered filling it in."

    Harry couldn't explain, even to himself, why he didn't just throw Riddle's diary away. The fact was
that even though he knew the diary was blank, he kept absentmindedly picking it up and turning the
pages, as though it were a story he wanted to finish. And while Harry was sure he had never heard the
name T. M. Riddle before, it still seemed to mean something to him, almost as though Riddle was a friend
he'd had when he was very small, and had half-forgotten. But this was absurd. He'd never had friends
before Hogwarts, Dudley had made sure of that.

     Nevertheless, Harry was determined to find out more about Riddle, so next day at break, he headed
for the trophy room to examine Riddle's special award, accompanied by an interested Hermione and a
thoroughly unconvinced Ron, who told them he'd seen enough of the trophy room to last him a lifetime.

    Riddle's burnished gold shield was tucked away in a corner cabinet. It didn't carry details of why it
had been given to him ("Good thing, too, or it'd be even bigger and I'd still be polishing it," said Ron).
However, they did find Riddle's name on an old Medal for Magical Merit, and on a list of old Head


                                                                                                                 Page 134
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Boys.

    "He sounds like Percy," said Ron, wrinkling his nose in disgust. "Prefect, Head Boy ...probably top
of every class --"

    "You say that like it's a bad thing," said Hermione in a slightly hurt voice.



The sun had now begun to shine weakly on Hogwarts again. Inside the castle, the mood had grown
more hopeful. There had been no more attacks since those on Justin and Nearly Headless Nick, and
Madam Pomfrey was pleased to report that the Mandrakes were becoming moody and secretive,
meaning that they were fast leaving childhood.

    "The moment their acne clears up, they'll be ready for repotting again," Harry heard her telling Filch
kindly one afternoon. "And after that, it won't be long until we're cutting them up and stewing them.
You'll have Mrs. Norris back in no time."

    Perhaps the Heir of Slytherin had lost his or her nerve, thought Harry. It must be getting riskier and
riskier to open the Chamber of Secrets, with the school so alert and suspicious. Perhaps the monster,
whatever it was, was even now settling itself down to hibernate for another fifty years....

    Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff didn't take this cheerful view. He was still convinced that Harry was
the guilty one, that he had "given himself away" at the Dueling Club. Peeves wasn't helping matters; he
kept popping up in the crowded corridors singing "Oh, Potter, you rotter..." now with a dance routine to
match.

    Gilderoy Lockhart seemed to think he himself had made the attacks stop. Harry overheard him telling
Professor McGonagall so while the Gryffindors were lining up for Transfiguration. "I don't think there'll
be any more trouble, Minerva," he said, tapping his nose knowingly and winking. "I think the Chamber
has been locked for good this time. The culprit must have known it was only a matter of time before I
caught him. Rather sensible to stop now, before I came down hard on him.

    "You know, what the school needs now is a morale-booster. Wash away the memories of last term!
I won't say any more just now, but I think I know just the thing..."

    He tapped his nose again and strode off.

   Lockhart's idea of a morale-booster became clear at breakfast time on February fourteenth. Harry
hadn't had much sleep because of a late-running Quidditch practice the night before, and he hurried
down to the Great Hall, slightly late. He thought, for a moment, that he'd walked through the wrong
doors.

     The walls were all covered with large, lurid pink flowers. Worse still, heart-shaped confetti was
falling from the pale blue ceiling. Harry went over to the Gryffindor table, where Ron was sitting looking
sickened, and Hermione seemed to have been overcome with giggles.

    "What's going on?" Harry asked them, sitting down and wiping confetti off his bacon.

    Ron pointed to the teachers' table, apparently too disgusted to speak. Lockhart, wearing lurid pink
robes to match the decorations, was waving for silence. The teachers on either side of him were looking


                                                                                                             Page 135
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




stony-faced. From where he sat, Harry could see a muscle going in Professor McGonagall's cheek.
Snape looked as though someone had just fed him a large beaker of Skele-Gro.

    "Happy Valentine's Day!" Lockhart shouted. "And may I thank the forty-six people who have so far
sent me cards! Yes, I have taken the liberty of arranging this little surprise for you all -- and it doesn't
end here!"

    Lockhart clapped his hands and through the doors to the entrance hall marched a dozen
surly-looking dwarfs. Not just any dwarfs, however. Lockhart had them all wearing golden wings and
carrying harps.

    "My friendly, card-carrying cupids!" beamed Lockhart. "They will be roving around the school today
delivering your valentines! And the fun doesn't stop here! I'm sure my colleagues will want to enter into
the spirit of the occasion! Why not ask Professor Snape to show you how to whip up a Love Potion!
And while you're at it, Professor Flitwick knows more about Entrancing Enchantments than any wizard
I've ever met, the sly old dog!"

   Professor Flitwick buried his face in his hands. Snape was looking as though the first person to ask
him for a Love Potion would be force-fed poison.

    "Please, Hermione, tell me you weren't one of the forty-six, said Ron as they left the Great Hall for
their first lesson. Hermione suddenly became very interested in searching her bag for her schedule and
didn't answer.

    All day long, the dwarfs kept barging into their classes to deliver valentines, to the annoyance of the
teachers, and late that afternoon as the Gryffindors were walking upstairs for Charms, one of the dwarfs
caught up with Harry.

    "Oy, you! `Arry Potter!" shouted a particularly grim-looking dwarf, elbowing people out of the way
to get to Harry.

    Hot all over at the thought of being given a valentine in front of a line of first years, which happened to
include Ginny Weasley, Harry tried to escape. The dwarf, however, cut his way through the crowd by
kicking people's shins, and reached him before he'd gone two paces.

    "I've got a musical message to deliver to `Arry Potter in person," he said, twanging his harp in a
threatening sort of way.

    "Not here," Harry hissed, trying to escape.

    "Stay still!" grunted the dwarf, grabbing hold of Harry's bag and pulling him back.

    "Let me go!" Harry snarled, tugging.

    With a loud ripping noise, his bag split in two. His books, wand, parchment, and quill spilled onto the
floor and his ink bottle smashed over everything.

    Harry scrambled around, trying to pick it all up before the dwarf started singing, causing something of
a holdup in the corridor.

    "What's going on here?" came the cold, drawling voice of Draco Malfoy. Harry started stuffing


                                                                                                                  Page 136
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




everything feverishly into his ripped bag, desperate to get away before Malfoy could hear his musical
valentine.

    "What's all this commotion?" said another familiar voice as Percy Weasley arrived.

    Losing his head, Harry tried to make a run for it, but the dwarf seized him around the knees and
brought him crashing to the floor.

    "Right," he said, sitting on Harry's ankles. "Here is your singing valentine:



        His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad,

        His hair is as dark as a blackboard,

        I wish he was mine,

        he's really divine,

        The hero who conquered the Dark Lord



    Harry would have given all the gold in Gringotts to evaporate on the spot. Trying valiantly to laugh
along with everyone else, he got up, his feet numb from the weight of the dwarf, as Percy Weasley did his
best to disperse the crowd, some of whom were crying with mirth.

    "Off you go, off you go, the bell rang five minutes ago, off to class, now," he said, shooing some of
the younger students away. "And you, Malfoy --"

    Harry, glancing over, saw Malfoy stoop and snatch up something. Leering, he showed it to Crabbe
and Goyle, and Harry realized that he'd got Riddle's diary.

    "Give that back," said Harry quietly.

    "Wonder what Potter's written in this?" said Malfoy, who obviously hadn't noticed the year on the
cover and thought he had Harry's own diary. A hush fell over the onlookers. Ginny was staring from the
diary to Harry, looking terrified.

    "Hand it over, Malfoy," said Percy sternly.

    "When I've had a look," said Malfoy, waving the diary tauntingly at Harry.

   Percy said, "As a school prefect --" but Harry had lost his temper. He pulled out his wand and
shouted, "Expelliarmus!" and just as Snape had disarmed Lockhart, so Malfoy found the diary
shooting out of his hand into the air. Ron, grinning broadly, caught it.

    "Harry!" said Percy loudly. "No magic in the corridors. I'll have to report this, you know!"

    But Harry didn't care, he was one-up on Malfoy, and that was worth five points from Gryffindor any


                                                                                                            Page 137
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




day. Malfoy was looking furious, and as Ginny passed him to enter her classroom, he yelled spitefully
after her, "I don't think Potter liked your valentine much!"

   Ginny covered her face with her hands and ran into class. Snarling, Ron pulled out his wand, too, but
Harry pulled him away. Ron didn't need to spend the whole of Charms belching slugs.

     It wasn't until they had reached Professor Flitwick's class that Harry noticed something rather odd
about Riddle's diary. All his other books were drenched in scarlet ink. The diary, however, was as clean
as it had been before the ink bottle had smashed all over it. He tried to point this out to Ron, but Ron
was having trouble with his wand again; large purple bubbles were blossoming out of the end, and he
wasn't much interested in anything else.

    Harry went to bed before anyone else in his dormitory that night. This was partly because he didn't
think he could stand Fred and George singing, "His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad" one more
time, and partly because he wanted to examine Riddle's diary again, and knew that Ron thought he was
wasting his time.

    Harry sat on his four-poster and flicked through the blank pages, not one of which had a trace of
scarlet ink on it. Then he pulled a new bottle out of his bedside cabinet, dipped his quill into it, and
dropped a blot onto the first page of the diary.

   The ink shone brightly on the paper for a second and then, as though it was being sucked into the
page, vanished. Excited, Harry loaded up his quill a second time and wrote, "My name is Harry Potter."

   The words shone momentarily on the page and they, too, sank without trace. Then, at last, something
happened.

    Oozing back out of the page, in his very own ink, came words Harry had never written.

    "Hello, Harry Potter. My name is Tom Riddle. How did you come by my diary?"

    These words, too, faded away, but not before Harry had started to scribble back.

    "Someone tried to flush it down a toilet."

    He waited eagerly for Riddle's reply.

    "Lucky that I recorded my memories in some more lasting way than ink. But I always knew that
there would be those who would not want this diary read."

    "What do you mean?" Harry scrawled, blotting the page in his excitement.

   `I mean that this diary holds memories of terrible things. Things that were covered up. Things that
happened at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry."

   "That's where I am now," Harry wrote quickly. "I'm at Hogwarts, and horrible stuff's been
happening. Do you know anything about the Chamber of Secrets?"

   His heart was hammering. Riddle's reply came quickly, his writing becoming untidier, as though he
was hurrying to tell all he knew.




                                                                                                           Page 138
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




     "Of course I know about the Chamber of Secrets. In my day, they told us it was a legend, that it did
not exist. But this was a lie. In my fifth year, the Chamber was opened and the monster attacked several
students, finally killing one. I caught the person who'd opened the Chamber and he was expelled. But the
Headmaster, Professor Dippet, ashamed that such a thing had happened at Hogwarts, forbade me to tell
the truth. A story was given out that the girl had died in a freak accident. They gave me a nice, shiny,
engraved trophy for my trouble and warned me to keep my mouth shut. But I knew it could happen
again. The monster lived on, and the one who had the power to release it was not imprisoned."

    Harry nearly upset his ink bottle in his hurry to write back.

   "It's happening again now. There have been three attacks and no one seems to know who's behind
them. Who was it last time?"

    "I can show you, if you like, "came Riddle's reply. "You don't have to take my word for it. I can
take you inside my memory of the night when I caught him."

    Harry hesitated, his quill suspended over the diary. What did Riddle mean? How could he be taken
inside somebody else's memory? He glanced nervously at the door to the dormitory, which was growing
dark. When he looked back at the diary, he saw fresh words forming.

    "Let me show you."

    Harry paused for a fraction of a second and then wrote two letters.

    OK

    The pages of the diary began to blow as though caught in a high wind, stopping halfway through the
month of June. Mouth hanging open, Harry saw that the little square for June thirteenth seemed to have
turned into a miniscule television screen. His hands trembling slightly, he raised the book to press his eye
against the little window, and before he knew what was happening, he was tilting forward; the window
was widening, he felt his body leave his bed, and he was pitched headfirst through the opening in the
page, into a whirl of color and shadow.

    He felt his feet hit solid ground, and stood, shaking, as the blurred shapes around him came suddenly
into focus.

     He knew immediately where he was. This circular room with the sleeping portraits was
Dumbledore's office -- but it wasn't Dumbledore who was sitting behind the desk. A wizened,
frail-looking wizard, bald except for a few wisps of white hair, was reading a letter by candlelight. Harry
had never seen this man before.

    "I'm sorry," he said shakily. "I didn't mean to butt in --"

    But the wizard didn't look up. He continued to read, frowning slightly. Harry drew nearer to his desk
and stammered, "Er -- I'll just go, shall I?"

    Still the wizard ignored him. He didn't seem even to have heard him. Thinking that the wizard might
be deaf, Harry raised his voice.

    "Sorry I disturbed you. I'll go now," he half-shouted.




                                                                                                               Page 139