Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs is a 1937 
American animated film based on Snow White, a German fairy tale by the Brothers Grimm. It was the first full-length cel-animated feature in motion picture history, as well as the first animated feature film produced in America, the first produced in full color, the first to be produced by Walt Disney and Walt Disney Productions, and the first in the Walt Disney Animated Classics canon.[3]
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21, 1937, and the film was released to theaters nationwide by RKO Radio Pictures on February 4, 1938. The story was adapted by storyboard artists Dorothy Ann Blank, Richard Creedon, Merrill De Maris, Otto Englander, Earl Hurd, Dick Rickard, Ted Sears and Webb Smith. David Hand was the supervising director, while William Cottrell, Wilfred Jackson, Larry Morey, Perce Pearce, and Ben Sharpsteen directed the film's individual sequences.
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was one of only two animated films to rank in the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest American films of all time in 1997 (the other being Disney's Fantasia), ranking number 49. It achieved a higher ranking (#34) in the list's 2007 update, this time being the only traditionally animated film on the list. The following year AFI named the film as the greatest American animated film of all time.
In 1989, the film was added to the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
Contents [hide]
1 Plot
2 Cast
3 Production
3.1 Story development
3.2 Design
3.3 Music
3.4 Cinematic influences
4 Release
4.1 Theatrical run
4.2 Critical reception
4.3 Home media
5 Media
5.1 Theme parks
5.2 Video games
5.3 Comics
5.4 Musical
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
Plot

Through a textual prologue told via a stop-motion storybook, the audience is told that Snow White is a princess living with her stepmother, a vain and wicked Queen who is assumed to have taken over the kingdom after the death of Snow White's father. Fearing Snow White's beauty surpassing her own, the Queen forced her to work as a scullery maid and asked her Magic Mirror daily "who is the fairest one of all". For many years the mirror always answered that the Queen was, pleasing her.
At the film's opening, the Magic Mirror informs the Queen that Snow White is now the fairest in the land. The jealous Queen orders a reluctant huntsman to take Snow White into the woods and kill her. She further demands that the huntsman return with Snow White's heart in a jeweled box as proof of the deed. The huntsman encounters Snow White but decides not to harm her. He tearfully begs for her forgiveness and urges her to flee into the woods and never come back, bringing back a pig's heart instead.
Lost and frightened, the princess is befriended by woodland creatures who lead her to a cottage deep in the woods. Finding seven small chairs in the cottage's dining room, Snow White assumes the cottage is the untidy home of seven orphaned children. It soon becomes apparent that the cottage belongs instead to seven adult dwarfs, Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy, and Dopey, who work in a nearby mine. Returning home, they are alarmed to find their cottage clean and surmise that an intruder has invaded their home. The dwarfs find Snow White upstairs, asleep across three of their beds. Snow White awakes to find the Dwarfs at her bedside and introduces herself, and all of the dwarfs eventually welcome her into their home after they learn she can cook and clean beautifully. Snow White begins a new life cooking, cleaning, and keeping house for the dwarfs while they mine for jewels and at night sing, play music and dance.
Meanwhile, the Queen discovers that Snow White is still alive when the mirror again answers that Snow White is the fairest in the land. Using magic to disguise herself as an old hag, the Queen concocts a potion named "Sleeping Death" and dips an ordinary apple into the brew. The Evil Queen explains that Snow White would collapse into a magical sleep if she were to take even a single bite of the apple. The sleep can only be cured by the power of "love's first kiss". The Queen reasons that this is no danger to her plans, as the dwarfs would not be able to awaken Snow White, and would think she was dead, thus resulting in Snow White being "buried alive". The Queen goes to the cottage while the dwarfs are away and tricks Snow White into biting into the poisoned apple. As Snow White falls asleep the Queen exclaims "Now I'll be fairest in the land!" The vengeful dwarfs, alerted by the woodland animals who recognize her, chase the Queen up a cliff and trap her. She tries to roll a boulder over them but lightning strikes the cliff she is standing on, causing it to collapse. The Queen falls to her death, and her body is crushed by the boulder.
The dwarfs return to their cottage and find Snow White seemingly dead, being kept in a death-like slumber by the potion. Unwilling to bury her out of sight in the ground, they instead place her in a glass coffin trimmed with gold in a clearing in the forest. Together with the woodland creatures, they keep watch over her in an "eternal vigil". After some time, a prince, who had previously met and fallen in love with Snow White, learns of her eternal sleep and visits her coffin. Captivated by her beauty, he kisses her, which breaks the spell and awakens her. The dwarfs and animals all rejoice as the prince takes Snow White to his castle, which glows in the presence of Snow White.
Cast



Walt Disney introduces each of the Seven Dwarfs in a scene from the original 1937 Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs theatrical trailer
Adriana Caselotti as Snow White: Snow White is a young princess and the protagonist of the film. She is the daughter of a great king whose wife died when the daughter was very young. Her wicked stepmother has forced her to work as a scullery maid in the castle. Despite this, she retains a cheerful but naïve demeanor.
Lucille La Verne as Queen Grimhilde: The Queen is the stepmother of Snow White and the main antagonist of the film. Once her magic mirror tells her that Snow White is fairer than she is, she immediately enlists Humbert the huntsman to kill her in the woods. After she discovers that Snow White did not die, she disguises herself as an old hag and uses a poisoned apple in order to remove Snow White from her path without killing her.
Harry Stockwell as The Prince: The prince first sees Snow White singing at her wishing well. He immediately falls in love with her and her voice. He later reappears to revive her.
Roy Atwell as Doc: The leader of the seven dwarfs, Doc wears glasses and often mixes up his words.
Pinto Colvig as Grumpy: Grumpy initially disapproves of Snow White's presence in the dwarfs' home, but later warns her of the threat posed by the Queen and rushes to her aid upon realizing that she is in danger, leading the charge himself. He has the biggest nose of the dwarfs, and is frequently seen with one eye shut.
Otis Harlan as Happy: Happy is the joyous dwarf and is usually portrayed laughing.
Pinto Colvig as Sleepy: Sleepy is always tired and appears laconic in most situations. Sterling Holloway was also considered for the role.[citation needed]
Scotty Mattraw as Bashful: Bashful is the shyest of the dwarfs, and is often embarrassed by the presence of any attention directed at him.
Billy Gilbert as Sneezy:[4] Sneezy's name is earned by his extraordinarily powerful sneezes (caused by hay fever), which are seen blowing even the heaviest of objects across a room.
Eddie Collins as Dopey (vocal effects and live-action reference only):[4] Dopey is the only dwarf that does not have a beard. He is clumsy and mute, with Happy explaining that he has simply "never tried to speak".
Moroni Olsen as The Magic Mirror: The Slave of the Magic Mirror appears as a green mask in clouds of smoke. The Queen regularly asks him who is the fairest in the land.
Stuart Buchanan as Humbert the Huntsman: Despite his status as the Queen's assassin, the Huntsman cannot bear to kill Snow White, even when the Queen orders him to take the princess's heart.
Production

Development on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs began in early 1934, and in June 1934, Walt Disney announced the production of his first feature to the New York Times.[5] Before Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, the Disney studio had been primarily involved in the production of animated short subjects in the Mickey Mouse and Silly Symphonies series. Disney hoped to expand his studio's prestige and revenues by moving into features,[6] and estimated that Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs could be produced for a budget of US$250,000;[5] this was ten times the budget of an average Silly Symphony.[5]
Walt Disney had to fight to get the film produced. Both his brother and business partner Roy Disney and his wife Lillian attempted to talk him out of it,[6] and the Hollywood movie industry referred to the film derisively as "Disney's Folly" while it was in production. He even had to mortgage his house to help finance the film's production, which eventually ran up a total cost of $1,488,422.74, a massive sum for a feature film in 1937.[1]
Story development
On August 9, 1934, twenty-one pages of notes—entitled "Snowwhite suggestions"—were compiled by staff writer Richard Creedon, suggesting the principal characters, as well as situations and 'gags' for the story. As Disney had stated at the very beginning of the project, the main attraction of the story for him was the Seven Dwarfs, and their possibilities for "screwiness" and "gags"; the three story meetings held in October and attended by Disney, Creedon, Larry Morey, Albert Hurter, Ted Sears and Pinto Colvig were dominated by such subjects. At this point, Disney felt that the story should begin with Snow White's discovery of the Cottage of the Seven Dwarfs.[5] Walt Disney had suggested from the beginning that each of the dwarfs, whose names and personalities are not stated in the original fairy tale, could have individual personalities. The dwarfs names were chosen from a pool of about fifty potentials, including Jumpy, Deafy, Dizzey, Hickey, Wheezy, Baldy, Gabby, Nifty, Sniffy, Swift, Lazy, Puffy, Stuffy, Tubby, Shorty and Burpy.[7] The seven finalists were chosen through a process of elimination. The leader of the dwarfs, required to be pompous, self important and bumbling, was named Doc; others were named for their distinguishing character traits. At the end of the October story meetings, however, only Doc, Grumpy, Bashful, Sleepy and Happy of the final seven were named; at this point, Sneezy and Dopey were replaced by 'Jumpy' and an unnamed seventh dwarf.[1]
Along with a focus on the characterisations and comedic possibilities of the dwarfs, Creedon's eighteen-page outline of the story written from the October meetings, featured a continuous flow of gags as well as the Queen's attempt to kill Snow White with a poisoned comb, an element taken from the Grimms' original story. After persuading Snow White to use the comb, the disguised Queen would have escaped alive, but the dwarfs would have arrived in time to remove it. After the failure of the comb, the Queen was to have the Prince captured and taken to her dungeon, where she would have come to him (story sketches show this event both with the Queen and the Witch) and used magic to bring the dungeon's skeletons to life, making them dance for him and identifying one skeleton as 'Prince Oswald' (an example of the more humorous atmosphere of this original story treatment[5]). It is written in story notes that the Queen has such magical power only in her own domain, the castle. With the Prince refusing to marry her, the Queen leaves him to his death (one sketch shows the Prince trapped in a subterranean chamber filling with water[8]) as she makes her way to the dwarfs' cottage with the poisoned apple. The forest animals were to help the Prince escape the Queen's minions and find his horse. The Prince was to ride to the cottage to save Snow White, but took the wrong road (despite warnings from the forest animals and his horse, whom he, unlike Snow White, could not understand). He therefore would not have arrived in time to save her from the Queen, but would have been able to save her with love's first kiss. This plot was not used in the final film, though many sketches of the scene in the dungeon were made by Ferdinand Hovarth.
Other examples of the more comical nature of the story at this point include suggestions for gags with the Witch's warts[citation needed] and a 'fat, batty, cartoon type, self-satisfied' Queen.[5] The Prince was also more of a clown, and was to serenade Snow White in a more comical fashion. Walt Disney encouraged all staff at the studio to contribute to the story, offering five dollars for every 'gag'; such gags included the dwarfs' noses popping over the foot of the bed when they first meet Snow White.[9]
Disney was concerned that such a comical approach would lessen the plausibility of the characters and, sensing that more time was needed for the development of the Queen, advised in an outline circulated on November 6 that attention be paid exclusively to "scenes in which only Snow White, the Dwarfs, and their bird and animal friends appear". The names and personalities of the dwarfs, however, were still "open to change". A meeting of November 16 resulted in another outline entitled 'Dwarfs Discover Snowwhite', which introduced the character of Dopey,[5] who would ultimately prove to be the most successful and popular of the dwarf characterisations.[7] For the rest of 1934 Disney further developed the story by himself, finding a dilemma in the characterisation of the Queen, who he felt could no longer be 'fat' and 'batty', but a 'stately beautiful type' (a possibility already brought up in previous story meetings). Disney did not focus on the project again until the autumn of 1935; it is thought that he may have doubted his, and his studio's, ability, and that his trip to Europe that summer restored his confidence. At this point Disney and his writers focused on the scenes in which Snow White and the dwarfs are introduced to the audience and each other. He laid out the likely assignments for everyone working on the film in a memorandum of November 25, 1935, and had decided on the personalities of the individual dwarfs.[5]
It had first been thought that the dwarfs would be the main focus of the story, and many sequences were written for the seven characters. However, at a certain point, it was decided that the main thrust of the story was provided by the relationship between the Queen and Snow White.[9] For this reason, several sequences featuring the dwarfs were cut from the film. The first, which was animated in its entirety before being cut, showed Doc and Grumpy arguing about whether Snow White should stay with them. Another, also completely animated, would have shown the dwarfs eating soup noisily and messily; Snow White (unsuccessfully) attempts to teach them how to eat 'like gentlemen'. A partially animated sequence involved the dwarfs holding a "lodge meeting" in which they try to think of a gift for Snow White; this was to be followed by the elaborate 'bed building sequence', in which the dwarfs and the forest animals construct and carve a bed for the princess. This also was cut, as it was thought to slow down the movement of the story.[9] The soup-eating and bed-building sequences were animated by Ward Kimball, who was sufficiently discouraged by their removal to consider leaving the studio, though he ultimately decided to remain.[10]
Design
The primary authority on the design of the film was concept artist Albert Hurter. All designs used in the film, from characters' appearances to the look of the rocks in the background, had to meet Hurter's approval before being finalised.[8] Two other concept artists contributed to the visual style of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs: Ferdinand Hovarth (whose designs were often thought not to be as easily translated into animation as Hurter's, but who produced a number of dark concepts for the film) and Gustaf Tenggren, whose style borrowed from the likes of Arthur Rackham and John Bauer, and thus possessed the European illustration quality that Walt Disney was interested in. Tenggren was used primarily as a color stylist and to determine the staging and atmosphere of many of the scenes in the film. He also designed the posters for the film and illustrated the press book. However, only Hurter receives a credit for the film, as a character designer. Other artists to work on the film included Joe Grant, whose most significant contribution was the design for the Queen's Witch form.[8]
Don Graham really knew what he was teaching, and he "showed" you how to do something – he didn't just talk. He taught us things that were very important for animation. How to simplify our drawings – how to cut out all the unnecessary hen scratching amateurs have a habit of using. He showed us how to make a drawing look solid. He taught us about tension points – like a bent knee, and how the pant leg comes down from that knee and how important the wrinkles from it are to describe form. I learned a hell of a lot from him!
Art Babbitt[11]
Art Babbit, an animator who joined the Disney studio in 1932, invited seven of his colleagues (who worked in the same room as him) to come with him to an art class that he himself had set up at his home in the Hollywood Hills. Though there was no teacher, Babbit had recruited a model to pose for him and his fellow animators as they drew. These "classes" were held weekly; each week, more animators would come. After three weeks, Walt Disney called Babbit to his office and offered to provide the supplies, working space and models required if the sessions were moved to the studio. Babbit ran the sessions for a month until animator Hardie Gramatky suggested that they recruit Don Graham; the art teacher from the Chouinard Institute taught his first class at the studio on 15 November 1932, and was joined by Phil Dike a few weeks later.[5] These classes were principally concerned with human anatomy and movement, though instruction later included action analysis, animal anatomy and acting.[11]
The first duty of the cartoon is not to picture or duplicate real action or things as they actually happen, but to give a character life and action; to picture on the screen things that have run through the imagination of the audience and to bring to life dream-fantasies and imaginative fancies that we have all thought of during our lives or have had pictured to us in various forms during our lives... I definitely feel that we cannot do the fantastic things based on the real, unless we first know the real. This point should be brought out very clearly to all new men, and even the older men.
Walt Disney in 1935[11]
Though the classes were originally described as a "brutal battle", with neither instructor nor students well-versed in the other's craft,[5] the enthusiasm and energy of both parties made the classes stimulating and beneficial for all involved. Graham often screened Disney shorts and, along with the animators, provided critique featuring both strengths and weaknesses. For example, Graham criticised Babbit's animation of Abner the mouse in The Country Cousin as "taking a few of the obvious actions of a drunk without coordinating the rest of the body", while praising it for maintaining its humour without getting "dirty or mean or vulgar. The country mouse is always having a good time".[11]
Very few of the animators at the Disney studio had had artistic training (most had been newspaper cartoonists); among these few was Grim Natwick, who had trained in Europe. The animator's success in designing and animating Betty Boop for Fleischer Studios showed an understanding of human female anatomy, and when Walt Disney hired Natwick he was given female characters to animate almost exclusively. Attempts to animate Persephone, the female lead of The Goddess of Spring, had proved largely unsuccessful; Natwick's animation of the heroine in Cookie Carnival showed greater promise, and the animator was eventually given the task of animating Snow White herself. Though live action footage of Snow White, the Prince and the Queen was shot as reference for the animators, the artists animators disapproved of rotoscoping, considering it to hinder the production of effective caricature. None of Babbit's animation of the Queen was rotoscoped;[12] despite Graham and Natwick's objections, however, some scenes of Snow White and the Prince were directly traced from the live-action footage.[11]
Music
The songs in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs were composed by Frank Churchill and Larry Morey. Paul J. Smith and Leigh Harline composed the incidental music score. Well-known songs from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs include "Heigh-Ho", "Some Day My Prince Will Come", and "Whistle While You Work". Because Disney did not have its own music publishing company at this time, the publishing rights for the music and songs were administered through the Bourne Co., which continues to hold these rights. In later years, the studio was able to acquire back the rights to the music from many of the other films, but not Snow White. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the first American film to have a soundtrack album released in conjunction with the feature film. Prior to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, a movie soundtrack recording was unheard of and of little value to a movie studio.
Cinematic influences
At this time, Disney also encouraged his staff to see a variety of films. These ranged from the mainstream, such as MGM's Romeo and Juliet (to which Disney made direct reference in a story meeting pertaining to the scene in which Snow White lies in her glass coffin), to the more obscure, including European silent cinema. The influence of German expressionism (examples of which exist in Nosferatu and The Cabinet of Dr. Calligari, both of which were recommended by Disney to his staff) can be found in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (as well as the two films to follow it), particularly in the scenes of Snow White fleeing through the forest and the Queen's transformation into the Witch. The latter was also inspired by 1931's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, to which Disney made specific reference in story meetings.[11]
Release

Theatrical run


Cover to the 2010 Diamond Edition which includes the DVD and Blu-ray
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was first re-released in 1944, in order to raise revenue for the Disney studio during the World War II period. This re-release set a tradition of re-releasing Disney animated features every seven to ten years, and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was re-released to theaters in 1952, 1958, 1967, 1975, 1983, 1987, and 1993. Coinciding with the fiftieth anniversary release in 1987, Disney released an authorized novelization of the story, written by children's author Suzanne Weyn.
In 1993, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the first film to be entirely scanned to digital files, manipulated, and recorded back to film. The restoration project was carried out entirely at 4K resolution[clarification needed] and 10-bit color depth using the Cineon system to digitally remove dirt and scratches and restore faded colors.[13]
Critical reception


The famous "Heigh-Ho" sequence from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, animated by Shamus Culhane
Disney's wife, Lillian, told him: "No one's ever gonna pay a dime to see a dwarf picture".[14] Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21, 1937 to a wildly receptive audience, many of whom were the same naysayers who dubbed the film "Disney's Folly".[1] The film received a standing ovation at its completion from a star-studded audience that included such celebrities as Charlie Chaplin and Paulette Goddard, Shirley Temple, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., Judy Garland, Ginger Rogers, Jack Benny, Fred MacMurray, Clark Gable and Carole Lombard, Burns and Allen, Ed Sullivan, Milton Berle, John Barrymore, and Marlene Dietrich. Six days later, Walt Disney and the seven dwarfs appeared on the cover of Time magazine. The New York Times said "Thank you very much, Mr. Disney".
RKO Radio Pictures put the film into general release on February 4, 1938, and it went on to become a major box-office success, making four times more money than any other motion picture released in 1938.[15] In its original release, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs grossed $3.5 million in the United States and Canada,[16] and by May 1939 its total international gross of $6.5 million made it the most successful film of all time, displacing Al Jolson's The Singing Fool (1928) (Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was later displaced from this position by Gone with the Wind in 1941).[16] By the end of its original run, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs had earned over $8 million in international box office receipts,[17] and has had a lifetime gross of $184,925,486 across its original release and several reissues.[18] Adjusted for inflation, and incorporating subsequent releases, the film still registers one of the top ten American film moneymakers of all time.[19]
The film won an Academy Honorary Award for Walt Disney "as a significant screen innovation which has charmed millions and pioneered a great new entertainment field". Disney received a full-size Oscar statuette and seven miniature ones, presented to him by 10-year-old child actress Shirley Temple. The film was also nominated for Best Musical Score. "Some Day My Prince Will Come" has become a jazz standard that has been performed by numerous artists, including Buddy Rich, Lee Wiley, Oscar Peterson, and Miles Davis.
Noted filmmakers such as Sergei Eisenstein and Charlie Chaplin praised Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs as a notable achievement in cinema; Eisenstein went so far as to call it the greatest film ever made.[20] The film inspired Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to produce its own fantasy film, The Wizard of Oz in 1939. Another animation pioneer Max Fleischer decided to produce his animated feature film Gulliver's Travels inorder to compete with Snow White. The 1941 parody Ball of Fire featured a nightclub singer disrupting the lives of seven scholars (and Gary Cooper) while hiding from the police. The 1943 Merrie Melodies short Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs, directed by Bob Clampett, parodies Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs by presenting the story with an all-black cast singing a jazz score.
Snow White's success led to Disney moving ahead with more feature-film productions. Walt Disney used much of the profits from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to finance a new $4.5 million studio in Burbank - the location on which The Walt Disney Studios is located to this day.[15] Within two years, the studio completed Pinocchio and Fantasia, and had begun production on features such as Dumbo, Bambi, Alice in Wonderland and Peter Pan.[5]
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)
American Film Institute recognition
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #49
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:
The Queen - #10 Villain
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:
"Someday My Prince Will Come" - #19
"Whistle While You Work" - Nominated
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:
"Magic Mirror on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?" - Nominated
AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals - Nominated
AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #34
AFI's 10 Top 10 - #1 Animated film
Home media
On October 28, 1994, it was released as the first video in the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection. It was the last of the early Disney animated films to be released on home video.
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on DVD on October 9, 2001, the first in Disney's Platinum Editions, and featured, across two discs, the digitally restored film, a making-of documentary narrated by Angela Lansbury, an audio commentary by John Canemaker and (via archived audio clips) Walt Disney, and many more special features.
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on Blu-ray Disc on October 6, 2009, the first of Disney's Diamond Editions, and a new DVD edition was released on November 24, 2009. The Blu-ray includes a high-definition version of the movie sourced from a new restoration by Lowry Digital, a DVD copy of the film, and several bonus features not included on the 2001 DVD. This set returned to the Disney Vault on April 30, 2011.[21]
The film also finally made its world television premiere in February 2010 on Disney corporate sibling ABC Family.
Media

Theme parks
Snow White's Scary Adventures is a popular theme park ride at Disneyland (an opening day attraction dating from 1955),[22] Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom,[23] Tokyo Disneyland,[24] and Disneyland Paris.[25] Snow White, her Prince, the Queen (both in the form of a regent and a hag), and the Seven Dwarfs are also featured in parades and character appearances throughout the parks. Fantasyland at Walt Disney World is currently undergoing an expansion due to end in 2013. The Snow White's Scary Adventures ride will be closing and replaced with Princess Fairytale Hall, where Snow White and other princesses will be located for a meet and greet. Also included in the 2013 expansion of Fantasyland is the Seven Dwarves Mine Train roller coaster.[26]
Video games
The first attempt at a Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs video game was for the Atari 2600 as part of Atari's line of children's games.[27] It was never officially released, although a "homebrew" version was made available on a limited basis.[28] A Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs video game was released for the Game Boy Color system. Snow White also makes an appearance in the popular PlayStation 2 game Kingdom Hearts as one of the seven fabled Princesses of Heart.[29] A world based on the movie, Dwarf Woodlands, appears in Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep for the PSP, and the characters from the film who appear are Snow White, the Dwarfs, the Magic Mirror, the Prince and the Evil Queen in both her forms. Snow White, the Seven Dwarfs, the Forest Animals and the Witch also appear at the beginning of the first Kingdom Hearts in the Awakening world.
Comics
A comic book version was also published around the release of the film. It was more loyal to the original script, where the prince had a bigger role, while parts of Snow White's dress were green. The film's characters, especially the dwarfs and the witch, also appeared in later Disney comics and stories not related to the movie.[citation needed]
Musical
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered on October 18, 1979 at the Radio City Music Hall, and closed on November 18, 1979. It reopened on January 11, 1980, and closed after 106 performances on March 9, 1980.



Snow White

Snow White in her coffin, Theodor Hosemann, 1852
Folk tale
Name:	Snow White
Data
Aarne-Thompson Grouping:	709
Country:	Germany
Related:	Bella Venezia
Myrsina
Nourie Hadig
The Young Slave
Gold-Tree and Silver-Tree
and "The Jealous Sisters"
"Snow White" is a fairy tale known from many countries in Europe, the best known version being the German one collected by the Brothers Grimm (German: Schneewittchen und die sieben Zwerge, "Snow White and the Seven Dwarves"). The German version features elements such as the magic mirror, the poisoned apple, the glass coffin, and the seven dwarves, who were first given individual names in the 1912 Broadway play Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and then given different names in Disney's 1937 film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. The Grimm story, which is commonly referred to as "Snow White", should not be confused with the story of "Snow White and Rose Red", another fairy tale collected by the Brothers Grimm.
In the Aarne-Thompson folklore classification, tales of this kind are grouped together as type 709, Snow White. Others of this kind include Bella Venezia, Myrsina, Nourie Hadig and Gold-Tree and Silver-Tree.[1]
Contents [hide]
1 Story outline
2 Comments
3 Margarete von Waldeck (1533–1554)
4 Other versions
4.1 Variations from other European traditions
4.2 Modern narratives
4.3 Film and television
4.4 Music
4.5 Theatre
4.6 Related video games
4.7 In other languages
5 Snow White and Rose Red
6 Trademark
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links
[edit]Story outline



Snow White (illustrations of Franz Jüttner, 1905-1910)


The seven dwarves find Snow White sleeping


The queen asks the magic mirror


The dwarves warn Snow White


The queen and the poisoned apple


The prince and Snow White's awakening


The queen arrives to the wedding
The English translation of the definitive edition of the Grimm's Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Berlin 1857), tale number 53, is the basis for the English translation by D. L. Ashliman.[2]
Once upon a time as a queen sits sewing at her window, she pricks her finger on her needle and three drops of blood fall on the snow that had fallen on her ebony window frame. As she looks at the blood on the snow, she says to herself, "Oh, how I wish that I had a daughter that had skin white as snow, lips red as blood, and hair black as ebony". Soon after that, the queen gives birth to a baby girl who has skin white as snow, lips red as blood, and hair black as ebony. They name her Princess Snow White. As soon as the child is born, the queen dies.
Soon after, the king takes a new wife, who is beautiful but also very vain. The Queen possesses a magical mirror, an animate object that answers any question, to whom she often asks: "Mirror, mirror on the wall / Who is the most beautiful of all?" (in German "Spieglein, Spieglein, an der Wand / Wer ist die Schönste im ganzen Land?") to which the mirror always replies "You, my queen, are fairest of all." But when Snow White reaches the age of seven, she becomes as beautiful as the day, and when the queen asks her mirror, it responds: "Queen, you are full fair, 'tis true, but Snow White is fairer than you." Though in another version, the mirror simply replies: "Snow White is the fairest of them all."
The queen becomes jealous, and orders a huntsman to take Snow White into the woods to be killed. She demands that the huntsman, as proof of killing Snow White, return with her lungs and her liver. The huntsman takes Snow White into the forest, but after raising his knife to stab her, he finds himself unable to kill her. Instead, he lets her go, telling her to flee and hide from the Queen. He then brings the queen the lungs and the liver of a boar, which is prepared by the cook and eaten by the queen.
In the forest, Snow White discovers a tiny cottage belonging to a group of seven dwarves, where she rests. There, the dwarves take pity on her, saying "If you will keep house for us, and cook, make beds, wash, sew, and knit, and keep everything clean and orderly, then you can stay with us, and you shall have everything that you want." They warn her to take care and let no one in when they are away delving in the mountains. Meanwhile, the Queen asks her mirror once again "Who's the fairest of them all?", and is horrified to learn that Snow White is not only alive and well and living with the dwarves, but is still the fairest of them all.
Three times the Queen disguises herself and visits the dwarves' cottage while they are away during the day, trying to kill Snow White. First, disguised as a peddler, the Queen offers colorful stay-laces and laces Snow White up so tight that she faints, causing the Queen to leave her dead on the floor. However, Snow White is revived by the cats when they loosen the laces. Next, the Queen dresses as a different old woman and brushes Snow White's hair with a poisoned comb. Snow White again collapses, but again is saved by the dwarves. Finally, the Queen makes a poisoned apple, and in the disguise of a farmer's wife, offers it to Snow White. When she is hesitant to accept it, the Queen cuts the apple in half, eats the white part and gives the poisoned red part to Snow White. She eats the apple eagerly and immediately falls into a deep stupor. When the dwarves find her, they cannot revive her, and they place her in a glass coffin, assuming that she is dead.
Time passes, and a prince traveling through the land sees Snow White. He strides to her coffin. The prince is enchanted by her beauty and instantly falls in love with her. He begs the dwarves to let him have the coffin. The prince's servants carry the coffin away. While doing so, they stumble on some bushes and the movement causes the piece of poisoned apple to dislodge from Snow White's throat, awakening her. The prince then declares his love for her and soon a wedding is planned.
The vain Queen, still believing that Snow White is dead, once again asks her mirror who is the fairest in the land, and yet again the mirror disappoints her by responding that "You, my queen, are fair; it is true. But the young queen is a thousand times fairer than you."
Not knowing that this new queen was indeed her stepdaughter, she arrives at the wedding, and her heart fills with the deepest of dread when she realizes the truth. As punishment for her wicked ways, a pair of heated iron shoes are brought forth with tongs and placed before the Queen. She is then forced to step into the iron shoes and dance until she drops dead. (Other versions imply that she dies of a heart attack.)[3]
[edit]Comments

In their first edition, the Brothers Grimm published the version they had first collected, in which the villain of the piece is Snow White's jealous mother. In a version sent to another folklorist prior to the first edition, additionally, she does not order a servant to take her to the woods, but takes her there herself to gather flowers and abandons her; in the first edition, this task was transferred to a servant.[4] It is believed that the change to a stepmother in later editions was to tone down the story for children.[5]
Snow White's triple seeming-death and resurrection, beyond an amusement or wish-fulfilling temporary escape, fulfills the initiatory process of life, as Mircea Eliade described it: "What is called 'initiation' coexists with the human condition, reaffirms the ultimate religious significance of life and the real possibility of a 'happy ending.'"[6]
Maria Tatar interprets the tale[7] as a polarization of women into the evil and active versus the innocent, passive and domestic.
[edit]Margarete von Waldeck (1533–1554)

The story of Snow White may have been intertwined with those of some historical figures. Scholars have uncovered parallels between the legendary Snow White and Margarete von Waldeck (1533–1554).[8][9] Like Snow White, Margarete was a strikingly attractive young woman. Like Snow White she had a problematic relationship with her stepmother. She grew up in the mining town of Waldeck, where small children known as "dwarves" worked in the mines. At 17, Margarete moved to Brussels. There, she attracted the romantic interest of several nobles, including Philip II of Spain. Philip hoped to marry her because she was beautiful, but she became ill as a result of poisoning. Ruthless politics were a part of medieval court, where marriage to powerful personage was often viewed as a way for a clan to gain allies to the detriment of rivals. Margarete died at the age of 21. The handwriting of her will, written shortly before her death, shows evidence of tremor. The perpetrator was never exposed, but it could not have been her stepmother, who was already dead at the time. The poignant tale of a beautiful young woman whose life was cut short may have captured the popular imagination and provided inspiration for the folktale.[10]
Also the city of Lohr is said to be the birthplace of Snow White. This theory refers to the historical person of Maria Sophia Margaretha Catharina von Erthal[11], daughter of Philipp Christoph von Erthal and hence sister of Friedrich Karl Joseph von Erthal.
[edit]Other versions

[edit]Variations from other European traditions
In the many non-German versions, the dwarves are generally robbers, while the magic mirror is a dialog with the sun or moon.[citation needed]
In a version from Albania, collected by Johann Georg von Hahn,[12] the main character lives with 40 dragons. Her sleep is caused by a ring. The beginning of the story has a twist, in that a teacher urges the heroine to kill her evil stepmother so that she would take her place. The origin of this tale is debated; it is likely no older than the Middle Ages. In fact there are possibly two Albanian versions of Snow White: one where her stepmother tries to kill her, and another where her two jealous sisters try to kill her. "The Jealous Sisters" is another Albanian fairy tale. In both fairy tales the death is caused by a ring.
[edit]Modern narratives
Paralleling the stepmother's question of her magic mirror, the 1540 epic poem Padmavat includes the line: "Who is more beautiful, I or Padmavati?, Queen Nagamati asks to her new parrot, and it gives a displeasing reply...";
The story in Russian writer Alexander Pushkin's 1833 poem The Tale of the Dead Princess and the Seven Knights is similar to that of Snow White, with knights replacing dwarves.[13]
One of the many retellings of the Snow White tale appears in A Book of Dwarfs by Ruth Manning-Sanders. Other versions include Tanith Lee's short story "Red as Blood" (published in her story collection of the same title), and Neil Gaiman's short story "Snow, Glass, Apples". Other writers who have made use of the theme include Donald Barthelme (in his novel Snow White), Gregory Maguire (in his novel Mirror Mirror), Jane Yolen (in her story "Snow in Summer," published in Black Swan, White Raven), Debra Doyle & James D. Macdonald (in their story "The Queen's Mirror," published in A Wizard's Dozen), Anne Sexton (in her poem "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," published in Transformations), Gail Carson Levine (in Fairest), and A. S. Byatt (in her essay "Ice, Snow, Glass," published in Mirror, Mirror on the Wall).[citation needed]
White as Snow, another retelling by Tanith Lee, combines elements of the Snow White story with the Greek myth of Demeter and Persephone.
Angela Carter has also written a postmodern version of the tale entitled 'The Snow Child' in her collection 'The Bloody Chamber'. Her story recreates a version of the tale collected but unpublished by the Grimm Brothers in which Snow White is a child of the father's desire rather than the mother's.
In 1982, Roald Dahl's book Revolting Rhymes rewrote the story in a more modern way. In this version, Snow White was a savvy young woman who stole the magic mirror to help the dwarves gamble on winning horses.
Snow White is also a significant character in Bill Willingham's Fables comic book series. This version uses aspects of the seven dwarves' Snow White, but has a sister named Rose Red.
In Ludwig Revolution, a gothic shojo manga by Kaori Yuki, uses aspects of Snow White story.
Mirror, Mirror, a novel by Gregory Maguire is based on the tale of Snow White. Bianca De Nevada is the child of Don Vincente De Nevada, who finds a mirror in a lake, a relic placed there by the mysterious stone dwarves. Don Vincente is sent on a holy quest for a branch from the Tree of Knowledge by Lucrezia Borgia and her brother Cesare, so that leaves Bianca under the watchful eye of the jealous Lucrezia.
Snow White or the House in the Wood, a 1900 novel by Laura E. Richards, is about a little girl who pretends to be Snow White. She is lost in the woods and finds a house that she hopes has seven dwarves. But there is only one dwarf who takes her in and cares for her a while. The dwarf is a person of importance who had lost faith in humanity but finds it again in the little girl.
The Blood Confession a novel by Alisa M. Libby about a young countess who bathes in the blood of virgins in her desperation to be eternally young and beautiful. The novel is told in the point of view of the countess and draws on the evil stepmother character in Snow White. When a young girl named Snow appears, the countess endeavors to corrupt her perfect innocence. The Countess is also based on the legend of Countess Bathory.
Shel Silverstein's flippant poem Mirror, Mirror tells the alternate story of the mirror changing its mind after the Queen threatens to destroy it.
Emma Donoghue presents her version of the story in her short story collection "Kissing The Witch," which does away with the prince. Instead it tells a much more complicated story of emotional tangle between Snow White and her young stepmother who is nearly the same age as she, with strong hints of romantic interest between the two.
Jim C. Hines's Princess series of books include Snow White as one of the main protagonists. She is an accomplished sorceress of mirror magic, who works alongside Danielle (Cinderella) and Talia (Sleeping Beauty).
[edit]Film and television
A 1902 Snow White film was released.
A 1916 silent film titled Snow White was made by Famous Players-Lasky Corporation and produced by Adolph Zukor and Daniel Frohman. Directed by J. Searle Dawley, it was adapted to the screen by Jessie Braham White from his play Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. The film starred Marguerite Clark as Snow White, Creighton Hale as Prince Florimond and Dorothy Cumming as Queen Brangomar/Mary Jane.
A 1933 Betty Boop cartoon, Snow White.
The famous 1937 Disney animated feature, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. The dwarves are Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy, and Dopey. In the Disney version, Snow White wakes from her enchanted sleep as soon as Prince Jonathan kisses her. Furthermore, Prince Jonathan and Snow White have met prior to her enchanted sleep, so that he has fallen in love with the awake rather than the sleeping princess, an unusual variation in the Snow White tales.[14] This version of Snow White appears at the Walt Disney Parks and Resorts as a meetable character, and is part of the Disney Princesses franchise. She is voiced by Adriana Caselotti.
The Disney version is distinctly parodied in the 1943 Merrie Melodies short cartoon Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs.
An "all new, all live" version was done as a West German film in 1955 as Schneewittchen und die sieben Zwerge, and released in 1965.[15]
In 1961, the story was parodied in the film Snow White and the Three Stooges, starring Moe Howard, Larry Fine and Joe "Curly-Joe" DeRita. In the film, the dwarves had gone on vacation and lent Moe, Larry and Curly Joe the use of their cottage.
The comedy-horror-erotic adaptation of Grimm's Fairy Tales, Grimms Märchen von Lüsternen Pärchen (1969), presented Snow White among other characters of Grimm Tales.
The Goodies produced their version of the fairytale, called Snow White 2.
A 1973 episode of The Brady Bunch portrayed the Bradys (and Alice's boyfriend Sam) putting on a performance of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" in their backyard.
A pornographic version of Snow White was released in 1976 in the X-rated animated film Once Upon a Girl.
A 1979 Pornochanchada adaptation Histórias Que Nossas Babás Não Contavam ("Stories Our Nannies Don't Tell") featured an Afro-Brazilian actress, Adele Fátima, as Snow White. However, Snow White was not named "White" (branca) but clara (a Brazilian racial term similar to fair skin).
1982 film Biancaneve & Co. is an adaptation of the fumetto Biancaneve by Leone Frollo. The film features the starlet Michela Miti as "Snow White".
In 1984, Shelley Duvall's television show Faerie Tale Theatre did their own version of the tale with Vanessa Redgrave as The Evil Queen, Elizabeth McGovern as Snow White, Rex Smith as the prince and Vincent Price as The Magic Mirror. Duvall made an appearance in that episode as Snow White's Mother.
In 1987, ABC debuted a sitcom based on the home life of Snow White and Prince Charming called The Charmings. The characters found themselves transported from their Enchanted Forest home to the Los Angeles suburbs, where they tried to adapt to life in the modern world.
The 1987 fantasy film Snow White (starring Diana Rigg as the Wicked Queen and Sarah Patterson as Snow White) was released direct to video using the Cannon Movie Tale logo. Other fantasy films were released in the series. It is currently available on Region 1 DVD from MGM.
Nippon Animation told the story of Snow White in four episodes of its 1987 TV series Grimm Meisaku Gekijo (released in English as Grimm's Fairy Tale Classics).
Filmation Studios produced a film (Happily Ever After) in 1988, starring Irene Cara, as if a sequel to the 1937 Disney film, meeting with the Seven Dwarfelles, the dwarves' cousins. Released theatrically in 1993, the film was commercially a failure; the company had planned to create more unauthorized sequels to Disney films.
Daddy's Little Bit of Dresden China, a 1988 short film by British animator Karen Watson, uses the Snow White story as part of a story of child sexual abuse.
In 1988, the Filmation company produced a Snow White tale, Snow White and the Realm of Doom. Disney filed a lawsuit, which led the latter to change the film's title to Happily Ever After. Other drastic changes were made to the film, which was released on video in 1993. The story involves Snow White and her prince on their way to meet the seven dwarves, but the wicked queen's brother, Lord Malice, wants revenge for his sister's death.
The Disney version of Snow White makes a cameo amongst the crowd of Toons during the final scene of Who Framed Roger Rabbit.
The story is also adapted in the Japanese OVA, Super Mario's Snow White which King Koopa playing the role as the evil Queen, Princess Peach as Snow White, Mario as her rescuer, and seven toads instead of seven dwarves.
Snow White has a role in the videogame Kingdom Hearts where she is one of the Princesses of Heart kidnapped by Maleficent along with Kairi, Alice, Jasmine, Belle, Cinderella, and Aurora. She also has a world based upon her known as Dwarf Woodlands.
In 1994, the Tatsunoko animation studio adapted the story into a 52-episode TV series, Shirayuki-hime no Densetsu ("The Legend of Princess Snow White"), aired in Japan on NHK. Tatsunoko's production incorporated several "prelude" episodes emphasizing the romance between Snow White and her prince before launching into the story proper.
Also in 1994, an animated version entitled "Snow White by Enchanted Tales" was released by Sony as part of their Enchanted Tales Collection.
Snow White: A Tale of Terror is a 1997 horror film based on the Snow White story. It stars Sigourney Weaver and Sam Neill. The original music score is composed by John Ottman. The film is marketed with the tagline "The fairy tale is over." The film received mixed reviews but is praised for staying with the dark formulas that were once present in fairy tales. It features seven miners instead of dwarves.
The Snow White story has also been made into a number of adult films. The most famous among these films is Biancaneve e i sette nani (1995) by Luca Damiano, starring Ludmilla Antonova.
In one of the episodes of Sailor Moon R, the main characters perform a stage version of Snow White and Ann (one of the villains from that season) plays Snow White after using a trick to get the role in order to get a kiss from Darien/Mamoru (Sailor Moon's love interest).
In 2001 Hallmark made their own retelling of the story with Snow White: The Fairest of Them All starring Kristin Kreuk.[16]
In 2001 another live action version was made for TV, called Snow White. This version changed the storyline to include several more magical elements such as demons.
10th Kingdom, a made for TV movie series, was loosely based on Snow White, as well as many other fairy tales. Snow White herself (who acts as a fairy godmother) finds a bond with the heroine, as her mother tried to drown her, and Snow White's own mother tried to kill her. In 2000 the 10th Kingdom featured Camryn Manheim as Snow White. She appears to Virginia when they go to visit the dwarves of Dragon Mountain. Snow White's mother was the swamp witch who brought Virginia mother Christine to the 9 Kingdoms and used her to carry out her revenge. In this version Snow White relates the tale of the Grimm Books but says that her stepmother after dancing instead of dying dragged herself to a swamp and became known as the swamp witch. Her Grandson Prince Wendell White is the current ruler of the fourth Kingdom.
Branca de Neve (2000) is a Portuguese movie of João César Monteiro. Is a very polemic movie, where the image treatment is not classical nor orthodox. It is a reinterpretation of the Schneewitchen of the Belgian author, Robert Walser.
A segment of the 2005 Turkish anthology film Istanbul Tales made up of five stories based on popular fairy tales is based on this tale where the daughter of a mobster meets the eighth dwarf in underground tunnels.
A woman in the 2005 film "The 9th Company" (a film about a company of Soviet soldiers' experience in Afghanistan) is referred to as "Snow White" because of her very light blond hair. The reference is deliberately ironic, and highlights the contradiction between her promiscuity and the virtue of her namesake, the fairy tale Snow White.
Fairy Tales Exposed: The Facts Behind the Fiction (2005) is a 3-part documentary produced by ZDF Enterprises that explores the real-life events and people on which popular fairy tales including Snow White are based. It suggests that Margarethe von Waldeck alleged mistress of King Philip ll of Spain was the real Snow White.
Using ideas from Stanislav Grof, Joseph Campbell, and Carl G. Jung, Roberts[17] claims that the Disney version of Snow White appeals to unconscious parts of the human mind including Grof's descriptions of birth experiences, Campbell's Hero's Journey, and Jung's archetypes.
HBO's Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales for Every Child cast Snow White as White Snow, daughter of a native American chieftain.
Another unofficial sequel of sorts was released in theaters in Belgium and France in January 2007: Blanche Neige, la suite (Snow White: The Sequel), an animated film for mature audiences. It was directed by Picha, who is known for his animated films of a sexually explicit nature, including Tarzoon: Shame of the Jungle, B.C. Rock, and The Big Bang.
The 2007 film Sydney White is a modern retelling of the classic fairy tale. It stars Amanda Bynes as Sydney White (Snow White), Sara Paxton as Rachel Witchburn (the Wicked Queen), and Matt Long as Tyler Prince (Prince Charming).
2007 also saw Snow White as part of the Disney movie Enchanted.
A new film Snow White and the Huntsman, directed by Rupert Sanders, starring Kristen Stewart, Charlize Theron, Chris Hemsworth and Sam Claflin is set for release on June 1, 2012.[18]
Relativity Media is working on "The Brothers Grimm: Snow White", directed by Tarsem Singh, it is set for release on March 16, 2012. Julia Roberts,[19] Lily Collins, Armie Hammer, and Nathan Lane are attached.[20]
A present-day take on the story provide the setting for the 2011 ABC fantasy series Once Upon a Time, in which the daughter and grandson of Snow White and Prince Charming hold the key to breaking the curse on a small Maine town where Snow White is a teacher and the Prince is a John Doe and have no memory of their past because the Queen put a spell on the fairytale world and erased everything.
[edit]Music
A sadistic version of the Disney Snow White appears in German metal band Rammstein's video for the song Sonne.[21] White is portrayed as a dominatrix and drug addict (who shoots up gold dust as a drug).
Snow White is described with stalking and obsession overtones in the song "Snow White Queen" on Evanescence's album The Open Door. The title is only an indirect reference to Snow White, as it's referring to Amy Lee's username (SnowWhite) on the official Evanescence fan forum.
Snow White was also a song by Canadian Pop-Rock band Streetheart which alluded to a mischievous young woman who disguised her self as a pure, Snow White like figure.
Mirrors by Envy on the Coast is a darker song dedicated to the tale of Snow White.
Japanese visual kei rock band D released a single titled "Snow White" on January 21, 2009.
There is a song entitled "Shiroi Yuki no Purinsesu Wa..." , meaning "The Snow White Princess is..." sung by VOCALOID virtual diva Hatsune Miku.
The Cure's 2008 album "4:13 Dream" includes a song entitled "The Real Snow White."
Kanon Wakeshima's song "Kagami" talks of the story of Snow White.
Xandria, a German band, also has a song named after Snow White.
Florence + The Machine recently released a song, Blinding, loosely based on the relationship between Snow White and the prince.
[edit]Theatre
The story of Snow White is a popular theme for British pantomime. In 2009 Snow White was performed on Åbo Unga Teater in Finland. In Swedish Snow White is called Snövit In some productions of the musical Into the Woods Snow White appears as the illicit love interest of one of the princes. Snow White is the central character in the long running musical Beach Blanket Babylon, which has been performed since 1974 in San Francisco
[edit]Related video games
Snow White: Happily Ever After (Super NES, 1994)
Snow White: The Veil of My Heart (PC, 1999)
Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (Game Boy Color, 2001)
Kagami no Naka no Orgel: Futatsume no Monogatari - Snow White (PC, 2003)
Snow White and the 7 Clever Boys (PlayStation 2, 2006)
Snow White (iPhone, 2009)
Crazy Face: Snow White (iPhone, 2010)
Snow White StoryChimes Match Game (iPhone, 2010)
Snow White is also featured as a playable character in Fairytale Fights. She is shown in Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep and makes a cameo appearance in the first Kingdom Hearts. Kurumi Kobato does her voice in Japanese, and Carolyn Gardner in English.
[edit]In other languages
Albanian - Borëbardha
Arabic -   - Bayad-Althalj
Bengali  - Tusar Kanya
Bosnian - Snjezana
Bulgarian -  - Snezhanka
Catalan - Blanca Neus
Chinese -  - Báixue Gongzhu
Croatian - Snjeguljica
Czech - Snehurka
Danish - Snehvide
Dutch - Sneeuwwitje
English - Snow White
Estonian - Lumivalgeke
Finnish - Lumikki
French - Blanche-Neige
German - Schneewittchen
Georgia - (fifqia)
Greek  - Chionáti
Hebrew  - Shilgia
Hindi  - Himgauri
Hungarian - Hófehérke
Icelandic - Mjallhvít
Indonesian - Putih Salju but commonly known as Putri Salju (literally means Snow Princess)
Irish - Sneachta Bán
Italian - Biancaneve
Japanese   - Shirayuki-hime
Korean  - Baegseol Gongju
Latvian - Sniegbaltite
Lower Sorbian - Snezenka
Marathi -  - Himgauri
Montenegrin - Snjezana
Norwegian - Snehvit
Oriya--Dhola gori
Persian  - Sefid Barfi
Polish - Królewna Sniezka
Portuguese - Branca de Neve
Romanian - Alba ca Zapada
Russian  - Belosnezhka
Scots - Snaw White
Scottish Gaelic - Sneachd Bàn
Serbian  - Snezana
Serbo-Croatian - Snjezana
Slovak - Snehulienka
Slovenian - Sneguljcica
Sinhalese - Hima Kumaari
Swedish - Snövit
Spanish - Blancanieves
Thai  - Snow White
Turkish - Pamuk Prenses
Ukrainian  - Bilosnizhka
Upper Sorbian - Sneholinka
Welsh - Eira Wen
Vietnamese - Nàng Bch Tuyt và 7 Chú Lùn
[edit]Snow White and Rose Red

There is another Brothers Grimm tale called Snow White and Rose Red which also includes a character called Snow White. However, this Snow White is a completely separate character from the one found in this tale. The original German names are also different: Schneewittchen and Schneeweißchen. There is actually no difference in the meaning (both mean "snow white"), but the first name is more influenced by the dialects of Low Saxon while the second one is the standard German version, demonstrating a class difference between the two Snow Whites.[citation needed]
[edit]Trademark

The Walt Disney Company currently has a trademark application pending with the US Patent and Trademark Office, filed November 19, 2008, for the name "Snow White" that would cover all live and recorded movie, television, radio, stage, computer, Internet, news, and photographic entertainment uses, except literature works of fiction and nonfiction.[22]