   The wizard folded up the letter with a sigh, stood up, walked past Harry without glancing at him, and
went to draw the curtains at his window.

   The sky outside the window was ruby-red; it seemed to be sunset. The wizard went back to the
desk, sat down, and twiddled his thumbs, watching the door.

    Harry looked around the office. No Fawkes the phoenix -- no whirring silver contraptions. This was
Hogwarts as Riddle had known it, meaning that this unknown wizard was Headmaster, not Dumbledore,
and he, Harry, was little more than a phantom, completely invisible to the people of fifty years ago.

    There was a knock on the office door.

    "Enter," said the old wizard in a feeble voice.

   A boy of about sixteen entered, taking off his pointed hat. A silver prefect's badge was glinting on his
chest. He was much taller than Harry, but he, too, had jet-black hair.

    "Ah, Riddle," said the Headmaster.

    "You wanted to see me, Professor Dippet?" said Riddle. He looked nervous.

    "Sit down," said Dippet. "I've just been reading the letter you sent me."

    "Oh," said Riddle. He sat down, gripping his hands together very tightly.

   "My dear boy," said Dipper kindly, "I cannot possibly let you stay at school over the summer. Surely
you want to go home for the holidays?"

    "No," said Riddle at once. "I'd much rather stay at Hogwarts than go back to that -- to that --"

    "You live in a Muggle orphanage during the holidays, I believe?" said Dippet curiously.

    "Yes, sir," said Riddle, reddening slightly.

    "You are Muggle-born?"

    "Half-blood, sir," said Riddle. "Muggle father, witch mother."

    "And are both your parents --?"

    "My mother died just after I was born, sir. They told me at the orphanage she lived just long enough
to name me -- Tom after my father, Marvolo after my grandfather."

    Dipper clucked his tongue sympathetically.

    "The thing is, Tom," he sighed, "Special arrangements might have been made for you, but in the
current circumstances..."

    "You mean all these attacks, sir?" said Riddle, and Harry's heart leapt, and he moved closer, scared
of missing anything.




                                                                                                              Page 140
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




   "Precisely," said the headmaster. "My dear boy, you must see how foolish it would be of me to allow
you to remain at the castle when term ends. Particularly in light of the recent tragedy... the death of that
poor little girl... You will be safer by far at your orphanage. As a matter of fact, the Ministry of Magic is
even now talking about closing the school. We are no nearer locating the -- er -- source of all this
unpleasantness..."

    Riddle's eyes had widened.

    "Sir -- if the person was caught -- if it all stopped --"

   "What do you mean?" said Dippet with a squeak in his voice, sitting up in his chair. "Riddle, do you
mean you know something about these attacks?"

    "No, sir," said Riddle quickly.

    But Harry was sure it was the same sort of "no" that he himself had given Dumbledore.

    Dippet sank back, looking faintly disappointed.

    "You may go, Tom..."

    Riddle slid off his chair and slouched out of the room. Harry followed him.

    Down the moving spiral staircase they went, emerging next to the gargoyle in the darkening corridor.
Riddle stopped, and so did Harry, watching him. Harry could tell that Riddle was doing some serious
thinking. He was biting his lip, his forehead furrowed.

   Then, as though he had suddenly reached a decision, he hurried off, Harry gliding noiselessly behind
him. They didn't see another person until they reached the entrance hall, when a tall wizard with long,
sweeping auburn hair and a beard called to Riddle from the marble staircase.

    "What are you doing, wandering around this late, Tom?"

    Harry gaped at the wizard. He was none other than a fifty-year-younger Dumbledore.

    "I had to see the headmaster, sir," said Riddle.

   "Well, hurry off to bed," said Dumbledore, giving Riddle exactly the kind of penetrating stare Harry
knew so well. "Best not to roam the corridors these days. Not since..."

    He sighed heavily, bade Riddle good night, and strode off. Riddle watched him walk out of sight and
then, moving quickly, headed straight down the stone steps to the dungeons, with Harry in hot pursuit.

    But to Harry's disappointment, Riddle led him not into a hidden passageway or a secret tunnel but to
the very dungeon in which Harry had Potions with Snape. The torches hadn't been lit, and when Riddle
pushed the door almost closed, Harry could only just see him, standing stock-still by the door, watching
the passage outside.

    It felt to Harry that they were there for at least an hour. All he could see was the figure of Riddle at
the door, staring through the crack, waiting like a statue. And just when Harry had stopped feeling
expectant and tense and started wishing he could return to the present, he heard something move beyond


                                                                                                                Page 141
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




the door.

    Someone was creeping along the passage. He heard whoever it was pass the dungeon where he and
Riddle were hidden. Riddle, quiet as a shadow, edged through the door and followed, Harry tiptoeing
behind him, forgetting that he couldn't be heard.

     For perhaps five minutes they followed the footsteps, until Riddle stopped suddenly, his head inclined
in the direction of new noises. Harry heard a door creak open, and then someone speaking in a hoarse
whisper.

    "C'mon...gotta get yeh outta here...C'mon now...in the box..."

    There was something familiar about that voice...

    Riddle suddenly jumped around the corner. Harry stepped out behind him. He could see the dark
outline of a huge boy who was crouching in front of an open door, a very large box next to it.

    "Evening, Rubeus," said Riddle sharply.

    The boy slammed the door shut and stood up.

    "What yer doin' down here, Tom?"

    Riddle stepped closer.

   "It's all over," he said. "I'm going to have to turn you in, Rubeus. They're talking about closing
Hogwarts if the attacks don't stop."

    "`N at d'yeh --"

    "I don't think you meant to kill anyone. But monsters don't make good pets. I suppose you just let it
out for exercise and --"

    "It never killed no one!" said the large boy, backing against the closed door. From behind him, Harry
could hear a funny rustling and clicking.

   "Come on, Rubeus," said Riddle, moving yet closer. "The dead girl's parents will be here tomorrow.
The least Hogwarts can do is make sure that the thing that killed their daughter is slaughtered..."

    "It wasn't him!" roared the boy, his voice echoing in the dark passage. "He wouldn'! He never!"

    "Stand aside," said Riddle, drawing out his wand.

    His spell lit the corridor with a sudden flaming light. The door behind the large boy flew open with
such force it knocked him into the wall opposite. And out of it came something that made Harry let out a
long, piercing scream unheard by anyone.

    A vast, low-slung, hairy body and a tangle of black legs; a gleam of many eyes and a pair of
razor-sharp pincers -- Riddle raised his wand again, but he was too late. The thing bowled him over as it
scuttled away, tearing up the corridor and out of sight. Riddle scrambled to his feet, looking after it; he
raised his wand, but the huge boy leapt on him, seized his wand, and threw him back down, yelling,


                                                                                                              Page 142
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




"NOOOOOO!"

    The scene whirled, the darkness became complete; Harry felt himself falling and, with a crash, he
landed spread-eagled on his four-poster in the Gryffindor dormitory, Riddle's diary lying open on his
stomach.

    Before he had had time to regain his breath, the dormitory door opened and Ron came in.

    "There you are," he said.

    Harry sat up. He was sweating and shaking.

    "What's up?" said Ron, looking at him with concern.

    "It was Hagrid, Ron. Hagrid opened the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago."




                                         CHAPTER FOURTEEN



CORNELIUS FUDGE



 Harry, Ron, and Hermione had always known that Hagrid had an unfortunate liking for large and
monstrous creatures. During their first year at Hogwarts he had tried to raise a dragon in his little wooden
house, and it would be a long time before they forgot the giant, three-headed dog he'd christened
"Fluffy." And if, as a boy, Hagrid had heard that a monster was hidden somewhere in the castle, Harry
was sure he'd have gone to any lengths for a glimpse of it. He'd probably thought it was a shame that the
monster had been cooped up so long, and thought it deserved the chance to stretch its many legs; Harry
could just imagine the thirteen-year-old Hagrid trying to fit a leash and collar on it. But he was equally
certain that Hagrid would never have meant to kill anybody.

    Harry half wished he hadn't found out how to work Riddle's diary. Again and again Ron and
Hermione made him recount what he'd seen, until he was heartily sick of telling them and sick of the long,
circular conversations that followed.

   "Riddle might have got the wrong person," said Hermione. "Maybe it was some other monster that
was attacking people..."

    "How many monsters d'you think this place can hold?" Ron asked dully.

    "We always knew Hagrid had been expelled," said Harry miserably. "And the attacks must've
stopped after Hagrid was kicked out. Otherwise, Riddle wouldn't have got his award."


                                                                                                               Page 143
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Ron tried a different tack.

    "Riddle does sound like Percy -- who asked him to squeal on Hagrid, anyway?"

    "But the monster had killed someone, Ron," said Hermione.

    "And Riddle was going to go back to some Muggle orphanage if they closed Hogwarts," said Harry.
"I don't blame him for wanting to stay here..."

    "You met Hagrid down Knockturn Alley, didn't you, Harry?"

    "He was buying a Flesh-Eating Slug Repellent," said Harry quickly.

    The three of them fell silent. After a long pause, Hermione voiced the knottiest question of all in a
hesitant voice.

    "Do you think we should go and ask Hagrid about it all?"

    "That'd be a cheerful visit," said Ron. "`Hello, Hagrid. Tell us, have you been setting anything mad
and hairy loose in the castle lately?'"

    In the end, they decided that they would not say anything to Hagrid unless there was another attack,
and as more and more days went by with no whisper from the disembodied voice, they became hopeful
that they would never need to talk to him about why he had been expelled. It was now nearly four
months since Justin and Nearly Headless Nick had been Petrified, and nearly everybody seemed to think
that the attacker, whoever it was, had retired for good. Peeves had finally got bored of his "Oh, Potter,
you rotter" song, Ernie Macmillan asked Harry quite politely to pass a bucket of leaping toadstools in
Herbology one day, and in March several of the Mandrakes threw a loud and raucous party in
greenhouse three. This made Professor Sprout very happy.

    "The moment they start trying to move into each other's pots, we'll know they're fully mature," she
told Harry. "Then we'll be able to revive those poor people in the hospital wing."



 The second years were given something new to think about during their Easter holidays. The time had
come to choose their subjects for the third year, a matter that Hermione, at least, took very seriously.

   "...it could affect our whole future," she told Harry and Ron as they pored over lists of new subjects,
marking them with checks.

    "I just want to give up Potions," said Harry.

   "We can't," said Ron gloomily. "We keep all our old subjects, or I'd've ditched Defense Against the
Dark Arts."

    "But that's very important!" said Hermione, shocked.

    "Not the way Lockhart teaches it," said Ron. "I haven't learned anything from him except not to set
pixies loose."


                                                                                                             Page 144
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Neville Longbottom had been sent letters from all the witches and wizards in his family, all giving him
different advice on what to choose. Confused and worried, he sat reading the subject lists with his tongue
poking out, asking people whether they thought Arithmancy sounded more difficult than the study of
Ancient Runes. Dean Thomas, who, like Harry, had grown up with Muggles, ended up closing his eyes
and jabbing his wand at the list, then picking the subjects it landed on. Hermione took nobody's advice
but signed up for everything.

     Harry smiled grimly to himself at the thought of what Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia would say if he
tried to discuss his career in wizardry with them. Not that he didn't get any guidance: Percy Weasley was
eager to share his experience.

     "Depends where you want to go, Harry," he said. "It's never too early to think about the future, so
I'd recommend Divination. People say Muggle Studies is a soft option, but I personally think wizards
should have a thorough understanding of the non-magical community, particularly if they're thinking of
working in close contact with them -- look at my father, he has to deal with Muggle business all the time.
My brother Charlie was always more of an outdoor type, so he went for Care of Magical Creatures.
Play to your strengths, Harry."

    But the only thing Harry felt he was really good at was Quidditch. In the end, he chose the same new
subjects as Ron, feeling that if he was lousy at them, at least he'd have someone friendly to help him.



 Gryffindor's next Quidditch match would be against Hufflepuff. Wood was insisting on team practices
every night after dinner, so that Harry barely had time for anything but Quidditch and homework.
However, the training sessions were getting better, or at least drier, and the evening before Saturday's
match he went up to his dormitory to drop off his broomstick feeling Gryffindor's chances for the
Quidditch cup had never been better.

   But his cheerful mood didn't last long. At the top of the stairs to the dormitory, he met Neville
Longbottom, who was looking frantic.

    "Harry -- I don't know who did it -- I just found --"

    Watching Harry fearfully, Neville pushed open the door.

    The contents of Harry's trunk had been thrown everywhere. His cloak lay ripped on the floor. The
bedclothes had been pulled off his four-poster and the drawer had been pulled out of his bedside cabinet,
the contents strewn over the mattress.

    Harry walked over to the bed, open-mouthed, treading on a few loose pages of Travels with Trolls.
As he and Neville pulled the blankets back onto his bed, Ron, Dean, and Seamus came in. Dean swore
loudly.

    "What happened, Harry?"

    "No idea," said Harry. But Ron was examining Harry's robes. All the pockets were hanging out.

    "Someone's been looking for something," said Ron. "Is there anything missing?"




                                                                                                              Page 145
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Harry started to pick up all his things and throw them into his trunk. It was only as he threw the last
of the Lockhart books back into it that he realized what wasn't there.

    "Riddle's diary's gone," he said in an undertone to Ron.

    "What?"

    Harry jerked his head toward the dormitory door and Ron followed him out. They hurried down to
the Gryffindor common room, which was half-empty, and joined Hermione, who was sitting alone,
reading a book called Ancient Runes Made Easy .

    Hermione looked aghast at the news.

    "But -- only a Gryffindor could have stolen -- nobody else knows our password --"

    "Exactly," said Harry.



They woke the next day to brilliant sunshine and a light, refreshing breeze.

    "Perfect Quidditch conditions!" said Wood enthusiastically at the Gryffindor table, loading the team's
plates with scrambled eggs. "Harry, buck up there, you need a decent breakfast."

    Harry had been staring down the packed Gryffindor table, wondering if the new owner of Riddle's
diary was right in front of his eyes. Hermione had been urging him to report the robbery, but Harry didn't
like the idea. He'd have to tell a teacher all about the diary, and how many people knew why Hagrid had
been expelled fifty years ago? He didn't want to be the one who brought it all up again.

    As he left the Great Hall with Ron and Hermione to go and collect his Quidditch things, another very
serious worry was added to Harry's growing list. He had just set foot on the marble staircase when he
heard it yet again.

    "Kill this time...let me rip...tear..."

    He shouted aloud and Ron and Hermione both jumped away from him in alarm.

    "The voice!" said Harry, -looking over his shoulder. "I just heard it again -- didn't you?"

    Ron shook his head, wide-eyed. Hermione, however, clapped a hand to her forehead.

    "Harry -- I think I've just understood something! I've got to go to the library!"

    And she sprinted away, up the stairs.

    "What does she understand?" said Harry distractedly, still looking around, trying to tell where the
voice had come from.

    "Loads more than I do," said Ron, shaking his head.

    "But why's she got to go to the library?"


                                                                                                              Page 146
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "Because that's what Hermione does," said Ron, shrugging. "When in doubt, go to the library."

   Harry stood, irresolute, trying to catch the voice again, but people were now emerging from the
Great Hall behind him, talking loudly, exiting through the front doors on their way to the Quidditch pitch.

    "You'd better get moving," said Ron. "It's nearly eleven -- the match --"

    Harry raced up to Gryffindor Tower, collected his Nimbus Two Thousand, and joined the large
crowd swarming across the grounds, but his mind was still in the castle along with the bodiless voice, and
as he pulled on his scarlet robes in the locker room, his only comfort was that everyone was now outside
to watch the game.

    The teams walked onto the field to tumultuous applause. Oliver Wood took off for a warm-up flight
around the goal posts; Madam Hooch released the balls. The Hufflepuffs, who played in canary yellow,
were standing in a huddle, having a last-minute discussion of tactics.

    Harry was just mounting his broom when Professor McGonagall came half marching, half running
across the pitch, carrying an enormous purple megaphone.

    Harry's heart dropped like a stone.

    "This match has been cancelled," Professor McGonagall called through the megaphone, addressing
the packed stadium. There were boos and shouts. Oliver Wood, looking devastated, landed and ran
toward Professor McGonagall without getting off his broomstick.

    "But, Professor!" he shouted. "We've got to play -- the cup -- Gryffindor --"

    Professor McGonagall ignored him and continued to shout through her megaphone:

    "All students are to make their way back to the House common rooms, where their Heads of Houses
will give them further information. As quickly as you can, please!"

    Then she lowered the megaphone and beckoned Harry over to her.

    "Potter, I think you'd better come with me...."

    Wondering how she could possibly suspect him this time, Harry saw Ron detach himself from the
complaining crowd; he came running up to them as they set off toward the castle. To Harry's surprise,
Professor McGonagall didn't object.

    "Yes, perhaps you'd better come, too, Weasley..."

     Some of the students swarming around them were grumbling about the match being canceled; others
looked worried. Harry and Ron followed Professor McGonagall back into the school and up the marble
staircase. But they weren't taken to anybody's office this time.

   "This will be a bit of a shock," said Professor McGonagall in a surprisingly gentle voice as they
approached the infirmary. "There has been another attack ... another double attack."

    Harry's insides did a horrible somersault. Professor McGonagall pushed the door open and he and


                                                                                                              Page 147
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Ron entered. . Madam Pomfrey was bending over a fifth-year girl with long, curly hair. Harry
recognized her as the Ravenclaw they'd accidentally asked for directions to the Slytherin common room.
And on the bed next to her was --

    " Hermione!" Ron groaned.

    Hermione lay utterly still, her eyes open and glassy.

    "They were found near the library," said Professor McGonagall. "I don't suppose either of you can
explain this? It was on the floor next to them..."

    She was holding up a small, circular mirror.

    Harry and Ron shook their heads, both staring at Hermione.

    "I will escort you back to Gryffindor Tower," said Professor McGonagall heavily. "I need to address
the students in any case."



 "All students will return to their House common rooms by six o'clock in the evening. No student is to
leave the dormitories after that time. You will be escorted to each lesson by a teacher. No student is to
use the bathroom unaccompanied by a teacher. All further Quidditch training and matches are to be
postponed. There will be no more evening activities."

     The Gryffindors packed inside the common room listened to Professor McGonagall in silence. She
rolled up the parchment from which she had been reading and said in a somewhat choked voice, "I need
hardly add that I have rarely been so distressed. It is likely that the school will be closed unless the culprit
behind these attacks is caught. I would urge anyone who thinks they might know anything about them to
come forward."

   She climbed somewhat awkwardly out of the portrait hole, and the Gryffindors began talking
immediately.

     "That's two Gryffindors down, not counting a Gryffindor ghost, one Ravenclaw, and one Hufflepuff,
" said the Weasley twins' friend Lee Jordan, counting on his fingers. "Haven't any of the teachers noticed
that the Slytherins are all safe? Isn't it obvious all this stuff's coming from Slytherin? The Heir of Slytherin,
the monster of Slytherin -- why don't they just chuck all the Slytherins out?" he roared, to nods and
scattered applause.

    Percy Weasley was sitting in a chair behind Lee, but for once he didn't seem keen to make his views
heard. He was looking pale and stunned.

    "Percy's in shock," George told Harry quietly. "That Ravenclaw girl -- Penelope Clearwater --
she's a prefect. I don't think he thought the monster would dare attack a prefect."

    But Harry was only half-listening. He didn't seem to be able to get rid of the picture of Hermione,
lying on the hospital bed as though carved out of stone. And if the culprit wasn't caught soon, he was
looking at a lifetime back with the Dursleys. Tom Riddle had turned Hagrid in because he was faced with
the prospect of a Muggle orphanage if the school closed. Harry now knew exactly how he had felt.




                                                                                                                    Page 148
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    "What're we going to do?" said Ron quietly in Harry's ear. "D'you think they suspect Hagrid?"

     "We've got to go and talk to him," said Harry, making up his mind. "I can't believe it's him this time,
but if he set the monster loose last time he'll know how to get inside the Chamber of Secrets, and that's a
start."

    "But McGonagall said we've got to stay in our tower unless we're in class --"

    "I think," said Harry, more quietly still, "it's time to get my dad's old cloak out again."



 Harry had inherited just one thing from his father: a long and silvery Invisibility Cloak. It was their only
chance of sneaking out of the school to visit Hagrid without anyone knowing about it. They went to bed
at the usual time, waited until Neville, Dean, and Seamus had stopped discussing the Chamber of Secrets
and finally fallen asleep, then got up, dressed again, and threw the cloak over themselves.

    The journey through the dark and deserted castle corridors wasn't enjoyable. Harry, who had
wandered the castle at night several times before, had never seen it so crowded after sunset. Teachers,
prefects, and ghosts were marching the corridors in pairs, staring around for any unusual activity. Their
Invisibility Cloak didn't stop them making any noise, and there was a particularly tense moment when
Ron stubbed his toe only yards from the spot where Snape stood standing guard. Thankfully, Snape
sneezed at almost exactly the moment Ron swore. It was with relief that they reached the oak front doors
and eased them open.

    It was a clear, starry night. They hurried toward the lit windows of Hagrid's house and pulled off the
cloak only when they were right outside his front door.

   Seconds after they had knocked, Hagrid flung it open. They found themselves face-to-face with him
aiming a crossbow at them. Fang the boarhound barked loudly behind him.

    "Oh," he said, lowering the weapon and staring at them. "What're you two doin' here?"

    "What's that for?" said Harry, pointing at the crossbow as they stepped inside.

   "Nothin' -- nothin' --" Hagrid muttered. "I've bin expectin' -- doesn' matter -- Sit down -- I'll
make tea --"

    He hardly seemed to know what he was doing. He nearly extinguished the fire, spilling water from the
kettle on it, and then smashed the teapot with a nervous jerk of his massive hand.

    "Are you okay, Hagrid?" said Harry. "Did you hear about Hermione?"

    "Oh, I heard, all righ'," said Hagrid, a slight break in his voice.

   He kept glancing nervously at the windows. He poured them both large mugs of boiling water (he
had forgotten to add tea bags) and was just putting a slab of fruitcake on a plate when there was a loud
knock on the door.

    Hagrid dropped the fruitcake. Harry and Ron exchanged panicstricken looks, then threw the
Invisibility Cloak back over themselves and retreated into a corner. Hagrid checked that they were


                                                                                                                Page 149
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




hidden, seized his crossbow, and flung open his door once more.

    "Good evening, Hagrid."

   It was Dumbledore. He entered, looking deadly serious, and was followed by a second, very
odd-looking man.

    The stranger had rumpled gray hair and an anxious expression, and was wearing a strange mixture of
clothes: a pinstriped suit, a scarlet tie, a long black cloak, and pointed purple boots. Under his arm he
carried a lime-green bowler.

    "That's Dad's boss!" Ron breathed. "Cornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic!"

    Harry elbowed Ron hard to make him shut up.

    Hagrid had gone pale and sweaty. He dropped into one of his chairs and looked from Dumbledore
to Cornelius Fudge.

    "Bad business, Hagrid," said Fudge in rather clipped tones. "Very bad business. Had to come. Four
attacks on Muggle-borns. Things've gone far enough. Ministry's got to act."

  "I never," said Hagrid, looking imploringly at Dumbledore. "You know I never, Professor
Dumbledore, sir --"

   "I want it understood, Cornelius, that Hagrid has my full confidence," said Dumbledore, frowning at
Fudge.

   "Look, Albus," said Fudge, uncomfortably. "Hagrid's record's against him. Ministry's got to do
something -- the school governors have been in touch --"

  "Yet again, Cornelius, I tell you that taking Hagrid away will not help in the slightest," said
Dumbledore. His blue eyes were full of a fire Harry had never seen before.

    "Look at it from my point of view," said Fudge, fidgeting with his bowler. "I'm under a lot of
pressure. Got to be seen to be doing something. If it turns out it wasn't Hagrid, he'll be back and no
more said. But I've got to take him. Got to. Wouldn't be doing my duty --"

    "Take me?" said Hagrid, who was trembling. "Take me where?"

    "For a short stretch only," said Fudge, not meeting Hagrid's eyes. "Not a punishment, Hagrid, more
a precaution. If someone else is caught, you'll be let out with a full apology --"

    "Not Azkaban?" croaked Hagrid.

    Before Fudge could answer, there was another loud rap on the door.

    Dumbledore answered it. It was Harry's turn for an elbow in the ribs; he'd let out an audible gasp.

    Mr. Lucius Malfoy strode into Hagrid's hut, swathed in a long black traveling cloak, smiling a cold
and satisfied smile. Fang started to growl.




                                                                                                            Page 150
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




      "Already here, Fudge," he said approvingly. "Good, good..."

      "What're you doin' here?" said Hagrid furiously. "Get outta my house!"

     "My dear man, please believe me, I have no pleasure at all in being inside your -- er -- d'you call
this a house?" said Lucius Malfoy, sneering as he looked around the small cabin. "I simply called at the
school and was told that the headmaster was here."

   "And what exactly did you want with me, Lucius?" said Dumbledore. He spoke politely, but the fire
was still blazing in his blue eyes.

    "Dreadful thing, Dumbledore," said Malfoy lazily, taking out a long roll of parchment, "but the
governors feel it's time for you to step aside. This is an Order of Suspension -- you'll find all twelve
signatures on it. I'm afraid we feel you're losing your touch. How many attacks have there been now?
Two more this afternoon, wasn't it? At this rate, there'll be no Muggle-borns left at Hogwarts, and we all
know what an awful loss that would be to the school."

     "Oh, now, see here, Lucius," said Fudge, looking alarmed, "Dumbledore suspended -- no, no --
last thing we want just now."

   "The appointment -- or suspension -- of the headmaster is a matter for the governors, Fudge," said
Mr. Malfoy smoothly. "And as Dumbledore has failed to stop these attacks --"

    "See here, Malfoy, if Dumbledore can't stop them," said Fudge, whose upper lip was sweating now,
"I mean to say, who can?"

      "That remains to be seen," said Mr. Malfoy with a nasty smile. "But as all twelve of us have voted
--"

      Hagrid leapt to his feet, his shaggy black head grazing the ceiling.

      `An' how many did yeh have ter threaten an' blackmail before they agreed, Malfoy, eh?" he roared.

      "Dear, dear, you know, that temper of yours will lead you into trouble one of these days, Hagrid,"
said Mr. Malfoy. "I would advise you not to shout at the Azkaban guards like that. They won't like it at
all."

    "Yeh can' take Dumbledore!" yelled Hagrid, making Fang the boarhound cower and whimper in his
basket. "Take him away, an' the Muggle-borns won' stand a chance! There'll be killin' next!"

      "Calm yourself, Hagrid," said Dumbledore sharply. He looked at Lucius Malfoy.

      "If the governors want my removal, Lucius, I shall of course step aside --"

      "But --" stuttered Fudge.

      "No!" growled Hagrid.

      Dumbledore had not taken his bright blue eyes off Lucius Malfoy's cold gray ones.

      "However," said Dumbledore, speaking very slowly and clearly so that none of them could miss a


                                                                                                             Page 151
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




word, "you will find that I will only truly have left this school when none here are loyal to me...Help will
always be given at Hogwarts to those who ask for it."

   For a second, Harry was almost sure Dumbledore's eyes flickered toward the corner where he and
Ron were hidden.

    "Admirable sentiments," said Malfoy, bowing. "We shall all miss your -- er -- highly individual way
of running things, Albus, and only hope your successor willl manage to prevent any -- ah -- killins."

    He strode to the cabin door, opened it, and bowed Dumbledore out. Fudge, fiddling with his bowler,
waited for Hagrid to go ahead of him, but Hagrid stood his ground, took a deep breath, and said
carefully, "If anyone wanted ter find out some stuff, all they'd have ter do would be ter follow the spiders.
That'd lead `em right. That's all I'm sayin'."

    Fudge stared at him in amazement.

   "All right, I'm comin', said Hagrid, pulling on his moleskin overcoat. But as he was about to follow
Fudge through the door, he stopped again and said loudly, "An' someone'll need ter feed Fang while I'm
away."

    The door banged shut and Ron pulled off the Invisibility Cloak.

    "We're in trouble now," Ron said hoarsely. "No Dumbledore. They might as well close the school
tonight. There'll be an attack a day with him gone."

    Fang started howling, scratching at the closed door.




                                            CAPTER FIFTEEN



ARAGOG



 Summer was creeping over the grounds around the castle; sky and lake alike turned periwinkle blue and
flowers large as cabbages burst into bloom in the greenhouses. But with no Hagrid visible from the castle
windows, striding the grounds with Fang at his heels, the scene didn't look right to Harry; no better, in
fact, than the inside of the castle, where things were so horribly wrong.

    Harry and Ron had tried to visit Hermione, but visitors were now barred from the hospital wing.

     "We're taking no more chances," Madam Pomfrey told them severely through a crack in the
infirmary door. "No, I'm sorry, there's every chance the attacker might come back to finish these people
off...."




                                                                                                                Page 152
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    With Dumbledore gone, fear had spread as never before, so that the sun warming the castle walls
outside seemed to stop at the mullioned windows. There was barely a face to be seen in the school that
didn't look worried and tense, and any laughter that rang through the corridors sounded shrill and
unnatural and was quickly stifled.

    Harry constantly repeated Dumbledore's final words to himself "I will only truly have left this
school when none here are loyal to me....Help will always be given at Hogwarts to those who ask
for it." But what good were these words? Who exactly were they supposed to ask for help, when
everyone was just as confused and scared as they were?

    Hagrid's hint about the spiders was far easier to understand. The trouble was, there didn't seem to
be a single spider left in the castle to follow. Harry looked everywhere he went, helped (rather
reluctantly) by Ron. They were hampered, of course, by the fact that they weren't allowed to wander off
on their own but had to move around the castle in a pack with the other Gryffindors. Most of their fellow
students seemed glad that they were being shepherded from class to class by teachers, but Harry found it
very irksome.

    One person, however, seemed to be thoroughly enjoying the atmosphere of terror and suspicion.
Draco Malfoy was strutting around the school as though he had just been appointed Head Boy. Harry
didn't realize what he was so pleased about until the Potions lesson about two weeks after Dumbledore
and Hagrid had left, when, sitting right behind Malfoy, Harry overheard him gloating to Crabbe and
Goyle.

    "I always thought Father might be the one who got rid of Dumbledore," he said, not troubling to keep
his voice down. "I told you he thinks Dumbledore's the worst headmaster the school's ever had. Maybe
we'll get a decent headmaster now. Someone who won't want the Chamber of Secrets closed.
McGonagall won't last long, she's only filling in...."

    Snape swept past Harry, making no comment about Hermione's empty seat and cauldron.

    "Sir," said Malfoy loudly. "Sir, why don't you apply for the headmaster's job?"

  "Now, now, Malfoy," said Snape, though he couldn't suppress a thin-lipped smile. "Professor
Dumbledore has only been suspended by the governors. I daresay he'll be back with us soon enough."

     "Yeah, right," said Malfoy, smirking. "I expect you'd have Father's vote, sir, if you wanted to apply
for the job -- I'll tell Father you're the best teacher here, sir --"

   Snape smirked as he swept off around the dungeon, fortunately not spotting Seamus Finnigan, who
was pretending to vomit into his cauldron.

   "I'm quite surprised the Mudbloods haven't all packed their bags by now," Malfoy went on. "Bet
you five Galleons the next one dies. Pity it wasn't Granger --"

    The bell rang at that moment, which was lucky; at Malfoy's last words, Ron had leapt off his stool,
and in the scramble to collect bags and books, his attempts to reach Malfoy went unnoticed.

   "Let me at him," Ron growled as Harry and Dean hung onto his arms. "I don't care, I don't need my
wand, I'm going to kill him with my bare hands --"

    "Hurry up, I've got to take you all to Herbology," barked Snape over the class's heads, and off they


                                                                                                             Page 153
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




marched, with Harry, Ron, and Dean bringing up the rear, Ron still trying to get loose. It was only safe to
let go of him when Snape had seen them out of the castle and they were making their way across the
vegetable patch toward the greenhouses.

   The Herbology class was very subdued; there were now two missing from their number, Justin and
Hermione.

    Professor Sprout set them all to work pruning the Abyssinian Shrivelfigs. Harry went to tip an armful
of withered stalks onto the compost heap and found himself face-to-face with Ernie Macmillan. Ernie
took a deep breath and said, very formally, "I just want to say, Harry, that I'm sorry I ever suspected
you. I know you'd never attack Hermione Granger, and I apologize for all the stuff I said. We're all in
the same boat now, and, well --"

    He held out a pudgy hand, and Harry shook it.

    Ernie and his friend Hannah came to work at the same Shrivelfig as Harry and Ron.

     "That Draco Malfoy character," said Ernie, breaking off dead twigs, "he seems very pleased about
all this, doesn't he? D'you know, I think he might be Slytherin's heir."

    "That's clever of you," said Ron, who didn't seem to have forgiven Ernie as readily as Harry.

    "Do you think it's Malfoy, Harry?" Ernie asked.

    "No," said Harry, so firmly that Ernie and Hannah stared.

    A second later, Harry spotted something.

    Several large spiders were scuttling over the ground on the other side of the glass, moving in an
unnaturally straight line as though taking the shortest route to a prearranged meeting. Harry hit Ron over
the hand with his pruning shears.

    " Ouch!What're you --"

    Harry pointed out the spiders, following their progress with his eyes screwed up against the sun.

    "Oh, yeah," said Ron, trying, and failing, to look pleased. "But we can't follow them now --"

    Ernie and Hannah were listening curiously.

    Harry's eyes narrowed as he focused on the spiders. If they pursued their fixed course, there could
be no doubt about where they would end up.

    "Looks like they're heading for the Forbidden Forest...."

    And Ron looked even unhappier about that.

    At the end of the lesson Professor Sprout escorted the class to their Defense Against the Dark Arts
lesson. Harry and Ron lagged behind the others so they could talk out of earshot.

    "We'll have to use the Invisibility Cloak again," Harry told Ron. "We can take Fang with us. He's


                                                                                                              Page 154
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




used to going into the forest with Hagrid, he might be some help."

    "Right," said Ron, who was twirling his wand nervously in his fingers. "Er -- aren't there -- aren't
there supposed to be werewolves in the forest?" he added as they took their usual places at the back of
Lockhart's classroom.

    Preferring not to answer that question, Harry said, "There are good things in there, too. The centaurs
are all right, and the unicorns..."

   Ron had never been into the Forbidden Forest before. Harry had entered it only once and had hoped
never to do so again.

    Lockhart bounded into the room and the class stared at him. Every other teacher in the place was
looking grimmer than usual, but Lockhart appeared nothing short of buoyant.

    "Come now," he cried, beaming around him. "Why all these long faces?"

    People swapped exasperated looks, but nobody answered.

   "Don't you people realize," said Lockhart, speaking slowly, as though they were all a bit dim, "the
danger has passed! The culprit has been taken away --"

    "Says who?" said Dean Thomas loudly.

   "My dear young man, the Minister of Magic wouldn't have taken Hagrid if he hadn't been one
hundred percent sure that he was guilty," said Lockhart, in the tone of someone explaining that one and
one made two.

    "Oh, yes he would," said Ron, even more loudly than Dean.

   "I flatter myself I know a touch more about Hagrid's arrest than you do, Mr. Weasley," said
Lockhart in a self-satisfied tone.

   Ron started to say that he didn't think so, somehow, but stopped in midsentence when Harry kicked
him hard under the desk.

    "We weren't there, remember?" Harry muttered.

    But Lockhart's disgusting cheeriness, his hints that he had always thought Hagrid was no good, his
confidence that the whole business was now at an end, irritated Harry so much that he yearned to throw
Gadding with Ghouls right in Lockhart's stupid face. Instead he contented himself with scrawling a note
to Ron: Let's do it tonight.

   Ron read the message, swallowed hard, and looked sideways at the empty seat usually filled by
Hermione. The sight seemed to stiffen his resolve, and he nodded.



 The Gryffindor common room was always very crowded these days, because from six o'clock onward
the Gryffindors had nowhere else to go. They also had plenty to talk about, with the result that the
common room often didn't empty until past midnight.


                                                                                                             Page 155
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




    Harry went to get the Invisibility Cloak out of his trunk right after dinner, and spent the evening sitting
on it, waiting for the room to clear. Fred and George challenged Harry and Ron to a few games of
Exploding Snap, and Ginny sat watching them, very subdued in Hermione's usual chair. Harry and Ron
kept losing on purpose, trying to finish the games quickly, but even so, it was well past midnight when
Fred, George, and Ginny finally went to bed.

    Harry and Ron waited for the distant sounds of two dormitory doors closing before seizing the cloak,
throwing it over themselves, and climbing through the portrait hole.

    It was another difficult journey through the castle, dodging all the teachers. At last they reached the
entrance hall, slid back the lock on the oak front doors, squeezed between them, trying to stop any
creaking, and stepped out into the moonlit grounds.

    "'Course," said Ron abruptly as they strode across the black grass, "we might get to the forest and
find there's nothing to follow. Those spiders might not've been going there at all. I know it looked like
they were moving in that sort of general direction, but..."

    His voice trailed away hopefully.

    They reached Hagrid's house, sad and sorry-looking with its blank windows. When Harry pushed
the door open, Fang went mad with joy at the sight of them. Worried he might wake everyone at the
castle with his deep, booming barks, they hastily fed him treacle fudge from a tin on the mantelpiece,
which glued his teeth together.

    Harry left the Invisibility Cloak on Hagrid's table. There would be no need for it in the pitch-dark
forest.

    "C'mon, Fang, we're going for a walk," said Harry, patting his leg, and Fang bounded happily out of
the house behind them, dashed to the edge of the forest, and lifted his leg against a large sycamore tree.

     Harry took out his wand, murmured, "Lumos!" and a tiny light appeared at the end of it, just enough
to let them watch the path for signs of spiders.

   "Good thinking," said Ron. "I'd light mine, too, but you know -- it'd probably blow up or
something...."

    Harry tapped Ron on the shoulder, pointing at the grass. Two solitary spiders were hurrying away
from the wandlight into the shade of the trees.

    "Okay," Ron sighed as though resigned to the worst, "I'm ready. Let's go."

    So, with Fang scampering around them, sniffing tree roots and leaves, they entered the forest. By the
glow of Harry's wand, they followed the steady trickle of spiders moving along the path. They walked
behind them for about twenty minutes, not speaking, listening hard for noises other than breaking twigs
and rustling leaves. Then, when the trees had become thicker than ever, so that the stars overhead were
no longer visible, and Harry's wand shone alone in the sea of dark, they saw their spider guides leaving
the path.

    Harry paused, trying to see where the spiders were going, but everything outside his little sphere of
light was pitch-black. He had never been this deep into the forest before. He could vividly remember


                                                                                                                  Page 156
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




Hagrid advising him not to leave the forest path last time he'd been in here. But Hagrid was miles away
now, probably sitting in a cell in Azkaban, and he had also said to follow the spiders.

   Something wet touched Harry's hand and he jumped backward, crushing Ron's foot, but it was only
Fang's nose.

    "What d'you reckon?" Harry said to Ron, whose eyes he could just make out, reflecting the light
from his wand.

    "We've come this far," said Ron.

    So they followed the darting shadows of the spiders into the trees. They couldn't move very quickly
now; there were tree roots and stumps in their way, barely visible in the near blackness. Harry could feel
Fang's hot breath on his hand. More than once, they had to stop, so that Harry could crouch down and
find the spiders in the wandlight.

    They walked for what seemed like at least half an hour, their robes snagging on low-slung branches
and brambles. After a while, they noticed that the ground seemed to be sloping downward, though the
trees were as thick as ever.

    Then Fang suddenly let loose a great, echoing bark, making both Harry and Ron jump out of their
skins.

    "What?" said Ron loudly, looking around into the pitch-dark, and gripping Harry's elbow very hard.

    "There's something moving over there," Harry breathed. "Listen...sounds like something big...."

    They listened. Some distance to their right, the something big was snapping branches as it carved a
path through the trees.

    "Oh, no," said Ron. "Oh, no, oh, no, oh --"

    "Shut up," said Harry frantically. "It'll hear you."

    "Hear me ?" said Ron in an unnaturally high voice. "It's already heard Fang!"

    The darkness seemed to be pressing on their eyeballs as they stood, terrified, waiting. There was a
strange rumbling noise and then silence.

    "What d'you think it's doing?" said Harry.

    "Probably getting ready to pounce," said Ron.

    They waited, shivering, hardly daring to move.

    "D'you think it's gone?" Harry whispered.

    "Dunno --"

    Then, to their right, came a sudden blaze of light, so bright in the darkness that both of them flung up
their hands to shield their eyes. Fang yelped and tried to run, but got lodged in a tangle of thorns and


                                                                                                               Page 157
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




yelped even louder.

    "Harry!" Ron shouted, his voice breaking with relief "Harry, it's our car!"

    "What?"

    "Come on!"

   Harry blundered after Ron toward the light, stumbling and tripping, and a moment later they had
emerged into a clearing.

    Mr. Weasley's car was standing, empty, in the middle of a circle of thick trees under a roof of dense
branches, its headlights ablaze. As Ron walked, open-mouthed, toward it, it moved slowly toward him,
exactly like a large, turquoise dog greeting its owner.

    "It's been here all the time!" said Ron delightedly, walking around the car. "Look at it. The forest's
turned it wild...."

    The sides of the car were scratched and smeared with mud. Apparently it had taken to trundling
around the forest on its own. Fang didn't seem at all keen on it; he kept close to Harry, who could feel
him quivering. His breathing slowing down again, Harry stuffed his wand back into his robes.

   "And we thought it was going to attack us!" said Ron, leaning against the car and patting it. "I
wondered where it had gone!"

    Harry squinted around on the floodlit ground for signs of more spiders, but they had all scuttled away
from the glare of the headlights.

    "We've lost the trail," he said. "C'mon, let's go and find them."

    Ron didn't speak. He didn't move. His eyes were fixed on a point some ten feet above the forest
floor, right behind Harry. His face was livid with terror.

    Harry didn't even have time to turn around. There was a loud clicking noise and suddenly he felt
something long and hairy seize him around the middle and lift him off the ground, so that he was hanging
facedown. Struggling, terrified, he heard more clicking, and saw Ron's legs leave the ground, too, heard
Fang whimpering and howling -- next moment, he was being swept away into the dark trees.

     Head hanging, Harry saw that what had hold of him was marching on six immensely long, hairy legs,
the front two clutching him tightly below a pair of shining black pincers. Behind him, he could hear
another of the creatures, no doubt carrying Ron. They were moving into the very heart of the forest.
Harry could hear Fang fighting to free himself from a third monster, whining loudly, but Harry couldn't
have yelled even if he had wanted to; he seemed to have left his voice back with the car in the clearing.

     He never knew how long he was in the creature's clutches; he only knew that the darkness suddenly
lifted enough for him to see that the leaf-strewn ground was now swarming with spiders. Craning his neck
sideways, he realized that they had reached the ridge of a vast hollow, a hollow that had been cleared of
trees, so that the stars shone brightly onto the worst scene he had ever laid eyes on.

    Spiders. Not tiny spiders like those surging over the leaves below. Spiders the size of carthorses,
eight-eyed, eight-legged, black, hairy, gigantic. The massive specimen that was carrying Harry made its


                                                                                                             Page 158
   Generated by ABC Amber LIT Converter, http://www.processtext.com/abclit.html




way down the steep slope toward a misty, domed web in the very center of the hollow, while its fellows
closed in all around it, clicking their pincers excitedly at the sight of its load.

    Harry fell to the ground on all fours as the spider released him. Ron and Fang thudded down next to
him. Fang wasn't howling anymore, but cowering silently on the spot. Ron looked exactly like Harry felt.
His mouth was stretched wide in a kind of silent scream and his eyes were popping.

     Harry suddenly realized that the spider that had dropped him was saying something. It had been hard
to tell, because he clicked his pincers with every word he spoke.

    "Aragog!" it called. "Aragog!"

    And from the middle of the misty, domed web, a spider the size of a small elephant emerged, very
slowly. There was gray in the black of his body and legs, and each of the eyes on his ugly, pincered head
was milky white. He was blind.

    "What is it?" he said, clicking his pincers rapidly.

    "Men," clicked the spider who had caught Harry.

    "Is it Hagrid?" said Aragog, moving closer, his eight milky eyes wandering vaguely.

    "Strangers," clicked the spider who had brought Ron.

    "Kill them," clicked Aragog fretfully. "I was sleeping...."

    "We're friends of Hagrid's," Harry shouted. His heart seemed to have left his chest to pound in his
throat.

    Click, click, click went the pincers of the spiders all around the hollow.

    Aragog paused.

    "Hagrid has never sent men into our hollow before," he said slowly.

    "Hagrid's in trouble," said Harry, breathing very fast. "That's why we've come."

   "In trouble?" said the aged spider, and Harry thought he heard concern beneath the clicking pincers.
"But why has he sent you?"

    Harry thought of getting to his feet but decided against it; he didn't think his legs would support him.
So he spoke from the ground, as calmly as he could.

    "They think, up at the school, that Hagrid's been setting a -- a -- something on students. They've
taken him to Azkaban."

    Aragog clicked his pincers furiously, and all around the hollow the sound was echoed by the crowd
of spiders; it was like applause, except applause didn't usually make Harry feel sick with fear.

   "But that was years ago," said Aragog fretfully. "Years and years ago. I remember it well. That's
why they made him leave the school. They believed that I was the monster that dwells in what they call
the Chamber of Secrets. They thought that Hagrid had opened the Chamber and set me free."


                                                                                                               Page 159