Sleeping Beauty (French: La Belle au bois dormant, "The Beauty in the sleeping woods") by Charles Perrault or Little Briar Rose (German: Dornröschen) by the Brothers Grimm is a classic fairytale involving a beautiful princess called Aurora, enchantment, and a handsome prince. It is the first in the set published in 1697 by Charles Perrault, Contes de ma Mère l'Oye ("Tales of Mother Goose").[1]
The most familiar Sleeping Beauty in the English-speaking world has become the 1959 Walt Disney animated film, which draws as much from Tchaikovsky's ballet (premiered at Saint Petersburg in 1890) as it does from Perrault.
Contents [hide]
1 Perrault's narrative
1.1 Part one
1.2 Part two
2 Sources
3 Variants
4 Myth themes
5 Modern retellings
6 Sleeping Beauty in music
7 Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty
8 Uses of Sleeping Beauty
9 Gallery
10 In other languages
11 See also
12 References
13 External links
[edit]Perrault's narrative

The basic elements of Perrault's narrative are in two parts. Some folklorists believe that they were originally separate tales, as they became afterward in the Grimms' version, and were joined together by Basile, and Perrault following him.[2]
[edit]Part one


Sleeping Beauty is shown a spindle by the witch. "Sleeping Beauty", by Alexander Zick (1845 - 1907)
At the christening of a long-wished-for princess, fairies invited as godmothers offer gifts: beauty, wit, and musical talent. However, as her gift, a wicked fairy who was overlooked, places the princess under an enchantment, saying that, on reaching adulthood, she will prick her finger on the spindle of the Spinning Wheel of Death and die. However, one last fairy has yet to give her gift. She partially reverses the wicked fairy's curse, proclaiming that the princess will instead fall into a deep sleep for 100 years.
The king forbade spinning on distaff or spindle, or the possession of one, upon pain of death, throughout the kingdom, but all in vain. When the princess was fifteen or sixteen she chanced to come upon an old woman, who was really the wicked fairy in disguise, in a tower of the castle, who was spinning. The princess asked to try the unfamiliar task and the inevitable happened. The wicked fairy's curse was fulfilled. The good fairy returned and put everyone in the castle to sleep. A forest of briars sprang up around the castle, shielding it from the outside world: no one could try to penetrate it without facing certain death in the thorns.
After a hundred years had passed, a prince who had heard the story of the enchantment braved the wood, which parted at his approach, and entered the castle. He trembled upon seeing the princess's beauty and fell on his knees before her. He kissed her, then she woke up, then everyone in the castle woke to continue where they had left off, and they all lived happily ever after.
[edit]Part two
Secretly wed by the reawakened Royal almoner, the Prince continued to visit the Princess, who bore him two children, L'Aurore (Dawn) and Le Jour (Day), which he kept secret from his step-mother, who was of an ogre lineage. Once he had ascended the throne, he brought his wife and the talabutte ("Count of The Mount").
The Ogress Queen Mother sent the young Queen and the children to a house secluded in the woods, and directed her cook there to prepare the boy for her dinner, with a sauce Robert. The humane cook substituted a lamb, which satisfied the Queen Mother, who then demanded the girl, but was satisfied with a young goat prepared in the same excellent sauce. When the Ogress demanded that he serve up the young Queen, the latter offered her throat to be slit, so that she might join the children she imagined were dead. There was a tearful secret reunion in the cook's little house, while the Queen Mother was satisfied with a hind prepared with sauce Robert. Soon she discovered the trick and prepared a tub in the courtyard filled with vipers and other noxious creatures. The King returned in the nick of time and the Ogress, being discovered, threw herself into the pit she had prepared and was consumed, and everyone else lived happily ever after.
[edit]Sources



An older image of the sleeping princess: Brünnhilde, surrounded by magical fire rather than roses (illustration by Arthur Rackham to Richard Wagner's Die Walküre
Perrault transformed the tone of Basile's "Sole, Luna, e Talia". Beside differences in tone, the most notable differences in the plot is that, in Basile's version, the sleep did not stem from a curse, but was prophesied; that the king did not wake Talia from the sleep with a kiss, but raped her,[3] and when she gave birth to two children, one sucked on her finger, drawing out the piece of flax that had put her to sleep, which woke her; and that the woman who resented her and tried to eat her and her children was not the king's mother but his jealous wife. The mother-in-law's jealousy is less motivated, although common in fairy tales.
There are earlier elements that contributed to the tale, in the medieval courtly romance Perceforest (published in 1528), in which a princess named Zellandine falls in love with a man named Troylus. Her father sends him to perform tasks to prove himself worthy of her, and while he is gone, Zellandine falls into an enchanted sleep. Troylus finds her and impregnates her in her sleep; when their child is born, he draws from her finger the flax that caused her sleep. She realizes from the ring he left her that the father was Troylus; he returns after his adventures to marry her.[4]
Earlier influences come from the story of the sleeping Brynhild in the Volsunga saga and the tribulations of saintly female martyrs in early Christian hagiography conventions. It was, in fact, the existence of Brynhild that persuaded the Brothers Grimm to include the story in later editions of their work rather than eliminate it, as they did to other works they deemed to be purely French, stemming from Perrault's work.
The second half, in which the princess and her children are almost put to death, but hidden instead, may have been influenced by St. Genevieve.
[edit]Variants

This fairy tale is classified as Aarne-Thompson type 410.[5]
The princess's name has been unstable. In Sun, Moon, and Talia, she is named Talia ("Sun" and "Moon" being her twin children). Perrault removed this, leaving her anonymous, although naming her daughter "L'Aurore". The Brothers Grimm named her "Briar Rose" in their 1812 collection.[6] This transfer was taken up by Disney in the film, which also called her Aurora.[7] John Stejean named her "Rosebud" in TeleStory Presents.
The Brothers Grimm included a variant, Briar Rose, in their collection (1812).[6] It truncates the story as Perrault and Basile told it to the ending now generally known: the arrival of the prince concludes the tale.[8] Some translations of the Grimm tale give the princess the name Rosamond. The brothers considered rejecting the story on the grounds that it was derived from Perrault's version, but the presence of the Brynhild tale convinced them to include it as an authentically German tale. Still, it is the only known German variant of the tale, and the influence of Perrault is almost certain.[9]
The Brothers Grimm also included, in the first edition of their tales, a fragmentary fairy tale, The Evil Mother-in-Law. This began with the heroine married and the mother of two children, as in the second part of Perrault's tale, and her mother-in-law attempted to eat first the children and then the heroine. Unlike Perrault's version, the heroine herself suggested an animal be substituted in the dish, and the fragment ends with the heroine's worry that she can not keep her children from crying, and so from coming to the attention of the mother-in-law. Like many German tales showing French influence, it appeared in no subsequent edition.[10]
Italo Calvino included a variant in Italian Folktales. The cause of her sleep is an ill-advised wish by her mother: she would not care if her daughter died of pricking her finger at fifteen, if only she had a daughter. As in Pentamerone, she wakes after the prince rapes her in her sleep, and her children are born and one sucks on her finger, pulling out the prick that had put her to sleep. He preserves that the woman who tries to kill the children is the king's mother, not his wife, but adds that she does not want to eat them herself but serves them to the king.[11] His version came from Calabria, but he noted that all Italian versions closely followed Basile's.[12]
Besides Sun, Moon, and Talia, Basile included another variant of this Aarne-Thompson type, The Young Slave. The Grimms also included a second, more distantly related one, The Glass Coffin.[5]
Joseph Jacobs noted the figure of the Sleeping Beauty was in common between this tale and the Gypsy tale The King of England and his Three Sons, in his More English Fairy Tales.[13]
The hostility of the king's mother to his new bride is repeated in the fairy tale The Six Swans,[14] and also features The Twelve Wild Ducks, where she is modified to be the king's stepmother, but these tales omit the cannibalism.
[edit]Myth themes

Some folklorists have analyzed Sleeping Beauty as indicating the replacement of the lunar year (with its thirteen months, symbolically depicted by the full thirteen fairies) by the solar year (which has twelve, symbolically the invited fairies). This, however, founders on the issue that only in the Grimms' tale is the wicked fairy the thirteenth fairy; in Perrault's, she is the eighth.[15]
Among familiar themes and elements in Perrault's tale:
the Wished-for Child
Further information: Saint Anne and Rapunzel
the Accursed Gift
Further information: Nessus and Deianira
the Inevitable Fate
the Spinner
Further information: Moirae and Norn
the Heroic Quest
the Ogre Stepmother
the Salvation through a Redemptor. Slumber as metaphor for sleeping death as though by sin
the Substituted Victim
Further information: Isaac, Jesus, Zeus, Cronos and Iphigeneia
See also: Weaving (mythology)
[edit]Modern retellings


This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2011)
Sleeping Beauty has been popular for many fairytale fantasy retellings. These include Mercedes Lackey's Elemental Masters novel The Gates of Sleep; Robin McKinley's Spindle's End, Orson Scott Card's Enchantment, Jane Yolen's Briar Rose, Sophie Masson's Clementine, Anne Rice's (as A. N. Roquelaure) Sleeping Beauty Trilogy and Jim C. Hines Princess Series.
The curse of the fairy godmother, by itself, has been taken from the tale and used in many contexts. George MacDonald used it in his Sleeping Beauty parody, The Light Princess, in which the evil fairy godmother curses the princess not to death but to lack gravity — leaving her both lacking in physical weight and unable to take other people's suffering seriously.[16] In Andrew Lang's Prince Prigio, the queen, who does not believe in fairies, does not invite them; the fairies come anyway and give good gifts, except for the last one, who says that he shall be "too clever" — and the problems with such a gift are only revealed later. In Patricia Wrede's Enchanted Forest Chronicles, a princess laments that she was not cursed at her christening. When another character points out that many princesses are not (even in the Chronicles' fairy-tale setting), she complains that in her case the wicked fairy did come to the christening, "had a wonderful time", and left the princess with no way to assume her proper, fairy-tale role. Another Wrede short story, "Stronger than Time," from the collection "Book of Enchantments," has a ghost story of Sleeping Beauty. In M.M. Kaye's The Ordinary Princess, the queen insists on inviting fairies to the princess's christening for the sake of tradition, despite the king's protestations, and the fairy Crustacea gives Princess Amy the "gift" of being ordinary.
Angela Carter's "The Bloody Chamber" provides a postmodern retelling of Sleeping Beauty entitled "The Lady of the House of Love". Although she deviates significantly from the original subject matter she keeps intact what she terms the "latent content", for example though not actually asleep there are repeated references to the protagonist existing as a somnambulist. The story follows the life of a Transylvanian vampire condemned by her fate until a young soldier arrives who, through his innocence, frees her from her curse.
Annaliese Evans's "Night's Rose" continues to play on the same elements from part two of Sleeping Beauty, in which the heroine, Rosemarie Edenberg (the princess) has her mind set on wiping out the entire orgre tribe. Through her journey she is joined by her fairy advisor Ambrose Nuit and a Vampire Lord Gareth Shenley.
Jim C. Hines retells the story of Talia aka Sleeping Beauty (along with Danielle (Cinderella) and Snow (Snow White) in his Princess series of books which include "The Step Sister Scheme", "The Mermaid's Madness" and "Red Hood's Revenge". In this retelling Talia is a cunning and deadly warrior. Due to the gifts bestowed to her by the fairies she possesses grace, beauty and the voice of an angel. Hines uses the less popular "Sun, Moon, and Talia" version of Sleeping Beauty's awaking-- as opposed to the romantic "kiss" scenario-- as her back story. Talia is also a lesbian in this series, which gives her a whole new dimension and an interesting take on the character.
Francesca Lia Block's The Rose and the Beast contains a story entitled "Charm", where Sleeping Beauty is re-imagined as a heroin addict with a history of sexual abuse living in modern-day Los Angeles.
Alex Flinn's A Kiss in Time is a modern version of Sleeping Beauty, in which Talia, princess of Euphrasia, touches a spindle, falling into a deep sleep for three-hundred years. She wakes to the kiss of an American boy named Jack, on a tour of Europe. Since everyone in her kingdom is angry at her for touching the spindle, she persuades Jack to take her back to his Miami home, where she enters a modern world, replete with South Beach models and Jell-O shots. A humorous fish-out-of-water romance, Booklist magazine said in their review that "[f]ans of Meg Cabot’s Princess Diaries and Gail Carson Levine’s Ella Enchanted (1997) will embrace this charming, lightweight fantasy." Publishers Weekly called the book, "clever and humorous," while HornBook magazine called it "satisfying."
[edit]Sleeping Beauty in music

Michele Carafa composed La belle au bois dormant in 1825.
The last movement of Märchenbilder (Schumann) depicts scenes from the story (source: section of Schumann's journals "hard to find and not translated into English".[17] Gerhard Schmidt, who taught at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama and at the City of London School for Girls, had access to a copy of this section before he left Austria for the UK).
Before Tchaikovsky's version, several ballet productions were based on the "sleeping beauty" theme, amongst which one from Eugène Scribe: in the winter of 1828–1829, the French playwright furnished a four-act mimed scenario as a basis for Aumer's choreography of a four-act ballet-pantomime La Belle au Bois Dormant. Scribe wisely omitted the violence of the second part of Perrault's tale for the ballet, which was set by Hérold and first staged at the Académie Royale in Paris on 27 April 1829. Though Hérold popularized his piece with a piano Rondo brilliant based on themes from the music, he was not successful in getting the ballet staged again.
When Ivan Vsevolozhsky, the Director of the Imperial Theatres in Saint Petersburg, wrote to Tchaikovsky on 25 May 1888, suggesting a ballet based on Perrault's tale, he also cut the violent second half, climaxed the action with the Awakening Kiss, and followed with a conventional festive last act, a series of bravura variations.
Although Tchaikovsky was may not have been very eager to compose a new ballet (remembering that the reception of his Swan Lake ballet music, staged eleven seasons earlier, had only been lukewarm), he set to work with Vsevolovzhsky's scenario. The ballet, with Tchaikovsky's music (his Opus 66) and choreography by Marius Petipa, was premiered in the Saint Petersburg Mariinsky Theatre on 24 January 1890.
Besides being Tchaikovsky's first major success in ballet composition, it set a new standard for what is now called "Classical Ballet", and remained one of the all-time favourites in the whole of the ballet repertoire. Sleeping Beauty was the first ballet that impresario Sergei Diaghilev ever saw – he later recorded in his memoirs – and also the first that ballerinas Anna Pavlova and Galina Ulanova ever saw, and the ballet that introduced the Russian dancer Rudolph Nureyev to European audiences. Diaghilev staged the ballet himself in 1921 in London with the Ballets Russes. Choreographer George Balanchine made his stage debut as a gilded Cupid sitting on a gilded cage, in the last act divertissements.
Mimed and danced versions of the ballet survived in the distinctly British genre of pantomime, with Carabosse, the evil fairy, a famous travesti role.
Maurice Ravel's Ma Mère l'Oye includes a movement entitled Pavane de la Belle au bois dormant (Pavane of the Beauty in the Sleeping Wood). This piece was also later developed into a ballet.
The band Alesana also has a song related to Sleeping Beauty called "The Uninvited Thirteenth" which is on the their album Where Myth Fades to Legend. "It's in the point of view of the uninvited thirteenth and the prince. Many princes before him had tried to wake Sleeping Beauty up but before they could reach her they got pierced by the thorns. The uninvited thirteenth is talking about revenge and killing the both of them. As for the prince is talking about saving her and how he struggles to pass the thorns. In the end he reaches her and kisses her. His prize is his darling Rosamond."
A new opera is currently in progress, with a German libretto by Peter Munns and music by Canadian composers Ian Dives and Roger Parton.
[edit]Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty

Main article: Sleeping Beauty (1959 film)
The Walt Disney Productions animated feature Sleeping Beauty was released on 29 January 1959 by Buena Vista Distribution. Disney spent nearly a decade working on the film, which was produced in the Super Technirama 70 widescreen film process with a stereophonic soundtrack. The film cost six million U.S. dollars to produce. Its musical score and songs are adapted from Tchaikovsky's ballet. This tale includes three good fairies - Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather - and one evil fairy, Maleficent. As in most Disney films, there are considerable changes made to the plot. For example, it is Maleficent herself that appears in the upper tower of the castle and creates the spinning wheel on which Princess Aurora (called Briar Rose by Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather in the years before the event), pricks her finger. In the original, a drop spindle rather than a spinning wheel was specified. The princess's hair is also changed from dark brown, as in Perrault's original book, to blonde. The princess has been described as Disney's most beautiful heroine,[18] and while it has been observed that "comparisons of this statuesque blonde to the contemporaneous Barbie doll are difficult to avoid,"[19] all the sequences of the film were first filmed in live action.[20]
[edit]Uses of Sleeping Beauty

In the Nintendo video game Zelda II: The Adventure of Link, a sleeping curse is put on Princess Zelda by an evil wizard. Only Link can break the curse, by reuniting the three pieces of the Triforce.
One of the fairy gifts is sometimes misremembered as Intelligence. No such gift was however offered in Perrault's version: not appropriate in 1697, when a good ear for playing music appeared more essential. More modern versions of the tale might include, apart from Intelligence, Courage and Independence as fairy gifts. This can be compared with the gifts Moll Flanders apparently possessed, in the book with the same name that appeared precisely a quarter of a century after Perrault's Sleeping Beauty (1722).
Freudian psychologists, encouraged by Bruno Bettelheim's The Uses of Enchantment, have found rich materials to analyze in Sleeping Beauty as a case history of latent female sexuality and a prescription for the passive socialization of those young women who were not destined for work.
Eric Berne uses this fairy tale to illustrate "Waiting for Rigor Mortis", as one of the life scripts.[21] After pointing out that almost everything in this story could actually happen, he singles out the key illusion that the story fails to recognize: that the time did not stop while she was asleep, that in reality Rose will not be fifteen years old, but thirty, forty, or fifty. Berne uses this and other fairy tales as a convenient tool to puncture the script armor that captivates people.
Joan Gould's book Turning Straw into Gold reclaims the story for women's agency, arguing that Sleeping Beauty is an example of a woman's ability to "turn off" in times of crisis. She cites a version of the story in which the princess awakes when the prince enters the room, because she knows it is time to wake up.
Terry Pratchett refers to several fairy tales in his Discworld series, especially in reference to witches who try to control the narrative potential of their world. In Wyrd Sisters the Lancre witches draw on the influence of Black Aliss, who moved a castle and its inhabitants one hundred years into the future, when Granny Weatherwax transports her own native kingdom seventeen years ahead to allow the proper heir to the usurped throne to reach adulthood abroad without having to wait. Later, in Witches Abroad, the same coven comes across a castle that has fallen under a curse that causes everyone to slumber while the forest grows into the courtyard; Granny explains that it has happened dozens of times. The servants wake up angry and determined to chase the witches away after they rouse the princess, not with a kiss but by pitching the spinning wheel out the window.
Pamela Ditchoff's novel, Mrs. Beast,[22] explores what happened to the famous Fairy Tales princesses including Sleeping Beauty after they said "I Do!".[23]
The Princess's sleeping attendants, waiting to accompany her when she wakes in the other world, even to the spit-boys in the kitchens and her pet dog, expresses one of the most ancient themes in ritual burial practices, though Perrault was probably unaware of the Egyptian burials, and certainly unaware of the royal tombs of Queen Puabi of the Third Dynasty of Ur, the courtiers that accompanied early emperors of China in the tomb, the horses that accompanied the noble riders in the kurgans of Scythian Pasyryk. The King and Queen are not included in this analogue of a burial, but retire, while the protective spectral thorn forest immediately grows up to protect the castle and its occupants, as effective as a tumulus.[citation needed]
Further information: Grave goods
Anne Rice's erotic novel, The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty, written under the name of A. N. Roquelaure, is loosely based on this fairy tale.
Sleeping Beauty appears as a character in the Fables comic book. She is one of the three ex-wives of Prince Charming, and is one of the wealthier Fables. She is still vulnerable to pricking herself, falling back into an enchanted slumber when this happens, along with all others in whatever building she is in. She is clearly identified as the 'Briar Rose' character and never referred to as Sleeping Beauty. Although this was placed on her as a curse, it is put to good use at some times, notably when putting the entire Imperial City to sleep.
The second half of Sleeping Beauty appears as one of the comics in Little Lit. The comic is written and drawn by famed comics author Art Spiegelman.
In 2002 the Dutch-speaking author Toon Tellegen published Brieven aan Doornroosje ("Letters to Sleeping Beauty"), leading, in 2005, to a year-long daily series of such letters, imagined to be written by the prince making his quest to Sleeping Beauty's castle, being presented at the Flemish classical radio station (Klara), every morning just before 7:00 opening the day program.
In the book Sisters Grimm she is one of the people who actually do not despise Relda Grimm. She is shown as a very kind person and she has cocoa-colored skin.
In Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales for Every Child, Sleeping Beauty is depicted as a Hispanic princess named Rosita. She was under the spell for a century.
The Sleeping Beauty (Live in Israel) is a live album by Tiamat.
Angela Carter reinterpreted the tale for her collection of short stories The Bloody Chamber.
Caitlín R. Kiernan's "Glass Coffin" is a retelling of "Sleeping Beauty." It appears in her collection Tales of Pain and Wonder. The story's title is a reference to P. J. Harvey's song "Hardly Wait", which is itself also a reference to "Sleeping Beauty."
Sheri S. Tepper adapts the Sleeping Beauty story in her novel, Beauty. This novel also includes references to Cinderella and The Frog Prince.
Bruce Bennett adapted Sleeping Beauty into a Children's Musical with Lynne Warren, which made its world premiere at Riverwalk Theatre
Catherynne M. Valente adapted the story in The Maiden-Tree, in which she likens the spindle to a syringe.
The video game Max Payne 2: The Fall of Max Payne uses Sleeping Beauty as an allegory to the game's own ending when Max kisses a dead Mona Sax on the lips—-according to Max, "...all this time we got the story of Sleeping Beauty all wrong." He theorizes that the prince, much like Max himself, is not kissing Sleeping Beauty to wake her up, but rather to wake himself from the hope and pain that brought him there—-Max states, "No one who's slept for a hundred years is likely to wake up." However, if one manages to beat the game on the hardest difficulty, Mona will wake up after the kiss, surviving in the alternate ending.
In philosophy, the Sleeping Beauty paradox is a thought-experiment where Beauty is given an amnesiac and put to sleep on Sunday night. A coin is flipped and if heads occurs, she will be awoken on Monday and then put back to sleep. if tails occurs, she is awoken on Monday and Tuesday. Whenever she awakes, she will be asked what her subjective probability is for the coin having landed heads. Everybody agrees that she will answer 1/2 before the experiment, but some argue that during the experiment she will answer 1/3. If that is the case then she is said to defy the Reflection Principle, commonly thought by Bayesians to be a constraint on rationality.
In Cardcaptor Sakura, Sakura's class performs Sleeping Beauty in the episode "Sakura and the Blacked Out School Arts Festival", with the characters chosen at random. Sakura gets the title of the Prince and Syaoran gets the title of Aurora, with Yamazaki earning the title of the witch in the manga. However, since Meilin took the role of the witch in the anime, Yamazaki became the queen which lead to Rika, who was the queen in the manga, to be one of the fairies instead of an unnamed boy.
In Kaori Yuki's manga, Ludwig Revolution, the queen was infertile and had Princess Friederike after a fish relayed a prophecy. Rather than meeting a servant, the princess pricked her finger when the witch told her that there had been no prophesy; instead the queen had been raped and she was not the king's daughter. Friederike touched the spindle as a way to test if the witch was telling the truth and slept for one hundred years. When Prince Ludwig meets her in his dreams, he falls in love with her and his kiss breaks the spell. They do not, however, live happily ever after, as she dies the moment she awakens of old age. She later returns as a spirit and lends her powers to help overthrow the false queen, Lady Petronella.
In one chapter of Honey and Clover Morita threatens that if Ayumi does not invite him to a Christmas party, he will curse her, and have her future daughter, on her 15th birthday, prick her finger on a spindle and fall into a deep sleep.
A segment of the 2005 Turkish anthology film Istanbul Tales made up of five stories inspired by popular fairy tales is based on this tale in which an insane young woman is the Sleeping Beauty who lives in a Bosphorus mansion. She meets a young Kurdish man who has migrated to Istanbul.
Mattel Entertainment's (Universal Studios) Barbie as The Sleeping Beauty was launched on March 28, 2009, and features Barbie as the Princess Clarette, with music of Arnie Roth, based on Tchaikovsky's ballet, based on the story by The Brothers Grimm and Charles Perrault.
This was spoofed on Hanna Barbera's The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo in 1985, DreamWorks LLC's Shrek the Third in 2007, Disney's own House of Mouse in 2002, Disney's Enchanted in 2007 and Disney's Inspector Gadget in 1999.
Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty's main protagonist and antagonist were used in the Square-Enix/Disney collaboration PS2 games Kingdom Hearts, Kingdom Hearts II, and Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep for PSP. Aurora is one of the Princesses of Heart who are princesses that have no darkness in their hearts. Gathering all seven of the Princesses of Heart together will create a doorway to Kingdom Hearts, the heart of all worlds. She shares the title Princess of Heart with Cinderella, Belle, Alice, Snow White, Jasmine, and, the game's original princess, Kairi. Maleficent acts as a main antagonist in these games who helps the other Disney villains in their schemes while making her own come to fruition. After receiving a visit from Master Xehanort, the fairy Maleficent becomes obsessed with finding the Princesses of Heart, and even manipulates Terra into stealing Aurora's heart. Also featured in Kingdom Hearts II were the three good fairies Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather who give the main character, Sora, his new clothes and enable him to use his Drive Forms.
This was also spoofed in the 1948 Popeye cartoon Wotta Knight with Olive Oyl as Sleeping Beauty.
In the 1988 Muppet Babies episode "Slipping Beauty", while Piggy catches a case of the chicken pox, the gang cheers her up by telling her their version of the story of Sleeping Beauty over the walkie-talkie. During Piggy's imagination of the story, she plays the princess, while Kermit is the prince; Fozzie, Rowlf, and Gonzo are the three good fairies; Animal is the bad fairy, and Scooter and Skeeter are the king and queen. During the narration, Fozzie alters the princess's sleeping curse by having the princess (Piggy) step on a banana peel (since little children should not play with sharp objects) and "fall asleep" before her fourth birthday. At the same time, the "nice little cottage" is really Buckingham Palace, and Piggy only goes away to throw away the giant harp Rowlf gave her.
In the "Sleeping Beauty" episode of Fractured Fairy Tales of the Rocky and Bullwinkle show, the narrator quickly gets through the story from the princess's birth to the point where the prince arrives at the castle. From there, rather than kiss her, the prince opens up Sleeping Beauty Land (a parody of Disneyland). While business booms, he is constantly interrupted by the bad fairy and disposes of her in many ways. Finally, at the end of the episode, after business goes downhill with fewer attendants, the princess cheers up the prince and bad fairy by waking up without true love's first kiss.
A new book that tells the story of "Sleeping Beauty's Daughter" called "Alinda of the Loch"[24] was released tentatively in August 2009. It has been a multi-year writing collaboration of two teachers who each "live across the pond." Oonagh Jane Pope (UK Andover 3rd grade teacher) and Julie Ann Brown (US Santa Barbara College Professor) who each felt that it was time to tell the story of Queen Aurora of Inverness-Shire and her youngest daughter, Alinda. The Scottish fairy tale answers many a question as to why the land and the loch have held such mystery, adventure and magic throughout the passing centuries.
Jane Yolen's novel "Briar Rose" reimagines the tale of "Sleeping Beauty" against the background of the Holocaust.
In the Sixth/Last (depending on one's viewing order) episode of The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya season one, while trapped in 'Closed Space' Kyon is given the mysterious message 'Sleeping Beauty' by Nagato Yuki through a computer.
Joss Whedon's series Dollhouse uses this story as an extended metaphor in the aptly named episode "Briar Rose", equating it both to the brainwashed members of the Dollhouse and a young character dealing with the after-effects of sexual abuse.
Randy Lofficier has used Sleeping Beauty, awakened in the 1930s, as a crimefighter nicknamed the Phantom Angel in several stories published in Tales of the Shadowmen.
German photographer Herbert W. Hesselmann used Sleeping Beauties as the title of a photo series, taken in 1983 in an overgrown French garden. The photos which show some 50 high-class classical cars in a dilapidated state covered with dust, moss and chicken dirt, caused quite a stir among car enthusiasts worldwide. The photos of the collection formerly owned by famous wine expert Michel Dovaz have been published in two books titled Sleeping Beauties and many magazine publications (Stern, Automobile Quarterly, Geo, Supercar Classics, Autoretro and others). A new book titled "The Fate of the Sleeping Beauties" (September 2010) tells the backgrounds and the fate of the Sleeping Beauties collection.
The attraction, Songs of the Sea located in Sentosa Island, Singapore has a plot which makes a reference to Sleeping Beauty.
Sleeping Beauty (La Belle au Bois dormant (The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood)) is a classic fairy tale, and it also may refer to:
Contents [hide]
1 Film
2 Literature
3 Music and theatre
4 Science
5 Television
6 Other uses
[edit]Film

The Sleeping Beauty (film), a 1930 Soviet film directed by Georgi Vasilyev and Sergei Vasilyev
Sleeping Beauty (1959 film), a Disney animated film
Aurora (Disney), the title character of the Disney film
Sleeping Beauty (1973 film) or Some Call It Loving, a drama by James B. Harris
Sleeping Beauty (1995 film), a direct-to-video animated film
The Sleeping Beauty (1935 film), a cartoon in the Puppetoon series by George Pal, included in The Puppetoon Movie
Sleeping Beauty (1987 film), a 1987 film starring Tahnee Welch
Sleeping Beauty (2010 film), by Catherine Breillat
Sleeping Beauty (Tornerose), a Norwegian film in the Varg Veum series
Sleeping Beauty (2011 film), an Australian film starring Emily Browning
[edit]Literature

Sleeping Beauty (Ross Macdonald novel)
Sleeping Beauty Trilogy, three erotic novels by Anne Rice writing under the pseudonym A. N. Roquelaure
The Sleeping Beauty (Taylor novel), a novel by the English writer Elizabeth Taylor
[edit]Music and theatre

The Sleeping Beauty (ballet), a ballet by Tchaikovsky, originally choreographed by Marius Petipa
La belle au bois dormant (opera), an opera by Michele Carafa
The Sleeping Beauty (Live in Israel), an album by Tiamat
"Sleeping Beauty", a song by Brotherhood of Man from Higher Than High
"Sleeping Beauty", a song by A Perfect Circle from Mer de Noms
[edit]Science

Sleeping Beauty Galaxy or Black Eye Galaxy
Sleeping Beauty transposon system, a genetic tool for gene discovery and gene transfer
Oxalis corniculata or Sleeping Beauty, a herbaceous plant
Kleine-Levin syndrome or Sleeping Beauty syndrome, a neurological disorder
Somnophilia or Sleeping Beauty syndrome, a paraphilia
[edit]Television

"Sleeping Beauty" (Faerie Tale Theatre), an episode of Faerie Tale Theatre
"The Sleeping Beauty" (The O.C.), an episode of The O.C.
[edit]Other uses

Sleeping Beauty (album), a comedy album by Cheech and Chong
Sleeping Beauty (canoe), a WWII submersible electric-powered canoe for a frogman to ride
The Sleeping Beauty (wax figure), a wax figure at Madame Tussauds in London
Sleeping Beauty, Kalinga, a mountain in the Philippines
Sleeping Beauty Castle, a structure at the center of Disneyland Park and Hong Kong Disneyland Park
Sleeping Beauty Mountain Provincial Park, British Columbia, Canada
Sleeping Beauty problem, a puzzle in probability

Sleeping Beauty is a 1959 American animated film produced by Walt Disney and based on the fairy tale "La Belle au bois dormant" by Charles Perrault. Sixteenth animated feature in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series, the film was originally released to theatres on January 29, 1959 by Buena Vista Distribution.
Contents [hide]
1 Plot
2 Production
2.1 Overview and art direction
2.2 Characters and story development
2.3 Live-action reference footage
3 Release and later history
3.1 Theatrical release
3.2 Home video release
3.3 Other appearances
4 Characters
5 Awards and nominations
6 Media and merchandise
6.1 Board game
6.2 Theme parks
7 Soundtrack listing
8 References
9 External links
Plot

After many childless years, King Stefan and his Queen welcome the arrival of their daughter, Aurora. The newborn Princess is named after the Roman Goddess of the dawn because of how she fills the lives of the King and Queen with sunshine. While still an infant, she is betrothed to the also-young Prince Phillip, son of King Hubert, uniting their respective kingdoms. At her christening, three good fairies - Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather - arrive to bless the child with gifts. Flora gives the princess the gift of beauty, while Fauna gives her the gift of song.
Before Merryweather is able to give her blessing, a wicked witch named Maleficent appears, expressing disappointment of not being invited to the ceremony. As revenge for the insult she curses the princess: before the sun sets on her sixteenth birthday, Aurora will prick her finger on the spindle of a spinning wheel and die.
As Maleficent disappears, the distraught King Stefan requests that Merryweather break the curse. Even though Merryweather is unable to undo Maleficent's curse, she is able to weaken it. If Aurora was to touch a spindle, she wouldn't die, but rather fall into a deep slumber that she could only be awoken from by a true love's kiss.
Though King Stefan orders all spinning wheels in the kingdom burned, the three fairies know Maleficent's spell cannot be stopped that easily and devise a plan to protect her. With the King and Queen's consent, they disguise themselves as mortals and sneak Aurora away with them to a woodland cottage.
Sixteen years later, Aurora - renamed Briar Rose - has grown into a gorgeous young woman with the blessings that Flora and Fauna bestowed to her. Sweet and gentle, she dreams of falling in love one day. As Rose gathers berries, while singing, she attracts the attention of Prince Phillip as he is out riding his horse Samson (who goes, "HEY! HEY! HEY!") in the woods. When they meet, they instantly fall in love; Phillip believing her to be a peasant girl, and she thinking him a woodsman. Realizing that she has to return home, Rose flees from Phillip without ever learning his name.
Later that day, the fairies reveal the truth to Rose and despite her heartbreak they take her to her parents. Meanwhile, Phillip tells his father about the "peasant girl" he met, adding that he wishes to marry the her in spite of his betrothal to Princess Aurora. King Hubert tries to convince Phillip to marry the princess, but fails.
In the palace, Maleficent uses her magic to lure Aurora to a strange room, where an enchanted spinning wheel awaits her. Spellbound, Aurora touches the spindle, pricking her finger and fulfilling the altered curse. The good fairies place Aurora on a bed and place a powerful charm on all the people in the kingdom, causing them to fall in a deep sleep until the spell is broken.
Before falling asleep, King Hubert tells Stefan of his son being in love with a peasant girl, which the fairies overhear and realize that Prince Phillip is the man Aurora has fallen in love with. They set off on a search to find, and convince him to kiss the princess and break the curse. However, the Prince has already been kidnapped by Maleficent and taken to the dungeons on the forbidden mountain, to prevent him from breaking her spell.
The fairies discover the Prince's whereabouts, sneak into the forbidden mountain, and free the prince. Armed with a magical Sword and Shield, Phillip and the fairies escape from the forbidden mountain. Maleficent places a massive forest of thorns around the kingdom to keep Phillip out. But as Phillip is undeterred, Maleficent calls on the powers of Hell to transform herself into a Dragon. After a long fight, Phillip defeats the dragon, kisses Aurora and restores the kingdom.
Production

Overview and art direction
Sleeping Beauty spent nearly the entire decade of the 1950s in production: the story work began in 1951, voices were recorded in 1952, animation production took from 1953 until 1958, and the stereophonic musical score, mostly based on Tchaikovsky's ballet of the same name, was recorded in 1957. The film holds a notable position in Disney animation as the last Disney feature to use hand-inked cels. Beginning with the next feature, One Hundred and One Dalmatians, Disney would move to the use of xerography to transfer animators' drawings from paper to celluloid. Its art, which Walt Disney wanted to look like a living illustration and which was inspired by medieval art, was not in the typical Disney style. Because the Disney studio had already made two features based on fairy tales, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and Cinderella, Walt Disney wanted this film to stand out from its predecessors by choosing a different visual style. The movie eschewed the soft, rounded look of earlier Disney features for a more stylized one. Since Super Technirama 70 was used, it also meant the backgrounds could contain more detailed and complex artwork than ever used in an animated movie before.
While Disney's regular production designer, Ken Anderson was in charge of the film's overall look, Disney artist Eyvind Earle was made the film's color stylist and chief background designer, and Disney gave him a significant amount of freedom in designing the settings and selecting colors for the film. Earle also painted the majority of the backgrounds himself. The elaborate paintings usually took seven to ten days to paint; by contrast, a typical animation background took only one workday to complete. Disney's decision to give Earle so much artistic freedom was not popular among the Disney animators, who had until Sleeping Beauty exercised some influence over the style of their characters and settings.
It was also the first time the studio experimented with the Xerox process. Woolie Reitherman used it on the dragon as a way to enlarge and reduce its size, but due to the primitive equipment available in this early test, the Xerox lines were then replaced with traditional ink and paint.[3]
Of interesting note is the fact that Chuck Jones, who gained fame as an animation director with Warner Bros. Animation, did some work on the film. He worked with the studio during a brief period when Warner Bros. closed its Animation department, anticipating that 3-D film would replace animation as a box office draw. When the studio was re-opened following the failure of 3-D, Jones ended his work at Disney and returned to Warner Bros. His work on Sleeping Beauty, which he spent four months on, remained uncredited. Ironically, during his early years at WB, Jones was a heavy user of Disney-style animation.
Characters and story development
The name given to the princess by her royal birth parents is "Aurora" (Latin for "dawn"), as it was in the original Tchaikovsky ballet. This name occurred in Perrault's version as well, not as the princess's name, but as her daughter's.[4] In hiding, she is called Briar Rose, the name of the princess in the Brothers Grimm variant.[5] The prince was given the princely name most familiar to Americans in the 1950s: "Prince Phillip", named after Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. The evil fairy was aptly named Maleficent (a Latin-derived adjective meaning "harmfully malicious").[6] Sleeping Beauty's mother is never named in the film itself or the character reference sheets but according to Disney legend around the studio she was meant to be called Queen Leah, but is otherwise always referred to as "the queen," whereas both her father and that of the prince are given names that are used several times, both in dialogue and narration.
Walt Disney had suggested that all three good fairies should look alike, but veteran animators Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston objected, saying that three identical fairies would not be exciting. They chose to have the fairies in different personalities, looks, and colours just like the famed Disney duck trio Huey, Dewey and Louie. Additionally, the idea originally included seven fairies instead of three, as there are seven fairies in the story's main reference, Perrault's version. In determining Maleficent's design, standard depictions of witches and hags were dismissed (as it would too closely resembled the Wicked Queen's guise in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs) for animator Marc Davis opted for a more elegant look. In his research of the period and artwork of the Medieval times he came across a picture of a woman of a religious nature but was dressed elegantly devilish with flowing capes and clothes resembling flames. With this image in his head he centered around the appearance of flames, ultimately crowning the villain with "the horns of the devil." He even went as far as to give Maleficent bat-looking wings for her collar. In the final production the individual character of the three good fairies and the elegant villain proved to be among the film's strongest points.
Several story points for this film came from discarded ideas for Disney's previous fairy tale involving a sleeping heroine: Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. They include Maleficent's capture of the Prince, as well as her mocking him and the Prince's daring escape from her castle. Disney discarded these ideas from Snow White because his artists were not able to draw a human male believably enough at the time[citation needed], although they were incorporated into the comic book version of the film. Also discarded from Snow White but used in this film were the ideas of the dance with the makeshift prince (also used as "Prince Buckethead" in the Snow White comic book), and the fantasy sequence of the prince and princess dancing in the clouds, which was also considered but dropped from Cinderella.
Live-action reference footage
Before animation production began, every shot in the film was done in a live-action reference version, with live actors in costume serving as models for the animators. The role of Prince Phillip was modeled by Ed Kemmer, who had played Commander Buzz Corry on television's Space Patrol five years before Sleeping Beauty was released. For the final battle sequence, Kemmer was photographed on a wooden buck. Among the actresses who performed in reference footage for this film were Spring Byington, Frances Bavier, and Helene Stanley.
Helene Stanley was the live action reference for Princess Aurora. The only known surviving footage of Stanley as Aurora's live-action reference is a clip from the television program Disneyland, which consists of the artists sketching her dancing with the woodland animals. It was not the first or last time Stanley worked for Disney; she also provided live-action references for Cinderella and Anita from One Hundred and One Dalmatians,[7] and portrayed Polly Crockett for the TV series Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier. An episode of The Mickey Mouse Club television series features Stanley re-enacting scenes from the Sleeping Beauty for the Mousketeers to watch (a clip from this episode is included as a special feature on the Cinderella Platinum Edition DVD).
All the live actors' performances were screened for the animators' reference as Walt Disney insisted that much of Sleeping Beauty's character animation be as close to live action as possible.[8]
Release and later history

Theatrical release
Disney's distribution arm, Buena Vista Distribution, originally released Sleeping Beauty to theaters in both standard 35mm prints and large-format 70mm prints. The Super Technirama 70 prints were equipped with six-track stereophonic sound; some CinemaScope-compatible 35mm Technirama prints were released in four-track stereo, and others had monaural soundtracks. On the initial run, Sleeping Beauty was paired with the short musical/documentary film Grand Canyon which won an Academy Award.
During its original release in 1959, Sleeping Beauty earned approximately $7.7 million in box office rentals.[9] Sleeping Beauty's production costs, which totaled $6 million,[1] made it the most expensive Disney film up to that point, and over twice as expensive as each of the preceding three Disney animated features: Alice in Wonderland, Peter Pan, and Lady and the Tramp.[10] The high production costs of Sleeping Beauty, coupled with the underperformance of much of the rest of Disney's 1959-1960 release slate resulted in the company posting its first annual loss in a decade for fiscal year 1960,[1] and massive layoffs were done throughout the animation department.[11]
The film was met with mixed reviews from critics, often citing the film being slowly paced and having little character development.[8] Nevertheless, the film has sustained a strong following and is today hailed as one of the best animated features ever made, thanks to its stylized designs by painter Eyvind Earle who also was the art director for the movie, its lush music score and its large-format widescreen and stereophonic sound presentation.
Like Alice in Wonderland, which was not initially successful either, Sleeping Beauty was never re-released theatrically in Walt Disney's lifetime. However, it had many re-releases in theaters over the decades. The film was re-released theatrically in 1970, 1979 (in 70mm 6 channel stereo, as well as in 35 mm stereo and mono), 1986, 1993, and 1995. Sleeping Beauty's successful reissues have made it the second most successful film released in 1959, second to Ben-Hur,[12] with a lifetime gross of $51.6 million.[2] When adjusted for ticket price inflation, the domestic total gross comes out to $478.22 million, placing it in the top 30 of adjusted films.[13]
Home video release
Sleeping Beauty was released on VHS, Betamax and Laserdisc in 1986 in the Classics collection, becoming the first Disney Classics video to be digitally processed in Hi-Fi stereo. The film underwent a digital restoration in 1997, and that version was released to both VHS and Laserdisc again as part of the Masterpiece Collection. The 1997 VHS edition also came with a special commemorative booklet included, with brief facts on the making of the movie. In 2003, the restored Sleeping Beauty was released to DVD in a 2-disc "Special Edition" which included both a widescreen version (formatted at 2.35:1) and a pan and scan version as well.
A 50th Anniversary Platinum Edition release of Sleeping Beauty, as a 2-disc DVD & Blu-ray Disc, was released on October 7, 2008 in the US, making Sleeping Beauty the first entry in the Platinum Edition line to be released in high definition video. This release is based upon a new 2007 restoration of Sleeping Beauty from the original Technicolor negatives (intrapositives several generations removed from the original negative were used for other home video releases). The new restoration features the film in its full negative aspect ratio of 2.55:1, wider than both the prints shown at the film's original limited Technirama engagements in 2.20:1 and the CinemaScope-compatible reduction prints for general release at 2.35:1. The Blu-ray set features BD-Live, an online feature, and the extras include a virtual castle and multi-player games.[14][15] The Blu-ray release also includes disc 1 of the DVD version of the film in addition to the two Blu-ray discs. The DVD was released on October 27, 2008 in the UK. The Blu-ray release is the first ever release on the Blu-ray format of any Disney feature produced by Walt Disney himself.
Other appearances
Aurora is one of the seven Princesses of Heart in the popular Square Enix game Kingdom Hearts (although her appearances are brief), and Maleficent is a villain in all three Kingdom Hearts games, and as a brief ally at the third game's climax. The good fairies appear in Kingdom Hearts II, giving Sora new clothes. Diablo appears in Kingdom Hearts II to resurrect her defeated mistress. The PSP game Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep, features a world based on the movie, Enchanted Dominion, and characters who appear are Aurora/Briar Rose, Maleficent, Maleficent's goons, the three faires and Prince Phillip, the latter serving as temporary party member for Aqua during her battle against Maleficent and her henchmen.
She is also a playable character in the game Disney Princess.
Princess Aurora, Prince Phillip, Flora, Fauna and Merryweather were featured as guests in Disney's House of Mouse and Maleficent was one of the villains in Mickey's House of Villains.
Maleficent's goons appear in the Maroon Cartoon studio lot in the film Who Framed Roger Rabbit. The Bluebirds from the film also appear as "tweeting birds" that fly around Roger Rabbit's or Eddie Valiant's heads in two scenes, after a refrigerator fell on top of Roger's head and while Eddie Valiant is in Toontown, the birds are seen again flying around his head until he shoos them away.
The first all-new story featuring the characters from the movie appeared in Disney Princess Enchanted Tales: Follow Your Dreams, the first volume of collection of the Disney Princesses. It was released on September 4, 2007.
Various characters from the film also appear in the board game of the same name.
Aurora is featured in a PSA for wildfire prevention with Smokey Bear.
Flora, Fauna and Merryweather have a brief computer animated cameo appearances in Shrek as well as Aurora, who also appeared in Shrek 2 and Shrek the Third but looks different than her appearance in the Disney film.
In the upcoming American fantasy drama series Once Upon a Time, Maleficent will be a recurring regular, as she will be a adversary of the Evil Queen, and is also sinister. Her role will be played by Paula Marshall.
Characters

Main article: List of Disney's Sleeping Beauty characters
Princess Aurora/Sleeping Beauty, voiced by Mary Costa.
Maleficent, voiced by Eleanor Audley.
Flora the pink/red fairy, voiced by Verna Felton
Fauna the green fairy, voiced by Barbara Jo Allen
Merryweather the blue fairy, voiced by Barbara Luddy
Prince Phillip, voiced by Bill Shirley.
King Stefan, voiced by Taylor Holmes.
Queen Leah, voiced by Verna Felton
King Hubert, voiced by Bill Thompson.
The Narrator, voiced by Marvin Miller.
Maleficent's Goons, voiced by Candy Candido, Pinto Colvig, and Bill Amsbery.
The Owl, voiced by Dallas McKennon.
Awards and nominations

Academy Awards[16]
Best Scoring of a Musical Picture (George Bruns) (Lost against Porgy and Bess)
Grammy Awards[17]
Best Soundtrack Album, Original Cast - Motion Picture or Television (Lost against Porgy and Bess)
Young Artist Award[18]
Best Musical Entertainment Featuring Youth - TV or Motion Picture
American Film Institute Lists
AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
Maleficent - Nominated Villain[19]
AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Animated Film[20]
Media and merchandise

Board game
Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty Game (1958) is a Parker Brothers children's board game for two to four players based upon Sleeping Beauty. The object of the game is to be the first player holding three different picture cards to reach the castle and the space marked "The End".[21]
The Disney film retains the basics of Charles Perrault's 17th century fairy tale about a princess cursed to sleep one hundred years, but adds three elderly fairies who protect the princess, a prince armed with a magic sword and shield, and other details. The Disney twists on the tale are incorporated into the game, and Disney's "stunning graphics"[21] illustrate the game board. In addition to the board game, the film generated books, toys, and other juvenile merchandise.
The equipment consists of a center-seamed game board, four tokens in various colors, four spinners, four magic wands, and a deck of picture cards.
The first player moves the number of spaces along the track according to their spin on their dial. If they land on a pink star, their turn ends. If they land on a yellow star, they draws a card and follows its instruction. If they draw a picture card, they retain it face down at their place. If a player spins a 6, they have the choice of moving 6 spaces or taking a magic wand. They may play the wand at any time during the game and in doing so draws 2 cards, following their instructions. A player must hold three different picture cards before entering the Path of Happiness. If they do not hold 3 picture cards, they continues around the Deep Sleep circle until they attains the required 3 picture cards. Should a player land on a purple Maleficent space, they returns one of their picture cards to the deck.
Theme parks


Sleeping Beauty cast member at Walt Disney World
Sleeping Beauty was made while Walt Disney was building Disneyland (hence the four year production time). To help promote the film, Imagineers named the park's icon "Sleeping Beauty Castle" (it was originally to be Snow White's).[citation needed] An indoor walk-through exhibit was added to the empty castle interior in 1957, where guests could walk-through the castle, up and over the castle entrance, viewing "Story Moment" dioramas of scenes from the film, which were improved with animated figurines in 1977. It closed shortly after the September 11, 2001 attacks, supposedly because the dark, unmonitored corridors were a risk.[citation needed] After being closed for seven years, the exhibit space underwent extensive refurbishment to restore the original 1957 displays, and reopened to guests on November 27, 2008. Accommodations were also made on the ground floor with a "virtual" version for disabled guests unable to navigate stairs. Hong Kong Disneyland opened in 2005, also with a Sleeping Beauty Castle, nearly replicating Disneyland's original design.
Le Château de la Belle au Bois Dormant at Disneyland Paris is a variant of Sleeping Beauty Castle. The version found at Disneyland Paris is much more reminiscent of the film's artistic direction. The Château features an animatronic dragon, imagineered to look like Maleficent's dragon form, is found in the lower level dungeon - La Tanière du Dragon.[22] The building also contains la Galerie de la Belle au Bois Dormant, a gallery of displays which illustrate the story of Sleeping Beauty in tapestries, stained glass windows and figures.[23]
Princess Aurora (and, to a lesser extent, Prince Phillip, the three good fairies, and Maleficent) makes regular appearances in the parks and parades.
Maleficent is featured as one of the villains in the nighttime show Fantasmic! at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios.
Soundtrack listing

"Main Title"/"Once Upon a Dream"/"Prologue"
"Hail to the Princess Aurora"
"The Gifts of Beauty and Song"/"Maleficent Appears"/"True Love Conquers All"
"The Burning of the Spinning Wheels"/"The Fairies' Plan"
"Maleficent's Frustration"
"A Cottage in the Woods"
"Do You Hear That?"/"I Wonder[disambiguation needed]"
"An Unusual Prince"/"Once Upon a Dream"
"Magical House Cleaning"/"Blue or Pink"
"A Secret Revealed"
"Skumps (Drinking Song)"/"The Royal Argument"
"Prince Phillip Arrives"/"How to Tell Stefan"
"Aurora's Return"/"Maleficent's Evil Spell"
"Poor Aurora"/"Sleeping Beauty"
"Forbidden Mountain"
"A Fairy Tale Come True"
"Battle with the Forces of Evil"
"Awakening"
"Finale"
The Classic Disney: 60 Years of Musical Magic album includes "Once Upon a Dream" on the green disc, and "I Wonder" on the purple disc. Additionally, Disney's Greatest Hits includes "Once Upon a Dream" on the blue disc.
No Secrets performed a cover version of "Once Upon A Dream" on the album Disneymania 2, which appears as a music video on the 2003 DVD. More recently, Emily Osment sang a remake of "Once Upon A Dream", released on the Disney Channel on September 12, 2008, and included on the Platinum Edition DVD and Blu-ray.