Notes from the Underground
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Part I
Underground*
*The author of the diary and the diary itself
are, of course, imaginary. Nevertheless it is
clear that such persons as the writer of these
notes not only may, but positively must,
exist in our society, when we consider the
circumstances in the midst of which our
society is formed. I have tried to expose to
the view of the public more distinctly than
is commonly done, one of the characters of
the recent past. He is one of the
representatives of a generation still living.
In this fragment, entitled ‘Underground,’
this person introduces himself and his
views, and, as it were, tries to explain the
causes owing to which he has made his
appearance and was bound to make his
appearance in our midst. In the second
fragment there are added the actual notes of
this person concerning certain events in his
life. —AUTHOR’S NOTE.

3 of 203
I
I am a sick man ... I am a spiteful man. I am an
unattractive man. I believe my liver is diseased. However,
I know nothing at all about my disease, and do not know
for certain what ails me. I don’t consult a doctor for it, and
never have, though I have a respect for medicine and
doctors. Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently
so to respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated
enough not to be superstitious, but I am superstitious).
No, I refuse to consult a doctor from spite. That you
probably will not understand. Well, I understand it,
though. Of course, I can’t explain who it is precisely that I
am mortifying in this case by my spite: I am perfectly well
aware that I cannot ‘pay out’ the doctors by not consulting
them; I know better than anyone that by all this I am only
injuring myself and no one else. But still, if I don’t consult
a doctor it is from spite. My liver is bad, well—let it get
worse!
I have been going on like that for a long time—twenty
years. Now I am forty. I used to be in the government
service, but am no longer. I was a spiteful official. I was
rude and took pleasure in being so. I did not take bribes,
you see, so I was bound to find a recompense in that, at
eBook brought to you by


4 of 203
least. (A poor jest, but I will not scratch it out. I wrote it
thinking it would sound very witty; but now that I have
seen myself that I only wanted to show off in a despicable
way, I will not scratch it out on purpose!)
When petitioners used to come for information to the
table at which I sat, I used to grind my teeth at them, and
felt intense enjoyment when I succeeded in making
anybody unhappy. I almost did succeed. For the most part
they were all timid people—of course, they were
petitioners. But of the uppish ones there was one officer in
particular I could not endure. He simply would not be
humble, and clanked his sword in a disgusting way. I
carried on a feud with him for eighteen months over that
sword. At last I got the better of him. He left off clanking
it. That happened in my youth, though. But do you
know, gentlemen, what was the chief point about my
spite? Why, the whole point, the real sting of it lay in the
fact that continually, even in the moment of the acutest
spleen, I was inwardly conscious with shame that I was not
only not a spiteful but not even an embittered man, that I
was simply scaring sparrows at random and amusing myself
by it. I might foam at the mouth, but bring me a doll to
play with, give me a cup of tea with sugar in it, and maybe
I should be appeased. I might even be genuinely touched,

5 of 203
though probably I should grind my teeth at myself
afterwards and lie awake at night with shame for months
after. That was my way.
I was lying when I said just now that I was a spiteful
official. I was lying from spite. I was simply amusing
myself with the petitioners and with the officer, and in
reality I never could become spiteful. I was conscious
every moment in myself of many, very many elements
absolutely opposite to that. I felt them positively swarming
in me, these opposite elements. I knew that they had been
swarming in me all my life and craving some outlet from
me, but I would not let them, would not let them,
purposely would not let them come out. They tormented
me till I was ashamed: they drove me to convulsions
and—sickened me, at last, how they sickened me! Now,
are not you fancying, gentlemen, that I am expressing
remorse for something now, that I am asking your
forgiveness for something? I am sure you are fancying that
... However, I assure you I do not care if you are. ...
It was not only that I could not become spiteful, I did
not know how to become anything; neither spiteful nor
kind, neither a rascal nor an honest man, neither a hero
nor an insect. Now, I am living out my life in my corner,
taunting myself with the spiteful and useless consolation

6 of 203
that an intelligent man cannot become anything seriously,
and it is only the fool who becomes anything. Yes, a man
in the nineteenth century must and morally ought to be
pre-eminently a characterless creature; a man of character,
an active man is pre-eminently a limited creature. That is
my conviction of forty years. I am forty years old now,
and you know forty years is a whole lifetime; you know it
is extreme old age. To live longer than forty years is bad
manners, is vulgar, immoral. Who does live beyond forty?
Answer that, sincerely and honestly I will tell you who do:
fools and worthless fellows. I tell all old men that to their
face, all these venerable old men, all these silver-haired and
reverend seniors! I tell the whole world that to its face! I
have a right to say so, for I shall go on living to sixty
myself. To seventy! To eighty! ... Stay, let me take breath
...
You imagine no doubt, gentlemen, that I want to
amuse you. You are mistaken in that, too. I am by no
means such a mirthful person as you imagine, or as you
may imagine; however, irritated by all this babble (and I
feel that you are irritated) you think fit to ask me who I
am—then my answer is, I am a collegiate assessor. I was in
the service that I might have something to eat (and solely
for that reason), and when last year a distant relation left

7 of 203
me six thousand roubles in his will I immediately retired
from the service and settled down in my corner. I used to
live in this corner before, but now I have settled down in
it. My room is a wretched, horrid one in the outskirts of
the town. My servant is an old country- woman, illnatured
from stupidity, and, moreover, there is always a
nasty smell about her. I am told that the Petersburg
climate is bad for me, and that with my small means it is
very expensive to live in Petersburg. I know all that better
than all these sage and experienced counsellors and
monitors. ... But I am remaining in Petersburg; I am not
going away from Petersburg! I am not going away because
... ech! Why, it is absolutely no matter whether I am going
away or not going away.
But what can a decent man speak of with most
pleasure?
Answer: Of himself.
Well, so I will talk about myself.

8 of 203
II
I want now to tell you, gentlemen, whether you care
to hear it or not, why I could not even become an insect.
I tell you solemnly, that I have many times tried to
become an insect. But I was not equal even to that. I
swear, gentlemen, that to be too conscious is an illness—a
real thorough-going illness. For man’s everyday needs, it
would have been quite enough to have the ordinary
human consciousness, that is, half or a quarter of the
amount which falls to the lot of a cultivated man of our
unhappy nineteenth century, especially one who has the
fatal ill-luck to inhabit Petersburg, the most theoretical and
intentional town on the whole terrestrial globe. (There are
intentional and unintentional towns.) It would have been
quite enough, for instance, to have the consciousness by
which all so-called direct persons and men of action live. I
bet you think I am writing all this from affectation, to be
witty at the expense of men of action; and what is more,
that from ill-bred affectation, I am clanking a sword like
my officer. But, gentlemen, whoever can pride himself on
his diseases and even swagger over them?

9 of 203
Though, after all, everyone does do that; people do
pride themselves on their diseases, and I do, may be, more
than anyone. We will not dispute it; my contention was
absurd. But yet I am firmly persuaded that a great deal of
consciousness, every sort of consciousness, in fact, is a
disease. I stick to that. Let us leave that, too, for a minute.
Tell me this: why does it happen that at the very, yes, at
the very moments when I am most capable of feeling
every refinement of all that is ‘sublime and beautiful,’ as
they used to say at one time, it would, as though of
design, happen to me not only to feel but to do such ugly
things, such that ... Well, in short, actions that all, perhaps,
commit; but which, as though purposely, occurred to me
at the very time when I was most conscious that they
ought not to be committed. The more conscious I was of
goodness and of all that was ‘sublime and beautiful,’ the
more deeply I sank into my mire and the more ready I was
to sink in it altogether. But the chief point was that all this
was, as it were, not accidental in me, but as though it were
bound to be so. It was as though it were my most normal
condition, and not in the least disease or depravity, so that
at last all desire in me to struggle against this depravity
passed. It ended by my almost believing (perhaps actually
believing) that this was perhaps my normal condition. But

10 of 203
at first, in the beginning, what agonies I endured in that
struggle! I did not believe it was the same with other
people, and all my life I hid this fact about myself as a
secret. I was ashamed (even now, perhaps, I am ashamed):
I got to the point of feeling a sort of secret abnormal,
despicable enjoyment in returning home to my corner on
some disgusting Petersburg night, acutely conscious that
that day I had committed a loathsome action again, that
what was done could never be undone, and secretly,
inwardly gnawing, gnawing at myself for it, tearing and
consuming myself till at last the bitterness turned into a
sort of shameful accursed sweetness, and at last—into
positive real enjoyment! Yes, into enjoyment, into
enjoyment! I insist upon that. I have spoken of this
because I keep wanting to know for a fact whether other
people feel such enjoyment? I will explain; the enjoyment
was just from the too intense consciousness of one’s own
degradation; it was from feeling oneself that one had
reached the last barrier, that it was horrible, but that it
could not be otherwise; that there was no escape for you;
that you never could become a different man; that even if
time and faith were still left you to change into something
different you would most likely not wish to change; or if
you did wish to, even then you would do nothing;

11 of 203
because perhaps in reality there was nothing for you to
change into.
And the worst of it was, and the root of it all, that it
was all in accord with the normal fundamental laws of
over-acute consciousness, and with the inertia that was the
direct result of those laws, and that consequently one was
not only unable to change but could do absolutely
nothing. Thus it would follow, as the result of acute
consciousness, that one is not to blame in being a
scoundrel; as though that were any consolation to the
scoundrel once he has come to realise that he actually is a
scoundrel. But enough. ... Ech, I have talked a lot of
nonsense, but what have I explained? How is enjoyment
in this to be explained? But I will explain it. I will get to
the bottom of it! That is why I have taken up my pen. ...
I, for instance, have a great deal of AMOUR
PROPRE. I am as suspicious and prone to take offence as
a humpback or a dwarf. But upon my word I sometimes
have had moments when if I had happened to be slapped
in the face I should, perhaps, have been positively glad of
it. I say, in earnest, that I should probably have been able
to discover even in that a peculiar sort of enjoyment—the
enjoyment, of course, of despair; but in despair there are
the most intense enjoyments, especially when one is very

12 of 203
acutely conscious of the hopelessness of one’s position.
And when one is slapped in the face—why then the
consciousness of being rubbed into a pulp would positively
overwhelm one. The worst of it is, look at it which way
one will, it still turns out that I was always the most to
blame in everything. And what is most humiliating of all,
to blame for no fault of my own but, so to say, through
the laws of nature. In the first place, to blame because I am
cleverer than any of the people surrounding me. (I have
always considered myself cleverer than any of the people
surrounding me, and sometimes, would you believe it,
have been positively ashamed of it. At any rate, I have all
my life, as it were, turned my eyes away and never could
look people straight in the face.) To blame, finally,
because even if I had had magnanimity, I should only have
had more suffering from the sense of its uselessness. I
should certainly have never been able to do anything from
being magnanimous—neither to forgive, for my assailant
would perhaps have slapped me from the laws of nature,
and one cannot forgive the laws of nature; nor to forget,
for even if it were owing to the laws of nature, it is
insulting all the same. Finally, even if I had wanted to be
anything but magnanimous, had desired on the contrary to
revenge myself on my assailant, I could not have revenged

13 of 203
myself on any one for anything because I should certainly
never have made up my mind to do anything, even if I
had been able to. Why should I not have made up my
mind? About that in particular I want to say a few words.

14 of 203
III
With people who know how to revenge themselves
and to stand up for themselves in general, how is it done?
Why, when they are possessed, let us suppose, by the
feeling of revenge, then for the time there is nothing else
but that feeling left in their whole being. Such a
gentleman simply dashes straight for his object like an
infuriated bull with its horns down, and nothing but a wall
will stop him. (By the way: facing the wall, such
gentlemen—that is, the ‘direct’ persons and men of
action—are genuinely nonplussed. For them a wall is not
an evasion, as for us people who think and consequently
do nothing; it is not an excuse for turning aside, an excuse
for which we are always very glad, though we scarcely
believe in it ourselves, as a rule. No, they are nonplussed
in all sincerity. The wall has for them something
tranquillising, morally soothing, final— maybe even
something mysterious ... but of the wall later.)
Well, such a direct person I regard as the real normal
man, as his tender mother nature wished to see him when
she graciously brought him into being on the earth. I envy
such a man till I am green in the face. He is stupid. I am

15 of 203
not disputing that, but perhaps the normal man should be
stupid, how do you know? Perhaps it is very beautiful, in
fact. And I am the more persuaded of that suspicion, if one
can call it so, by the fact that if you take, for instance, the
antithesis of the normal man, that is, the man of acute
consciousness, who has come, of course, not out of the lap
of nature but out of a retort (this is almost mysticism,
gentlemen, but I suspect this, too), this retort-made man is
sometimes so nonplussed in the presence of his antithesis
that with all his exaggerated consciousness he genuinely
thinks of himself as a mouse and not a man. It may be an
acutely conscious mouse, yet it is a mouse, while the other
is a man, and therefore, et caetera, et caetera. And the
worst of it is, he himself, his very own self, looks on
himself as a mouse; no one asks him to do so; and that is
an important point. Now let us look at this mouse in
action. Let us suppose, for instance, that it feels insulted,
too (and it almost always does feel insulted), and wants to
revenge itself, too. There may even be a greater
accumulation of spite in it than in L’HOMME DE LA
NATURE ET DE LA VERITE. The base and nasty
desire to vent that spite on its assailant rankles perhaps
even more nastily in it than in L’HOMME DE LA
NATURE ET DE LA VERITE. For through his innate
eBook brought to you by


16 of 203
stupidity the latter looks upon his revenge as justice pure
and simple; while in consequence of his acute
consciousness the mouse does not believe in the justice of
it. To come at last to the deed itself, to the very act of
revenge. Apart from the one fundamental nastiness the
luckless mouse succeeds in creating around it so many
other nastinesses in the form of doubts and questions, adds
to the one question so many unsettled questions that there
inevitably works up around it a sort of fatal brew, a
stinking mess, made up of its doubts, emotions, and of the
contempt spat upon it by the direct men of action who
stand solemnly about it as judges and arbitrators, laughing
at it till their healthy sides ache. Of course the only thing
left for it is to dismiss all that with a wave of its paw, and,
with a smile of assumed contempt in which it does not
even itself believe, creep ignominiously into its mousehole.
There in its nasty, stinking, underground home our
insulted, crushed and ridiculed mouse promptly becomes
absorbed in cold, malignant and, above all, everlasting
spite. For forty years together it will remember its injury
down to the smallest, most ignominious details, and every
time will add, of itself, details still more ignominious,
spitefully teasing and tormenting itself with its own
imagination. It will itself be ashamed of its imaginings, but

17 of 203
yet it will recall it all, it will go over and over every detail,
it will invent unheard of things against itself, pretending
that those things might happen, and will forgive nothing.
Maybe it will begin to revenge itself, too, but, as it were,
piecemeal, in trivial ways, from behind the stove,
incognito, without believing either in its own right to
vengeance, or in the success of its revenge, knowing that
from all its efforts at revenge it will suffer a hundred times
more than he on whom it revenges itself, while he, I
daresay, will not even scratch himself. On its deathbed it
will recall it all over again, with interest accumulated over
all the years and ...
But it is just in that cold, abominable half despair, half
belief, in that conscious burying oneself alive for grief in
the underworld for forty years, in that acutely recognised
and yet partly doubtful hopelessness of one’s position, in
that hell of unsatisfied desires turned inward, in that fever
of oscillations, of resolutions determined for ever and
repented of again a minute later—that the savour of that
strange enjoyment of which I have spoken lies. It is so
subtle, so difficult of analysis, that persons who are a little
limited, or even simply persons of strong nerves, will not
understand a single atom of it. ‘Possibly,’ you will add on
your own account with a grin, ‘people will not understand

18 of 203
it either who have never received a slap in the face,’ and
in that way you will politely hint to me that I, too,
perhaps, have had the experience of a slap in the face in
my life, and so I speak as one who knows. I bet that you
are thinking that. But set your minds at rest, gentlemen, I
have not received a slap in the face, though it is absolutely
a matter of indifference to me what you may think about
it. Possibly, I even regret, myself, that I have given so few
slaps in the face during my life. But enough ... not another
word on that subject of such extreme interest to you.
I will continue calmly concerning persons with strong
nerves who do not understand a certain refinement of
enjoyment. Though in certain circumstances these
gentlemen bellow their loudest like bulls, though this, let
us suppose, does them the greatest credit, yet, as I have
said already, confronted with the impossible they subside
at once. The impossible means the stone wall! What stone
wall? Why, of course, the laws of nature, the deductions
of natural science, mathematics. As soon as they prove to
you, for instance, that you are descended from a monkey,
then it is no use scowling, accept it for a fact. When they
prove to you that in reality one drop of your own fat must
be dearer to you than a hundred thousand of your fellowcreatures,
and that this conclusion is the final solution of

19 of 203
all so-called virtues and duties and all such prejudices and
fancies, then you have just to accept it, there is no help for
it, for twice two is a law of mathematics. Just try refuting
it.
‘Upon my word, they will shout at you, it is no use
protesting: it is a case of twice two makes four! Nature
does not ask your permission, she has nothing to do with
your wishes, and whether you like her laws or dislike
them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and
consequently all her conclusions. A wall, you see, is a wall
... and so on, and so on.’
Merciful Heavens! but what do I care for the laws of
nature and arithmetic, when, for some reason I dislike
those laws and the fact that twice two makes four? Of
course I cannot break through the wall by battering my
head against it if I really have not the strength to knock it
down, but I am not going to be reconciled to it simply
because it is a stone wall and I have not the strength.
As though such a stone wall really were a consolation,
and really did contain some word of conciliation, simply
because it is as true as twice two makes four. Oh, absurdity
of absurdities! How much better it is to understand it all,
to recognise it all, all the impossibilities and the stone wall;
not to be reconciled to one of those impossibilities and

20 of 203
stone walls if it disgusts you to be reconciled to it; by the
way of the most inevitable, logical combinations to reach
the most revolting conclusions on the everlasting theme,
that even for the stone wall you are yourself somehow to
blame, though again it is as clear as day you are not to
blame in the least, and therefore grinding your teeth in
silent impotence to sink into luxurious inertia, brooding
on the fact that there is no one even for you to feel
vindictive against, that you have not, and perhaps never
will have, an object for your spite, that it is a sleight of
hand, a bit of juggling, a card- sharper’s trick, that it is
simply a mess, no knowing what and no knowing who,
but in spite of all these uncertainties and jugglings, still
there is an ache in you, and the more you do not know,
the worse the ache.

21 of 203
IV
‘Ha, ha, ha! You will be finding enjoyment in
toothache next,’ you cry, with a laugh.
‘Well, even in toothache there is enjoyment,’ I answer.
I had toothache for a whole month and I know there is. In
that case, of course, people are not spiteful in silence, but
moan; but they are not candid moans, they are malignant
moans, and the malignancy is the whole point. The
enjoyment of the sufferer finds expression in those moans;
if he did not feel enjoyment in them he would not moan.
It is a good example, gentlemen, and I will develop it.
Those moans express in the first place all the aimlessness of
your pain, which is so humiliating to your consciousness;
the whole legal system of nature on which you spit
disdainfully, of course, but from which you suffer all the
same while she does not. They express the consciousness
that you have no enemy to punish, but that you have pain;
the consciousness that in spite of all possible Wagenheims
you are in complete slavery to your teeth; that if someone
wishes it, your teeth will leave off aching, and if he does
not, they will go on aching another three months; and that
finally if you are still contumacious and still protest, all that

22 of 203
is left you for your own gratification is to thrash yourself
or beat your wall with your fist as hard as you can, and
absolutely nothing more. Well, these mortal insults, these
jeers on the part of someone unknown, end at last in an
enjoyment which sometimes reaches the highest degree of
voluptuousness. I ask you, gentlemen, listen sometimes to
the moans of an educated man of the nineteenth century
suffering from toothache, on the second or third day of
the attack, when he is beginning to moan, not as he
moaned on the first day, that is, not simply because he has
toothache, not just as any coarse peasant, but as a man
affected by progress and European civilisation, a man who
is ‘divorced from the soil and the national elements,’ as
they express it now-a-days. His moans become nasty,
disgustingly malignant, and go on for whole days and
nights. And of course he knows himself that he is doing
himself no sort of good with his moans; he knows better
than anyone that he is only lacerating and harassing himself
and others for nothing; he knows that even the audience
before whom he is making his efforts, and his whole
family, listen to him with loathing, do not put a ha’porth
of faith in him, and inwardly understand that he might
moan differently, more simply, without trills and
flourishes, and that he is only amusing himself like that

23 of 203
from ill-humour, from malignancy. Well, in all these
recognitions and disgraces it is that there lies a voluptuous
pleasure. As though he would say: ‘I am worrying you, I
am lacerating your hearts, I am keeping everyone in the
house awake. Well, stay awake then, you, too, feel every
minute that I have toothache. I am not a hero to you
now, as I tried to seem before, but simply a nasty person,
an impostor. Well, so be it, then! I am very glad that you
see through me. It is nasty for you to hear my despicable
moans: well, let it be nasty; here I will let you have a
nastier flourish in a minute. ...’ You do not understand
even now, gentlemen? No, it seems our development and
our consciousness must go further to understand all the
intricacies of this pleasure. You laugh? Delighted. My jests,
gentlemen, are of course in bad taste, jerky, involved,
lacking self-confidence. But of course that is because I do
not respect myself. Can a man of perception respect
himself at all?

24 of 203
V
Come, can a man who attempts to find enjoyment in
the very feeling of his own degradation possibly have a
spark of respect for himself? I am not saying this now from
any mawkish kind of remorse. And, indeed, I could never
endure saying, ‘Forgive me, Papa, I won’t do it again,’ not
because I am incapable of saying that—on the contrary,
perhaps just because I have been too capable of it, and in
what a way, too. As though of design I used to get into
trouble in cases when I was not to blame in any way. That
was the nastiest part of it. At the same time I was
genuinely touched and penitent, I used to shed tears and,
of course, deceived myself, though I was not acting in the
least and there was a sick feeling in my heart at the time.
... For that one could not blame even the laws of nature,
though the laws of nature have continually all my life
offended me more than anything. It is loathsome to
remember it all, but it was loathsome even then. Of
course, a minute or so later I would realise wrathfully that
it was all a lie, a revolting lie, an affected lie, that is, all this
penitence, this emotion, these vows of reform. You will
ask why did I worry myself with such antics: answer,

25 of 203
because it was very dull to sit with one’s hands folded, and
so one began cutting capers. That is really it. Observe
yourselves more carefully, gentlemen, then you will
understand that it is so. I invented adventures for myself
and made up a life, so as at least to live in some way. How
many times it has happened to me—well, for instance, to
take offence simply on purpose, for nothing; and one
knows oneself, of course, that one is offended at nothing;
that one is putting it on, but yet one brings oneself at last
to the point of being really offended. All my life I have
had an impulse to play such pranks, so that in the end I
could not control it in myself. Another time, twice, in
fact, I tried hard to be in love. I suffered, too, gentlemen, I
assure you. In the depth of my heart there was no faith in
my suffering, only a faint stir of mockery, but yet I did
suffer, and in the real, orthodox way; I was jealous, beside
myself ... and it was all from ENNUI, gentlemen, all from
ENNUI; inertia overcame me. You know the direct,
legitimate fruit of consciousness is inertia, that is, conscious
sitting-with-the-hands-folded. I have referred to this
already. I repeat, I repeat with emphasis: all ‘direct’
persons and men of action are active just because they are
stupid and limited. How explain that? I will tell you: in
consequence of their limitation they take immediate and

26 of 203
secondary causes for primary ones, and in that way
persuade themselves more quickly and easily than other
people do that they have found an infallible foundation for
their activity, and their minds are at ease and you know
that is the chief thing. To begin to act, you know, you
must first have your mind completely at ease and no trace
of doubt left in it. Why, how am I, for example, to set my
mind at rest? Where are the primary causes on which I am
to build? Where are my foundations? Where am I to get
them from? I exercise myself in reflection, and
consequently with me every primary cause at once draws
after itself another still more primary, and so on to infinity.
That is just the essence of every sort of consciousness and
reflection. It must be a case of the laws of nature again.
What is the result of it in the end? Why, just the same.
Remember I spoke just now of vengeance. (I am sure you
did not take it in.) I said that a man revenges himself
because he sees justice in it. Therefore he has found a
primary cause, that is, justice. And so he is at rest on all
sides, and consequently he carries out his revenge calmly
and successfully, being persuaded that he is doing a just
and honest thing. But I see no justice in it, I find no sort
of virtue in it either, and consequently if I attempt to
revenge myself, it is only out of spite. Spite, of course,

27 of 203
might overcome everything, all my doubts, and so might
serve quite successfully in place of a primary cause,
precisely because it is not a cause. But what is to be done
if I have not even spite (I began with that just now, you
know). In consequence again of those accursed laws of
consciousness, anger in me is subject to chemical
disintegration. You look into it, the object flies off into
air, your reasons evaporate, the criminal is not to be
found, the wrong becomes not a wrong but a phantom,
something like the toothache, for which no one is to
blame, and consequently there is only the same outlet left
again—that is, to beat the wall as hard as you can. So you
give it up with a wave of the hand because you have not
found a fundamental cause. And try letting yourself be
carried away by your feelings, blindly, without reflection,
without a primary cause, repelling consciousness at least
for a time; hate or love, if only not to sit with your hands
folded. The day after tomorrow, at the latest, you will
begin despising yourself for having knowingly deceived
yourself. Result: a soap-bubble and inertia. Oh,
gentlemen, do you know, perhaps I consider myself an
intelligent man, only because all my life I have been able
neither to begin nor to finish anything. Granted I am a
babbler, a harmless vexatious babbler, like all of us. But
eBook brought to you by


28 of 203
what is to be done if the direct and sole vocation of every
intelligent man is babble, that is, the intentional pouring of
water through a sieve?

29 of 203
VI
Oh, if I had done nothing simply from laziness!
Heavens, how I should have respected myself, then. I
should have respected myself because I should at least have
been capable of being lazy; there would at least have been
one quality, as it were, positive in me, in which I could
have believed myself. Question: What is he? Answer: A
sluggard; how very pleasant it would have been to hear
that of oneself! It would mean that I was positively
defined, it would mean that there was something to say
about me. ‘Sluggard’—why, it is a calling and vocation, it
is a career. Do not jest, it is so. I should then be a member
of the best club by right, and should find my occupation
in continually respecting myself. I knew a gentleman who
prided himself all his life on being a connoisseur of Lafitte.
He considered this as his positive virtue, and never
doubted himself. He died, not simply with a tranquil, but
with a triumphant conscience, and he was quite right, too.
Then I should have chosen a career for myself, I should
have been a sluggard and a glutton, not a simple one, but,
for instance, one with sympathies for everything sublime
and beautiful. How do you like that? I have long had

30 of 203
visions of it. That ‘sublime and beautiful’ weighs heavily
on my mind at forty But that is at forty; then—oh, then it
would have been different! I should have found for myself
a form of activity in keeping with it, to be precise,
drinking to the health of everything ‘sublime and
beautiful.’ I should have snatched at every opportunity to
drop a tear into my glass and then to drain it to all that is
‘sublime and beautiful.’ I should then have turned
everything into the sublime and the beautiful; in the
nastiest, unquestionable trash, I should have sought out the
sublime and the beautiful. I should have exuded tears like
a wet sponge. An artist, for instance, paints a picture
worthy of Gay. At once I drink to the health of the artist
who painted the picture worthy of Gay, because I love all
that is ‘sublime and beautiful.’ An author has written AS
YOU WILL: at once I drink to the health of ‘anyone you
will’ because I love all that is ‘sublime and beautiful.’
I should claim respect for doing so. I should persecute
anyone who would not show me respect. I should live at
ease, I should die with dignity, why, it is charming,
perfectly charming! And what a good round belly I should
have grown, what a treble chin I should have established,
what a ruby nose I should have coloured for myself, so
that everyone would have said, looking at me: ‘Here is an

31 of 203
asset! Here is something real and solid!’ And, say what you
like, it is very agreeable to hear such remarks about oneself
in this negative age.

32 of 203
VII
But these are all golden dreams. Oh, tell me, who was
it first announced, who was it first proclaimed, that man
only does nasty things because he does not know his own
interests; and that if he were enlightened, if his eyes were
opened to his real normal interests, man would at once
cease to do nasty things, would at once become good and
noble because, being enlightened and understanding his
real advantage, he would see his own advantage in the
good and nothing else, and we all know that not one man
can, consciously, act against his own interests,
consequently, so to say, through necessity, he would begin
doing good? Oh, the babe! Oh, the pure, innocent child!
Why, in the first place, when in all these thousands of
years has there been a time when man has acted only from
his own interest? What is to be done with the millions of
facts that bear witness that men, CONSCIOUSLY, that is
fully understanding their real interests, have left them in
the background and have rushed headlong on another
path, to meet peril and danger, compelled to this course
by nobody and by nothing, but, as it were, simply
disliking the beaten track, and have obstinately, wilfully,

33 of 203
struck out another difficult, absurd way, seeking it almost
in the darkness. So, I suppose, this obstinacy and perversity
were pleasanter to them than any advantage. ... Advantage!
What is advantage? And will you take it upon yourself to
define with perfect accuracy in what the advantage of man
consists? And what if it so happens that a man’s advantage,
SOMETIMES, not only may, but even must, consist in
his desiring in certain cases what is harmful to himself and
not advantageous. And if so, if there can be such a case,
the whole principle falls into dust. What do you think—
are there such cases? You laugh; laugh away, gentlemen,
but only answer me: have man’s advantages been reckoned
up with perfect certainty? Are there not some which not
only have not been included but cannot possibly be
included under any classification? You see, you gentlemen
have, to the best of my knowledge, taken your whole
register of human advantages from the averages of
statistical figures and politico-economical formulas. Your
advantages are prosperity, wealth, freedom, peace—and so
on, and so on. So that the man who should, for instance,
go openly and knowingly in opposition to all that list
would to your thinking, and indeed mine, too, of course,
be an obscurantist or an absolute madman: would not he?
But, you know, this is what is surprising: why does it so

34 of 203
happen that all these statisticians, sages and lovers of
humanity, when they reckon up human advantages
invariably leave out one? They don’t even take it into
their reckoning in the form in which it should be taken,
and the whole reckoning depends upon that. It would be
no greater matter, they would simply have to take it, this
advantage, and add it to the list. But the trouble is, that
this strange advantage does not fall under any classification
and is not in place in any list. I have a friend for instance
... Ech! gentlemen, but of course he is your friend, too;
and indeed there is no one, no one to whom he is not a
friend! When he prepares for any undertaking this
gentleman immediately explains to you, elegantly and
clearly, exactly how he must act in accordance with the
laws of reason and truth. What is more, he will talk to you
with excitement and passion of the true normal interests of
man; with irony he will upbraid the short- sighted fools
who do not understand their own interests, nor the true
significance of virtue; and, within a quarter of an hour,
without any sudden outside provocation, but simply
through something inside him which is stronger than all
his interests, he will go off on quite a different tack—that
is, act in direct opposition to what he has just been saying
about himself, in opposition to the laws of reason, in

35 of 203
opposition to his own advantage, in fact in opposition to
everything ... I warn you that my friend is a compound
personality and therefore it is difficult to blame him as an
individual. The fact is, gentlemen, it seems there must
really exist something that is dearer to almost every man
than his greatest advantages, or (not to be illogical) there is
a most advantageous advantage (the very one omitted of
which we spoke just now) which is more important and
more advantageous than all other advantages, for the sake
of which a man if necessary is ready to act in opposition to
all laws; that is, in opposition to reason, honour, peace,
prosperity—in fact, in opposition to all those excellent and
useful things if only he can attain that fundamental, most
advantageous advantage which is dearer to him than all.
‘Yes, but it’s advantage all the same,’ you will retort. But
excuse me, I’ll make the point clear, and it is not a case of
playing upon words. What matters is, that this advantage is
remarkable from the very fact that it breaks down all our
classifications, and continually shatters every system
constructed by lovers of mankind for the benefit of
mankind. In fact, it upsets everything. But before I
mention this advantage to you, I want to compromise
myself personally, and therefore I boldly declare that all
these fine systems, all these theories for explaining to

36 of 203
mankind their real normal interests, in order that
inevitably striving to pursue these interests they may at
once become good and noble—are, in my opinion, so far,
mere logical exercises! Yes, logical exercises. Why, to
maintain this theory of the regeneration of mankind by
means of the pursuit of his own advantage is to my mind
almost the same thing ... as to affirm, for instance,
following Buckle, that through civilisation mankind
becomes softer, and consequently less bloodthirsty and less
fitted for warfare. Logically it does seem to follow from his
arguments. But man has such a predilection for systems
and abstract deductions that he is ready to distort the truth
intentionally, he is ready to deny the evidence of his senses
only to justify his logic. I take this example because it is
the most glaring instance of it. Only look about you:
blood is being spilt in streams, and in the merriest way, as
though it were champagne. Take the whole of the
nineteenth century in which Buckle lived. Take
Napoleon—the Great and also the present one. Take
North America—the eternal union. Take the farce of
Schleswig-Holstein .... And what is it that civilisation
softens in us? The only gain of civilisation for mankind is
the greater capacity for variety of sensations—and
absolutely nothing more. And through the development of

37 of 203
this many- sidedness man may come to finding enjoyment
in bloodshed. In fact, this has already happened to him.
Have you noticed that it is the most civilised gentlemen
who have been the subtlest slaughterers, to whom the
Attilas and Stenka Razins could not hold a candle, and if
they are not so conspicuous as the Attilas and Stenka
Razins it is simply because they are so often met with, are
so ordinary and have become so familiar to us. In any case
civilisation has made mankind if not more bloodthirsty, at
least more vilely, more loathsomely bloodthirsty. In old
days he saw justice in bloodshed and with his conscience
at peace exterminated those he thought proper. Now we
do think bloodshed abominable and yet we engage in this
abomination, and with more energy than ever. Which is
worse? Decide that for yourselves. They say that Cleopatra
(excuse an instance from Roman history) was fond of
sticking gold pins into her slave-girls’ breasts and derived
gratification from their screams and writhings. You will
say that that was in the comparatively barbarous times; that
these are barbarous times too, because also, comparatively
speaking, pins are stuck in even now; that though man has
now learned to see more clearly than in barbarous ages, he
is still far from having learnt to act as reason and science
would dictate. But yet you are fully convinced that he will

38 of 203
be sure to learn when he gets rid of certain old bad habits,
and when common sense and science have completely reeducated
human nature and turned it in a normal
direction. You are confident that then man will cease from
INTENTIONAL error and will, so to say, be compelled
not to want to set his will against his normal interests.
That is not all; then, you say, science itself will teach man
(though to my mind it’s a superfluous luxury) that he
never has really had any caprice or will of his own, and
that he himself is something of the nature of a piano-key
or the stop of an organ, and that there are, besides, things
called the laws of nature; so that everything he does is not
done by his willing it, but is done of itself, by the laws of
nature. Consequently we have only to discover these laws
of nature, and man will no longer have to answer for his
actions and life will become exceedingly easy for him. All
human actions will then, of course, be tabulated according
to these laws, mathematically, like tables of logarithms up
to 108,000, and entered in an index; or, better still, there
would be published certain edifying works of the nature of
encyclopaedic lexicons, in which everything will be so
clearly calculated and explained that there will be no more
incidents or adventures in the world.

39 of 203
Then—this is all what you say—new economic
relations will be established, all ready-made and worked
out with mathematical exactitude, so that every possible
question will vanish in the twinkling of an eye, simply
because every possible answer to it will be provided. Then
the ‘Palace of Crystal’ will be built. Then ... In fact, those
will be halcyon days. Of course there is no guaranteeing
(this is my comment) that it will not be, for instance,
frightfully dull then (for what will one have to do when
everything will be calculated and tabulated), but on the
other hand everything will be extraordinarily rational. Of
course boredom may lead you to anything. It is boredom
sets one sticking golden pins into people, but all that
would not matter. What is bad (this is my comment again)
is that I dare say people will be thankful for the gold pins
then. Man is stupid, you know, phenomenally stupid; or
rather he is not at all stupid, but he is so ungrateful that
you could not find another like him in all creation. I, for
instance, would not be in the least surprised if all of a
sudden, A PROPOS of nothing, in the midst of general
prosperity a gentleman with an ignoble, or rather with a
reactionary and ironical, countenance were to arise and,
putting his arms akimbo, say to us all: ‘I say, gentleman,
hadn’t we better kick over the whole show and scatter
eBook brought to you by


40 of 203
rationalism to the winds, simply to send these logarithms
to the devil, and to enable us to live once more at our
own sweet foolish will!’ That again would not matter, but
what is annoying is that he would be sure to find
followers—such is the nature of man. And all that for the
most foolish reason, which, one would think, was hardly
worth mentioning: that is, that man everywhere and at all
times, whoever he may be, has preferred to act as he chose
and not in the least as his reason and advantage dictated.
And one may choose what is contrary to one’s own
interests, and sometimes one POSITIVELY OUGHT
(that is my idea). One’s own free unfettered choice, one’s
own caprice, however wild it may be, one’s own fancy
worked up at times to frenzy—is that very ‘most
advantageous advantage’ which we have overlooked,
which comes under no classification and against which all
systems and theories are continually being shattered to
atoms. And how do these wiseacres know that man wants
a normal, a virtuous choice? What has made them
conceive that man must want a rationally advantageous
choice? What man wants is simply INDEPENDENT
choice, whatever that independence may cost and
wherever it may lead. And choice, of course, the devil
only knows what choice.

41 of 203
VIII
‘Ha! ha! ha! But you know there is no such thing as
choice in reality, say what you like,’ you will interpose
with a chuckle. ‘Science has succeeded in so far analysing
man that we know already that choice and what is called
freedom of will is nothing else than—‘
Stay, gentlemen, I meant to begin with that myself I
confess, I was rather frightened. I was just going to say that
the devil only knows what choice depends on, and that
perhaps that was a very good thing, but I remembered the
teaching of science ... and pulled myself up. And here you
have begun upon it. Indeed, if there really is some day
discovered a formula for all our desires and caprices—that
is, an explanation of what they depend upon, by what laws
they arise, how they develop, what they are aiming at in
one case and in another and so on, that is a real
mathematical formula—then, most likely, man will at once
cease to feel desire, indeed, he will be certain to. For who
would want to choose by rule? Besides, he will at once be
transformed from a human being into an organ-stop or
something of the sort; for what is a man without desires,
without free will and without choice, if not a stop in an

42 of 203
organ? What do you think? Let us reckon the chances—
can such a thing happen or not?
‘H’m!’ you decide. ‘Our choice is usually mistaken
from a false view of our advantage. We sometimes choose
absolute nonsense because in our foolishness we see in that
nonsense the easiest means for attaining a supposed
advantage. But when all that is explained and worked out
on paper (which is perfectly possible, for it is contemptible
and senseless to suppose that some laws of nature man will
never understand), then certainly so-called desires will no
longer exist. For if a desire should come into conflict with
reason we shall then reason and not desire, because it will
be impossible retaining our reason to be SENSELESS in
our desires, and in that way knowingly act against reason
and desire to injure ourselves. And as all choice and
reasoning can be really calculated—because there will
some day be discovered the laws of our so-called free
will—so, joking apart, there may one day be something
like a table constructed of them, so that we really shall
choose in accordance with it. If, for instance, some day
they calculate and prove to me that I made a long nose at
someone because I could not help making a long nose at
him and that I had to do it in that particular way, what
FREEDOM is left me, especially if I am a learned man

43 of 203
and have taken my degree somewhere? Then I should be
able to calculate my whole life for thirty years beforehand.
In short, if this could be arranged there would be nothing
left for us to do; anyway, we should have to understand
that. And, in fact, we ought unwearyingly to repeat to
ourselves that at such and such a time and in such and such
circumstances nature does not ask our leave; that we have
got to take her as she is and not fashion her to suit our
fancy, and if we really aspire to formulas and tables of
rules, and well, even ... to the chemical retort, there’s no
help for it, we must accept the retort too, or else it will be
accepted without our consent ....’
Yes, but here I come to a stop! Gentlemen, you must
excuse me for being over-philosophical; it’s the result of
forty years underground! Allow me to indulge my fancy.
You see, gentlemen, reason is an excellent thing, there’s
no disputing that, but reason is nothing but reason and
satisfies only the rational side of man’s nature, while will is
a manifestation of the whole life, that is, of the whole
human life including reason and all the impulses. And
although our life, in this manifestation of it, is often
worthless, yet it is life and not simply extracting square
roots. Here I, for instance, quite naturally want to live, in
order to satisfy all my capacities for life, and not simply my

44 of 203
capacity for reasoning, that is, not simply one twentieth of
my capacity for life. What does reason know? Reason only
knows what it has succeeded in learning (some things,
perhaps, it will never learn; this is a poor comfort, but
why not say so frankly?) and human nature acts as a whole,
with everything that is in it, consciously or unconsciously,
and, even if it goes wrong, it lives. I suspect, gentlemen,
that you are looking at me with compassion; you tell me
again that an enlightened and developed man, such, in
short, as the future man will be, cannot consciously desire
anything disadvantageous to himself, that that can be
proved mathematically. I thoroughly agree, it can—by
mathematics. But I repeat for the hundredth time, there is
one case, one only, when man may consciously,
purposely, desire what is injurious to himself, what is
stupid, very stupid—simply in order to have the right to
desire for himself even what is very stupid and not to be
bound by an obligation to desire only what is sensible. Of
course, this very stupid thing, this caprice of ours, may be
in reality, gentlemen, more advantageous for us than
anything else on earth, especially in certain cases. And in
particular it may be more advantageous than any advantage
even when it does us obvious harm, and contradicts the
soundest conclusions of our reason concerning our

45 of 203
advantage—for in any circumstances it preserves for us
what is most precious and most important—that is, our
personality, our individuality. Some, you see, maintain
that this really is the most precious thing for mankind;
choice can, of course, if it chooses, be in agreement with
reason; and especially if this be not abused but kept within
bounds. It is profitable and sometimes even praiseworthy.
But very often, and even most often, choice is utterly and
stubbornly opposed to reason ... and ... and ... do you
know that that, too, is profitable, sometimes even
praiseworthy? Gentlemen, let us suppose that man is not
stupid. (Indeed one cannot refuse to suppose that, if only
from the one consideration, that, if man is stupid, then
who is wise?) But if he is not stupid, he is monstrously
ungrateful! Phenomenally ungrateful. In fact, I believe that
the best definition of man is the ungrateful biped. But that
is not all, that is not his worst defect; his worst defect is his
perpetual moral obliquity, perpetual—from the days of the
Flood to the Schleswig-Holstein period. Moral obliquity
and consequently lack of good sense; for it has long been
accepted that lack of good sense is due to no other cause
than moral obliquity. Put it to the test and cast your eyes
upon the history of mankind. What will you see? Is it a
grand spectacle? Grand, if you like. Take the Colossus of

46 of 203
Rhodes, for instance, that’s worth something. With good
reason Mr. Anaevsky testifies of it that some say that it is
the work of man’s hands, while others maintain that it has
been created by nature herself. Is it many-coloured? May
be it is many-coloured, too: if one takes the dress
uniforms, military and civilian, of all peoples in all ages—
that alone is worth something, and if you take the undress
uniforms you will never get to the end of it; no historian
would be equal to the job. Is it monotonous? May be it’s
monotonous too: it’s fighting and fighting; they are
fighting now, they fought first and they fought last—you
will admit, that it is almost too monotonous. In short, one
may say anything about the history of the world—
anything that might enter the most disordered
imagination. The only thing one can’t say is that it’s
rational. The very word sticks in one’s throat. And,
indeed, this is the odd thing that is continually happening:
there are continually turning up in life moral and rational
persons, sages and lovers of humanity who make it their
object to live all their lives as morally and rationally as
possible, to be, so to speak, a light to their neighbours
simply in order to show them that it is possible to live
morally and rationally in this world. And yet we all know
that those very people sooner or later have been false to

47 of 203
themselves, playing some queer trick, often a most
unseemly one. Now I ask you: what can be expected of
man since he is a being endowed with strange qualities?
Shower upon him every earthly blessing, drown him in a
sea of happiness, so that nothing but bubbles of bliss can
be seen on the surface; give him economic prosperity,
such that he should have nothing else to do but sleep, eat
cakes and busy himself with the continuation of his
species, and even then out of sheer ingratitude, sheer spite,
man would play you some nasty trick. He would even risk
his cakes and would deliberately desire the most fatal
rubbish, the most uneconomical absurdity, simply to
introduce into all this positive good sense his fatal fantastic
element. It is just his fantastic dreams, his vulgar folly that
he will desire to retain, simply in order to prove to
himself—as though that were so necessary— that men still
are men and not the keys of a piano, which the laws of
nature threaten to control so completely that soon one
will be able to desire nothing but by the calendar. And
that is not all: even if man really were nothing but a
piano-key, even if this were proved to him by natural
science and mathematics, even then he would not become
reasonable, but would purposely do something perverse
out of simple ingratitude, simply to gain his point. And if

48 of 203
he does not find means he will contrive destruction and
chaos, will contrive sufferings of all sorts, only to gain his
point! He will launch a curse upon the world, and as only
man can curse (it is his privilege, the primary distinction
between him and other animals), may be by his curse
alone he will attain his object—that is, convince himself
that he is a man and not a piano-key! If you say that all
this, too, can be calculated and tabulated—chaos and
darkness and curses, so that the mere possibility of
calculating it all beforehand would stop it all, and reason
would reassert itself, then man would purposely go mad in
order to be rid of reason and gain his point! I believe in it,
I answer for it, for the whole work of man really seems to
consist in nothing but proving to himself every minute
that he is a man and not a piano-key! It may be at the cost
of his skin, it may be by cannibalism! And this being so,
can one help being tempted to rejoice that it has not yet
come off, and that desire still depends on something we
don’t know?
You will scream at me (that is, if you condescend to do
so) that no one is touching my free will, that all they are
concerned with is that my will should of itself, of its own
free will, coincide with my own normal interests, with the
laws of nature and arithmetic.

49 of 203
Good heavens, gentlemen, what sort of free will is left
when we come to tabulation and arithmetic, when it will
all be a case of twice two make four? Twice two makes
four without my will. As if free will meant that!

50 of 203
IX
Gentlemen, I am joking, and I know myself that my
jokes are not brilliant,but you know one can take
everything as a joke. I am, perhaps, jesting against the
grain. Gentlemen, I am tormented by questions; answer
them for me. You, for instance, want to cure men of their
old habits and reform their will in accordance with science
and good sense. But how do you know, not only that it is
possible, but also that it is DESIRABLE to reform man in
that way? And what leads you to the conclusion that man’s
inclinations NEED reforming? In short, how do you
know that such a reformation will be a benefit to man?
And to go to the root of the matter, why are you so
positively convinced that not to act against his real normal
interests guaranteed by the conclusions of reason and
arithmetic is certainly always advantageous for man and
must always be a law for mankind? So far, you know, this
is only your supposition. It may be the law of logic, but
not the law of humanity. You think, gentlemen, perhaps
that I am mad? Allow me to defend myself. I agree that
man is pre-eminently a creative animal, predestined to
strive consciously for an object and to engage in

51 of 203
engineering—that is, incessantly and eternally to make
new roads, WHEREVER THEY MAY LEAD. But the
reason why he wants sometimes to go off at a tangent may
just be that he is PREDESTINED to make the road, and
perhaps, too, that however stupid the ‘direct’ practical
man may be, the thought sometimes will occur to him
that the road almost always does lead SOMEWHERE,
and that the destination it leads to is less important than
the process of making it, and that the chief thing is to save
the well-conducted child from despising engineering, and
so giving way to the fatal idleness, which, as we all know,
is the mother of all the vices. Man likes to make roads and
to create, that is a fact beyond dispute. But why has he
such a passionate love for destruction and chaos also? Tell
me that! But on that point I want to say a couple of words
myself. May it not be that he loves chaos and destruction
(there can be no disputing that he does sometimes love it)
because he is instinctively afraid of attaining his object and
completing the edifice he is constructing? Who knows,
perhaps he only loves that edifice from a distance, and is
by no means in love with it at close quarters; perhaps he
only loves building it and does not want to live in it, but
will leave it, when completed, for the use of LES
ANIMAUX DOMESTIQUES—such as the ants, the
eBook brought to you by


52 of 203
sheep, and so on. Now the ants have quite a different
taste. They have a marvellous edifice of that pattern which
endures for ever—the ant-heap.
With the ant-heap the respectable race of ants began
and with the ant- heap they will probably end, which does
the greatest credit to their perseverance and good sense.
But man is a frivolous and incongruous creature, and
perhaps, like a chess player, loves the process of the game,
not the end of it. And who knows (there is no saying with
certainty), perhaps the only goal on earth to which
mankind is striving lies in this incessant process of
attaining, in other words, in life itself, and not in the thing
to be attained, which must always be expressed as a
formula, as positive as twice two makes four, and such
positiveness is not life, gentlemen, but is the beginning of
death. Anyway, man has always been afraid of this
mathematical certainty, and I am afraid of it now. Granted
that man does nothing but seek that mathematical
certainty, he traverses oceans, sacrifices his life in the quest,
but to succeed, really to find it, dreads, I assure you. He
feels that when he has found it there will be nothing for
him to look for...