The Island of Doctor Moreau
------------------------------------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION.
ON February the First 1887, the Lady Vain was lost by
collision with a derelict when about the latitude 1’ S. and
longitude 107’ W.
On January the Fifth, 1888—that is eleven months and
four days after— my uncle, Edward Prendick, a private
gentleman, who certainly went aboard the Lady Vain at
Callao, and who had been considered drowned, was
picked up in latitude 5’ 3’ S. and longitude 101’ W. in a
small open boat of which the name was illegible, but
which is supposed to have belonged to the missing
schooner Ipecacuanha. He gave such a strange account of
himself that he was supposed demented. Subsequently he
alleged that his mind was a blank from the moment of his
escape from the Lady Vain. His case was discussed among
psychologists at the time as a curious instance of the lapse
of memory consequent upon physical and mental stress.
The following narrative was found among his papers by
the undersigned, his nephew and heir, but unaccompanied
by any definite request for publication.
The only island known to exist in the region in which
my uncle was picked up is Noble’s Isle, a small volcanic
islet and uninhabited. It was visited in 1891 by H. M. S.

3 of 209
Scorpion. A party of sailors then landed, but found
nothing living thereon except certain curious white
moths, some hogs and rabbits, and some rather peculiar
rats. So that this narrative is without confirmation in its
most essential particular. With that understood, there
seems no harm in putting this strange story before the
public in accordance, as I believe, with my uncle’s
intentions. There is at least this much in its behalf: my
uncle passed out of human knowledge about latitude 5’ S.
and longitude 105’ E., and reappeared in the same part of
the ocean after a space of eleven months. In some way he
must have lived during the interval. And it seems that a
schooner called the Ipecacuanha with a drunken captain,
John Davies, did start from Africa with a puma and certain
other animals aboard in January, 1887, that the vessel was
well known at several ports in the South Pacific, and that
it finally disappeared from those seas (with a considerable
amount of copra aboard), sailing to its unknown fate from
Bayna in December, 1887, a date that tallies entirely with
my uncle’s story.
CHARLES EDWARD PRENDICK.
(The Story written by Edward Prendick.)
eBook brought to you by


4 of 209
I. IN THE DINGEY OF THE ‘LADY VAIN.’
I DO not propose to add anything to what has already
been written concerning the loss of the ‘Lady Vain.’ As
everyone knows, she collided with a derelict when ten
days out from Callao. The longboat, with seven of the
crew, was picked up eighteen days after by H. M. gunboat
‘Myrtle,’ and the story of their terrible privations has
become quite as well known as the far more horrible
‘Medusa’ case. But I have to add to the published story of
the ‘Lady Vain’ another, possibly as horrible and far
stranger. It has hitherto been supposed that the four men
who were in the dingey perished, but this is incorrect. I
have the best of evidence for this assertion: I was one of
the four men.
But in the first place I must state that there never were
four men in the dingey,—the number was three.
Constans, who was ‘seen by the captain to jump into the
gig,’* luckily for us and unluckily for himself did not reach
us. He came down out of the tangle of ropes under the
stays of the smashed bowsprit, some small rope caught his
heel as he let go, and he hung for a moment head
downward, and then fell and struck a block or spar floating

5 of 209
in the water. We pulled towards him, but he never came
up.
* Daily News, March 17, 1887.
I say lucky for us he did not reach us, and I might
almost say luckily for himself; for we had only a small
breaker of water and some soddened ship’s biscuits with
us, so sudden had been the alarm, so unprepared the ship
for any disaster. We thought the people on the launch
would be better provisioned (though it seems they were
not), and we tried to hail them. They could not have
heard us, and the next morning when the drizzle
cleared,— which was not until past midday,—we could
see nothing of them. We could not stand up to look about
us, because of the pitching of the boat. The two other
men who had escaped so far with me were a man named
Helmar, a passenger like myself, and a seaman whose name
I don’t know,— a short sturdy man, with a stammer.
We drifted famishing, and, after our water had come to
an end, tormented by an intolerable thirst, for eight days
altogether. After the second day the sea subsided slowly to
a glassy calm. It is quite impossible for the ordinary reader
to imagine those eight days. He has not, luckily for

6 of 209
himself, anything in his memory to imagine with. After
the first day we said little to one another, and lay in our
places in the boat and stared at the horizon, or watched,
with eyes that grew larger and more haggard every day,
the misery and weakness gaining upon our companions.
The sun became pitiless. The water ended on the fourth
day, and we were already thinking strange things and
saying them with our eyes; but it was, I think, the sixth
before Helmar gave voice to the thing we had all been
thinking. I remember our voices were dry and thin, so
that we bent towards one another and spared our words. I
stood out against it with all my might, was rather for
scuttling the boat and perishing together among the sharks
that followed us; but when Helmar said that if his proposal
was accepted we should have drink, the sailor came round
to him.
I would not draw lots however, and in the night the
sailor whispered to Helmar again and again, and I sat in
the bows with my clasp-knife in my hand, though I doubt
if I had the stuff in me to fight; and in the morning I
agreed to Helmar’s proposal, and we handed halfpence to
find the odd man. The lot fell upon the sailor; but he was
the strongest of us and would not abide by it, and attacked
Helmar with his hands. They grappled together and almost

7 of 209
stood up. I crawled along the boat to them, intending to
help Helmar by grasping the sailor’s leg; but the sailor
stumbled with the swaying of the boat, and the two fell
upon the gunwale and rolled overboard together. They
sank like stones. I remember laughing at that, and
wondering why I laughed. The laugh caught me suddenly
like a thing from without.
I lay across one of the thwarts for I know not how
long, thinking that if I had the strength I would drink seawater
and madden myself to die quickly. And even as I lay
there I saw, with no more interest than if it had been a
picture, a sail come up towards me over the sky-line. My
mind must have been wandering, and yet I remember all
that happened, quite distinctly. I remember how my head
swayed with the seas, and the horizon with the sail above
it danced up and down; but I also remember as distinctly
that I had a persuasion that I was dead, and that I thought
what a jest it was that they should come too late by such a
little to catch me in my body.
For an endless period, as it seemed to me, I lay with my
head on the thwart watching the schooner (she was a little
ship, schooner-rigged fore and aft) come up out of the sea.
She kept tacking to and fro in a widening compass, for she
was sailing dead into the wind. It never entered my head

8 of 209
to attempt to attract attention, and I do not remember
anything distinctly after the sight of her side until I found
myself in a little cabin aft. There’s a dim half-memory of
being lifted up to the gangway, and of a big red
countenance covered with freckles and surrounded with
red hair staring at me over the bulwarks. I also had a
disconnected impression of a dark face, with extraordinary
eyes, close to mine; but that I thought was a nightmare,
until I met it again. I fancy I recollect some stuff being
poured in between my teeth; and that is all.

9 of 209
II. THE MAN WHO WAS GOING
NOWHERE
THE cabin in which I found myself was small and
rather untidy. A youngish man with flaxen hair, a bristly
straw-coloured moustache, and a dropping nether lip, was
sitting and holding my wrist. For a minute we stared at
each other without speaking. He had watery grey eyes,
oddly void of expression. Then just overhead came a
sound like an iron bedstead being knocked about, and the
low angry growling of some large animal. At the same
time the man spoke. He repeated his question,—‘How do
you feel now?’
I think I said I felt all right. I could not recollect how I
had got there. He must have seen the question in my face,
for my voice was inaccessible to me.
‘You were picked up in a boat, starving. The name on
the boat was the ‘Lady Vain,’ and there were spots of
blood on the gunwale.’
At the same time my eye caught my hand, thin so that
it looked like a dirty skin-purse full of loose bones, and all
the business of the boat came back to me.

10 of 209
‘Have some of this,’ said he, and gave me a dose of
some scarlet stuff, iced.
It tasted like blood, and made me feel stronger.
‘You were in luck,’ said he, ‘to get picked up by a ship
with a medical man aboard.’ He spoke with a slobbering
articulation, with the ghost of a lisp.
‘What ship is this?’ I said slowly, hoarse from my long
silence.
‘It’s a little trader from Arica and Callao. I never asked
where she came from in the beginning,—out of the land
of born fools, I guess. I’m a passenger myself, from Arica.
The silly ass who owns her,—he’s captain too, named
Davies,— he’s lost his certificate, or something. You
know the kind of man,— calls the thing the
‘Ipecacuanha,’ of all silly, infernal names; though when
there’s much of a sea without any wind, she certainly acts
according.’
(Then the noise overhead began again, a snarling growl
and the voice of a human being together. Then another
voice, telling some ‘Heaven-forsaken idiot’ to desist.)
‘You were nearly dead,’ said my interlocutor. ‘It was a
very near thing, indeed. But I’ve put some stuff into you
now. Notice your arm’s sore? Injections. You’ve been
insensible for nearly thirty hours.’

11 of 209
I thought slowly. (I was distracted now by the yelping
of a number of dogs.) ‘Am I eligible for solid food?’ I
asked.
‘Thanks to me,’ he said. ‘Even now the mutton is
boiling.’
‘Yes,’ I said with assurance; ‘I could eat some mutton.’
‘But,’ said he with a momentary hesitation, ‘you know
I’m dying to hear of how you came to be alone in that
boat. Damn that howling!’ I thought I detected a certain
suspicion in his eyes.
He suddenly left the cabin, and I heard him in violent
controversy with some one, who seemed to me to talk
gibberish in response to him. The matter sounded as
though it ended in blows, but in that I thought my ears
were mistaken. Then he shouted at the dogs, and returned
to the cabin.
‘Well?’ said he in the doorway. ‘You were just
beginning to tell me.’
I told him my name, Edward Prendick, and how I had
taken to Natural History as a relief from the dulness of my
comfortable independence.
He seemed interested in this. ‘I’ve done some science
myself. I did my Biology at University College,—getting
out the ovary of the earthworm and the radula of the snail,

12 of 209
and all that. Lord! It’s ten years ago. But go on! go on! tell
me about the boat.’
He was evidently satisfied with the frankness of my
story, which I told in concise sentences enough, for I felt
horribly weak; and when it was finished he reverted at
once to the topic of Natural History and his own
biological studies. He began to question me closely about
Tottenham Court Road and Gower Street. ‘Is Caplatzi
still flourishing? What a shop that was!’ He had evidently
been a very ordinary medical student, and drifted
incontinently to the topic of the music halls. He told me
some anecdotes.
‘Left it all,’ he said, ‘ten years ago. How jolly it all used
to be! But I made a young ass of myself,—played myself
out before I was twenty-one. I daresay it’s all different
now. But I must look up that ass of a cook, and see what
he’s done to your mutton.’
The growling overhead was renewed, so suddenly and
with so much savage anger that it startled me. ‘What’s
that?’ I called after him, but the door had closed. He came
back again with the boiled mutton, and I was so excited
by the appetising smell of it that I forgot the noise of the
beast that had troubled me.

13 of 209
After a day of alternate sleep and feeding I was so far
recovered as to be able to get from my bunk to the scuttle,
and see the green seas trying to keep pace with us. I
judged the schooner was running before the wind.
Montgomery—that was the name of the flaxen-haired
man— came in again as I stood there, and I asked him for
some clothes. He lent me some duck things of his own,
for those I had worn in the boat had been thrown
overboard. They were rather loose for me, for he was
large and long in his limbs. He told me casually that the
captain was three-parts drunk in his own cabin. As I
assumed the clothes, I began asking him some questions
about the destination of the ship. He said the ship was
bound to Hawaii, but that it had to land him first.
‘Where?’ said I.
‘It’s an island, where I live. So far as I know, it hasn’t
got a name.’
He stared at me with his nether lip dropping, and
looked so wilfully stupid of a sudden that it came into my
head that he desired to avoid my questions. I had the
discretion to ask no more.

14 of 209
III. THE STRANGE FACE.
WE left the cabin and found a man at the companion
obstructing our way. He was standing on the ladder with
his back to us, peering over the combing of the hatchway.
He was, I could see, a misshapen man, short, broad, and
clumsy, with a crooked back, a hairy neck, and a head
sunk between his shoulders. He was dressed in dark-blue
serge, and had peculiarly thick, coarse, black hair. I heard
the unseen dogs growl furiously, and forthwith he ducked
back,— coming into contact with the hand I put out to
fend him off from myself. He turned with animal
swiftness.
In some indefinable way the black face thus flashed
upon me shocked me profoundly. It was a singularly
deformed one. The facial part projected, forming
something dimly suggestive of a muzzle, and the huge
half-open mouth showed as big white teeth as I had ever
seen in a human mouth. His eyes were blood-shot at the
edges, with scarcely a rim of white round the hazel pupils.
There was a curious glow of excitement in his face.
‘Confound you!’ said Montgomery. ‘Why the devil
don’t you get out of the way?’

15 of 209
The black-faced man started aside without a word. I
went on up the companion, staring at him instinctively as
I did so. Montgomery stayed at the foot for a moment.
‘You have no business here, you know,’ he said in a
deliberate tone. ‘Your place is forward.’
The black-faced man cowered. ‘They—won’t have me
forward.’ He spoke slowly, with a queer, hoarse quality in
his voice.
‘Won’t have you forward!’ said Montgomery, in a
menacing voice. ‘But I tell you to go!’ He was on the
brink of saying something further, then looked up at me
suddenly and followed me up the ladder.
I had paused half way through the hatchway, looking
back, still astonished beyond measure at the grotesque
ugliness of this black-faced creature. I had never beheld
such a repulsive and extraordinary face before, and yet—if
the contradiction is credible—I experienced at the same
time an odd feeling that in some way I had already
encountered exactly the features and gestures that now
amazed me. Afterwards it occurred to me that probably I
had seen him as I was lifted aboard; and yet that scarcely
satisfied my suspicion of a previous acquaintance. Yet how
one could have set eyes on so singular a face and yet have
forgotten the precise occasion, passed my imagination.
eBook brought to you by


16 of 209
Montgomery’s movement to follow me released my
attention, and I turned and looked about me at the flush
deck of the little schooner. I was already half prepared by
the sounds I had heard for what I saw. Certainly I never
beheld a deck so dirty. It was littered with scraps of carrot,
shreds of green stuff, and indescribable filth. Fastened by
chains to the mainmast were a number of grisly
staghounds, who now began leaping and barking at me,
and by the mizzen a huge puma was cramped in a little
iron cage far too small even to give it turning room.
Farther under the starboard bulwark were some big
hutches containing a number of rabbits, and a solitary
llama was squeezed in a mere box of a cage forward. The
dogs were muzzled by leather straps. The only human
being on deck was a gaunt and silent sailor at the wheel.
The patched and dirty spankers were tense before the
wind, and up aloft the little ship seemed carrying every sail
she had. The sky was clear, the sun midway down the
western sky; long waves, capped by the breeze with froth,
were running with us. We went past the steersman to the
taffrail, and saw the water come foaming under the stern
and the bubbles go dancing and vanishing in her wake. I
turned and surveyed the unsavoury length of the ship.
‘Is this an ocean menagerie?’ said I.

17 of 209
‘Looks like it,’ said Montgomery.
‘What are these beasts for? Merchandise, curios? Does
the captain think he is going to sell them somewhere in
the South Seas?’
‘It looks like it, doesn’t it?’ said Montgomery, and
turned towards the wake again.
Suddenly we heard a yelp and a volley of furious
blasphemy from the companion hatchway, and the
deformed man with the black face came up hurriedly. He
was immediately followed by a heavy red-haired man in a
white cap. At the sight of the former the staghounds, who
had all tired of barking at me by this time, became
furiously excited, howling and leaping against their chains.
The black hesitated before them, and this gave the redhaired
man time to come up with him and deliver a
tremendous blow between the shoulder-blades. The poor
devil went down like a felled ox, and rolled in the dirt
among the furiously excited dogs. It was lucky for him
that they were muzzled. The red-haired man gave a yawp
of exultation and stood staggering, and as it seemed to me
in serious danger of either going backwards down the
companion hatchway or forwards upon his victim.
So soon as the second man had appeared, Montgomery
had started forward. ‘Steady on there!’ he cried, in a tone

18 of 209
of remonstrance. A couple of sailors appeared on the
forecastle. The black-faced man, howling in a singular
voice rolled about under the feet of the dogs. No one
attempted to help him. The brutes did their best to worry
him, butting their muzzles at him. There was a quick
dance of their lithe grey-figured bodies over the clumsy,
prostrate figure. The sailors forward shouted, as though it
was admirable sport. Montgomery gave an angry
exclamation, and went striding down the deck, and I
followed him. The black-faced man scrambled up and
staggered forward, going and leaning over the bulwark by
the main shrouds, where he remained, panting and glaring
over his shoulder at the dogs. The red-haired man laughed
a satisfied laugh.
‘Look here, Captain,’ said Montgomery, with his lisp a
little accentuated, gripping the elbows of the red-haired
man, ‘this won’t do!’
I stood behind Montgomery. The captain came half
round, and regarded him with the dull and solemn eyes of
a drunken man. ‘Wha’ won’t do?’ he said, and added, after
looking sleepily into Montgomery’s face for a minute,
‘Blasted Sawbones!’

19 of 209
With a sudden movement he shook his arm free, and
after two ineffectual attempts stuck his freckled fists into
his side pockets.
‘That man’s a passenger,’ said Montgomery. ‘I’d advise
you to keep your hands off him.’
‘Go to hell!’ said the captain, loudly. He suddenly
turned and staggered towards the side. ‘Do what I like on
my own ship,’ he said.
I think Montgomery might have left him then, seeing
the brute was drunk; but he only turned a shade paler, and
followed the captain to the bulwarks.
‘Look you here, Captain,’ he said; ‘that man of mine is
not to be ill-treated. He has been hazed ever since he
came aboard.’
For a minute, alcoholic fumes kept the captain
speechless. ‘Blasted Sawbones!’ was all he considered
necessary.
I could see that Montgomery had one of those slow,
pertinacious tempers that will warm day after day to a
white heat, and never again cool to forgiveness; and I saw
too that this quarrel had been some time growing. ‘The
man’s drunk,’ said I, perhaps officiously; ‘you’ll do no
good.’

20 of 209
Montgomery gave an ugly twist to his dropping lip.
‘He’s always drunk. Do you think that excuses his
assaulting his passengers?’
‘My ship,’ began the captain, waving his hand
unsteadily towards the cages, ‘was a clean ship. Look at it
now!’ It was certainly anything but clean. ‘Crew,’
continued the captain, ‘clean, respectable crew.’
‘You agreed to take the beasts.’
‘I wish I’d never set eyes on your infernal island. What
the devil— want beasts for on an island like that? Then,
that man of yours— understood he was a man. He’s a
lunatic; and he hadn’t no business aft. Do you think the
whole damned ship belongs to you?’
‘Your sailors began to haze the poor devil as soon as he
came aboard.’
‘That’s just what he is—he’s a devil! an ugly devil! My
men can’t stand him. I can’t stand him. None of us can’t
stand him. Nor you either!’
Montgomery turned away. ‘You leave that man alone,
anyhow,’ he said, nodding his head as he spoke.
But the captain meant to quarrel now. He raised his
voice. ‘If he comes this end of the ship again I’ll cut his
insides out, I tell you. Cut out his blasted insides! Who are
you, to tell me what I’m to do? I tell you I’m captain of

21 of 209
this ship,—captain and owner. I’m the law here, I tell
you,—the law and the prophets. I bargained to take a man
and his attendant to and from Arica, and bring back some
animals. I never bargained to carry a mad devil and a silly
Sawbones, a—‘
Well, never mind what he called Montgomery. I saw
the latter take a step forward, and interposed. ‘He’s drunk,’
said I. The captain began some abuse even fouler than the
last. ‘Shut up!’ I said, turning on him sharply, for I had
seen danger in Montgomery’s white face. With that I
brought the downpour on myself.
However, I was glad to avert what was uncommonly
near a scuffle, even at the price of the captain’s drunken
ill-will. I do not think I have ever heard quite so much
vile language come in a continuous stream from any man’s
lips before, though I have frequented eccentric company
enough. I found some of it hard to endure, though I am a
mild-tempered man; but, certainly, when I told the
captain to ‘shut up’ I had forgotten that I was merely a bit
of human flotsam, cut off from my resources and with my
fare unpaid; a mere casual dependant on the bounty, or
speculative enterprise, of the ship. He reminded me of it
with considerable vigour; but at any rate I prevented a
fight.

22 of 209
IV. AT THE SCHOONER’S RAIL.
THAT night land was sighted after sundown, and the
schooner hove to. Montgomery intimated that was his
destination. It was too far to see any details; it seemed to
me then simply a low-lying patch of dim blue in the
uncertain blue-grey sea. An almost vertical streak of smoke
went up from it into the sky. The captain was not on deck
when it was sighted. After he had vented his wrath on me
he had staggered below, and I understand he went to sleep
on the floor of his own cabin. The mate practically
assumed the command. He was the gaunt, taciturn
individual we had seen at the wheel. Apparently he was in
an evil temper with Montgomery. He took not the
slightest notice of either of us. We dined with him in a
sulky silence, after a few ineffectual efforts on my part to
talk. It struck me too that the men regarded my
companion and his animals in a singularly unfriendly
manner. I found Montgomery very reticent about his
purpose with these creatures, and about his destination;
and though I was sensible of a growing curiosity as to
both, I did not press him.

23 of 209
We remained talking on the quarter deck until the sky
was thick with stars. Except for an occasional sound in the
yellow-lit forecastle and a movement of the animals now
and then, the night was very still. The puma lay crouched
together, watching us with shining eyes, a black heap in
the corner of its cage. Montgomery produced some cigars.
He talked to me of London in a tone of half-painful
reminiscence, asking all kinds of questions about changes
that had taken place. He spoke like a man who had loved
his life there, and had been suddenly and irrevocably cut
off from it. I gossiped as well as I could of this and that.
All the time the strangeness of him was shaping itself in
my mind; and as I talked I peered at his odd, pallid face in
the dim light of the binnacle lantern behind me. Then I
looked out at the darkling sea, where in the dimness his
little island was hidden.
This man, it seemed to me, had come out of Immensity
merely to save my life. To-morrow he would drop over
the side, and vanish again out of my existence. Even had it
been under commonplace circumstances, it would have
made me a trifle thoughtful; but in the first place was the
singularity of an educated man living on this unknown
little island, and coupled with that the extraordinary nature
of his luggage. I found myself repeating the captain’s

24 of 209
question, What did he want with the beasts? Why, too,
had he pretended they were not his when I had remarked
about them at first? Then, again, in his personal attendant
there was a bizarre quality which had impressed me
profoundly. These circumstances threw a haze of mystery
round the man. They laid hold of my imagination, and
hampered my tongue.
Towards midnight our talk of London died away, and
we stood side by side leaning over the bulwarks and
staring dreamily over the silent, starlit sea, each pursuing
his own thoughts. It was the atmosphere for sentiment,
and I began upon my gratitude.
‘If I may say it,’ said I, after a time, ‘you have saved my
life.’
‘Chance,’ he answered. ‘Just chance.’
‘I prefer to make my thanks to the accessible agent.’
‘Thank no one. You had the need, and I had the
knowledge; and I injected and fed you much as I might
have collected a specimen. I was bored and wanted
something to do. If I’d been jaded that day, or hadn’t liked
your face, well—it’s a curious question where you would
have been now!’
This damped my mood a little. ‘At any rate,’ I began.

25 of 209
‘It’s chance, I tell you,’ he interrupted, ‘as everything is
in a man’s life. Only the asses won’t see it! Why am I here
now, an outcast from civilisation, instead of being a happy
man enjoying all the pleasures of London? Simply because
eleven years ago— I lost my head for ten minutes on a
foggy night.’
He stopped. ‘Yes?’ said I.
‘That’s all.’
We relapsed into silence. Presently he laughed. ‘There’s
something in this starlight that loosens one’s tongue. I’m
an ass, and yet somehow I would like to tell you.’
‘Whatever you tell me, you may rely upon my keeping
to myself— if that’s it.’
He was on the point of beginning, and then shook his
head, doubtfully.
‘Don’t,’ said I. ‘It is all the same to me. After all, it is
better to keep your secret. There’s nothing gained but a
little relief if I respect your confidence. If I don’t—well?’
He grunted undecidedly. I felt I had him at a
disadvantage, had caught him in the mood of indiscretion;
and to tell the truth I was not curious to learn what might
have driven a young medical student out of London. I
have an imagination. I shrugged my shoulders and turned
away. Over the taffrail leant a silent black figure, watching

26 of 209
the stars. It was Montgomery’s strange attendant. It looked
over its shoulder quickly with my movement, then looked
away again.
It may seem a little thing to you, perhaps, but it came
like a sudden blow to me. The only light near us was a
lantern at the wheel. The creature’s face was turned for
one brief instant out of the dimness of the stern towards
this illumination, and I saw that the eyes that glanced at
me shone with a pale-green light. I did not know then
that a reddish luminosity, at least, is not uncommon in
human eyes. The thing came to me as stark inhumanity.
That black figure with its eyes of fire struck down through
all my adult thoughts and feelings, and for a moment the
forgotten horrors of childhood came back to my mind.
Then the effect passed as it had come. An uncouth black
figure of a man, a figure of no particular import, hung
over the taffrail against the starlight, and I found
Montgomery was speaking to me.
‘I’m thinking of turning in, then,’ said he, ‘if you’ve
had enough of this.’
I answered him incongruously. We went below, and he
wished me good-night at the door of my cabin.
That night I had some very unpleasant dreams. The
waning moon rose late. Its light struck a ghostly white

27 of 209
beam across my cabin, and made an ominous shape on the
planking by my bunk. Then the staghounds woke, and
began howling and baying; so that I dreamt fitfully, and
scarcely slept until the approach of dawn.
eBook brought to you by


28 of 209
V. THE MAN WHO HAD NOWHERE TO
GO.
IN the early morning (it was the second morning after
my recovery, and I believe the fourth after I was picked
up), I awoke through an avenue of tumultuous dreams,—
dreams of guns and howling mobs,—and became sensible
of a hoarse shouting above me. I rubbed my eyes and lay
listening to the noise, doubtful for a little while of my
whereabouts. Then came a sudden pattering of bare feet,
the sound of heavy objects being thrown about, a violent
creaking and the rattling of chains. I heard the swish of the
water as the ship was suddenly brought round, and a
foamy yellow-green wave flew across the little round
window and left it streaming. I jumped into my clothes
and went on deck.
As I came up the ladder I saw against the flushed sky—
for the sun was just rising—the broad back and red hair of
the captain, and over his shoulder the puma spinning from
a tackle rigged on to the mizzen spanker-boom.
The poor brute seemed horribly scared, and crouched
in the bottom of its little cage.

29 of 209
‘Overboard with ‘em!’ bawled the captain. ‘Overboard
with ‘em! We’ll have a clean ship soon of the whole bilin’
of ‘em.’
He stood in my way, so that I had perforce to tap his
shoulder to come on deck. He came round with a start,
and staggered back a few paces to stare at me. It needed no
expert eye to tell that the man was still drunk.
‘Hullo!’ said he, stupidly; and then with a light coming
into his eyes, ‘Why, it’s Mister—Mister?’
‘Prendick,’ said I.
‘Pendick be damned!’ said he. ‘Shut-up,—that’s your
name. Mister Shut-up.’
It was no good answering the brute; but I certainly did
not expect his next move. He held out his hand to the
gangway by which Montgomery stood talking to a massive
grey-haired man in dirty-blue flannels, who had
apparently just come aboard.
‘That way, Mister Blasted Shut-up! that way!’ roared
the captain.
Montgomery and his companion turned as he spoke.
‘What do you mean?’ I said.
‘That way, Mister Blasted Shut-up,—that’s what I
mean! Overboard, Mister Shut-up,—and sharp! We’re

30 of 209
cleaning the ship out,— cleaning the whole blessed ship
out; and overboard you go!’
I stared at him dumfounded. Then it occurred to me
that it was exactly the thing I wanted. The lost prospect of
a journey as sole passenger with this quarrelsome sot was
not one to mourn over. I turned towards Montgomery.
‘Can’t have you,’ said Montgomery’s companion,
concisely.
‘You can’t have me!’ said I, aghast. He had the squarest
and most resolute face I ever set eyes upon.
‘Look here,’ I began, turning to the captain.
‘Overboard!’ said the captain. ‘This ship aint for beasts
and cannibals and worse than beasts, any more. Overboard
you go, Mister Shut-up. If they can’t have you, you goes
overboard. But, anyhow, you go—with your friends. I’ve
done with this blessed island for evermore, amen! I’ve had
enough of it.’
‘But, Montgomery,’ I appealed.
He distorted his lower lip, and nodded his head
hopelessly at the grey-haired man beside him, to indicate
his powerlessness to help me.
‘I’ll see to you, presently,’ said the captain.
Then began a curious three-cornered altercation.
Alternately I appealed to one and another of the three

31 of 209
men,— first to the grey-haired man to let me land, and
then to the drunken captain to keep me aboard. I even
bawled entreaties to the sailors. Montgomery said never a
word, only shook his head. ‘You’re going overboard, I tell
you,’ was the captain’s refrain. ‘Law be damned! I’m king
here.’ At last I must confess my voice suddenly broke in
the middle of a vigorous threat. I felt a gust of hysterical
petulance, and went aft and stared dismally at nothing.
Meanwhile the sailors progressed rapidly with the task
of unshipping the packages and caged animals. A large
launch, with two standing lugs, lay under the lea of the
schooner; and into this the strange assortment of goods
were swung. I did not then see the hands from the island
that were receiving the packages, for the hull of the launch
was hidden from me by the side of the schooner. Neither
Montgomery nor his companion took the slightest notice
of me, but busied themselves in assisting and directing the
four or five sailors who were unloading the goods. The
captain went forward interfering rather than assisting. I
was alternately despairful and desperate. Once or twice as I
stood waiting there for things to accomplish themselves, I
could not resist an impulse to laugh at my miserable
quandary. I felt all the wretcheder for the lack of a
breakfast. Hunger and a lack of blood-corpuscles take all

32 of 209
the manhood from a man. I perceived pretty clearly that I
had not the stamina either to resist what the captain chose
to do to expel me, or to force myself upon Montgomery
and his companion. So I waited passively upon fate; and
the work of transferring Montgomery’s possessions to the
launch went on as if I did not exist.
Presently that work was finished, and then came a
struggle. I was hauled, resisting weakly enough, to the
gangway. Even then I noticed the oddness of the brown
faces of the men who were with Montgomery in the
launch; but the launch was now fully laden, and was
shoved off hastily. A broadening gap of green water
appeared under me, and I pushed back with all my
strength to avoid falling headlong. The hands in the
launch shouted derisively, and I heard Montgomery curse
at them; and then the captain, the mate, and one of the
seamen helping him, ran me aft towards the stern.
The dingey of the ‘Lady Vain’ had been towing
behind; it was half full of water, had no oars, and was
quite unvictualled. I refused to go aboard her, and flung
myself full length on the deck. In the end, they swung me
into her by a rope (for they had no stern ladder), and then
they cut me adrift. I drifted slowly from the schooner. In a
kind of stupor I watched all hands take to the rigging, and

33 of 209
slowly but surely she came round to the wind; the sails
fluttered, and then bellied out as the wind came into
them. I stared at her weather-beaten side heeling steeply
towards me; and then she passed out of my range of view.
I did not turn my head to follow her. At first I could
scarcely believe what had happened. I crouched in the
bottom of the dingey, stunned, and staring blankly at the
vacant, oily sea. Then I realized that I was in that little hell
of mine again, now half swamped; and looking back over
the gunwale, I saw the schooner standing away from me,
with the red-haired captain mocking at me over the
taffrail, and turning towards the island saw the launch
growing smaller as she approached the beach.
Abruptly the cruelty of this desertion became clear to
me. I had no means of reaching the land unless I should
chance to drift there. I was still weak, you must
remember, from my exposure in the boat; I was empty
and very faint, or I should have had more heart. But as it
was I suddenly began to sob and weep, as I had never
done since I was a little child. The tears ran down my face.
In a passion of despair I struck with my fists at the water in
the bottom of the boat, and kicked savagely at the
gunwale. I prayed aloud for God to let me die.

34 of 209
VI. THE EVIL-LOOKING BOATMEN.
BUT the islanders, seeing that I was really adrift, took
pity on me. I drifted very slowly to the eastward,
approaching the island slantingly; and presently I saw, with
hysterical relief, the launch come round and return
towards me. She was heavily laden, and I could make out
as she drew nearer Montgomery’s white-haired, broadshouldered
companion sitting cramped up with the dogs
and several packing-cases in the stern sheets. This
individual stared fixedly at me without moving or
speaking. The black-faced cripple was glaring at me as
fixedly in the bows near the puma. There were three
other men besides,—three strange brutish-looking fellows,
at whom the staghounds were snarling savagely.
Montgomery, who was steering, brought the boat by me,
and rising, caught and fastened my painter to the tiller to
tow me, for there was no room aboard.
I had recovered from my hysterical phase by this time
and answered his hail, as he approached, bravely enough. I
told him the dingey was nearly swamped, and he reached
me a piggin. I was jerked back as the rope tightened
between the boats. For some time I was busy baling.

35 of 209
It was not until I had got the water under (for the
water in the dingey had been shipped; the boat was
perfectly sound) that I had leisure to look at the people in
the launch again.
The white-haired man I found was still regarding me
steadfastly, but with an expression, as I now fancied, of
some perplexity. When my eyes met his, he looked down
at the staghound that sat between his knees. He was a
powerfully-built man, as I have said, with a fine forehead
and rather heavy features; but his eyes had that odd
drooping of the skin above the lids which often comes
with advancing years, and the fall of his heavy mouth at
the corners gave him an expression of pugnacious
resolution. He talked to Montgomery in a tone too low
for me to hear.
From him my eyes travelled to his three men; and a
strange crew they were. I saw only their faces, yet there
was something in their faces— I knew not what—that
gave me a queer spasm of disgust. I looked steadily at
them, and the impression did not pass, though I failed to
see what had occasioned it. They seemed to me then to be
brown men; but their limbs were oddly swathed in some
thin, dirty, white stuff down even to the fingers and feet: I
have never seen men so wrapped up before, and women

36 of 209
so only in the East. They wore turbans too, and
thereunder peered out their elfin faces at me,—faces with
protruding lower-jaws and bright eyes. They had lank
black hair, almost like horsehair, and seemed as they sat to
exceed in stature any race of men I have seen. The whitehaired
man, who I knew was a good six feet in height, sat
a head below any one of the three. I found afterwards that
really none were taller than myself; but their bodies were
abnormally long, and the thigh-part of the leg short and
curiously twisted. At any rate, they were an amazingly
ugly gang, and over the heads of them under the forward
lug peered the black face of the man whose eyes were
luminous in the dark. As I stared at them, they met my
gaze; and then first one and then another turned away
from my direct stare, and looked at me in an odd, furtive
manner. It occurred to me that I was perhaps annoying
them, and I turned my attention to the island we were
approaching.
It was low, and covered with thick vegetation,—chiefly
a kind of palm, that was new to me. From one point a
thin white thread of vapour rose slantingly to an immense
height, and then frayed out like a down feather. We were
now within the embrace of a broad bay flanked on either
hand by a low promontory. The beach was of dull-grey

37 of 209
sand, and sloped steeply up to a ridge, perhaps sixty or
seventy feet above the sea-level, and irregularly set with
trees and undergrowth. Half way up was a square
enclosure of some greyish stone, which I found
subsequently was built partly of coral and partly of
pumiceous lava. Two thatched roofs peeped from within
this enclosure. A man stood awaiting us at the water’s
edge. I fancied while we were still far off that I saw some
other and very grotesque-looking creatures scuttle into the
bushes upon the slope; but I saw nothing of these as we
drew nearer. This man was of a moderate size, and with a
black negroid face. He had a large, almost lipless, mouth,
extraordinary lank arms, long thin feet, and bow-legs, and
stood with his heavy face thrust forward staring at us. He
was dressed like Montgomery and his white-haired
companion, in jacket and trousers of blue serge. As we
came still nearer, this individual began to run to and fro on
the beach, making the most grotesque movements.
At a word of command from Montgomery, the four
men in the launch sprang up, and with singularly awkward
gestures struck the lugs. Montgomery steered us round and
into a narrow little dock excavated in the beach. Then the
man on the beach hastened towards us. This dock, as I call
it, was really a mere ditch just long enough at this phase of

38 of 209
the tide to take the longboat. I heard the bows ground in
the sand, staved the dingey off the rudder of the big boat
with my piggin, and freeing the painter, landed. The three
muffled men, with the clumsiest movements, scrambled
out upon the sand, and forthwith set to landing the cargo,
assisted by the man on the beach. I was struck especially
by the curious movements of the legs of the three swathed
and bandaged boatmen,— not stiff they were, but
distorted in some odd way, almost as if they were jointed
in the wrong place. The dogs were still snarling, and
strained at their chains after these men, as the white-haired
man landed with them. The three big fellows spoke to one
another in odd guttural tones, and the man who had
waited for us on the beach began chattering to them
excitedly—a foreign language, as I fancied—as they laid
hands on some bales piled near the stern. Somewhere I
had heard such a voice before, and I could not think
where. The white-haired man stood, holding in a tumult
of six dogs, and bawling orders over their din.
Montgomery, having unshipped the rudder, landed
likewise, and all set to work at unloading. I was too faint,
what with my long fast and the sun beating down on my
bare head, to offer any assistance.

39 of 209
Presently the white-haired man seemed to recollect my
presence, and came up to me.
‘You look,’ said he, ‘as though you had scarcely
breakfasted.’ His little eyes were a brilliant black under his
heavy brows. ‘I must apologise for that. Now you are our
guest, we must make you comfortable,—though you are
uninvited, you know.’ He looked keenly into my face.
‘Montgomery says you are an educated man, Mr.
Prendick; says you know something of science. May I ask
what that signifies?’
I told him I had spent some years at the Royal College
of Science, and had done some researches in biology
under Huxley. He raised his eyebrows slightly at that.
‘That alters the case a little, Mr. Prendick,’ he said,
with a trifle more respect in his manner. ‘As it happens,
we are biologists here. This is a biological station—of a
sort.’ His eye rested on the men in white who were busily
hauling the puma, on rollers, towards the walled yard. ‘I
and Montgomery, at least,’ he added. Then, ‘When you
will be able to get away, I can’t say. We’re off the track to
anywhere. We see a ship once in a twelve-month or so.’
He left me abruptly, and went up the beach past this
group, and I think entered the enclosure. The other two
men were with Montgomery, erecting a pile of smaller
eBook brought to you by


40 of 209
packages on a low-wheeled truck. The llama was still on
the launch with the rabbit hutches; the staghounds were
still lashed to the thwarts. The pile of things completed, all
three men laid hold of the truck and began shoving the
ton-weight or so upon it after the puma. Presently
Montgomery left them, and coming back to me held out
his hand.
‘I’m glad,’ said he, ‘for my own part. That captain was
a silly ass. He’d have made things lively for you.’
‘lt was you,’ said I, ‘that saved me again".
‘That depends. You’ll find this island an infernally rum
place, I promise you. I’d watch my goings carefully, if I
were you. He—’ He hesitated, and seemed to alter his
mind about what was on his lips. ‘I wish you’d help me
with these rabbits,’ he said.
His procedure with the rabbits was singular. I waded in
with him, and helped him lug one of the hutches ashore.
No sooner was that done than he opened the door of it,
and tilting the thing on one end turned its living contents
out on the ground. They fell in a struggling heap one on
the top of the other. He clapped his hands, and forthwith
they went off with that hopping run of theirs, fifteen or
twenty of them I should think, up the beach.

41 of 209
‘Increase and multiply, my friends,’ said Montgomery.
‘Replenish the island. Hitherto we’ve had a certain lack of
meat here.’
As I watched them disappearing, the white-haired man
returned with a brandy-flask and some biscuits.
‘Something to go on with, Prendick,’ said he, in a far
more familiar tone than before. I made no ado, but set to
work on the biscuits at once, while the white-haired man
helped Montgomery to release about a score more of the
rabbits. Three big hutches, however, went up to the house
with the puma. The brandy I did not touch, for I have
been an abstainer from my birth.

42 of 209
VII. ‘THE LOCKED DOOR.’
THE reader will perhaps understand that at first
everything was so strange about me, and my position was
the outcome of such unexpected adventures, that I had no
discernment of the relative strangeness of this or that
thing. I followed the llama up the beach, and was
overtaken by Montgomery, who asked me not to enter
the stone enclosure. I noticed then that the puma in its
cage and the pile of packages had been placed outside the
entrance to this quadrangle.
I turned and saw that the launch had now been
unloaded, run out again, and was being beached, and the
white-haired man was walking towards us. He addressed
Montgomery.
‘And now comes the problem of this uninvited guest.
What are we to do with him?’
‘He knows something of science,’ said Montgomery.
‘I’m itching to get to work again—with this new stuff,’
said the white-haired man, noddding towards the
enclosure. His eyes grew brighter.
‘I daresay you are,’ said Montgomery, in anything but a
cordial tone.

43 of 209
‘We can’t send him over there, and we can’t spare the
time to build him a new shanty; and we certainly can’t
take him into our confidence just yet.’
‘I’m in your hands,’ said I. I had no idea of what he
meant by ‘over there.’
‘I’ve been thinking of the same things,’ Montgomery
answered. ‘There’s my room with the outer door—‘
‘That’s it,’ said the elder man, promptly, looking at
Montgomery; and all three of us went towards the
enclosure. ‘I’m sorry to make a mystery, Mr. Prendick;
but you’ll remember you’re uninvited. Our little
establishment here contains a secret or so, is a kind of
Blue-Beard’s chamber, in fact. Nothing very dreadful,
really, to a sane man; but just now, as we don’t know
you—‘
‘Decidedly,’ said I, ‘I should be a fool to take offence at
any want of confidence.’
He twisted his heavy mouth into a faint smile—he was
one of those saturnine people who smile with the corners
of the mouth down,— and bowed his acknowledgment of
my complaisance. The main entrance to the enclosure we
passed; it was a heavy wooden gate, framed in iron and
locked, with the cargo of the launch piled outside it, and
at the corner we came to a small doorway I had not

44 of 209
previously observed. The white-haired man produced a
bundle of keys from the pocket of his greasy blue jacket,
opened this door, and entered. His keys, and the elaborate
locking-up of the place even while it was still under his
eye, struck me as peculiar. I followed him, and found
myself in a small apartment, plainly but not uncomfortably
furnished and with its inner door, which was slightly ajar,
opening into a paved courtyard. This inner door
Montgomery at once closed. A hammock was slung across
the darker corner of the room, and a small unglazed
window defended by an iron bar looked out towards the
sea.
This the white-haired man told me was to be my
apartment; and the inner door, which ‘for fear of
accidents,’ he said, he would lock on the other side, was
my limit inward. He called my attention to a convenient
deck-chair before the window, and to an array of old
books, chiefly, I found, surgical works and editions of the
Latin and Greek classics (languages I cannot read with any
comfort), on a shelf near the hammock. He left the room
by the outer door, as if to avoid opening the inner one
again.
‘We usually have our meals in here,’ said Montgomery,
and then, as if in doubt, went out after the other.

45 of 209
‘Moreau!’ I heard him call, and for the moment I do not
think I noticed. Then as I handled the books on the shelf
it came up in consciousness: Where had I heard the name
of Moreau before? I sat down before the window, took
out the biscuits that still remained to me, and ate them
with an excellent appetite. Moreau!
Through the window I saw one of those unaccountable
men in white, lugging a packing-case along the beach.
Presently the window-frame hid him. Then I heard a key
inserted and turned in the lock behind me. After a little
while I heard through the locked door the noise of the
staghounds, that had now been brought up from the
beach. They were not barking, but sniffing and growling
in a curious fashion. I could hear the rapid patter of their
feet, and Montgomery’s voice soothing them.
I was very much impressed by the elaborate secrecy of
these two men regarding the contents of the place, and for
some time I was thinking of that and of the unaccountable
familiarity of the name of Moreau; but so odd is the
human memory that I could not then recall that wellknown
name in its proper connection. From that my
thoughts went to the indefinable queerness of the
deformed man on the beach. I never saw such a gait, such
odd motions as he pulled at the box. I recalled that none

46 of 209
of these men had spoken to me, though most of them I
had found looking at me at one time or another in a
peculiarly furtive manner, quite unlike the frank stare of
your unsophisticated savage. Indeed, they had all seemed
remarkably taciturn, and when they did speak, endowed
with very uncanny voices. What was wrong with them?
Then I recalled the eyes of Montgomery’s ungainly
attendant.
Just as I was thinking of him he came in. He was now
dressed in white, and carried a little tray with some coffee
and boiled vegetables thereon. I could hardly repress a
shuddering recoil as he came, bending amiably, and placed
the tray before me on the table. Then astonishment
paralysed me. Under his stringy black locks I saw his ear; it
jumped upon me suddenly close to my face. The man had
pointed ears, covered with a fine brown fur!
‘Your breakfast, sair,’ he said.
I stared at his face without attempting to answer him.
He turned and went towards the door, regarding me oddly
over his shoulder. I followed him out with my eyes; and as
I did so, by some odd trick of unconscious cerebration,
there came surging into my head the phrase, ‘The Moreau
Hollows’—was it? ‘The Moreau—’ Ah! It sent my
memory back ten years. ‘The Moreau Horrors!’ The

47 of 209
phrase drifted loose in my mind for a moment, and then I
saw it in red lettering on a little buff-coloured pamphlet,
to read which made one shiver and creep. Then I
remembered distinctly all about it. That long-forgotten
pamphlet came back with startling vividness to my mind. I
had been a mere lad then, and Moreau was, I suppose,
about fifty,— a prominent and masterful physiologist,
well-known in scientific circles for his extraordinary
imagination and his brutal directness in discussion.
Was this the same Moreau? He had published some
very astonishing facts in connection with the transfusion of
blood, and in addition was known to be doing valuable
work on morbid growths. Then suddenly his career was
closed. He had to leave England. A journalist obtained
access to his laboratory in the capacity of laboratoryassistant,
with the deliberate intention of making
sensational exposures; and by the help of a shocking
accident (if it was an accident), his gruesome pamphlet
became notorious. On the day of its publication a
wretched dog, flayed and otherwise mutilated, escaped
from Moreau’s house. It was in the silly season, and a
prominent editor, a cousin of the temporary laboratoryassistant,
appealed to the conscience of the nation. It was
not the first time that conscience has turned against the

48 of 209
methods of research. The doctor was simply howled out
of the country. It may be that he deserved to be; but I still
think that the tepid support of his fellow-investigators and
his desertion by the great body of scientific workers was a
shameful thing. Yet some of his experiments, by the
journalist’s account, were wantonly cruel. He might
perhaps have purchased his social peace by abandoning his
investigations; but he apparently preferred the latter, as
most men would who have once fallen under the
overmastering spell of research. He was unmarried, and
had indeed nothing but his own interest to consider.
I felt convinced that this must be the same man.
Everything pointed to it. It dawned upon me to what end
the puma and the other animals— which had now been
brought with other luggage into the enclosure behind the
house—were destined; and a curious faint odour, the
halitus of something familiar, an odour that had been in
the background of my consciousness hitherto, suddenly
came forward into the forefront of my thoughts. It was the
antiseptic odour of the dissecting-room. I heard the puma
growling through the wall, and one of the dogs yelped as
though it had been struck.
Yet surely, and especially to another scientific man,
there was nothing so horrible in vivisection as to account

49 of 209
for this secrecy; and by some odd leap in my thoughts the
pointed ears and luminous eyes of Montgomery’s
attendant came back again before me with the sharpest
definition. I stared before me out at the green sea, frothing
under a freshening breeze, and let these and other strange
memories of the last few days chase one another through
my mind.
What could it all mean? A locked enclosure on a lonely
island, a notorious vivisector, and these crippled and
distorted men?

50 of 209
VIII. THE CRYING OF THE PUMA.
MONTGOMERY interrupted my tangle of
mystification and suspicion about one o’clock, and his
grotesque attendant followed him with a tray bearing
bread, some herbs and other eatables, a flask of whiskey, a
jug of water, and three glasses and knives. I glanced
askance at this strange creature, and found him watching
me with his queer, restless eyes. Montgomery said he
would lunch with me, but that Moreau was too
preoccupied with some work to come.
‘Moreau!’ said I. ‘I know that name.’
‘The devil you do!’ said he. ‘What an ass I was to
mention it to you! I might have thought. Anyhow, it will
give you an inkling of our—mysteries. Whiskey?’
‘No, thanks; I’m an abstainer.’
‘I wish I’d been. But it’s no use locking the door after
the steed is stolen. It was that infernal stuff which led to
my coming here,—that, and a foggy night. I thought
myself in luck at the time, when Moreau offered to get me
off. It’s queer—‘
‘Montgomery,’ said I, suddenly, as the outer door
closed, ‘why has your man pointed ears?’

51 of 209
‘Damn!’ he said, over his first mouthful of food. He
stared at me for a moment, and then repeated, ‘Pointed
ears?’
‘Little points to them,’ said I, as calmly as possible, with
a catch in my breath; ‘and a fine black fur at the edges?’
He helped himself to whiskey and water with great
deliberation. ‘I was under the impression—that his hair
covered his ears.’
‘I saw them as he stooped by me to put that coffee you
sent to me on the table. And his eyes shine in the dark.’
By this time Montgomery had recovered from the
surprise of my question. ‘I always thought,’ he said
deliberately, with a certain accentuation of his flavouring
of lisp, ‘that there was something the matter with his ears,
from the way he covered them. What were they like?’
I was persuaded from his manner that this ignorance
was a pretence. Still, I could hardly tell the man that I
thought him a liar. ‘Pointed,’ I said; ‘rather small and
furry,—distinctly furry. But the whole man is one of the
strangest beings I ever set eyes on.’
A sharp, hoarse cry of animal pain came from the
enclosure behind us. Its depth and volume testified to the
puma. I saw Montgomery wince.
‘Yes?’ he said.
eBook brought to you by


52 of 209
‘Where did you pick up the creature?’
‘San Francisco. He’s an ugly brute, I admit. Halfwitted,
you know. Can’t remember where he came from.
But I’m used to him, you know. We both are. How does
he strike you?’
‘He’s unnatural,’ I said. ‘There’s something about
him— don’t think me fanciful, but it gives me a nasty little
sensation, a tightening of my muscles, when he comes
near me. It’s a touch— of the diabolical, in fact.’
Montgomery had stopped eating while I told him this.
‘Rum!’ he said. ‘I can’t see it.’ He resumed his meal. ‘I
had no idea of it,’ he said, and masticated. ‘The crew of
the schooner must have felt it the same. Made a dead set at
the poor devil. You saw the captain?’
Suddenly the puma howled again, this time more
painfully. Montgomery swore under his breath. I had half
a mind to attack him about the men on the beach. Then
the poor brute within gave vent to a series of short, sharp
cries.
‘Your men on the beach,’ said I; ‘what race are they?’
‘Excellent fellows, aren’t they?’ said he,
absentmindedly, knitting his brows as the animal yelled
out sharply.
