The Metamorphosis
------------------------------------------------------------------

I
One morning, as Gregor Samsa was waking up from
anxious dreams, he discovered that in bed he had been
changed into a monstrous verminous bug. He lay on his
armour-hard back and saw, as he lifted his head up a little,
his brown, arched abdomen divided up into rigid bowlike
sections. From this height the blanket, just about
ready to slide off completely, could hardly stay in place.
His numerous legs, pitifully thin in comparison to the rest
of his circumference, flickered helplessly before his eyes.
‘What’s happened to me,’ he thought. It was no dream.
His room, a proper room for a human being, only
somewhat too small, lay quietly between the four wellknown
walls. Above the table, on which an unpacked
collection of sample cloth goods was spread out (Samsa
was a traveling salesman) hung the picture which he had
cut out of an illustrated magazine a little while ago and set
in a pretty gilt frame. It was a picture of a woman with a
fur hat and a fur boa. She sat erect there, lifting up in the
direction of the viewer a solid fur muff into which her
entire forearm disappeared.
Gregor’s glance then turned to the window. The dreary
weather (the rain drops were falling audibly down on the
eBook brought to you by


4 of 96
metal window ledge) made him quite melancholy. ‘Why
don’t I keep sleeping for a little while longer and forget all
this foolishness,’ he thought. But this was entirely
impractical, for he was used to sleeping on his right side,
and in his present state he couldn’t get himself into this
position. No matter how hard he threw himself onto his
right side, he always rolled again onto his back. He must
have tried it a hundred times, closing his eyes, so that he
would not have to see the wriggling legs, and gave up
only when he began to feel a light, dull pain in his side
which he had never felt before.
‘O God,’ he thought, ‘what a demanding job I’ve
chosen! Day in, day out on the road. The stresses of trade
are much greater than the work going on at head office,
and, in addition to that, I have to deal with the problems
of traveling, the worries about train connections, irregular
bad food, temporary and constantly changing human
relationships which never come from the heart. To hell
with it all!’ He felt a slight itching on the top of his
abdomen. He slowly pushed himself on his back closer to
the bed post so that he could lift his head more easily,
found the itchy part, which was entirely covered with
small white spots (he did not know what to make of
them), and wanted to feel the place with a leg. But he

5 of 96
retracted it immediately, for the contact felt like a cold
shower all over him.
He slid back again into his earlier position. ‘This
getting up early,’ he thought, ‘makes a man quite idiotic.
A man must have his sleep. Other traveling salesmen live
like harem women. For instance, when I come back to the
inn during the course of the morning to write up the
necessary orders, these gentlemen are just sitting down to
breakfast. If I were to try that with my boss, I’d be thrown
out on the spot. Still, who knows whether that mightn’t
be really good for me. If I didn’t hold back for my parents’
sake, I would’ve quit ages ago. I would’ve gone to the
boss and told him just what I think from the bottom of my
heart. He would’ve fallen right off his desk! How weird it
is to sit up at the desk and talk down to the employee
from way up there. The boss has trouble hearing, so the
employee has to step up quite close to him. Anyway, I
haven’t completely given up that hope yet. Once I’ve got
together the money to pay off the parents’ debt to him—
that should take another five or six years—I’ll do it for
sure. Then I’ll make the big break. In any case, right now
I have to get up. My train leaves at five o’clock.’
And he looked over at the alarm clock ticking away by
the chest of drawers. ‘Good God,’ he thought. It was half

6 of 96
past six, and the hands were going quietly on. It was past
the half hour, already nearly quarter to. Could the alarm
have failed to ring? One saw from the bed that it was
properly set for four o’clock. Certainly it had rung. Yes,
but was it possible to sleep through this noise that made
the furniture shake? Now, it’s true he’d not slept quietly,
but evidently he’d slept all the more deeply. Still, what
should he do now? The next train left at seven o’clock.
To catch that one, he would have to go in a mad rush.
The sample collection wasn’t packed up yet, and he really
didn’t feel particularly fresh and active. And even if he
caught the train, there was no avoiding a blow up with the
boss, because the firm’s errand boy would’ve waited for
the five o’clock train and reported the news of his absence
long ago. He was the boss’s minion, without backbone or
intelligence. Well then, what if he reported in sick? But
that would be extremely embarrassing and suspicious,
because during his five years’ service Gregor hadn’t been
sick even once. The boss would certainly come with the
doctor from the health insurance company and would
reproach his parents for their lazy son and cut short all
objections with the insurance doctor’s comments; for him
everyone was completely healthy but really lazy about
work. And besides, would the doctor in this case be totally

7 of 96
wrong? Apart from a really excessive drowsiness after the
long sleep, Gregor in fact felt quite well and even had a
really strong appetite.
As he was thinking all this over in the greatest haste,
without being able to make the decision to get out of bed
(the alarm clock was indicating exactly quarter to seven)
there was a cautious knock on the door by the head of the
bed.
‘Gregor,’ a voice called (it was his mother!) ‘it’s quarter
to seven. Don’t you want to be on your way?’ The soft
voice! Gregor was startled when he heard his voice
answering. It was clearly and unmistakably his earlier
voice, but in it was intermingled, as if from below, an
irrepressibly painful squeaking which left the words
positively distinct only in the first moment and distorted
them in the reverberation, so that one didn’t know if one
had heard correctly. Gregor wanted to answer in detail
and explain everything, but in these circumstances he
confined himself to saying, ‘Yes, yes, thank you mother.
I’m getting up right away.’ Because of the wooden door
the change in Gregor’s voice was not really noticeable
outside, so his mother calmed down with this explanation
and shuffled off. However, as a result of the short
conversation the other family members became aware of

8 of 96
the fact that Gregor was unexpectedly still at home, and
already his father was knocking on one side door, weakly
but with his fist. ‘Gregor, Gregor,’ he called out, ‘what’s
going on?’ And after a short while he urged him on again
in a deeper voice. ‘Gregor!’ Gregor!’ At the other side
door, however, his sister knocked lightly. ‘Gregor? Are
you all right? Do you need anything?’ Gregor directed
answers in both directions, ‘I’ll be ready right away.’ He
made an effort with the most careful articulation and by
inserting long pauses between the individual words to
remove everything remarkable from his voice. His father
turned back to his breakfast. However, the sister
whispered, ‘Gregor, open the door, I beg you.’ Gregor
had no intention of opening the door, but congratulated
himself on his precaution, acquired from traveling, of
locking all doors during the night, even at home.
First he wanted to stand up quietly and undisturbed, get
dressed, above all have breakfast, and only then consider
further action, for (he noticed this clearly) by thinking
things over in bed he would not reach a reasonable
conclusion. He remembered that he had already often felt
a light pain or other in bed, perhaps the result of an
awkward lying position, which later turned out to be
purely imaginary when he stood up, and he was eager to

9 of 96
see how his present fantasies would gradually dissipate.
That the change in his voice was nothing other than the
onset of a real chill, an occupational illness of commercial
travelers, of that he had not the slightest doubt.
It was very easy to throw aside the blanket. He needed
only to push himself up a little, and it fell by itself. But to
continue was difficult, particularly because he was so
unusually wide. He needed arms and hands to push
himself upright. Instead of these, however, he had only
many small limbs which were incessantly moving with
very different motions and which, in addition, he was
unable to control. If he wanted to bend one of them, then
it was the first to extend itself, and if he finally succeeded
doing with this limb what he wanted, in the meantime all
the others, as if left free, moved around in an excessively
painful agitation. ‘But I must not stay in bed uselessly,’ said
Gregor to himself.
At first he wanted to get of the bed with the lower part
of his body, but this lower part (which he incidentally had
not yet looked at and which he also couldn’t picture
clearly) proved itself too difficult to move. The attempt
went so slowly. When, having become almost frantic, he
finally hurled himself forward with all his force and
without thinking, he chose his direction incorrectly, and

10 of 96
he hit the lower bedpost hard. The violent pain he felt
revealed to him that the lower part of his body was at the
moment probably the most sensitive.
Thus, he tried to get his upper body out of the bed first
and turned his head carefully toward the edge of the bed.
He managed to do this easily, and in spite of its width and
weight his body mass at last slowly followed the turning of
his head. But as he finally raised his head outside the bed
in the open air, he became anxious about moving forward
any further in this manner, for if he allowed himself
eventually to fall by this process, it would take a miracle to
prevent his head from getting injured. And at all costs he
must not lose consciousness right now. He preferred to
remain in bed.
However, after a similar effort, while he lay there again
sighing as before and once again saw his small limbs
fighting one another, if anything worse than before, and
didn’t see any chance of imposing quiet and order on this
arbitrary movement, he told himself again that he couldn’t
possibly remain in bed and that it might be the most
reasonable thing to sacrifice everything if there was even
the slightest hope of getting himself out of bed in the
process. At the same moment, however, he didn’t forget
to remind himself from time to time of the fact that calm

11 of 96
(indeed the calmest) reflection might be better than the
most confused decisions. At such moments, he directed his
gaze as precisely as he could toward the window, but
unfortunately there was little confident cheer to be had
from a glance at the morning mist, which concealed even
the other side of the narrow street. ‘It’s already seven
o’clock’ he told himself at the latest striking of the alarm
clock, ‘already seven o’clock and still such a fog.’ And for
a little while longer he lay quietly with weak breathing, as
if perhaps waiting for normal and natural conditions to reemerge
out of the complete stillness.
But then he said to himself, ‘Before it strikes a quarter
past seven, whatever happens I must be completely out of
bed. Besides, by then someone from the office will arrive
to inquire about me, because the office will open before
seven o’clock.’ And he made an effort then to rock his
entire body length out of the bed with a uniform motion.
If he let himself fall out of the bed in this way, his head,
which in the course of the fall he intended to lift up
sharply, would probably remain uninjured. His back
seemed to be hard; nothing would really happen to that as
a result of the fall. His greatest reservation was a worry
about the loud noise which the fall must create and which
presumably would arouse, if not fright, then at least

12 of 96
concern on the other side of all the doors. However, it
had to be tried.
As Gregor was in the process of lifting himself half out
of bed (the new method was more of a game than an
effort; he needed only to rock with a constant rhythm) it
struck him how easy all this would be if someone were to
come to his aid. Two strong people (he thought of his
father and the servant girl) would have been quite
sufficient. They would have only had to push their arms
under his arched back to get him out of the bed, to bend
down with their load, and then merely to exercise
patience and care that he completed the flip onto the
floor, where his diminutive legs would then, he hoped,
acquire a purpose. Now, quite apart from the fact that the
doors were locked, should he really call out for help? In
spite of all his distress, he was unable to suppress a smile at
this idea.
He had already got to the point where, with a stronger
rocking, he maintained his equilibrium with difficulty, and
very soon he would finally have to decide, for in five
minutes it would be a quarter past seven. Then there was a
ring at the door of the apartment. ‘That’s someone from
the office’ he told himself, and he almost froze while his
small limbs only danced around all the faster. For one

13 of 96
moment everything remained still. ‘They aren’t opening,’
Gregor said to himself, caught up in some absurd hope.
But of course then, as usual, the servant girl with her firm
tread went to the door and opened it. Gregor needed to
hear only the visitor’s first word of greeting to recognize
immediately who it was, the manager himself. Why was
Gregor the only one condemned to work in a firm where
at the slightest lapse someone immediately attracted the
greatest suspicion? Were all the employees then
collectively, one and all, scoundrels? Was there then
among them no truly devoted person who, if he failed to
use just a couple of hours in the morning for office work,
would become abnormal from pangs of conscience and
really be in no state to get out of bed? Was it really not
enough to let an apprentice make inquiries, if such
questioning was even necessary? Must the manager himself
come, and in the process must it be demonstrated to the
entire innocent family that the investigation of this
suspicious circumstance could only be entrusted to the
intelligence of the manager? And more as a consequence
of the excited state in which this idea put Gregor than as a
result of an actual decision, he swung himself with all his
might out of the bed. There was a loud thud, but not a
real crash. The fall was absorbed somewhat by the carpet

14 of 96
and, in addition, his back was more elastic than Gregor
had thought. For that reason the dull noise was not quite
so conspicuous. But he had not held his head up with
sufficient care and had hit it. He turned his head, irritated
and in pain, and rubbed it on the carpet.
‘Something has fallen in there,’ said the manager in the
next room on the left. Gregor tried to imagine to himself
whether anything similar to what was happening to him
today could have also happened at some point to the
manager. At least one had to concede the possibility of
such a thing. However, as if to give a rough answer to this
question, the manager now took a few determined steps in
the next room, with a squeak of his polished boots. From
the neighbouring room on the right the sister was
whispering to inform Gregor: ‘Gregor, the manager is
here.’ ‘I know,’ said Gregor to himself. But he did not
dare make his voice loud enough so that his sister could
hear.
‘Gregor,’ his father now said from the neighbouring
room on the left, ‘Mr. Manager has come and is asking
why you have not left on the early train. We don’t know
what we should tell him. Besides, he also wants to speak to
you personally. So please open the door. He will good
enough to forgive the mess in your room.’

15 of 96
In the middle of all this, the manager called out in a
friendly way, ‘Good morning, Mr. Samsa.’ ‘He is not
well,’ said his mother to the manager, while his father was
still talking at the door, ‘He is not well, believe me, Mr.
Manager. Otherwise how would Gregor miss a train! The
young man has nothing in his head except business. I’m
almost angry that he never goes out at night. Right now
he’s been in the city eight days, but he’s been at home
every evening. He sits there with us at the table and reads
the newspaper quietly or studies his travel schedules. It’s a
quite a diversion for him if he busies himself with
fretwork. For instance, he cut out a small frame over the
course of two or three evenings. You’d be amazed how
pretty it is. It’s hanging right inside the room. You’ll see it
immediately, as soon as Gregor opens the door. Anyway,
I’m happy that you’re here, Mr. Manager. By ourselves,
we would never have made Gregor open the door. He’s
so stubborn, and he’s certainly not well, although he
denied that this morning.’
‘I’m coming right away,’ said Gregor slowly and
deliberately and didn’t move, so as not to lose one word of
the conversation. ‘My dear lady, I cannot explain it to
myself in any other way,’ said the manager; ‘I hope it is
nothing serious. On the other hand, I must also say that
eBook brought to you by


16 of 96
we business people, luckily or unluckily, however one
looks at it, very often simply have to overcome a slight
indisposition for business reasons.’ ‘So can Mr. Manager
come in to see you now’ asked his father impatiently and
knocked once again on the door. ‘No,’ said Gregor. In the
neighbouring room on the left a painful stillness
descended. In the neighbouring room on the right the
sister began to sob.
Why didn’t his sister go to the others? She’d probably
just gotten up out of bed now and hadn’t even started to
get dressed yet. Then why was she crying? Because he
wasn’t getting up and wasn’t letting the manager in;
because he was in danger of losing his position, and
because then his boss would badger his parents once again
with the old demands? Those were probably unnecessary
worries right now. Gregor was still here and wasn’t
thinking at all about abandoning his family. At the
moment he was lying right there on the carpet, and no
one who knew about his condition would’ve seriously
demanded that he let the manager in. But Gregor
wouldn’t be casually dismissed right way because of this
small discourtesy, for which he would find an easy and
suitable excuse later on. It seemed to Gregor that it might
be far more reasonable to leave him in peace at the

17 of 96
moment, instead of disturbing him with crying and
conversation. But it was the very uncertainty which
distressed the others and excused their behaviour.
‘Mr. Samsa,’ the manager was now shouting, his voice
raised, ‘what’s the matter? You are barricading yourself in
your room, answer with only a yes and a no, are making
serious and unnecessary troubles for your parents, and
neglecting (I mention this only incidentally) your
commercial duties in a truly unheard of manner. I am
speaking here in the name of your parents and your
employer, and I am requesting you in all seriousness for an
immediate and clear explanation. I am amazed. I am
amazed. I thought I knew you as a calm, reasonable
person, and now you appear suddenly to want to start
parading around in weird moods. The Chief indicated to
me earlier this very day a possible explanation for your
neglect—it concerned the collection of cash entrusted to
you a short while ago—but in truth I almost gave him my
word of honour that this explanation could not be correct.
However, now I see here your unimaginable pig
headedness, and I am totally losing any desire to speak up
for you in the slightest. And your position is not at all the
most secure. Originally I intended to mention all this to
you privately, but since you are letting me waste my time

18 of 96
here uselessly, I don’t know why the matter shouldn’t
come to the attention of your parents. Your productivity
has also been very unsatisfactory recently. Of course, it’s
not the time of year to conduct exceptional business, we
recognize that, but a time of year for conducting no
business, there is no such thing at all, Mr. Samsa, and such
a thing must never be.’
‘But Mr. Manager,’ called Gregor, beside himself and
in his agitation forgetting everything else, ‘I’m opening the
door immediately, this very moment. A slight
indisposition, a dizzy spell, has prevented me from getting
up. I’m still lying in bed right now. But now I’m quite
refreshed once again. I’m in the midst of getting out of
bed. Just have patience for a short moment! Things are not
going so well as I thought. But things are all right. How
suddenly this can overcome someone! Just yesterday
evening everything was fine with me. My parents certainly
know that. Actually just yesterday evening I had a small
premonition. People must have seen that in me. Why
have I not reported that to the office! But people always
think that they’ll get over sickness without having to stay
at home. Mr. Manager! Take it easy on my parents! There
is really no basis for the criticisms which you are now
making against me, and really nobody has said a word to

19 of 96
me about that. Perhaps you have not read the latest orders
which I shipped. Besides, now I’m setting out on my trip
on the eight o’clock train; the few hours’ rest have made
me stronger. Mr. Manager, do not stay. I will be at the
office in person right away. Please have the goodness to
say that and to convey my respects to the Chief.’
While Gregor was quickly blurting all this out, hardly
aware of what he was saying, he had moved close to the
chest of drawers without effort, probably as a result of the
practice he had already had in bed, and now he was trying
to raise himself up on it. Actually, he wanted to open the
door; he really wanted to let himself be seen by and to
speak with the manager. He was keen to witness what the
others now asking after him would say at the sight of him.
If they were startled, then Gregor had no more
responsibility and could be calm. But if they accepted
everything quietly, then he would have no reason to get
excited and, if he got a move on, could really be at the
station around eight o’clock.
At first he slid down a few times from the smooth chest
of drawers. But at last he gave himself a final swing and
stood upright there. He was no longer at all aware of the
pains in his lower body, no matter how they might still
sting. Now he let himself fall against the back of a nearby

20 of 96
chair, on the edge of which he braced himself with his
thin limbs. By doing this he gained control over himself
and kept quiet, for he could now hear the manager.
‘Did you understood a single word?’ the manager asked
the parents, ‘Is he playing the fool with us?’ ‘For God’s
sake,’ cried the mother already in tears, ‘perhaps he’s very
ill and we’re upsetting him. Grete! Grete!’ she yelled at
that point. ‘Mother?’ called the sister from the other side.
They were making themselves understood through
Gregor’s room. ‘You must go to the doctor right away.
Gregor is sick. Hurry to the doctor. Have you heard
Gregor speak yet?’ ‘That was an animal’s voice,’ said the
manager, remarkably quietly in comparison to the
mother’s cries.
‘Anna! Anna!’ yelled the father through the hall into
the kitchen, clapping his hands, ‘fetch a locksmith right
away!’ The two young women were already running
through the hall with swishing skirts (how had his sister
dressed herself so quickly?) and yanked open the doors of
the apartment. One couldn’t hear the doors closing at all.
They probably had left them open, as is customary in an
apartment in which a huge misfortune has taken place.
However, Gregor had become much calmer. All right,
people did not understand his words any more, although

21 of 96
they seemed clear enough to him, clearer than previously,
perhaps because his ears had gotten used to them. But at
least people now thought that things were not all right
with him and were prepared to help him. The confidence
and assurance with which the first arrangements had been
carried out made him feel good. He felt himself included
once again in the circle of humanity and was expecting
from both the doctor and the locksmith, without
differentiating between them with any real precision,
splendid and surprising results. In order to get as clear a
voice as possible for the critical conversation which was
imminent, he coughed a little, and certainly took the
trouble to do this in a really subdued way, since it was
possible that even this noise sounded like something
different from a human cough. He no longer trusted
himself to decide any more. Meanwhile in the next room
it had become really quiet. Perhaps his parents were sitting
with the manager at the table and were whispering;
perhaps they were all leaning against the door and
listening.
Gregor pushed himself slowly towards the door, with
the help of the easy chair, let go of it there, threw himself
against the door, held himself upright against it (the balls
of his tiny limbs had a little sticky stuff on them), and

22 of 96
rested there momentarily from his exertion. Then he made
an effort to turn the key in the lock with his mouth.
Unfortunately it seemed that he had no real teeth. How
then was he to grab hold of the key? But to make up for
that his jaws were naturally very strong; with their help he
managed to get the key really moving, and he did not
notice that he was obviously inflicting some damage on
himself, for a brown fluid came out of his mouth, flowed
over the key, and dripped onto the floor.
‘Just listen for a moment,’ said the manager in the next
room, ‘he’s turning the key.’ For Gregor that was a great
encouragement. But they all should’ve called out to him,
including his father and mother, ‘Come on, Gregor,’ they
should’ve shouted, ‘keep going, keep working on the
lock.’ Imagining that all his efforts were being followed
with suspense, he bit down frantically on the key with all
the force he could muster. As the key turned more, he
danced around the lock. Now he was holding himself
upright only with his mouth, and he had to hang onto the
key or then press it down again with the whole weight of
his body, as necessary. The quite distinct click of the lock
as it finally snapped really woke Gregor up. Breathing
heavily he said to himself, ‘So I didn’t need the locksmith,’

23 of 96
and he set his head against the door handle to open the
door completely.
Because he had to open the door in this way, it was
already open very wide without him yet being really
visible. He first had to turn himself slowly around the edge
of the door, very carefully, of course, if he did not want to
fall awkwardly on his back right at the entrance into the
room. He was still preoccupied with this difficult
movement and had no time to pay attention to anything
else, when he heard the manager exclaim a loud ‘Oh!’ (it
sounded like the wind whistling), and now he saw him,
nearest to the door, pressing his hand against his open
mouth and moving slowly back, as if an invisible constant
force was pushing him away. His mother (in spite of the
presence of the manager she was standing here with her
hair sticking up on end, still a mess from the night) with
her hands clasped was looking at his father; she then went
two steps towards Gregor and collapsed right in the
middle of her skirts spreading out all around her, her face
sunk on her breast, completely concealed. His father
clenched his fist with a hostile expression, as if he wished
to push Gregor back into his room, then looked
uncertainly around the living room, covered his eyes with
his hands, and cried so that his mighty breast shook.

24 of 96
At this point Gregor did not take one step into the
room, but leaned his body from the inside against the
firmly bolted wing of the door, so that only half his body
was visible, as well as his head, titled sideways, with which
he peeped over at the others. Meanwhile it had become
much brighter. Standing out clearly from the other side of
the street was a part of the endless gray-black house
situated opposite (it was a hospital) with its severe regular
windows breaking up the facade. The rain was still coming
down, but only in large individual drops visibly and firmly
thrown down one by one onto the ground. The breakfast
dishes were standing piled around on the table, because for
his father breakfast was the most important meal time in
the day, which he prolonged for hours by reading various
newspapers. Directly across on the opposite wall hung a
photograph of Gregor from the time of his military
service; it was a picture of him as a lieutenant, as he,
smiling and worry free, with his hand on his sword,
demanded respect for his bearing and uniform. The door
to the hall was ajar, and since the door to the apartment
was also open, one saw out into the landing of the
apartment and the start of the staircase going down.
‘Now,’ said Gregor, well aware that he was the only
one who had kept his composure. ‘I’ll get dressed right

25 of 96
away, pack up the collection of samples, and set off. You’ll
allow me to set out on my way, will you not? You see,
Mr. Manager, I am not pig-headed, and I am happy to
work. Traveling is exhausting, but I couldn’t live without
it. Where are you going, Mr. Manager? To the office?
Really? Will you report everything truthfully? A person
can be incapable of work momentarily, but that is
precisely the best time to remember the earlier
achievements and to consider that later, after the obstacles
have been shoved aside, the person will work all the more
keenly and intensely. I am really so indebted to Mr.
Chief—you know that perfectly well. On the other hand,
I am concerned about my parents and my sister. I’m in a
fix, but I’ll work myself out of it again. Don’t make things
more difficult for me than they already are. Speak up on
my behalf in the office! People don’t like traveling
salesmen. I know that. People think they earn pots of
money and thus lead a fine life. People don’t even have
any special reason to think through this judgment more
clearly. But you, Mr. Manager, you have a better
perspective on the interconnections than the other people,
even, I tell you in total confidence, a better perspective
than Mr. Chairman himself, who in his capacity as the
employer may let his judgment make casual mistakes at the

26 of 96
expense of an employee. You also know well enough that
the traveling salesman who is outside the office almost the
entire year can become so easily a victim of gossip,
coincidences, and groundless complaints, against which it’s
impossible for him to defend himself, since for the most
part he doesn’t hear about them at all and only then when
he’s exhausted after finishing a trip, and gets to feel in his
own body at home the nasty consequences, which can’t be
thoroughly explored back to their origins. Mr. Manager,
don’t leave without speaking a word telling me that you’ll
at least concede that I’m a little in the right!’
But at Gregor’s first words the manager had already
turned away, and now he looked back at Gregor over his
twitching shoulders with pursed lips. During Gregor’s
speech he was not still for a moment, but was moving
away towards the door, without taking his eyes off
Gregor, but really gradually, as if there was a secret ban on
leaving the room. He was already in the hall, and after the
sudden movement with which he finally pulled his foot
out of the living room, one could have believed that he
had just burned the sole of his foot. In the hall, however,
he stretched out his right hand away from his body
towards the staircase, as if some truly supernatural relief
was waiting for him there.

27 of 96
Gregor realized that he must not under any
circumstances allow the manager to go away in this frame
of mind, especially if his position in the firm was not to be
placed in the greatest danger. His parents did not
understand all this very well. Over the long years, they
had developed the conviction that Gregor was set up for
life in his firm and, in addition, they had so much to do
nowadays with their present troubles that all foresight was
foreign to them. But Gregor had this foresight. The
manager must be held back, calmed down, convinced, and
finally won over. The future of Gregor and his family
really depended on it! If only the sister had been there!
She was clever. She had already cried while Gregor was
still lying quietly on his back. And the manager, this friend
of the ladies, would certainly let himself be guided by her.
She would have closed the door to the apartment and
talked him out of his fright in the hall. But the sister was
not even there. Gregor must deal with it himself.
Without thinking that as yet he didn’t know anything
about his present ability to move and without thinking
that his speech possibly (indeed probably) had once again
not been understood, he left the wing of the door, pushed
himself through the opening, and wanted to go over to
the manager, who was already holding tight onto the
eBook brought to you by


28 of 96
handrail with both hands on the landing in a ridiculous
way. But as he looked for something to hold onto, with a
small scream Gregor immediately fell down onto his
numerous little legs. Scarcely had this happened, when he
felt for the first time that morning a general physical well
being. The small limbs had firm floor under them; they
obeyed perfectly, as he noticed to his joy, and strove to
carry him forward in the direction he wanted. Right away
he believed that the final amelioration of all his suffering
was immediately at hand. But at the very moment when
he lay on the floor rocking in a restrained manner quite
close and directly across from his mother (apparently
totally sunk into herself) she suddenly sprang right up with
her arms spread far apart and her fingers extended and
cried out, ‘Help, for God’s sake, help!’ She held her head
bowed down, as if she wanted to view Gregor better, but
ran senselessly back, contradicting that gesture, forgetting
that behind her stood the table with all the dishes on it.
When she reached the table, she sat down heavily on it, as
if absent-mindedly, and did not appear to notice at all that
next to her coffee was pouring out onto the carpet in a full
stream from the large overturned container.
‘Mother, mother,’ said Gregor quietly, and looked over
towards her. The manager momentarily had disappeared

29 of 96
completely from his mind; by contrast, at the sight of the
flowing coffee he couldn’t stop himself snapping his jaws
in the air a few times . At that his mother screamed all
over again, hurried from the table, and collapsed into the
arms of his father, who was rushing towards her. But
Gregor had no time right now for his parents: the manager
was already on the staircase. His chin level with the
banister, the manager looked back for the last time.
Gregor took an initial movement to catch up to him if
possible. But the manager must have suspected something,
because he made a leap down over a few stairs and
disappeared, still shouting ‘Huh!’ The sound echoed
throughout the entire stairwell.
Now, unfortunately this flight of the manager also
seemed completely to bewilder his father, who earlier had
been relatively calm, for instead of running after the
manager himself or at least not hindering Gregor from his
pursuit, with his right hand he grabbed hold of the
manager’s cane, which he had left behind with his hat and
overcoat on a chair. With his left hand, his father picked
up a large newspaper from the table and, stamping his feet
on the floor, he set out to drive Gregor back into his
room by waving the cane and the newspaper. No request
of Gregor’s was of any use; no request would even be

30 of 96
understood. No matter how willing he was to turn his
head respectfully, his father just stomped all the harder
with his feet.
Across the room from him his mother had pulled open
a window, in spite of the cool weather, and leaning out
with her hands on her cheeks, she pushed her face far
outside the window. Between the alley and the stair well a
strong draught came up, the curtains on the window flew
around, the newspapers on the table swished, and
individual sheets fluttered down over the floor. The father
relentlessly pressed forward pushing out sibilants, like a
wild man. Now, Gregor had no practice at all in going
backwards; it was really going very slowly. If Gregor only
had been allowed to turn himself around, he would have
been in his room right away, but he was afraid to make his
father impatient by the time-consuming process of turning
around, and each moment he faced the threat of a mortal
blow on his back or his head from the cane in his father’s
hand. Finally Gregor had no other option, for he noticed
with horror that he did not understand yet how to
maintain his direction going backwards. And so he began,
amid constantly anxious sideways glances in his father’s
direction, to turn himself around as quickly as possible
(although in truth this was only very slowly). Perhaps his

31 of 96
father noticed his good intentions, for he did not disrupt
Gregor in this motion, but with the tip of the cane from a
distance he even directed here and there Gregor’s rotating
movement.
If only there hadn’t been his father’s unbearable hissing!
Because of that Gregor totally lost his head. He was
already almost totally turned around, when, always with
this hissing in his ear, he just made a mistake and turned
himself back a little. But when he finally was successful in
getting his head in front of the door opening, it became
clear that his body was too wide to go through any
further. Naturally his father, in his present mental state,
had no idea of opening the other wing of the door a bit to
create a suitable passage for Gregor to get through. His
single fixed thought was that Gregor must get into his
room as quickly as possible. He would never have allowed
the elaborate preparations that Gregor required to orient
himself and thus perhaps get through the door. On the
contrary, as if there were no obstacle and with a peculiar
noise, he now drove Gregor forwards. Behind Gregor the
sound was at this point no longer like the voice of only a
single father. Now it was really no longer a joke, and
Gregor forced himself, come what might, into the door.
One side of his body was lifted up. He lay at an angle in

32 of 96
the door opening. His one flank was sore with the
scraping. On the white door ugly blotches were left. Soon
he was stuck fast and would have not been able to move
any more on his own. The tiny legs on one side hung
twitching in the air above, the ones on the other side were
pushed painfully into the floor. Then his father gave him
one really strong liberating push from behind, and he
scurried, bleeding severely, far into the interior of his
room. The door was slammed shut with the cane, and
finally it was quiet.

33 of 96
II
Gregor first woke up from his heavy swoon-like sleep
in the evening twilight. He would certainly have woken
up soon afterwards without any disturbance, for he felt
himself sufficiently rested and wide awake, although it
appeared to him as if a hurried step and a cautious closing
of the door to the hall had aroused him. The shine of the
electric streetlights lay pale here and there on the ceiling
and on the higher parts of the furniture, but underneath
around Gregor it was dark. He pushed himself slowly
toward the door, still groping awkwardly with his feelers,
which he now learned to value for the first time, to check
what was happening there. His left side seemed one single
long unpleasantly stretched scar, and he really had to
hobble on his two rows of legs. In addition, one small leg
had been seriously wounded in the course of the morning
incident (it was almost a miracle that only one had been
hurt) and dragged lifelessly behind.
By the door he first noticed what had really lured him
there: it was the smell of something to eat. For there stood
a bowl filled with sweetened milk, in which swam tiny
pieces of white bread. He almost laughed with joy, for he

34 of 96
now had a much greater hunger than in the morning, and
he immediately dipped his head almost up to and over his
eyes down into the milk. But he soon drew it back again
in disappointment, not just because it was difficult for him
to eat on account of his delicate left side (he could eat only
if his entire panting body worked in a coordinated way),
but also because the milk, which otherwise was his
favorite drink and which his sister had certainly placed
there for that reason, did not appeal to him at all. He
turned away from the bowl almost with aversion and crept
back into the middle of the room.
In the living room, as Gregor saw through the crack in
the door, the gas was lit, but where on other occasions at
this time of day the father was accustomed to read the
afternoon newspaper in a loud voice to his mother and
sometimes also to his sister, at the moment not a sound
was audible. Now, perhaps this reading aloud, about
which his sister always spoken and written to him, had
recently fallen out of their general routine. But it was so
still all around, in spite of the fact that the apartment was
certainly not empty. ‘What a quiet life the family leads’,
said Gregor to himself and, as he stared fixedly out in front
of him into the darkness, he felt a great pride that he had
been able to provide such a life in a beautiful apartment

35 of 96
like this for his parents and his sister. But how would
things go if now all tranquillity, all prosperity, all
contentment should come to a horrible end? In order not
to lose himself in such thoughts, Gregor preferred to set
himself moving and crawled up and down in his room.
Once during the long evening one side door and then
the other door was opened just a tiny crack and quickly
closed again. Someone presumably needed to come in but
had then thought better of it. Gregor immediately took up
a position by the living room door, determined to bring in
the hesitant visitor somehow or other or at least to find
out who it might be. But now the door was not opened
any more, and Gregor waited in vain. Earlier, when the
door had been barred, they had all wanted to come in to
him; now, when he had opened one door and when the
others had obviously been opened during the day, no one
came any more, and the keys were stuck in the locks on
the outside.
The light in the living room was turned off only late at
night, and now it was easy to establish that his parents and
his sister had stayed awake all this time, for one could hear
clearly as all three moved away on tiptoe. Now it was
certain that no one would come into Gregor any more
until the morning. Thus, he had a long time to think

36 of 96
undisturbed about how he should reorganize his life from
scratch. But the high, open room, in which he was
compelled to lie flat on the floor, made him anxious,
without his being able to figure out the reason, for he had
lived in the room for five years. With a half unconscious
turn and not without a slight shame he scurried under the
couch, where, in spite of the fact that his back was a little
cramped and he could no longer lift up his head, he felt
very comfortable and was sorry only that his body was too
wide to fit completely under it.
There he remained the entire night, which he spent
partly in a state of semi-sleep, out of which his hunger
constantly woke him with a start, but partly in a state of
worry and murky hopes, which all led to the conclusion
that for the time being he would have to keep calm and
with patience and the greatest consideration for his family
tolerate the troubles which in his present condition he was
now forced to cause them.
Already early in the morning (it was still almost night)
Gregor had an opportunity to test the power of the
decisions he had just made, for his sister, almost fully
dressed, opened the door from the hall into his room and
looked eagerly inside. She did not find him immediately,
but when she noticed him under the couch (God, he had

37 of 96
to be somewhere or other; for he could hardly fly away)
she got such a shock that, without being able to control
herself, she slammed the door shut once again from the
outside. However, as if she was sorry for her behaviour,
she immediately opened the door again and walked in on
her tiptoes, as if she was in the presence of a serious invalid
or a total stranger. Gregor had pushed his head forward
just to the edge of the couch and was observing her.
Would she really notice that he had left the milk standing,
not indeed from any lack of hunger, and would she bring
in something else to eat more suitable for him? If she did
not do it on her own, he would sooner starve to death
than call her attention to the fact, although he had a really
powerful urge to move beyond the couch, throw himself
at his sister’s feet, and beg her for something or other good
to eat. But his sister noticed right away with astonishment
that the bowl was still full, with only a little milk spilled
around it. She picked it up immediately (although not
with her bare hands but with a rag), and took it out of the
room. Gregor was extremely curious what she would
bring as a substitute, and he pictured to himself different
ideas about that. But he never could have guessed what his
sister out of the goodness of her heart in fact did. She
brought him, to test his taste, an entire selection, all spread

38 of 96
out on an old newspaper. There were old half-rotten
vegetables, bones from the evening meal, covered with a
white sauce which had almost solidified, some raisins and
almonds, cheese, which Gregor had declared inedible two
days earlier, a slice of dry bread, a slice of salted bread
smeared with butter. In addition to all this, she put down a
bowl (probably designated once and for all as Gregor’s)
into which she had poured some water. And out of her
delicacy of feeling, since she knew that Gregor would not
eat in front of her, she went away very quickly and even
turned the key in the lock, so that Gregor could now
observe that he could make himself as comfortable as he
wished. Gregor’s small limbs buzzed as the time for eating
had come. His wounds must, in any case, have already
healed completely. He felt no handicap on that score. He
was astonished at that and thought about it, how more
than a month ago he had cut his finger slightly with a
knife and how this wound had hurt enough even the day
before yesterday.
‘Am I now going to be less sensitive,’ he thought,
already sucking greedily on the cheese, which had strongly
attracted him right away, more than all the other foods.
Quickly and with his eyes watering with satisfaction, he
ate one after the other the cheese, the vegetables, and the

39 of 96
sauce; the fresh food, by contrast, didn’t taste good to him.
He couldn’t bear the smell and even carried the things he
wanted to eat a little distance away. By the time his sister
slowly turned the key as a sign that he should withdraw,
he was long finished and now lay lazily in the same spot.
The noise immediately startled him, in spite of the fact
that he was already almost asleep, and he scurried back
again under the couch. But it cost him great self-control
to remain under the couch, even for the short time his
sister was in the room, because his body had filled out
somewhat on account of the rich meal and in the narrow
space there he could scarcely breathe. In the midst of
minor attacks of asphyxiation, he looked at her with
somewhat protruding eyes, as his unsuspecting sister swept
up with a broom, not just the remnants, but even the
foods which Gregor had not touched at all, as if these
were also now useless, and as she dumped everything
quickly into a bucket, which she closed with a wooden
lid, and then carried all of it out of the room. She had
hardly turned around before Gregor had already dragged
himself out from the couch, stretched out, and let his body
expand.
In this way Gregor got his food every day, once in the
morning, when his parents and the servant girl were still
eBook brought to you by


40 of 96
asleep, and a second time after the common noon meal,
for his parents were, as before, asleep then for a little
while, and the servant girl was sent off by his sister on
some errand or other. Certainly they would not have
wanted Gregor to starve to death, but perhaps they could
not have endured finding out what he ate other than by
hearsay. Perhaps his sister wanted to spare them what was
possibly only a small grief, for they were really suffering
quite enough already.
What sorts of excuses people had used on that first
morning to get the doctor and the locksmith out of the
house Gregor was completely unable to ascertain. Since he
was not comprehensible, no one, not even his sister,
thought that he might be able to understand others, and
thus, when his sister was in her room, he had to be
content with listening now and then to her sighs and
invocations to the saints. Only later, when she had grown
somewhat accustomed to everything (naturally there could
never be any talk of her growing completely accustomed
to it) Gregor sometimes caught a comment which was
intended to be friendly or could be interpreted as such.
‘Well, today it tasted good to him,’ she said, if Gregor had
really cleaned up what he had to eat; whereas, in the
reverse situation, which gradually repeated itself more and

41 of 96
more frequently, she used to say sadly, ‘Now everything
has stopped again.’
But while Gregor could get no new information
directly, he did hear a good deal from the room next door,
and as soon as he heard voices, he scurried right away to
the relevant door and pressed his entire body against it. In
the early days especially, there was no conversation which
was not concerned with him in some way or other, even
if only in secret. For two days at all meal times discussions
on that subject could be heard on how people should now
behave; but they also talked about the same subject in the
times between meals, for there were always at least two
family members at home, since no one really wanted to
remain in the house alone and people could not under any
circumstances leave the apartment completely empty. In
addition, on the very first day the servant girl (it was not
completely clear what and how much she knew about
what had happened) on her knees had begged his mother
to let her go immediately, and when she said good bye
about fifteen minutes later, she thanked them for the
dismissal with tears in her eyes, as if she was receiving the
greatest favour which people had shown her there, and,
without anyone demanding it from her, she swore a fearful
oath not to betray anyone, not even the slightest bit.

42 of 96
Now his sister had to team up with his mother to do
the cooking, although that didn’t create much trouble
because people were eating almost nothing. Again and
again Gregor listened as one of them vainly invited
another one to eat and received no answer other than
‘Thank you. I have enough’ or something like that. And
perhaps they had stopped having anything to drink, too.
His sister often asked his father whether he wanted to have
a beer and gladly offered to fetch it herself, and when his
father was silent, she said, in order to remove any
reservations he might have, that she could send the
caretaker’s wife to get it. But then his father finally said a
resounding ‘No,’ and nothing more would be spoken
about it.
Already during the first day his father laid out all the
financial circumstances and prospects to his mother and to
his sister as well. From time to time he stood up from the
table and pulled out of the small lockbox salvaged from his
business, which had collapsed five years previously, some
document or other or some notebook. The sound was
audible as he opened up the complicated lock and, after
removing what he was looking for, locked it up again.
These explanations by his father were, in part, the first
enjoyable thing that Gregor had the chance to listen to

43 of 96
since his imprisonment. He had thought that nothing at all
was left over for his father from that business; at least his
father had told him nothing to the contradict that view,
and Gregor in any case hadn’t asked him about it. At the
time Gregor’s only concern had been to devote everything
he had in order to allow his family to forget as quickly as
possible the business misfortune which had brought them
all into a state of complete hopelessness. And so at that
point he’d started to work with a special intensity and
from an assistant had become, almost overnight, a traveling
salesman, who naturally had entirely different possibilities
for earning money and whose successes at work at once
were converted into the form of cash commissions, which
could be set out on the table at home in front of his
astonished and delighted family. Those had been beautiful
days, and they had never come back afterwards, at least
not with the same splendour, in spite of the fact that
Gregor later earned so much money that he was in a
position to bear the expenses of the entire family, expenses
which he, in fact, did bear. They had become quite
accustomed to it, both the family and Gregor as well.
They took the money with thanks, and he happily
surrendered it, but the special warmth was no longer
present. Only the sister had remained still close to Gregor,

44 of 96
and it was his secret plan to send her (in contrast to Gregor
she loved music very much and knew how to play the
violin charmingly) next year to the conservatory,
regardless of the great expense which that must necessitate
and which would be made up in other ways. Now and
then during Gregor’s short stays in the city the
conservatory was mentioned in conversations with his
sister, but always only as a beautiful dream, whose
realization was unimaginable, and their parents never
listened to these innocent expectations with pleasure. But
Gregor thought about them with scrupulous consideration
and intended to explain the matter ceremoniously on
Christmas Eve.
In his present situation, such futile ideas went through
his head, while he pushed himself right up against the door
and listened. Sometimes in his general exhaustion he
couldn’t listen any more and let his head bang listlessly
against the door, but he immediately pulled himself
together, for even the small sound which he made by this
motion was heard near by and silenced everyone. ‘ There
he goes on again,’ said his father after a while, clearly
turning towards the door, and only then would the
interrupted conversation gradually be resumed again.

45 of 96
Gregor found out clearly enough (for his father tended
to repeat himself often in his explanations, partly because
he had not personally concerned himself with these
matters for a long time now, and partly also because his
mother did not understand everything right away the first
time) that, in spite all bad luck, a fortune, although a very
small one, was available from the old times, which the
interest (which had not been touched) had in the
intervening time gradually allowed to increase a little.
Furthermore, in addition to this, the money which Gregor
had brought home every month (he had kept only a few
florins for himself) had not been completely spent and had
grown into a small capital amount. Gregor, behind his
door, nodded eagerly, rejoicing over this unanticipated
foresight and frugality. True, with this excess money, he
could have paid off more of his father’s debt to his
employer and the day on which he could be rid of this
position would have been a lot closer, but now things
were doubtless better the way his father had arranged
them.
At the moment, however, this money was nowhere
near sufficient to permit the family to live on the interest
payments. Perhaps it would be enough to maintain the
family for one or at most two years, that’s all. Thus it came

46 of 96
only to an amount which one should not really take out
and which must be set aside for an emergency. But the
money to live on must be earned. Now, his father was a
healthy man, although he was old, who had not worked at
all for five years now and thus could not be counted on
for very much. He had in these five years, the first
holidays of his trouble-filled but unsuccessful life, put on a
good deal of fat and thus had become really heavy. And
should his old mother now maybe work for money, a
woman who suffered from asthma, for whom wandering
through the apartment even now was a great strain and
who spent every second day on the sofa by the open
window labouring for breath? Should his sister earn
money, a girl who was still a seventeen-year-old child,
whose earlier life style had been so very delightful that it
had consisted of dressing herself nicely, sleeping in late,
helping around the house, taking part in a few modest
enjoyments and, above all, playing the violin? When it
came to talking about this need to earn money, at first
Gregor went away from the door and threw himself on
the cool leather sofa beside the door, for he was quite hot
from shame and sorrow.
Often he lay there all night long. He didn’t sleep a
moment and just scratched on the leather for hours at a

47 of 96
time. He undertook the very difficult task of shoving a
chair over to the window. Then he crept up on the
window sill and, braced in the chair, leaned against the
window to look out, obviously with some memory or
other of the satisfaction which that used to bring him in
earlier times. Actually from day to day he perceived things
with less and less clarity, even those a short distance away:
the hospital across the street, the all too frequent sight of
which he had previously cursed, was not visible at all any
more, and if he had not been precisely aware that he lived
in the quiet but completely urban Charlotte Street, he
could have believed that from his window he was peering
out at a featureless wasteland, in which the gray heaven
and the gray earth had merged and were indistinguishable.
His attentive sister must have observed a couple of times
that the chair stood by the window; then, after cleaning
up the room, each time she pushed the chair back right
against the window and from now on she even left the
inner casement open.
If Gregor had only been able to speak to his sister and
thank her for everything that she had to do for him, he
would have tolerated her service more easily. As it was he
suffered under it. The sister admittedly sought to cover up
the awkwardness of everything as much as possible, and, as

48 of 96
time went by, she naturally got more successful at it. But
with the passing of time Gregor also came to understand
everything more precisely. Even her entrance was terrible
for him. As soon as she entered, she ran straight to the
window, without taking the time to shut the door (in spite
of the fact that she was otherwise very considerate in
sparing anyone the sight of Gregor’s room), and yanked
the window open with eager hands, as if she was almost
suffocating, and remained for a while by the window
breathing deeply, even when it was still so cold. With this
running and noise she frightened Gregor twice every day.
The entire time he trembled under the couch, and yet he
knew very well that she would certainly have spared him
gladly if it had only been possible to remain with the
window closed in a room where Gregor lived.
On one occasion (about one month had already gone
by since Gregor’s transformation, and there was now no
particular reason any more for his sister to be startled at
Gregor’s appearance) she came a little earlier than usual
and came upon Gregor as he was still looking out the
window, immobile and well positioned to frighten
someone. It would not have come as a surprise to Gregor
if she had not come in, since his position was preventing
her from opening the window immediately. But she not

49 of 96
only did not step inside; she even retreated and shut the
door. A stranger really could have concluded from this
that Gregor had been lying in wait for her and wanted to
bite her. Of course, Gregor immediately concealed himself
under the couch, but he had to wait until the noon meal
before his sister returned, and she seemed much less calm
than usual. From this he realized that his appearance was
still constantly intolerable to her and must remain
intolerable in future, and that she really had to exert a lot
of self-control not to run away from a glimpse of only the
small part of his body which stuck out from under the
couch. In order to spare her even this sight, one day he
dragged the sheet on his back onto the couch (this task
took him four hours) and arranged it in such a way that he
was now completely concealed and his sister, even if she
bent down, could not see him. If this sheet was not
necessary as far as she was concerned, then she could
remove it, for it was clear enough that Gregor could not
derive any pleasure from isolating himself away so
completely. But she left the sheet just as it was, and
Gregor believed he even caught a look of gratitude when
on one occasion he carefully lifted up the sheet a little
with his head to check as his sister took stock of the new
arrangement.

50 of 96
In the first two weeks his parents could not bring
themselves to visit him, and he often heard how they fully
acknowledged his sister’s present work; whereas, earlier
they had often got annoyed at his sister because she had
seemed to them a somewhat useless young woman.
However, now both his father and his mother often
waited in front of Gregor’s door while his sister cleaned up
inside, and as soon as she came out she had to explain in
detail how things looked in the room, what Gregor had
eaten, how he had behaved this time, and whether perhaps
a slight improvement was perceptible. In any event, his
mother comparatively soon wanted to visit Gregor, but his
father and his sister restrained her, at first with reasons
which Gregor listened to very attentively and which he
completely endorsed. Later, however, they had to hold
her back forcefully, and when she then cried ‘Let me go to
Gregor. He’s my unlucky son! Don’t you understand that
I have to go to him?’ Gregor then thought that perhaps it
would be a good thing if his mother came in, not every
day, of course, but maybe once a week. She understood
everything much better than his sister, who in spite of all
her courage was still a child and, in the last analysis, had
perhaps undertaken such a difficult task only out of
childish recklessness.

51 of 96
Gregor’s wish to see his mother was soon realized.
While during the day Gregor, out of consideration for his
parents, did not want to show himself by the window, he
couldn’t crawl around very much on the few square
metres of the floor. He found it difficult to bear lying
quietly during the night, and soon eating no longer gave
him the slightest pleasure. So for diversion he acquired the
habit of crawling back and forth across the walls and
ceiling. He was especially fond of hanging from the
ceiling. The experience was quite different from lying on
the floor. It was easier to breathe, a slight vibration went
through his body, and in the midst of the almost happy
amusement which Gregor found up there, it could happen
that, to his own surprise, he let go and hit the floor.
However, now he naturally controlled his body quite
differently, and he did not injure himself in such a great
fall. His sister noticed immediately the new amusement
which Gregor had found for himself (for as he crept
around he left behind here and there traces of his sticky
stuff), and so she got the idea of making Gregor’s creeping
around as easy as possible and thus of removing the
furniture which got in the way, especially the chest of
drawers and the writing desk.