The Hound of the Baskervilles
------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 1
Mr. Sherlock Holmes
Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in the
mornings, save upon those not infrequent occasions when
he was up all night, was seated at the breakfast table. I
stood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the stick which
our visitor had left behind him the night before. It was a
fine, thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sort
which is known as a ‘Penang lawyer.’ Just under the head
was a broad silver band nearly an inch across. ‘To James
Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from his friends of the C.C.H.,’ was
engraved upon it, with the date ‘1884.’ It was just such a
stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to
carry—dignified, solid, and reassuring.
‘Well, Watson, what do you make of it?’
Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had
given him no sign of my occupation.
‘How did you know what I was doing? I believe you
have eyes in the back of your head.’
‘I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot
in front of me,’ said he. ‘But, tell me, Watson, what do
you make of our visitor’s stick? Since we have been so

3 of 279
unfortunate as to miss him and have no notion of his
errand, this accidental souvenir becomes of importance.
Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examination
of it.’
‘I think,’ said I, following as far as I could the methods
of my companion, ‘that Dr. Mortimer is a successful,
elderly medical man, well-esteemed since those who
know him give him this mark of their appreciation.’
‘Good!’ said Holmes. ‘Excellent!’
‘I think also that the probability is in favour of his being
a country practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting
on foot.’
‘Why so?’
‘Because this stick, though originally a very handsome
one has been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine a
town practitioner carrying it. The thick-iron ferrule is
worn down, so it is evident that he has done a great
amount of walking with it.’
‘Perfectly sound!’ said Holmes.
‘And then again, there is the ‘friends of the C.C.H.’ I
should guess that to be the Something Hunt, the local
hunt to whose members he has possibly given some
surgical assistance, and which has made him a small
presentation in return.’
eBook brought to you by


4 of 279
‘Really, Watson, you excel yourself,’ said Holmes,
pushing back his chair and lighting a cigarette. ‘I am
bound to say that in all the accounts which you have been
so good as to give of my own small achievements you
have habitually underrated your own abilities. It may be
that you are not yourself luminous, but you are a
conductor of light. Some people without possessing genius
have a remarkable power of stimulating it. I confess, my
dear fellow, that I am very much in your debt.’
He had never said as much before, and I must admit
that his words gave me keen pleasure, for I had often been
piqued by his indifference to my admiration and to the
attempts which I had made to give publicity to his
methods. I was proud, too, to think that I had so far
mastered his system as to apply it in a way which earned
his approval. He now took the stick from my hands and
examined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes. Then
with an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette,
and carrying the cane to the window, he looked over it
again with a convex lens.
‘Interesting, though elementary,’ said he as he returned
to his favourite corner of the settee. ‘There are certainly
one or two indications upon the stick. It gives us the basis
for several deductions.’

5 of 279
‘Has anything escaped me?’ I asked with some selfimportance.
‘I trust that there is nothing of consequence
which I have overlooked?’
‘I am afraid, my dear Watson, that most of your
conclusions were erroneous. When I said that you
stimulated me I meant, to be frank, that in noting your
fallacies I was occasionally guided towards the truth. Not
that you are entirely wrong in this instance. The man is
certainly a country practitioner. And he walks a good
deal.’
‘Then I was right.’
‘To that extent.’
‘But that was all.’
‘No, no, my dear Watson, not all—by no means all. I
would suggest, for example, that a presentation to a doctor
is more likely to come from a hospital than from a hunt,
and that when the initials ‘C.C.’ are placed before that
hospital the words ‘Charing Cross’ very naturally suggest
themselves.’
‘You may be right.’
‘The probability lies in that direction. And if we take
this as a working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from
which to start our construction of this unknown visitor.’

6 of 279
‘Well, then, supposing that ‘C.C.H.’ does stand for
‘Charing Cross Hospital,’ what further inferences may we
draw?’
‘Do none suggest themselves? You know my methods.
Apply them!’
‘I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the
man has practised in town before going to the country.’
‘I think that we might venture a little farther than this.
Look at it in this light. On what occasion would it be
most probable that such a presentation would be made?
When would his friends unite to give him a pledge of
their good will? Obviously at the moment when Dr.
Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital in
order to start in practice for himself. We know there has
been a presentation. We believe there has been a change
from a town hospital to a country practice. Is it, then,
stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation
was on the occasion of the change?’
‘It certainly seems probable.’
‘Now, you will observe that he could not have been on
the staff of the hospital, since only a man well-established
in a London practice could hold such a position, and such
a one would not drift into the country. What was he,
then? If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff he

7 of 279
could only have been a house-surgeon or a housephysician—
little more than a senior student. And he left
five years ago—the date is on the stick. So your grave,
middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin air, my
dear Watson, and there emerges a young fellow under
thirty, amiable, unambitious, absent-minded, and the
possessor of a favourite dog, which I should describe
roughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than a
mastiff.’
I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned
back in his settee and blew little wavering rings of smoke
up to the ceiling.
‘As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you,’
said I, ‘but at least it is not difficult to find out a few
particulars about the man’s age and professional career.’
From my small medical shelf I took down the Medical
Directory and turned up the name. There were several
Mortimers, but only one who could be our visitor. I read
his record aloud.
‘Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen,
Dartmoor, Devon. House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at
Charing Cross Hospital. Winner of the Jackson prize for
Comparative Pathology, with essay entitled ‘Is Disease a
Reversion?’ Corresponding member of the Swedish

8 of 279
Pathological Society. Author of ‘Some Freaks of Atavism’
(Lancet 1882). ‘Do We Progress?’ (Journal of Psychology,
March, 1883). Medical Officer for the parishes of
Grimpen, Thorsley, and High Barrow.’
‘No mention of that local hunt, Watson,’ said Holmes
with a mischievous smile, ‘but a country doctor, as you
very astutely observed. I think that I am fairly justified in
my inferences. As to the adjectives, I said, if I remember
right, amiable, unambitious, and absent-minded. It is my
experience that it is only an amiable man in this world
who receives testimonials, only an unambitious one who
abandons a London career for the country, and only an
absent-minded one who leaves his stick and not his
visiting-card after waiting an hour in your room.’
‘And the dog?’
‘Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his
master. Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by
the middle, and the marks of his teeth are very plainly
visible. The dog’s jaw, as shown in the space between
these marks, is too broad in my opinion for a terrier and
not broad enough for a mastiff. It may have been—yes, by
Jove, it is a curly-haired spaniel.’

9 of 279
He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. Now he
halted in the recess of the window. There was such a ring
of conviction in his voice that I glanced up in surprise.
‘My dear fellow, how can you possibly be so sure of
that?’
‘For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself
on our very door-step, and there is the ring of its owner.
Don’t move, I beg you, Watson. He is a professional
brother of yours, and your presence may be of assistance
to me. Now is the dramatic moment of fate, Watson,
when you hear a step upon the stair which is walking into
your life, and you know not whether for good or ill. What
does Dr. James Mortimer, the man of science, ask of
Sherlock Holmes, the specialist in crime? Come in!’
The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me,
since I had expected a typical country practitioner. He was
a very tall, thin man, with a long nose like a beak, which
jutted out between two keen, gray eyes, set closely
together and sparkling brightly from behind a pair of goldrimmed
glasses. He was clad in a professional but rather
slovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was dingy and his
trousers frayed. Though young, his long back was already
bowed, and he walked with a forward thrust of his head
and a general air of peering benevolence. As he entered his

10 of 279
eyes fell upon the stick in Holmes’s hand, and he ran
towards it with an exclamation of joy. ‘I am so very glad,’
said he. ‘I was not sure whether I had left it here or in the
Shipping Office. I would not lose that stick for the world.’
‘A presentation, I see,’ said Holmes.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘From Charing Cross Hospital?’
‘From one or two friends there on the occasion of my
marriage.’
‘Dear, dear, that’s bad!’ said Holmes, shaking his head.
Dr. Mortimer blinked through his glasses in mild
astonishment.
‘Why was it bad?’
‘Only that you have disarranged our little deductions.
Your marriage, you say?’
‘Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it
all hopes of a consulting practice. It was necessary to make
a home of my own.’
‘Come, come, we are not so far wrong, after all,’ said
Holmes. ‘And now, Dr. James Mortimer ———‘
‘Mister, sir, Mister—a humble M.R.C.S.’
‘And a man of precise mind, evidently.’
‘A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shells
on the shores of the great unknown ocean. I presume that

11 of 279
it is Mr. Sherlock Holmes whom I am addressing and not
———‘
‘No, this is my friend Dr. Watson.’
‘Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your name
mentioned in connection with that of your friend. You
interest me very much, Mr. Holmes. I had hardly
expected so dolichocephalic a skull or such well-marked
supra-orbital development. Would you have any objection
to my running my finger along your parietal fissure? A cast
of your skull, sir, until the original is available, would be
an ornament to any anthropological museum. It is not my
intention to be fulsome, but I confess that I covet your
skull.’
Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair.
‘You are an enthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive,
sir, as I am in mine,’ said he. ‘I observe from your
forefinger that you make your own cigarettes. Have no
hesitation in lighting one.’
The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the
one up in the other with surprising dexterity. He had
long, quivering fingers as agile and restless as the antennae
of an insect.
Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showed
me the interest which he took in our curious companion.

12 of 279
‘I presume, sir,’ said he at last, ‘that it was not merely
for the purpose of examining my skull that you have done
me the honour to call here last night and again to-day?’
‘No, sir, no; though I am happy to have had the
opportunity of doing that as well. I came to you, Mr.
Holmes, because I recognized that I am myself an
unpractical man and because I am suddenly confronted
with a most serious and extraordinary problem.
Recognizing, as I do, that you are the second highest
expert in Europe ———‘
‘Indeed, sir! May I inquire who has the honour to be
the first?’ asked Holmes with some asperity.
‘To the man of precisely scientific mind the work of
Monsieur Bertillon must always appeal strongly.’
‘Then had you not better consult him?’
‘I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as a
practical man of affairs it is acknowledged that you stand
alone. I trust, sir, that I have not inadvertently ———‘
‘Just a little,’ said Holmes. ‘I think, Dr. Mortimer, you
would do wisely if without more ado you would kindly
tell me plainly what the exact nature of the problem is in
which you demand my assistance.’

13 of 279
Chapter 2
The Curse of the Baskervilles
‘I have in my pocket a manuscript,’ said Dr. James
Mortimer.
‘I observed it as you entered the room,’ said Holmes.
‘It is an old manuscript.’
‘Early eighteenth century, unless it is a forgery.’
‘How can you say that, sir?’
‘You have presented an inch or two of it to my
examination all the time that you have been talking. It
would be a poor expert who could not give the date of a
document within a decade or so. You may possibly have
read my little monograph upon the subject. I put that at
1730.’
‘The exact date is 1742.’ Dr. Mortimer drew it from his
breast-pocket. ‘This family paper was committed to my
care by Sir Charles Baskerville, whose sudden and tragic
death some three months ago created so much excitement
in Devonshire. I may say that I was his personal friend as
well as his medical attendant. He was a strong-minded
man, sir, shrewd, practical, and as unimaginative as I am
myself. Yet he took this document very seriously, and his

14 of 279
mind was prepared for just such an end as did eventually
overtake him.’
Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and
flattened it upon his knee.
‘You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of the
long s and the short. It is one of several indications which
enabled me to fix the date.’
I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the
faded script. At the head was written: ‘Baskerville Hall,’
and below in large, scrawling figures: ‘1742.’
‘It appears to be a statement of some sort.’
‘Yes, it is a statement of a certain legend which runs in
the Baskerville family.’
‘But I understand that it is something more modern
and practical upon which you wish to consult me?’
‘Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, which
must be decided within twenty-four hours. But the
manuscript is short and is intimately connected with the
affair. With your permission I will read it to you.’
Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips
together, and closed his eyes, with an air of resignation.
Dr. Mortimer turned the manuscript to the light and read
in a high, cracking voice the following curious, old-world
narrative:—

15 of 279
‘Of the origin of  there
have been many statements, yet as I come in a direct line
from Hugo Baskerville, and as I had the story from my
father, who also had it from his, I have set it down with all
belief that it occurred even as is here set forth. And I
would have you believe, my sons, that the same Justice
which punishes sin may also most graciously forgive it, and
that no ban is so heavy but that by prayer and repentance
it may be removed. Learn then from this story not to fear
the fruits of the past, but rather to be circumspect in the
future, that those foul passions whereby our family has
suffered so grievously may not again be loosed to our
undoing.
‘Know then that in the time of the Great Rebellion
(the history of which by the learned Lord Clarendon I
most earnestly commend to your attention) this Manor of
Baskerville was held by Hugo of that name, nor can it be
gainsaid that he was a most wild, profane, and godless
man. This, in truth, his neighbours might have pardoned,
seeing that saints have never flourished in those parts, but
there was in him a certain wanton and cruel humour
which made his name a byword through the West. It
chanced that this Hugo came to love (if, indeed, so dark a
passion may be known under so bright a name) the
eBook brought to you by


16 of 279
daughter of a yeoman who held lands near the Baskerville
estate. But the young maiden, being discreet and of good
repute, would ever avoid him, for she feared his evil
name. So it came to pass that one Michaelmas this Hugo,
with five or six of his idle and wicked companions, stole
down upon the farm and carried off the maiden, her father
and brothers being from home, as he well knew. When
they had brought her to the Hall the maiden was placed in
an upper chamber, while Hugo and his friends sat down to
a long carouse, as was their nightly custom. Now, the
poor lass upstairs was like to have her wits turned at the
singing and shouting and terrible oaths which came up to
her from below, for they say that the words used by Hugo
Baskerville, when he was in wine, were such as might blast
the man who said them. At last in the stress of her fear she
did that which might have daunted the bravest or most
active man, for by the aid of the growth of ivy which
covered (and still covers) the south wall she came down
from under the eaves, and so homeward across the moor,
there being three leagues betwixt the Hall and her father’s
farm.
‘It chanced that some little time later Hugo left his
guests to carry food and drink—with other worse things,
perchance—to his captive, and so found the cage empty

17 of 279
and the bird escaped. Then, as it would seem, he became
as one that hath a devil, for, rushing down the stairs into
the dining-hall, he sprang upon the great table, flagons and
trenchers flying before him, and he cried aloud before all
the company that he would that very night render his
body and soul to the Powers of Evil if he might but
overtake the wench. And while the revellers stood aghast
at the fury of the man, one more wicked or, it may be,
more drunken than the rest, cried out that they should put
the hounds upon her. Whereat Hugo ran from the house,
crying to his grooms that they should saddle his mare and
unkennel the pack, and giving the hounds a kerchief of
the maid’s, he swung them to the line, and so off full cry
in the moonlight over the moor.
‘Now, for some space the revellers stood agape, unable
to understand all that had been done in such haste. But
anon their bemused wits awoke to the nature of the deed
which was like to be done upon the moorlands.
Everything was now in an uproar, some calling for their
pistols, some for their horses, and some for another flask of
wine. But at length some sense came back to their crazed
minds, and the whole of them, thirteen in number, took
horse and started in pursuit. The moon shone clear above
them, and they rode swiftly abreast, taking that course

18 of 279
which the maid must needs have taken if she were to
reach her own home.
‘They had gone a mile or two when they passed one of
the night shepherds upon the moorlands, and they cried to
him to know if he had seen the hunt. And the man, as the
story goes, was so crazed with fear that he could scarce
speak, but at last he said that he had indeed seen the
unhappy maiden, with the hounds upon her track. ‘But I
have seen more than that,’ said he, ‘for Hugo Baskerville
passed me upon his black mare, and there ran mute behind
him such a hound of hell as God forbid should ever be at
my heels.’ So the drunken squires cursed the shepherd and
rode onward. But soon their skins turned cold, for there
came a galloping across the moor, and the black mare,
dabbled with white froth, went past with trailing bridle
and empty saddle. Then the revellers rode close together,
for a great fear was on them, but they still followed over
the moor, though each, had he been alone, would have
been right glad to have turned his horse’s head. Riding
slowly in this fashion they came at last upon the hounds.
These, though known for their valour and their breed,
were whimpering in a cluster at the head of a deep dip or
goyal, as we call it, upon the moor, some slinking away

19 of 279
and some, with starting hackles and staring eyes, gazing
down the narrow valley before them.
‘The company had come to a halt, more sober men, as
you may guess, than when they started. The most of them
would by no means advance, but three of them, the
boldest, or it may be the most drunken, rode forward
down the goyal. Now, it opened into a broad space in
which stood two of those great stones, still to be seen
there, which were set by certain forgotten peoples in the
days of old. The moon was shining bright upon the
clearing, and there in the centre lay the unhappy maid
where she had fallen, dead of fear and of fatigue. But it
was not the sight of her body, nor yet was it that of the
body of Hugo Baskerville lying near her, which raised the
hair upon the heads of these three daredevil roysterers, but
it was that, standing over Hugo, and plucking at his throat,
there stood a foul thing, a great, black beast, shaped like a
hound, yet larger than any hound that ever mortal eye has
rested upon. And even as they looked the thing tore the
throat out of Hugo Baskerville, on which, as it turned its
blazing eyes and dripping jaws upon them, the three
shrieked with fear and rode for dear life, still screaming,
across the moor. One, it is said, died that very night of

20 of 279
what he had seen, and the other twain were but broken
men for the rest of their days.
‘Such is the tale, my sons, of the coming of the hound
which is said to have plagued the family so sorely ever
since. If I have set it down it is because that which is
clearly known hath less terror than that which is but
hinted at and guessed. Nor can it be denied that many of
the family have been unhappy in their deaths, which have
been sudden, bloody, and mysterious. Yet may we shelter
ourselves in the infinite goodness of Providence, which
would not forever punish the innocent beyond that third
or fourth generation which is threatened in Holy Writ. To
that Providence, my sons, I hereby commend you, and I
counsel you by way of caution to forbear from crossing
the moor in those dark hours when the powers of evil are
exalted.
‘[This from Hugo Baskerville to his sons Rodger and
John, with instructions that they say nothing thereof to
their sister Elizabeth.]"
When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular
narrative he pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and
stared across at Mr. Sherlock Holmes. The latter yawned
and tossed the end of his cigarette into the fire.
‘Well?’ said he.

21 of 279
‘Do you not find it interesting?’
‘To a collector of fairy tales.’
Dr. Mortimer drew a folded newspaper out of his
pocket.
‘Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a little
more recent. This is the Devon County Chronicle of May
14th of this year. It is a short account of the facts elicited
at the death of Sir Charles Baskerville which occurred a
few days before that date.’
My friend leaned a little forward and his expression
became intent. Our visitor readjusted his glasses and
began:—
‘The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville,
whose name has been mentioned as the probable Liberal
candidate for Mid-Devon at the next election, has cast a
gloom over the county. Though Sir Charles had resided at
Baskerville Hall for a comparatively short period his
amiability of character and extreme generosity had won
the affection and respect of all who had been brought into
contact with him. In these days of nouveaux riches it is
refreshing to find a case where the scion of an old county
family which has fallen upon evil days is able to make his
own fortune and to bring it back with him to restore the
fallen grandeur of his line. Sir Charles, as is well known,

22 of 279
made large sums of money in South African speculation.
More wise than those who go on until the wheel turns
against them, he realized his gains and returned to England
with them. It is only two years since he took up his
residence at Baskerville Hall, and it is common talk how
large were those schemes of reconstruction and
improvement which have been interrupted by his death.
Being himself childless, it was his openly expressed desire
that the whole country-side should, within his own
lifetime, profit by his good fortune, and many will have
personal reasons for bewailing his untimely end. His
generous donations to local and county charities have been
frequently chronicled in these columns.
‘The circumstances connected with the death of Sir
Charles cannot be said to have been entirely cleared up by
the inquest, but at least enough has been done to dispose
of those rumours to which local superstition has given rise.
There is no reason whatever to suspect foul play, or to
imagine that death could be from any but natural causes.
Sir Charles was a widower, and a man who may be said to
have been in some ways of an eccentric habit of mind. In
spite of his considerable wealth he was simple in his
personal tastes, and his indoor servants at Baskerville Hall
consisted of a married couple named Barrymore, the

23 of 279
husband acting as butler and the wife as housekeeper.
Their evidence, corroborated by that of several friends,
tends to show that Sir Charles’s health has for some time
been impaired, and points especially to some affection of
the heart, manifesting itself in changes of colour,
breathlessness, and acute attacks of nervous depression. Dr.
James Mortimer, the friend and medical attendant of the
deceased, has given evidence to the same effect.
‘The facts of the case are simple. Sir Charles Baskerville
was in the habit every night before going to bed of
walking down the famous Yew Alley of Baskerville Hall.
The evidence of the Barrymores shows that this had been
his custom. On the 4th of May Sir Charles had declared
his intention of starting next day for London, and had
ordered Barrymore to prepare his luggage. That night he
went out as usual for his nocturnal walk, in the course of
which he was in the habit of smoking a cigar. He never
returned. At twelve o’clock Barrymore, finding the hall
door still open, became alarmed, and, lighting a lantern,
went in search of his master. The day had been wet, and
Sir Charles’s footmarks were easily traced down the Alley.
Half-way down this walk there is a gate which leads out
on to the moor. There were indications that Sir Charles
had stood for some little time here. He then proceeded

24 of 279
down the Alley, and it was at the far end of it that his
body was discovered. One fact which has not been
explained is the statement of Barrymore that his master’s
footprints altered their character from the time that he
passed the moor-gate, and that he appeared from thence
onward to have been walking upon his toes. One
Murphy, a gipsy horse-dealer, was on the moor at no great
distance at the time, but he appears by his own confession
to have been the worse for drink. He declares that he
heard cries, but is unable to state from what direction they
came. No signs of violence were to be discovered upon
Sir Charles’s person, and though the doctor’s evidence
pointed to an almost incredible facial distortion—so great
that Dr. Mortimer refused at first to believe that it was
indeed his friend and patient who lay before him—it was
explained that that is a symptom which is not unusual in
cases of dyspnoea and death from cardiac exhaustion. This
explanation was borne out by the post-mortem
examination, which showed long-standing organic disease,
and the coroner’s jury returned a verdict in accordance
with the medical evidence. It is well that this is so, for it is
obviously of the utmost importance that Sir Charles’s heir
should settle at the Hall and continue the good work
which has been so sadly interrupted. Had the prosaic

25 of 279
finding of the coroner not finally put an end to the
romantic stories which have been whispered in connection
with the affair, it might have been difficult to find a tenant
for Baskerville Hall. It is understood that the next of kin is
Mr. Henry Baskerville, if he be still alive, the son of Sir
Charles Baskerville’s younger brother. The young man
when last heard of was in America, and inquiries are being
instituted with a view to informing him of his good
fortune.’
Dr. Mortimer refolded his paper and replaced it in his
pocket.
‘Those are the public facts, Mr. Holmes, in connection
with the death of Sir Charles Baskerville.’
‘I must thank you,’ said Sherlock Holmes, ‘for calling
my attention to a case which certainly presents some
features of interest. I had observed some newspaper
comment at the time, but I was exceedingly preoccupied
by that little affair of the Vatican cameos, and in my
anxiety to oblige the Pope I lost touch with several
interesting English cases. This article, you say, contains all
the public facts?’
‘It does.’

26 of 279
‘Then let me have the private ones.’ He leaned back,
put his finger-tips together, and assumed his most
impassive and judicial expression.
‘In doing so,’ said Dr. Mortimer, who had begun to
show signs of some strong emotion, ‘I am telling that
which I have not confided to anyone. My motive for
withholding it from the coroner’s inquiry is that a man of
science shrinks from placing himself in the public position
of seeming to indorse a popular superstition. I had the
further motive that Baskerville Hall, as the paper says,
would certainly remain untenanted if anything were done
to increase its already rather grim reputation. For both
these reasons I thought that I was justified in telling rather
less than I knew, since no practical good could result from
it, but with you there is no reason why I should not be
perfectly frank.
‘The moor is very sparsely inhabited, and those who
live near each other are thrown very much together. For
this reason I saw a good deal of Sir Charles Baskerville.
With the exception of Mr. Frankland, of Lafter Hall, and
Mr. Stapleton, the naturalist, there are no other men of
education within many miles. Sir Charles was a retiring
man, but the chance of his illness brought us together, and
a community of interests in science kept us so. He had

27 of 279
brought back much scientific information from South
Africa, and many a charming evening we have spent
together discussing the comparative anatomy of the
Bushman and the Hottentot.
‘Within the last few months it became increasingly
plain to me that Sir Charles’s nervous system was strained
to the breaking point. He had taken this legend which I
have read you exceedingly to heart—so much so that,
although he would walk in his own grounds, nothing
would induce him to go out upon the moor at night.
Incredible as it may appear to you, Mr. Holmes, he was
honestly convinced that a dreadful fate overhung his
family, and certainly the records which he was able to give
of his ancestors were not encouraging. The idea of some
ghastly presence constantly haunted him, and on more
than one occasion he has asked me whether I had on my
medical journeys at night ever seen any strange creature or
heard the baying of a hound. The latter question he put to
me several times, and always with a voice which vibrated
with excitement.
‘I can well remember driving up to his house in the
evening some three weeks before the fatal event. He
chanced to be at his hall door. I had descended from my
gig and was standing in front of him, when I saw his eyes
eBook brought to you by


28 of 279
fix themselves over my shoulder, and stare past me with an
expression of the most dreadful horror. I whisked round
and had just time to catch a glimpse of something which I
took to be a large black calf passing at the head of the
drive. So excited and alarmed was he that I was compelled
to go down to the spot where the animal had been and
look around for it. It was gone, however, and the incident
appeared to make the worst impression upon his mind. I
stayed with him all the evening, and it was on that
occasion, to explain the emotion which he had shown,
that he confided to my keeping that narrative which I read
to you when first I came. I mention this small episode
because it assumes some importance in view of the tragedy
which followed, but I was convinced at the time that the
matter was entirely trivial and that his excitement had no
justification.
‘It was at my advice that Sir Charles was about to go to
London. His heart was, I knew, affected, and the constant
anxiety in which he lived, however chimerical the cause
of it might be, was evidently having a serious effect upon
his health. I thought that a few months among the
distractions of town would send him back a new man. Mr.
Stapleton, a mutual friend who was much concerned at his

29 of 279
state of health, was of the same opinion. At the last instant
came this terrible catastrophe.
‘On the night of Sir Charles’s death Barrymore the
butler, who made the discovery, sent Perkins the groom
on horseback to me, and as I was sitting up late I was able
to reach Baskerville Hall within an hour of the event. I
checked and corroborated all the facts which were
mentioned at the inquest. I followed the footsteps down
the Yew Alley, I saw the spot at the moor-gate where he
seemed to have waited, I remarked the change in the
shape of the prints after that point, I noted that there were
no other footsteps save those of Barrymore on the soft
gravel, and finally I carefully examined the body, which
had not been touched until my arrival. Sir Charles lay on
his face, his arms out, his fingers dug into the ground, and
his features convulsed with some strong emotion to such
an extent that I could hardly have sworn to his identity.
There was certainly no physical injury of any kind. But
one false statement was made by Barrymore at the inquest.
He said that there were no traces upon the ground round
the body. He did not observe any. But I did—some little
distance off, but fresh and clear.’
‘Footprints?’
‘Footprints.’

30 of 279
‘A man’s or a woman’s?’
Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, and
his voice sank almost to a whisper as he answered:—
‘Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic
hound!’

31 of 279
Chapter 3
The Problem
I confess at these words a shudder passed through me.
There was a thrill in the doctor’s voice which showed that
he was himself deeply moved by that which he told us.
Holmes leaned forward in his excitement and his eyes had
the hard, dry glitter which shot from them when he was
keenly interested.
‘You saw this?’
‘As clearly as I see you.’
‘And you said nothing?’
‘What was the use?’
‘How was it that no one else saw it?’
‘The marks were some twenty yards from the body and
no one gave them a thought. I don’t suppose I should
have done so had I not known this legend.’
‘There are many sheep-dogs on the moor?’
‘No doubt, but this was no sheep-dog.’
‘You say it was large?’
‘Enormous.’
‘But it had not approached the body?’
‘No.’

32 of 279
‘What sort of night was it?’
‘Damp and raw.’
‘But not actually raining?’
‘No.’
‘What is the Alley like?’
‘There are two lines of old yew hedge, twelve feet high
and impenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eight
feet across.’
‘Is there anything between the hedges and the walk?’
‘Yes, there is a strip of grass about six feet broad on
either side.’
‘I understand that the yew hedge is penetrated at one
point by a gate?’
‘Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor.’
‘Is there any other opening?’
‘None.’
‘So that to reach the Yew Alley one either has to come
down it from the house or else to enter it by the moorgate?’
‘There is an exit through a summer-house at the far
end.’
‘Had Sir Charles reached this?’
‘No; he lay about fifty yards from it.’

33 of 279
‘Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer—and this is important—
the marks which you saw were on the path and not on the
grass?’
‘No marks could show on the grass.’
‘Were they on the same side of the path as the moorgate?’
‘Yes; they were on the edge of the path on the same
side as the moor-gate.’
‘You interest me exceedingly. Another point. Was the
wicket-gate closed?’
‘Closed and padlocked.’
‘How high was it?’
‘About four feet high.’
‘Then anyone could have got over it?’
‘Yes.’
‘And what marks did you see by the wicket-gate?’
‘None in particular.’
‘Good heaven! Did no one examine?’
‘Yes, I examined myself.’
‘And found nothing?’
‘It was all very confused. Sir Charles had evidently
stood there for five or ten minutes.’
‘How do you know that?’
‘Because the ash had twice dropped from his cigar.’

34 of 279
‘Excellent! This is a colleague, Watson, after our own
heart. But the marks?’
‘He had left his own marks all over that small patch of
gravel. I could discern no others.’
Sherlock Holmes struck his hand against his knee with
an impatient gesture.
‘If I had only been there!’ he cried. ‘It is evidently a
case of extraordinary interest, and one which presented
immense opportunities to the scientific expert. That gravel
page upon which I might have read so much has been
long ere this smudged by the rain and defaced by the clogs
of curious peasants. Oh, Dr. Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, to
think that you should not have called me in! You have
indeed much to answer for.’
‘I could not call you in, Mr. Holmes, without
disclosing these facts to the world, and I have already
given my reasons for not wishing to do so. Besides, besides
—‘
‘Why do you hesitate?’
‘There is a realm in which the most acute and most
experienced of detectives is helpless.’
‘You mean that the thing is supernatural?’
‘I did not positively say so.’
‘No, but you evidently think it.’

35 of 279
‘Since the tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come to
my ears several incidents which are hard to reconcile with
the settled order of Nature.’
‘For example?’
‘I find that before the terrible event occurred several
people had seen a creature upon the moor which
corresponds with this Baskerville demon, and which could
not possibly be any animal known to science. They all
agreed that it was a huge creature, luminous, ghastly, and
spectral. I have cross-examined these men, one of them a
hard-headed countryman, one a farrier, and one a
moorland farmer, who all tell the same story of this
dreadful apparition, exactly corresponding to the hellhound
of the legend. I assure you that there is a reign of
terror in the district, and that it is a hardy man who will
cross the moor at night.’
‘And you, a trained man of science, believe it to be
supernatural?’
‘I do not know what to believe.’
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
‘I have hitherto confined my investigations to this
world,’ said he. ‘In a modest way I have combated evil,
but to take on the Father of Evil himself would, perhaps,

36 of 279
be too ambitious a task. Yet you must admit that the
footmark is material.’
‘The original hound was material enough to tug a
man’s throat out, and yet he was diabolical as well.’
‘I see that you have quite gone over to the
supernaturalists. But now, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If
you hold these views, why have you come to consult me
at all? You tell me in the same breath that it is useless to
investigate Sir Charles’s death, and that you desire me to
do it.’
‘I did not say that I desired you to do it.’
‘Then, how can I assist you?’
‘By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry
Baskerville, who arrives at Waterloo Station’—Dr.
Mortimer looked at his watch—‘in exactly one hour and a
quarter.’
‘He being the heir?’
‘Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this
young gentleman and found that he had been farming in
Canada. From the accounts which have reached us he is
an excellent fellow in every way. I speak not as a medical
man but as a trustee and executor of Sir Charles’s will.’
‘There is no other claimant, I presume?’

37 of 279
‘None. The only other kinsman whom we have been
able to trace was Rodger Baskerville, the youngest of three
brothers of whom poor Sir Charles was the elder. The
second brother, who died young, is the father of this lad
Henry. The third, Rodger, was the black sheep of the
family. He came of the old masterful Baskerville strain,
and was the very image, they tell me, of the family picture
of old Hugo. He made England too hot to hold him, fled
to Central America, and died there in 1876 of yellow
fever. Henry is the last of the Baskervilles. In one hour and
five minutes I meet him at Waterloo Station. I have had a
wire that he arrived at Southampton this morning. Now,
Mr. Holmes, what would you advise me to do with him?’
‘Why should he not go to the home of his fathers?’
‘It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider that
every Baskerville who goes there meets with an evil fate. I
feel sure that if Sir Charles could have spoken with me
before his death he would have warned me against
bringing this, the last of the old race, and the heir to great
wealth, to that deadly place. And yet it cannot be denied
that the prosperity of the whole poor, bleak country-side
depends upon his presence. All the good work which has
been done by Sir Charles will crash to the ground if there
is no tenant of the Hall. I fear lest I should be swayed too

38 of 279
much by my own obvious interest in the matter, and that
is why I bring the case before you and ask for your
advice.’
Holmes considered for a little time.
‘Put into plain words, the matter is this,’ said he. ‘In
your opinion there is a diabolical agency which makes
Dartmoor an unsafe abode for a Baskerville—that is your
opinion?’
‘At least I might go the length of saying that there is
some evidence that this may be so.’
‘Exactly. But surely, if your supernatural theory be
correct, it could work the young man evil in London as
easily as in Devonshire. A devil with merely local powers
like a parish vestry would be too inconceivable a thing.’
‘You put the matter more flippantly, Mr. Holmes, than
you would probably do if you were brought into personal
contact with these things. Your advice, then, as I
understand it, is that the young man will be as safe in
Devonshire as in London. He comes in fifty minutes.
What would you recommend?’
‘I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off your
spaniel who is scratching at my front door, and proceed to
Waterloo to meet Sir Henry Baskerville.’
‘And then?’

39 of 279
‘And then you will say nothing to him at all until I
have made up my mind about the matter.’
‘How long will it take you to make up your mind?’
‘Twenty-four hours. At ten o’clock to-morrow, Dr.
Mortimer, I will be much obliged to you if you will call
upon me here, and it will be of help to me in my plans for
the future if you will bring Sir Henry Baskerville with
you.’
‘I will do so, Mr. Holmes.’ He scribbled the
appointment on his shirtcuff and hurried off in his strange,
peering, absent-minded fashion. Holmes stopped him at
the head of the stair.
‘Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say that
before Sir Charles Baskerville’s death several people saw
this apparition upon the moor?’
‘Three people did.’
‘Did any see it after?’
‘I have not heard of any.’
‘Thank you. Good morning.’
Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look of
inward satisfaction which meant that he had a congenial
task before him.
‘Going out, Watson?’
‘Unless I can help you.’
eBook brought to you by


40 of 279
‘No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that I
turn to you for aid. But this is splendid, really unique from
some points of view. When you pass Bradley’s, would you
ask him to send up a pound of the strongest shag tobacco?
Thank you. It would be as well if you could make it
convenient not to return before evening. Then I should
be very glad to compare impressions as to this most
interesting problem which has been submitted to us this
morning.’
I knew that seclusion and solitude were very necessary
for my friend in those hours of intense mental
concentration during which he weighed every particle of
evidence, constructed alternative theories, balanced one
against the other, and made up his mind as to which
points were essential and which immaterial. I therefore
spent the day at my club and did not return to Baker
Street until evening. It was nearly nine o’clock when I
found myself in the sitting-room once more.
My first impression as I opened the door was that a fire
had broken out, for the room was so filled with smoke
that the light of the lamp upon the table was blurred by it.
As I entered, however, my fears were set at rest, for it was
the acrid fumes of strong coarse tobacco which took me
by the throat and set me coughing. Through the haze I

41 of 279
had a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled
up in an armchair with his black clay pipe between his
lips. Several rolls of paper lay around him.
‘Caught cold, Watson?’ said he.
‘No, it’s this poisonous atmosphere.’
‘I suppose it is pretty thick, now that you mention it.’
‘Thick! It is intolerable.’
‘Open the window, then! You have been at your club
all day, I perceive.’
‘My dear Holmes!’
‘Am I right?’
‘Certainly, but how?’
He laughed at my bewildered expression.
‘There is a delightful freshness about you, Watson,
which makes it a pleasure to exercise any small powers
which I possess at your expense. A gentleman goes forth
on a showery and miry day. He returns immaculate in the
evening with the gloss still on his hat and his boots. He has
been a fixture therefore all day. He is not a man with
intimate friends. Where, then, could he have been? Is it
not obvious?’
‘Well, it is rather obvious.’

42 of 279
‘The world is full of obvious things which nobody by
any chance ever observes. Where do you think that I have
been?’
‘A fixture also.’
‘On the contrary, I have been to Devonshire.’
‘In spirit?’
‘Exactly. My body has remained in this arm-chair and
has, I regret to observe, consumed in my absence two
large pots of coffee and an incredible amount of tobacco.
After you left I sent down to Stamford’s for the Ordnance
map of this portion of the moor, and my spirit has
hovered over it all day. I flatter myself that I could find my
way about.’
‘A large scale map, I presume?’
‘Very large.’ He unrolled one section and held it over
his knee. ‘Here you have the particular district which
concerns us. That is Baskerville Hall in the middle.’
‘With a wood round it?’
‘Exactly. I fancy the Yew Alley, though not marked
under that name, must stretch along this line, with the
moor, as you perceive, upon the right of it. This small
clump of buildings here is the hamlet of Grimpen, where
our friend Dr. Mortimer has his headquarters. Within a
radius of five miles there are, as you see, only a very few

43 of 279
scattered dwellings. Here is Lafter Hall, which was
mentioned in the narrative. There is a house indicated
here which may be the residence of the naturalist—
Stapleton, if I remember right, was his name. Here are
two moorland farm-houses, High Tor and Foulmire.
Then fourteen miles away the great convict prison of
Princetown. Between and around these scattered points
extends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, is the stage
upon which tragedy has been played, and upon which we
may help to play it again.’
‘It must be a wild place.’
‘Yes, the setting is a worthy one. If the devil did desire
to have a hand in the affairs of men ——‘
‘Then you are yourself inclining to the supernatural
explanation.’
‘The devil’s agents may be of flesh and blood, may they
not? There are two questions waiting for us at the outset.
The one is whether any crime has been committed at all;
the second is, what is the crime and how was it
committed? Of course, if Dr. Mortimer’s surmise should
be correct, and we are dealing with forces outside the
ordinary laws of Nature, there is an end of our
investigation. But we are bound to exhaust all other
hypotheses before falling back upon this one. I think we’ll

44 of 279
shut that window again, if you don’t mind. It is a singular
thing, but I find that a concentrated atmosphere helps a
concentration of thought. I have not pushed it to the
length of getting into a box to think, but that is the logical
outcome of my convictions. Have you turned the case
over in your mind?’
‘Yes, I have thought a good deal of it in the course of
the day.’
‘What do you make of it?’
‘It is very bewildering.’
‘It has certainly a character of its own. There are points
of distinction about it. That change in the footprints, for
example. What do you make of that?’
‘Mortimer said that the man had walked on tiptoe
down that portion of the alley.’
‘He only repeated what some fool had said at the
inquest. Why should a man walk on tiptoe down the
alley?’
‘What then?’
‘He was running, Watson—running desperately,
running for his life, running until he burst his heart and
fell dead upon his face.’
‘Running from what?’

45 of 279
‘There lies our problem. There are indications that the
man was crazed with fear before ever he began to run.’
‘How can you say that?’
‘I am presuming that the cause of his fears came to him
across the moor. If that were so, and it seems most
probable, only a man who had lost his wits would have
run from the house instead of towards it. If the gipsy’s
evidence may be taken as true, he ran with cries for help
in the direction where help was least likely to be. Then,
again, whom was he waiting for that night, and why was
he waiting for him in the Yew Alley rather than in his
own house?’
‘You think that he was waiting for someone?’
‘The man was elderly and infirm. We can understand
his taking an evening stroll, but the ground was damp and
the night inclement. Is it natural that he should stand for
five or ten minutes, as Dr. Mortimer, with more practical
sense than I should have given him credit for, deduced
from the cigar ash?’
‘But he went out every evening.’
‘I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gate
every evening. On the contrary, the evidence is that he
avoided the moor. That night he waited there. It was the
night before he made his departure for London. The thing

46 of 279
takes shape, Watson. It becomes coherent. Might I ask
you to hand me my violin, and we will postpone all
further thought upon this business until we have had the
advantage of meeting Dr. Mortimer and Sir Henry
Baskerville in the morning.’

47 of 279
Chapter 4
Sir Henry Baskerville
Our breakfast-table was cleared early, and Holmes
waited in his dressing-gown for the promised interview.
Our clients were punctual to their appointment, for the
clock had just struck ten when Dr. Mortimer was shown
up, followed by the young baronet. The latter was a small,
alert, dark-eyed man about thirty years of age, very
sturdily built, with thick black eyebrows and a strong,
pugnacious face. He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit and
had the weather-beaten appearance of one who has spent
most of his time in the open air, and yet there was
something in his steady eye and the quiet assurance of his
bearing which indicated the gentleman.
‘This is Sir Henry Baskerville,’ said Dr. Mortimer.
‘Why, yes,’ said he, ‘and the strange thing is, Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, that if my friend here had not proposed
coming round to you this morning I should have come on
my own account. I understand that you think out little
puzzles, and I’ve had one this morning which wants more
thinking out than I am able to give it.’

48 of 279
‘Pray take a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you to say
that you have yourself had some remarkable experience
since you arrived in London?’
‘Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Only a
joke, as like as not. It was this letter, if you can call it a
letter, which reached me this morning.’
He laid an envelope upon the table, and we all bent
over it. It was of common quality, grayish in colour. The
address, ‘Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel,’
was printed in rough characters; the postmark ‘Charing
Cross,’ and the date of posting the preceding evening.
‘Who knew that you were going to the
Northumberland Hotel?’ asked Holmes, glancing keenly
across at our visitor.
‘No one could have known. We only decided after I
met Dr. Mortimer.’
‘But Dr. Mortimer was no doubt already stopping
there?’
‘No, I had been staying with a friend,’ said the doctor.
‘There was no possible indication that we intended to go
to this hotel.’
‘Hum! Someone seems to be very deeply interested in
your movements.’ Out of the envelope he took a halfsheet
of foolscap paper folded into four. This he opened

49 of 279
and spread flat upon the table. Across the middle of it a
single sentence had been formed by the expedient of
pasting printed words upon it. It ran: ‘As you value your
life or your reason keep away from the moor.’ The word
‘moor’ only was printed in ink.
‘Now,’ said Sir Henry Baskerville, ‘perhaps you will tell
me, Mr. Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that,
and who it is that takes so much interest in my affairs?’
‘What do you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You must
allow that there is nothing supernatural about this, at any
rate?’
‘No, sir, but it might very well come from someone
who was convinced that the business is supernatural.’
‘What business?’ asked Sir Henry sharply. ‘It seems to
me that all you gentlemen know a great deal more than I
do about my own affairs.’
‘You shall share our knowledge before you leave this
room, Sir Henry. I promise you that,’ said Sherlock
Holmes. ‘We will confine ourselves for the present with
your permission to this very interesting document, which
must have been put together and posted yesterday
evening. Have you yesterday’s Times, Watson?’
‘It is here in the corner.’

50 of 279
‘Might I trouble you for it—the inside page, please,
with the leading articles?’ He glanced swiftly over it,
running his eyes up and down the columns. ‘Capital article
this on free trade. Permit me to give you an extract from
it. ‘You may be cajoled into imagining that your own
special trade or your own industry will be encouraged by a
protective tariff, but it stands to reason that such legislation
must in the long run keep away wealth from the country,
diminish the value of our imports, and lower the general
conditions of life in this island.’ What do you think of
that, Watson?’ cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing his
hands together with satisfaction. ‘Don’t you think that is
an admirable sentiment?’
Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with an air of
professional interest, and Sir Henry Baskerville turned a
pair of puzzled dark eyes upon me.
‘I don’t know much about the tariff and things of that
kind,’ said he; ‘but it seems to me we’ve got a bit off the
trail so far as that note is concerned.’
‘On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot upon
the trail, Sir Henry. Watson here knows more about my
methods than you do, but I fear that even he has not quite
grasped the significance of this sentence.’
‘No, I confess that I see no connection.’

51 of 279
‘And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close a
connection that the one is extracted out of the other.
‘You,’ ‘your,’ ‘your,’ ‘life,’ ‘reason,’ ‘value,’ ‘keep away,’
‘from the.’ Don’t you see now whence these words have
been taken?’
‘By thunder, you’re right! Well, if that isn’t smart!’
cried Sir Henry.
‘If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the fact
that ‘keep away’ and ‘from the’ are cut out in one piece.’
‘Well, now—so it is!’
‘Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which I
could have imagined,’ said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at my
friend in amazement. ‘I could understand anyone saying
that the words were from a newspaper; but that you
should name which, and add that it came from the leading
article, is really one of the most remarkable things which I
have ever known. How did you do it?’
‘I presume, Doctor, that you could tell the skull of a
negro from that of an Esquimau?’
‘Most certainly.’
‘But how?’
‘Because that is my special hobby. The differences are
obvious. The supra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the
maxillary curve, the —‘
eBook brought to you by


52 of 279
‘But this is my special hobby, and the differences are
equally obvious. There is as much difference to my eyes
between the leaded bourgeois type of a Times article and
the slovenly print of an evening half-penny paper as there
could be between your negro and your Esquimau. The
detection of types is one of the most elementary branches
of knowledge to the special expert in crime, though I
confess that once when I was very young I confused the
Leeds Mercury with the Western Morning News. But a
Times leader is entirely distinctive, and these words could
have been taken from nothing else. As it was done
yesterday the strong probability was that we should find
the words in yesterday’s issue.’
‘So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes,’ said Sir
Henry Baskerville, ‘someone cut out this message with a
scissors—‘
‘Nail-scissors,’ said Holmes. ‘You can see that it was a
very short-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take two
snips over ‘keep away.’’
‘That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a
pair of short-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste—‘
‘Gum,’ said Holmes.
‘With gum on to the paper. But I want to know why
the word ‘moor’ should have been written?’
