"I can't help it. I FEEL he's here!"

She looked appealingly at Sir James, who replied gravely:

"With due deference to your feelings, Miss Tuppence (and mine as well
for that matter), I do not see how it is humanly possible for anyone to
be in the flat without our knowledge."

The girl was a little comforted by his wards.

"Sitting up at night is always rather jumpy," she confessed.

"Yes," said Sir James. "We are in the condition of people holding a
seance. Perhaps if a medium were present we might get some marvellous
results."

"Do you believe in spiritualism?" asked Tuppence, opening her eyes wide.

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.

"There is some truth in it, without a doubt. But most of the testimony
would not pass muster in the witness-box."

The hours drew on. With the first faint glimmerings of dawn, Sir James
drew aside the curtains. They beheld, what few Londoners see, the slow
rising of the sun over the sleeping city. Somehow, with the coming
of the light, the dreads and fancies of the past night seemed absurd.
Tuppence's spirits revived to the normal.

"Hooray!" she said. "It's going to be a gorgeous day. And we shall find
Tommy. And Jane Finn. And everything will be lovely. I shall ask Mr.
Carter if I can't be made a Dame!"

At seven o'clock Tuppence volunteered to go and make some tea. She
returned with a tray, containing the teapot and four cups.

"Who's the other cup for?" inquired Julius.

"The prisoner, of course. I suppose we might call her that?"

"Taking her tea seems a kind of anticlimax to last night," said Julius
thoughtfully.

"Yes, it does," admitted Tuppence. "But, anyway, here goes. Perhaps
you'd both come, too, in case she springs on me, or anything. You see,
we don't know what mood she'll wake up in."

Sir James and Julius accompanied her to the door.

"Where's the key? Oh, of course, I've got it myself."

She put it in the lock, and turned it, then paused.

"Supposing, after all, she's escaped?" she murmured in a whisper.

"Plumb impossible," replied Julius reassuringly.

But Sir James said nothing.

Tuppence drew a long breath and entered. She heaved a sigh of relief as
she saw that Mrs. Vandemeyer was lying on the bed.

"Good morning," she remarked cheerfully. "I've brought you some tea."

Mrs. Vandemeyer did not reply. Tuppence put down the cup on the table
by the bed and went across to draw up the blinds. When she turned, Mrs.
Vandemeyer still lay without a movement. With a sudden fear clutching
at her heart, Tuppence ran to the bed. The hand she lifted was cold as
ice.... Mrs. Vandemeyer would never speak now....

Her cry brought the others. A very few minutes sufficed. Mrs. Vandemeyer
was dead--must have been dead some hours. She had evidently died in her
sleep.

"If that isn't the cruellest luck," cried Julius in despair.

The lawyer was calmer, but there was a curious gleam in his eyes.

"If it is luck," he replied.

"You don't think--but, say, that's plumb impossible--no one could have
got in."

"No," admitted the lawyer. "I don't see how they could. And yet--she is
on the point of betraying Mr. Brown, and--she dies. Is it only chance?"

"But how----"

"Yes, HOW! That is what we must find out." He stood there silently,
gently stroking his chin. "We must find out," he said quietly, and
Tuppence felt that if she was Mr. Brown she would not like the tone of
those simple words.

Julius's glance went to the window.

"The window's open," he remarked. "Do you think----"

Tuppence shook her head.

"The balcony only goes along as far as the boudoir. We were there."

"He might have slipped out----" suggested Julius.

But Sir James interrupted him.

"Mr. Brown's methods are not so crude. In the meantime we must send for
a doctor, but before we do so, is there anything in this room that might
be of value to us?"

Hastily, the three searched. A charred mass in the grate indicated
that Mrs. Vandemeyer had been burning papers on the eve of her flight.
Nothing of importance remained, though they searched the other rooms as
well.

"There's that," said Tuppence suddenly, pointing to a small,
old-fashioned safe let into the wall. "It's for jewellery, I believe,
but there might be something else in it."

The key was in the lock, and Julius swung open the door, and searched
inside. He was some time over the task.

"Well," said Tuppence impatiently.

There was a pause before Julius answered, then he withdrew his head and
shut to the door.

"Nothing," he said.

In five minutes a brisk young doctor arrived, hastily summoned. He was
deferential to Sir James, whom he recognized.

"Heart failure, or possibly an overdose of some sleeping-draught." He
sniffed. "Rather an odour of chloral in the air."

Tuppence remembered the glass she had upset. A new thought drove her to
the washstand. She found the little bottle from which Mrs. Vandemeyer
had poured a few drops.

It had been three parts full. Now--IT WAS EMPTY.



CHAPTER XIV. A CONSULTATION

NOTHING was more surprising and bewildering to Tuppence than the ease
and simplicity with which everything was arranged, owing to Sir James's
skilful handling. The doctor accepted quite readily the theory that Mrs.
Vandemeyer had accidentally taken an overdose of chloral. He doubted
whether an inquest would be necessary. If so, he would let Sir James
know. He understood that Mrs. Vandemeyer was on the eve of departure for
abroad, and that the servants had already left? Sir James and his young
friends had been paying a call upon her, when she was suddenly stricken
down and they had spent the night in the flat, not liking to leave
her alone. Did they know of any relatives? They did not, but Sir James
referred him to Mrs. Vandemeyer's solicitor.

Shortly afterwards a nurse arrived to take charge, and the other left
the ill-omened building.

"And what now?" asked Julius, with a gesture of despair. "I guess we're
down and out for good."

Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully.

"No," he said quietly. "There is still the chance that Dr. Hall may be
able to tell us something."

"Gee! I'd forgotten him."

"The chance is slight, but it must not be neglected. I think I told you
that he is staying at the Metropole. I should suggest that we call upon
him there as soon as possible. Shall we say after a bath and breakfast?"

It was arranged that Tuppence and Julius should return to the Ritz, and
call for Sir James in the car. This programme was faithfully carried
out, and a little after eleven they drew up before the Metropole. They
asked for Dr. Hall, and a page-boy went in search of him. In a few
minutes the little doctor came hurrying towards them.

"Can you spare us a few minutes, Dr. Hall?" said Sir James pleasantly.
"Let me introduce you to Miss Cowley. Mr. Hersheimmer, I think, you
already know."

A quizzical gleam came into the doctor's eye as he shook hands with
Julius.

"Ah, yes, my young friend of the tree episode! Ankle all right, eh?"

"I guess it's cured owing to your skilful treatment, doc."

"And the heart trouble? Ha ha!"

"Still searching," said Julius briefly.

"To come to the point, can we have a word with you in private?" asked
Sir James.

"Certainly. I think there is a room here where we shall be quite
undisturbed."

He led the way, and the others followed him. They sat down, and the
doctor looked inquiringly at Sir James.

"Dr. Hall, I am very anxious to find a certain young lady for the
purpose of obtaining a statement from her. I have reason to believe
that she has been at one time or another in your establishment at
Bournemouth. I hope I am transgressing no professional etiquette in
questioning you on the subject?"

"I suppose it is a matter of testimony?"

Sir James hesitated a moment, then he replied:

"Yes."

"I shall be pleased to give you any information in my power. What is
the young lady's name? Mr. Hersheimmer asked me, I remember----" He half
turned to Julius.

"The name," said Sir James bluntly, "is really immaterial. She would be
almost certainly sent to you under an assumed one. But I should like to
know if you are acquainted with a Mrs. Vandemeyer?"

"Mrs. Vandemeyer, of 20 South Audley Mansions? I know her slightly."

"You are not aware of what has happened?"

"What do you mean?"

"You do not know that Mrs. Vandemeyer is dead?"

"Dear, dear, I had no idea of it! When did it happen?"

"She took an overdose of chloral last night."

"Purposely?"

"Accidentally, it is believed. I should not like to say myself. Anyway,
she was found dead this morning."

"Very sad. A singularly handsome woman. I presume she was a friend of
yours, since you are acquainted with all these details."

"I am acquainted with the details because--well, it was I who found her
dead."

"Indeed," said the doctor, starting.

"Yes," said Sir James, and stroked his chin reflectively.

"This is very sad news, but you will excuse me if I say that I do not
see how it bears on the subject of your inquiry?"

"It bears on it in this way, is it not a fact that Mrs. Vandemeyer
committed a young relative of hers to your charge?"

Julius leaned forward eagerly.

"That is the case," said the doctor quietly.

"Under the name of----?"

"Janet Vandemeyer. I understood her to be a niece of Mrs. Vandemeyer's."

"And she came to you?"

"As far as I can remember in June or July of 1915."

"Was she a mental case?"

"She is perfectly sane, if that is what you mean. I understood from Mrs.
Vandemeyer that the girl had been with her on the Lusitania when
that ill-fated ship was sunk, and had suffered a severe shock in
consequence."

"We're on the right track, I think?" Sir James looked round.

"As I said before, I'm a mutt!" returned Julius.

The doctor looked at them all curiously.

"You spoke of wanting a statement from her," he said. "Supposing she is
not able to give one?"

"What? You have just said that she is perfectly sane."

"So she is. Nevertheless, if you want a statement from her concerning
any events prior to May 7, 1915, she will not be able to give it to
you."

They looked at the little man, stupefied. He nodded cheerfully.

"It's a pity," he said. "A great pity, especially as I gather, Sir
James, that the matter is important. But there it is, she can tell you
nothing."

"But why, man? Darn it all, why?"

The little man shifted his benevolent glance to the excited young
American.

"Because Janet Vandemeyer is suffering from a complete loss of memory."

"WHAT?"

"Quite so. An interesting case, a very interesting case. Not so
uncommon, really, as you would think. There are several very well known
parallels. It's the first case of the kind that I've had under my own
personal observation, and I must admit that I've found it of absorbing
interest." There was something rather ghoulish in the little man's
satisfaction.

"And she remembers nothing," said Sir James slowly.

"Nothing prior to May 7, 1915. After that date her memory is as good as
yours or mine."

"Then the first thing she remembers?"

"Is landing with the survivors. Everything before that is a blank. She
did not know her own name, or where she had come from, or where she was.
She couldn't even speak her own tongue."

"But surely all this is most unusual?" put in Julius.

"No, my dear sir. Quite normal under the circumstances. Severe shock to
the nervous system. Loss of memory proceeds nearly always on the same
lines. I suggested a specialist, of course. There's a very good man in
Paris--makes a study of these cases--but Mrs. Vandemeyer opposed the
idea of publicity that might result from such a course."

"I can imagine she would," said Sir James grimly.

"I fell in with her views. There is a certain notoriety given to these
cases. And the girl was very young--nineteen, I believe. It seemed
a pity that her infirmity should be talked about--might damage her
prospects. Besides, there is no special treatment to pursue in such
cases. It is really a matter of waiting."

"Waiting?"

"Yes, sooner or later, the memory will return--as suddenly as it
went. But in all probability the girl will have entirely forgotten the
intervening period, and will take up life where she left off--at the
sinking of the Lusitania."

"And when do you expect this to happen?"

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.

"Ah, that I cannot say. Sometimes it is a matter of months, sometimes
it has been known to be as long as twenty years! Sometimes another shock
does the trick. One restores what the other took away."

"Another shock, eh?" said Julius thoughtfully.

"Exactly. There was a case in Colorado----" The little man's voice
trailed on, voluble, mildly enthusiastic.

Julius did not seem to be listening. He had relapsed into his own
thoughts and was frowning. Suddenly he came out of his brown study,
and hit the table such a resounding bang with his fist that every one
jumped, the doctor most of all.

"I've got it! I guess, doc, I'd like your medical opinion on the plan
I'm about to outline. Say Jane was to cross the herring pond again, and
the same thing was to happen. The submarine, the sinking ship, every one
to take to the boats--and so on. Wouldn't that do the trick? Wouldn't it
give a mighty big bump to her subconscious self, or whatever the jargon
is, and start it functioning again right away?"

"A very interesting speculation, Mr. Hersheimmer. In my own opinion, it
would be successful. It is unfortunate that there is no chance of the
conditions repeating themselves as you suggest."

"Not by nature, perhaps, doc. But I'm talking about art."

"Art?"

"Why, yes. What's the difficulty? Hire a liner----"

"A liner!" murmured Dr. Hall faintly.

"Hire some passengers, hire a submarine--that's the only difficulty, I
guess. Governments are apt to be a bit hidebound over their engines of
war. They won't sell to the firstcomer. Still, I guess that can be got
over. Ever heard of the word 'graft,' sir? Well, graft gets there every
time! I reckon that we shan't really need to fire a torpedo. If every
one hustles round and screams loud enough that the ship is sinking, it
ought to be enough for an innocent young girl like Jane. By the time
she's got a life-belt on her, and is being hustled into a boat, with
a well-drilled lot of artistes doing the hysterical stunt on deck,
why--she ought to be right back where she was in May, 1915. How's that
for the bare outline?"

Dr. Hall looked at Julius. Everything that he was for the moment
incapable of saying was eloquent in that look.

"No," said Julius, in answer to it, "I'm not crazy. The thing's
perfectly possible. It's done every day in the States for the movies.
Haven't you seen trains in collision on the screen? What's the
difference between buying up a train and buying up a liner? Get the
properties and you can go right ahead!"

Dr. Hall found his voice.

"But the expense, my dear sir." His voice rose. "The expense! It will be
COLOSSAL!"

"Money doesn't worry me any," explained Julius simply.

Dr. Hall turned an appealing face to Sir James, who smiled slightly.

"Mr. Hersheimmer is very well off--very well off indeed."

The doctor's glance came back to Julius with a new and subtle quality in
it. This was no longer an eccentric young fellow with a habit of falling
off trees. The doctor's eyes held the deference accorded to a really
rich man.

"Very remarkable plan. Very remarkable," he murmured. "The movies--of
course! Your American word for the kinema. Very interesting. I fear we
are perhaps a little behind the times over here in our methods. And you
really mean to carry out this remarkable plan of yours."

"You bet your bottom dollar I do."

The doctor believed him--which was a tribute to his nationality. If an
Englishman had suggested such a thing, he would have had grave doubts as
to his sanity.

"I cannot guarantee a cure," he pointed out. "Perhaps I ought to make
that quite clear."

"Sure, that's all right," said Julius. "You just trot out Jane, and
leave the rest to me."

"Jane?"

"Miss Janet Vandemeyer, then. Can we get on the long distance to your
place right away, and ask them to send her up; or shall I run down and
fetch her in my car?"

The doctor stared.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Hersheimmer. I thought you understood."

"Understood what?"

"That Miss Vandemeyer is no longer under my care."



CHAPTER XV. TUPPENCE RECEIVES A PROPOSAL

JULIUS sprang up.

"What?"

"I thought you were aware of that."

"When did she leave?"

"Let me see. To-day is Monday, is it not? It must have been last
Wednesday--why, surely--yes, it was the same evening that you--er--fell
out of my tree."

"That evening? Before, or after?"

"Let me see--oh yes, afterwards. A very urgent message arrived from Mrs.
Vandemeyer. The young lady and the nurse who was in charge of her left
by the night train."

Julius sank back again into his chair.

"Nurse Edith--left with a patient--I remember," he muttered. "My God, to
have been so near!"

Dr. Hall looked bewildered.

"I don't understand. Is the young lady not with her aunt, after all?"

Tuppence shook her head. She was about to speak when a warning glance
from Sir James made her hold her tongue. The lawyer rose.

"I'm much obliged to you, Hall. We're very grateful for all you've
told us. I'm afraid we're now in the position of having to track Miss
Vandemeyer anew. What about the nurse who accompanied her; I suppose you
don't know where she is?"

The doctor shook his head.

"We've not heard from her, as it happens. I understood she was to remain
with Miss Vandemeyer for a while. But what can have happened? Surely the
girl has not been kidnapped."

"That remains to be seen," said Sir James gravely.

The other hesitated.

"You do not think I ought to go to the police?"

"No, no. In all probability the young lady is with other relations."

The doctor was not completely satisfied, but he saw that Sir James was
determined to say no more, and realized that to try and extract
more information from the famous K.C. would be mere waste of labour.
Accordingly, he wished them goodbye, and they left the hotel. For a few
minutes they stood by the car talking.

"How maddening," cried Tuppence. "To think that Julius must have been
actually under the same roof with her for a few hours."

"I was a darned idiot," muttered Julius gloomily.

"You couldn't know," Tuppence consoled him. "Could he?" She appealed to
Sir James.

"I should advise you not to worry," said the latter kindly. "No use
crying over spilt milk, you know."

"The great thing is what to do next," added Tuppence the practical.

Sir James shrugged his shoulders.

"You might advertise for the nurse who accompanied the girl. That is
the only course I can suggest, and I must confess I do not hope for much
result. Otherwise there is nothing to be done."

"Nothing?" said Tuppence blankly. "And--Tommy?"

"We must hope for the best," said Sir James. "Oh yes, we must go on
hoping."

But over her downcast head his eyes met Julius's, and almost
imperceptibly he shook his head. Julius understood. The lawyer
considered the case hopeless. The young American's face grew grave. Sir
James took Tuppence's hand.

"You must let me know if anything further comes to light. Letters will
always be forwarded."

Tuppence stared at him blankly.

"You are going away?"

"I told you. Don't you remember? To Scotland."

"Yes, but I thought----" The girl hesitated.

Sir James shrugged his shoulders.

"My dear young lady, I can do nothing more, I fear. Our clues have all
ended in thin air. You can take my word for it that there is nothing
more to be done. If anything should arise, I shall be glad to advise you
in any way I can."

His words gave Tuppence an extraordinarily desolate feeling.

"I suppose you're right," she said. "Anyway, thank you very much for
trying to help us. Good-bye."

Julius was bending over the car. A momentary pity came into Sir James's
keen eyes, as he gazed into the girl's downcast face.

"Don't be too disconsolate, Miss Tuppence," he said in a low voice.
"Remember, holiday-time isn't always all playtime. One sometimes manages
to put in some work as well."

Something in his tone made Tuppence glance up sharply. He shook his head
with a smile.

"No, I shan't say any more. Great mistake to say too much. Remember
that. Never tell all you know--not even to the person you know best.
Understand? Good-bye."

He strode away. Tuppence stared after him. She was beginning to
understand Sir James's methods. Once before he had thrown her a hint
in the same careless fashion. Was this a hint? What exactly lay
behind those last brief words? Did he mean that, after all, he had not
abandoned the case; that, secretly, he would be working on it still
while----

Her meditations were interrupted by Julius, who adjured her to "get
right in."

"You're looking kind of thoughtful," he remarked as they started off.
"Did the old guy say anything more?"

Tuppence opened her mouth impulsively, and then shut it again. Sir
James's words sounded in her ears: "Never tell all you know--not even
to the person you know best." And like a flash there came into her mind
another memory. Julius before the safe in the flat, her own question and
the pause before his reply, "Nothing." Was there really nothing? Or
had he found something he wished to keep to himself? If he could make a
reservation, so could she.

"Nothing particular," she replied.

She felt rather than saw Julius throw a sideways glance at her.

"Say, shall we go for a spin in the park?"

"If you like."

For a while they ran on under the trees in silence. It was a beautiful
day. The keen rush through the air brought a new exhilaration to
Tuppence.

"Say, Miss Tuppence, do you think I'm ever going to find Jane?"

Julius spoke in a discouraged voice. The mood was so alien to him that
Tuppence turned and stared at him in surprise. He nodded.

"That's so. I'm getting down and out over the business. Sir James to-day
hadn't got any hope at all, I could see that. I don't like him--we don't
gee together somehow--but he's pretty cute, and I guess he wouldn't quit
if there was any chance of success--now, would he?"

Tuppence felt rather uncomfortable, but clinging to her belief that
Julius also had withheld something from her, she remained firm.

"He suggested advertising for the nurse," she reminded him.

"Yes, with a 'forlorn hope' flavour to his voice! No--I'm about fed up.
I've half a mind to go back to the States right away."

"Oh no!" cried Tuppence. "We've got to find Tommy."

"I sure forgot Beresford," said Julius contritely. "That's so. We must
find him. But after--well, I've been day-dreaming ever since I started
on this trip--and these dreams are rotten poor business. I'm quit of
them. Say, Miss Tuppence, there's something I'd like to ask you."

"Yes?"

"You and Beresford. What about it?"

"I don't understand you," replied Tuppence with dignity, adding rather
inconsequently: "And, anyway, you're wrong!"

"Not got a sort of kindly feeling for one another?"

"Certainly not," said Tuppence with warmth. "Tommy and I are
friends--nothing more."

"I guess every pair of lovers has said that sometime or another,"
observed Julius.

"Nonsense!" snapped Tuppence. "Do I look the sort of girl that's always
falling in love with every man she meets?"

"You do not. You look the sort of girl that's mighty often getting
fallen in love with!"

"Oh!" said Tuppence, rather taken aback. "That's a compliment, I
suppose?"

"Sure. Now let's get down to this. Supposing we never find Beresford
and--and----"

"All right--say it! I can face facts. Supposing he's--dead! Well?"

"And all this business fiddles out. What are you going to do?"

"I don't know," said Tuppence forlornly.

"You'll be darned lonesome, you poor kid."

"I shall be all right," snapped Tuppence with her usual resentment of
any kind of pity.

"What about marriage?" inquired Julius. "Got any views on the subject?"

"I intend to marry, of course," replied Tuppence. "That is, if"--she
paused, knew a momentary longing to draw back, and then stuck to her
guns bravely--"I can find some one rich enough to make it worth my
while. That's frank, isn't it? I dare say you despise me for it."

"I never despise business instinct," said Julius. "What particular
figure have you in mind?"

"Figure?" asked Tuppence, puzzled. "Do you mean tall or short?"

"No. Sum--income."

"Oh, I--I haven't quite worked that out."

"What about me?"

"You?"

"Sure thing."

"Oh, I couldn't!"

"Why not?"

"I tell you I couldn't."

"Again, why not?"

"It would seem so unfair."

"I don't see anything unfair about it. I call your bluff, that's all. I
admire you immensely, Miss Tuppence, more than any girl I've ever met.
You're so darned plucky. I'd just love to give you a real, rattling good
time. Say the word, and we'll run round right away to some high-class
jeweller, and fix up the ring business."

"I can't," gasped Tuppence.

"Because of Beresford?"

"No, no, NO!"

"Well then?"

Tuppence merely continued to shake her head violently.

"You can't reasonably expect more dollars than I've got."

"Oh, it isn't that," gasped Tuppence with an almost hysterical laugh.
"But thanking you very much, and all that, I think I'd better say no."

"I'd be obliged if you'd do me the favour to think it over until
to-morrow."

"It's no use."

"Still, I guess we'll leave it like that."

"Very well," said Tuppence meekly.

Neither of them spoke again until they reached the Ritz.

Tuppence went upstairs to her room. She felt morally battered to the
ground after her conflict with Julius's vigorous personality. Sitting
down in front of the glass, she stared at her own reflection for some
minutes.

"Fool," murmured Tuppence at length, making a grimace. "Little fool.
Everything you want--everything you've ever hoped for, and you go and
bleat out 'no' like an idiotic little sheep. It's your one chance. Why
don't you take it? Grab it? Snatch at it? What more do you want?"

As if in answer to her own question, her eyes fell on a small snapshot
of Tommy that stood on her dressing-table in a shabby frame. For a
moment she struggled for self-control, and then abandoning all presence,
she held it to her lips and burst into a fit of sobbing.

"Oh, Tommy, Tommy," she cried, "I do love you so--and I may never see
you again...."

At the end of five minutes Tuppence sat up, blew her nose, and pushed
back her hair.

"That's that," she observed sternly. "Let's look facts in the face. I
seem to have fallen in love--with an idiot of a boy who probably doesn't
care two straws about me." Here she paused. "Anyway," she resumed, as
though arguing with an unseen opponent, "I don't KNOW that he does. He'd
never have dared to say so. I've always jumped on sentiment--and here
I am being more sentimental than anybody. What idiots girls are! I've
always thought so. I suppose I shall sleep with his photograph under my
pillow, and dream about him all night. It's dreadful to feel you've been
false to your principles."

Tuppence shook her head sadly, as she reviewed her backsliding.

"I don't know what to say to Julius, I'm sure. Oh, what a fool I feel!
I'll have to say SOMETHING--he's so American and thorough, he'll insist
upon having a reason. I wonder if he did find anything in that safe----"

Tuppence's meditations went off on another tack. She reviewed the events
of last night carefully and persistently. Somehow, they seemed bound up
with Sir James's enigmatical words....

Suddenly she gave a great start--the colour faded out of her face. Her
eyes, fascinated, gazed in front of her, the pupils dilated.

"Impossible," she murmured. "Impossible! I must be going mad even to
think of such a thing...."

Monstrous--yet it explained everything....

After a moment's reflection she sat down and wrote a note, weighing each
word as she did so. Finally she nodded her head as though satisfied, and
slipped it into an envelope which she addressed to Julius. She went
down the passage to his sitting-room and knocked at the door. As she had
expected, the room was empty. She left the note on the table.

A small page-boy was waiting outside her own door when she returned to
it.

"Telegram for you, miss."

Tuppence took it from the salver, and tore it open carelessly. Then she
gave a cry. The telegram was from Tommy!



CHAPTER XVI. FURTHER ADVENTURES OF TOMMY

FROM a darkness punctuated with throbbing stabs of fire, Tommy dragged
his senses slowly back to life. When he at last opened his eyes, he was
conscious of nothing but an excruciating pain through his temples. He
was vaguely aware of unfamiliar surroundings. Where was he? What had
happened? He blinked feebly. This was not his bedroom at the Ritz. And
what the devil was the matter with his head?

"Damn!" said Tommy, and tried to sit up. He had remembered. He was in
that sinister house in Soho. He uttered a groan and fell back. Through
his almost-closed lids he reconnoitred carefully.

"He is coming to," remarked a voice very near Tommy's ear. He recognized
it at once for that of the bearded and efficient German, and lay
artistically inert. He felt that it would be a pity to come round too
soon; and until the pain in his head became a little less acute, he felt
quite incapable of collecting his wits. Painfully he tried to puzzle out
what had happened. Obviously somebody must have crept up behind him as
he listened and struck him down with a blow on the head. They knew
him now for a spy, and would in all probability give him short shrift.
Undoubtedly he was in a tight place. Nobody knew where he was, therefore
he need expect no outside assistance, and must depend solely on his own
wits.

"Well, here goes," murmured Tommy to himself, and repeated his former
remark.

"Damn!" he observed, and this time succeeded in sitting up.

In a minute the German stepped forward and placed a glass to his lips,
with the brief command "Drink." Tommy obeyed. The potency of the draught
made him choke, but it cleared his brain in a marvellous manner.

He was lying on a couch in the room in which the meeting had been held.
On one side of him was the German, on the other the villainous-faced
doorkeeper who had let him in. The others were grouped together at a
little distance away. But Tommy missed one face. The man known as Number
One was no longer of the company.

"Feel better?" asked the German, as he removed the empty glass.

"Yes, thanks," returned Tommy cheerfully.

"Ah, my young friend, it is lucky for you your skull is so thick. The
good Conrad struck hard." He indicated the evil-faced doorkeeper by a
nod. The man grinned.

Tommy twisted his head round with an effort.

"Oh," he said, "so you're Conrad, are you? It strikes me the thickness
of my skull was lucky for you too. When I look at you I feel it's almost
a pity I've enabled you to cheat the hangman."

The man snarled, and the bearded man said quietly:

"He would have run no risk of that."

"Just as you like," replied Tommy. "I know it's the fashion to run down
the police. I rather believe in them myself."

His manner was nonchalant to the last degree. Tommy Beresford was one
of those young Englishmen not distinguished by any special intellectual
ability, but who are emphatically at their best in what is known as a
"tight place." Their natural diffidence and caution fall from them like
a glove. Tommy realized perfectly that in his own wits lay the only
chance of escape, and behind his casual manner he was racking his brains
furiously.

The cold accents of the German took up the conversation:

"Have you anything to say before you are put to death as a spy?"

"Simply lots of things," replied Tommy with the same urbanity as before.

"Do you deny that you were listening at that door?"

"I do not. I must really apologize--but your conversation was so
interesting that it overcame my scruples."

"How did you get in?"

"Dear old Conrad here." Tommy smiled deprecatingly at him. "I hesitate
to suggest pensioning off a faithful servant, but you really ought to
have a better watchdog."

Conrad snarled impotently, and said sullenly, as the man with the beard
swung round upon him:

"He gave the word. How was I to know?"

"Yes," Tommy chimed in. "How was he to know? Don't blame the poor
fellow. His hasty action has given me the pleasure of seeing you all
face to face."

He fancied that his words caused some discomposure among the group, but
the watchful German stilled it with a wave of his hand.

"Dead men tell no tales," he said evenly.

"Ah," said Tommy, "but I'm not dead yet!"

"You soon will be, my young friend," said the German.

An assenting murmur came from the others.

Tommy's heart beat faster, but his casual pleasantness did not waver.

"I think not," he said firmly. "I should have a great objection to
dying."

He had got them puzzled, he saw that by the look on his captor's face.

"Can you give us any reason why we should not put you to death?" asked
the German.

"Several," replied Tommy. "Look here, you've been asking me a lot of
questions. Let me ask you one for a change. Why didn't you kill me off
at once before I regained consciousness?"

The German hesitated, and Tommy seized his advantage.

"Because you didn't know how much I knew--and where I obtained that
knowledge. If you kill me now, you never will know."

But here the emotions of Boris became too much for him. He stepped
forward waving his arms.

"You hell-hound of a spy," he screamed. "We will give you short shrift.
Kill him! Kill him!"

There was a roar of applause.

"You hear?" said the German, his eyes on Tommy. "What have you to say to
that?"

"Say?" Tommy shrugged his shoulders. "Pack of fools. Let them ask
themselves a few questions. How did I get into this place? Remember what
dear old Conrad said--WITH YOUR OWN PASSWORD, wasn't it? How did I get
hold of that? You don't suppose I came up those steps haphazard and said
the first thing that came into my head?"

Tommy was pleased with the concluding words of this speech. His only
regret was that Tuppence was not present to appreciate its full flavour.

"That is true," said the working man suddenly. "Comrades, we have been
betrayed!"

An ugly murmur arose. Tommy smiled at them encouragingly.

"That's better. How can you hope to make a success of any job if you
don't use your brains?"

"You will tell us who has betrayed us," said the German. "But that shall
not save you--oh, no! You shall tell us all that you know. Boris, here,
knows pretty ways of making people speak!"

"Bah!" said Tommy scornfully, fighting down a singularly unpleasant
feeling in the pit of his stomach. "You will neither torture me nor kill
me."

"And why not?" asked Boris.

"Because you'd kill the goose that lays the golden eggs," replied Tommy
quietly.

There was a momentary pause. It seemed as though Tommy's persistent
assurance was at last conquering. They were no longer completely sure of
themselves. The man in the shabby clothes stared at Tommy searchingly.

"He's bluffing you, Boris," he said quietly.

Tommy hated him. Had the man seen through him?

The German, with an effort, turned roughly to Tommy.

"What do you mean?"

"What do you think I mean?" parried Tommy, searching desperately in his
own mind.

Suddenly Boris stepped forward, and shook his fist in Tommy's face.

"Speak, you swine of an Englishman--speak!"

"Don't get so excited, my good fellow," said Tommy calmly. "That's the
worst of you foreigners. You can't keep calm. Now, I ask you, do I look
as though I thought there were the least chance of your killing me?"

He looked confidently round, and was glad they could not hear the
persistent beating of his heart which gave the lie to his words.

"No," admitted Boris at last sullenly, "you do not."

"Thank God, he's not a mind reader," thought Tommy. Aloud he pursued his
advantage:

"And why am I so confident? Because I know something that puts me in a
position to propose a bargain."

"A bargain?" The bearded man took him up sharply.

"Yes--a bargain. My life and liberty against----" He paused.

"Against what?"

The group pressed forward. You could have heard a pin drop.

Slowly Tommy spoke.

"The papers that Danvers brought over from America in the Lusitania."

The effect of his words was electrical. Every one was on his feet.
The German waved them back. He leaned over Tommy, his face purple with
excitement.

"Himmel! You have got them, then?"

With magnificent calm Tommy shook his head.

"You know where they are?" persisted the German.

Again Tommy shook his head. "Not in the least."

"Then--then----" angry and baffled, the words failed him.

Tommy looked round. He saw anger and bewilderment on every face, but his
calm assurance had done its work--no one doubted but that something lay
behind his words.

"I don't know where the papers are--but I believe that I can find them.
I have a theory----"

"Pah!"

Tommy raised his hand, and silenced the clamours of disgust.

"I call it a theory--but I'm pretty sure of my facts--facts that are
known to no one but myself. In any case what do you lose? If I can
produce the papers--you give me my life and liberty in exchange. Is it a
bargain?"

"And if we refuse?" said the German quietly.

Tommy lay back on the couch.

"The 29th," he said thoughtfully, "is less than a fortnight ahead----"

For a moment the German hesitated. Then he made a sign to Conrad.

"Take him into the other room."

For five minutes, Tommy sat on the bed in the dingy room next door. His
heart was beating violently. He had risked all on this throw. How would
they decide? And all the while that this agonized questioning went on
within him, he talked flippantly to Conrad, enraging the cross-grained
doorkeeper to the point of homicidal mania.

At last the door opened, and the German called imperiously to Conrad to
return.

"Let's hope the judge hasn't put his black cap on," remarked Tommy
frivolously. "That's right, Conrad, march me in. The prisoner is at the
bar, gentlemen."

The German was seated once more behind the table. He motioned to Tommy
to sit down opposite to him.

"We accept," he said harshly, "on terms. The papers must be delivered to
us before you go free."

"Idiot!" said Tommy amiably. "How do you think I can look for them if
you keep me tied by the leg here?"

"What do you expect, then?"

"I must have liberty to go about the business in my own way."

The German laughed.

"Do you think we are little children to let you walk out of here leaving
us a pretty story full of promises?"

"No," said Tommy thoughtfully. "Though infinitely simpler for me, I
did not really think you would agree to that plan. Very well, we must
arrange a compromise. How would it be if you attached little Conrad here
to my person. He's a faithful fellow, and very ready with the fist."

"We prefer," said the German coldly, "that you should remain here.
One of our number will carry out your instructions minutely. If the
operations are complicated, he will return to you with a report and you
can instruct him further."

"You're tying my hands," complained Tommy. "It's a very delicate affair,
and the other fellow will muff it up as likely as not, and then where
shall I be? I don't believe one of you has got an ounce of tact."

The German rapped the table.

"Those are our terms. Otherwise, death!"

Tommy leaned back wearily.

"I like your style. Curt, but attractive. So be it, then. But one thing
is essential, I must see the girl."

"What girl?"

"Jane Finn, of course."

The other looked at him curiously for some minutes, then he said slowly,
and as though choosing his words with care:

"Do you not know that she can tell you nothing?"

Tommy's heart beat a little faster. Would he succeed in coming face to
face with the girl he was seeking?

"I shall not ask her to tell me anything," he said quietly. "Not in so
many words, that is."

"Then why see her?"

Tommy paused.

"To watch her face when I ask her one question," he replied at last.

Again there was a look in the German's eyes that Tommy did not quite
understand.

"She will not be able to answer your question."

"That does not matter. I shall have seen her face when I ask it."

"And you think that will tell you anything?" He gave a short
disagreeable laugh. More than ever, Tommy felt that there was a
factor somewhere that he did not understand. The German looked at
him searchingly. "I wonder whether, after all, you know as much as we
think?" he said softly.

Tommy felt his ascendancy less sure than a moment before. His hold had
slipped a little. But he was puzzled. What had he said wrong? He spoke
out on the impulse of the moment.

"There may be things that you know which I do not. I have not pretended
to be aware of all the details of your show. But equally I've got
something up my sleeve that you don't know about. And that's where I
mean to score. Danvers was a damned clever fellow----" He broke off as
if he had said too much.

But the German's face had lightened a little.

"Danvers," he murmured. "I see----" He paused a minute, then waved to
Conrad. "Take him away. Upstairs--you know."

"Wait a minute," said Tommy. "What about the girl?"

"That may perhaps be arranged."

"It must be."

"We will see about it. Only one person can decide that."

"Who?" asked Tommy. But he knew the answer.

"Mr. Brown----"

"Shall I see him?"

"Perhaps."

"Come," said Conrad harshly.

Tommy rose obediently. Outside the door his gaoler motioned to him to
mount the stairs. He himself followed close behind. On the floor above
Conrad opened a door and Tommy passed into a small room. Conrad lit a
hissing gas burner and went out. Tommy heard the sound of the key being
turned in the lock.

He set to work to examine his prison. It was a smaller room than the
one downstairs, and there was something peculiarly airless about the
atmosphere of it. Then he realized that there was no window. He walked
round it. The walls were filthily dirty, as everywhere else. Four
pictures hung crookedly on the wall representing scenes from Faust.
Marguerite with her box of jewels, the church scene, Siebel and his
flowers, and Faust and Mephistopheles. The latter brought Tommy's mind
back to Mr. Brown again. In this sealed and closed chamber, with its
close-fitting heavy door, he felt cut off from the world, and the
sinister power of the arch-criminal seemed more real. Shout as he would,
no one could ever hear him. The place was a living tomb....

With an effort Tommy pulled himself together. He sank on to the bed
and gave himself up to reflection. His head ached badly; also, he was
hungry. The silence of the place was dispiriting.

"Anyway," said Tommy, trying to cheer himself, "I shall see the
chief--the mysterious Mr. Brown and with a bit of luck in bluffing I
shall see the mysterious Jane Finn also. After that----"

After that Tommy was forced to admit the prospect looked dreary.



CHAPTER XVII. ANNETTE

THE troubles of the future, however, soon faded before the troubles of
the present. And of these, the most immediate and pressing was that of
hunger. Tommy had a healthy and vigorous appetite. The steak and
chips partaken of for lunch seemed now to belong to another decade. He
regretfully recognized the fact that he would not make a success of a
hunger strike.

He prowled aimlessly about his prison. Once or twice he discarded
dignity, and pounded on the door. But nobody answered the summons.

"Hang it all!" said Tommy indignantly. "They can't mean to starve me
to death." A new-born fear passed through his mind that this might,
perhaps, be one of those "pretty ways" of making a prisoner speak, which
had been attributed to Boris. But on reflection he dismissed the idea.

"It's that sour faced brute Conrad," he decided. "That's a fellow I
shall enjoy getting even with one of these days. This is just a bit of
spite on his part. I'm certain of it."

Further meditations induced in him the feeling that it would be
extremely pleasant to bring something down with a whack on Conrad's
egg-shaped head. Tommy stroked his own head tenderly, and gave himself
up to the pleasures of imagination. Finally a bright idea flashed
across his brain. Why not convert imagination into reality? Conrad
was undoubtedly the tenant of the house. The others, with the possible
exception of the bearded German, merely used it as a rendezvous.
Therefore, why not wait in ambush for Conrad behind the door, and when
he entered bring down a chair, or one of the decrepit pictures, smartly
on to his head. One would, of course, be careful not to hit too hard.
And then--and then, simply walk out! If he met anyone on the way down,
well----Tommy brightened at the thought of an encounter with his fists.
Such an affair was infinitely more in his line than the verbal encounter
of this afternoon. Intoxicated by his plan, Tommy gently unhooked the
picture of the Devil and Faust, and settled himself in position. His
hopes were high. The plan seemed to him simple but excellent.

Time went on, but Conrad did not appear. Night and day were the same
in this prison room, but Tommy's wrist-watch, which enjoyed a certain
degree of accuracy, informed him that it was nine o'clock in the
evening. Tommy reflected gloomily that if supper did not arrive soon
it would be a question of waiting for breakfast. At ten o'clock hope
deserted him, and he flung himself on the bed to seek consolation in
sleep. In five minutes his woes were forgotten.

The sound of the key turning in the lock awoke him from his slumbers.
Not belonging to the type of hero who is famous for awaking in full
possession of his faculties, Tommy merely blinked at the ceiling and
wondered vaguely where he was. Then he remembered, and looked at his
watch. It was eight o'clock.

"It's either early morning tea or breakfast," deduced the young man,
"and pray God it's the latter!"

The door swung open. Too late, Tommy remembered his scheme of
obliterating the unprepossessing Conrad. A moment later he was glad that
he had, for it was not Conrad who entered, but a girl. She carried a
tray which she set down on the table.

In the feeble light of the gas burner Tommy blinked at her. He decided
at once that she was one of the most beautiful girls he had ever seen.
Her hair was a full rich brown, with sudden glints of gold in it as
though there were imprisoned sunbeams struggling in its depths. There
was a wild-rose quality about her face. Her eyes, set wide apart, were
hazel, a golden hazel that again recalled a memory of sunbeams.

A delirious thought shot through Tommy's mind.

"Are you Jane Finn?" he asked breathlessly.

The girl shook her head wonderingly.

"My name is Annette, monsieur."

She spoke in a soft, broken English.

"Oh!" said Tommy, rather taken aback. "Francaise?" he hazarded.

"Oui, monsieur. Monsieur parle francais?"

"Not for any length of time," said Tommy. "What's that? Breakfast?"

The girl nodded. Tommy dropped off the bed and came and inspected the
contents of the tray. It consisted of a loaf, some margarine, and a jug
of coffee.

"The living is not equal to the Ritz," he observed with a sigh. "But
for what we are at last about to receive the Lord has made me truly
thankful. Amen."

He drew up a chair, and the girl turned away to the door.

"Wait a sec," cried Tommy. "There are lots of things I want to ask you,
Annette. What are you doing in this house? Don't tell me you're Conrad's
niece, or daughter, or anything, because I can't believe it."

"I do the SERVICE, monsieur. I am not related to anybody."

"I see," said Tommy. "You know what I asked you just now. Have you ever
heard that name?"

"I have heard people speak of Jane Finn, I think."

"You don't know where she is?"

Annette shook her head.

"She's not in this house, for instance?"

"Oh no, monsieur. I must go now--they will be waiting for me."

She hurried out. The key turned in the lock.

"I wonder who 'they' are," mused Tommy, as he continued to make inroads
on the loaf. "With a bit of luck, that girl might help me to get out of
here. She doesn't look like one of the gang."

At one o'clock Annette reappeared with another tray, but this time
Conrad accompanied her.

"Good morning," said Tommy amiably. "You have NOT used Pear's soap, I
see."

Conrad growled threateningly.

"No light repartee, have you, old bean? There, there, we can't always
have brains as well as beauty. What have we for lunch? Stew? How did I
know? Elementary, my dear Watson--the smell of onions is unmistakable."

"Talk away," grunted the man. "It's little enough time you'll have to
talk in, maybe."

The remark was unpleasant in its suggestion, but Tommy ignored it. He
sat down at the table.

"Retire, varlet," he said, with a wave of his hand. "Prate not to thy
betters."

That evening Tommy sat on the bed, and cogitated deeply. Would Conrad
again accompany the girl? If he did not, should he risk trying to make
an ally of her? He decided that he must leave no stone unturned. His
position was desperate.

At eight o'clock the familiar sound of the key turning made him spring
to his feet. The girl was alone.

"Shut the door," he commanded. "I want to speak to you." She obeyed.

"Look here, Annette, I want you to help me get out of this." She shook
her head.

"Impossible. There are three of them on the floor below."

"Oh!" Tommy was secretly grateful for the information. "But you would
help me if you could?"

"No, monsieur."

"Why not?"

The girl hesitated.

"I think--they are my own people. You have spied upon them. They are
quite right to keep you here."

"They're a bad lot, Annette. If you'll help me, I'll take you away from
the lot of them. And you'd probably get a good whack of money."

But the girl merely shook her head.

"I dare not, monsieur; I am afraid of them."

She turned away.

"Wouldn't you do anything to help another girl?" cried Tommy. "She's
about your age too. Won't you save her from their clutches?"

"You mean Jane Finn?"

"Yes."

"It is her you came here to look for? Yes?"

"That's it."

The girl looked at him, then passed her hand across her forehead.

"Jane Finn. Always I hear that name. It is familiar."

Tommy came forward eagerly.

"You must know SOMETHING about her?"

But the girl turned away abruptly.

"I know nothing--only the name." She walked towards the door. Suddenly
she uttered a cry. Tommy stared. She had caught sight of the picture
he had laid against the wall the night before. For a moment he caught a
look of terror in her eyes. As inexplicably it changed to relief. Then
abruptly she went out of the room. Tommy could make nothing of it. Did
she fancy that he had meant to attack her with it? Surely not. He rehung
the picture on the wall thoughtfully.

Three more days went by in dreary inaction. Tommy felt the strain
telling on his nerves. He saw no one but Conrad and Annette, and the
girl had become dumb. She spoke only in monosyllables. A kind of dark
suspicion smouldered in her eyes. Tommy felt that if this solitary
confinement went on much longer he would go mad. He gathered from Conrad
that they were waiting for orders from "Mr. Brown." Perhaps, thought
Tommy, he was abroad or away, and they were obliged to wait for his
return.

But the evening of the third day brought a rude awakening.

It was barely seven o'clock when he heard the tramp of footsteps outside
in the passage. In another minute the door was flung open. Conrad
entered. With him was the evil-looking Number 14. Tommy's heart sank at
the sight of them.

"Evenin', gov'nor," said the man with a leer. "Got those ropes, mate?"

The silent Conrad produced a length of fine cord. The next minute Number
14's hands, horribly dexterous, were winding the cord round his limbs,
while Conrad held him down.

"What the devil----?" began Tommy.

But the slow, speechless grin of the silent Conrad froze the words on
his lips.

Number 14 proceeded deftly with his task. In another minute Tommy was a
mere helpless bundle. Then at last Conrad spoke:

"Thought you'd bluffed us, did you? With what you knew, and what you
didn't know. Bargained with us! And all the time it was bluff! Bluff!
You know less than a kitten. But your number's up now all right, you
b----swine."

Tommy lay silent. There was nothing to say. He had failed. Somehow
or other the omnipotent Mr. Brown had seen through his pretensions.
Suddenly a thought occurred to him.

"A very good speech, Conrad," he said approvingly. "But wherefore the
bonds and fetters? Why not let this kind gentleman here cut my throat
without delay?"

"Garn," said Number 14 unexpectedly. "Think we're as green as to do you
in here, and have the police nosing round? Not 'alf! We've ordered the
carriage for your lordship to-morrow mornin', but in the meantime we're
not taking any chances, see!"

"Nothing," said Tommy, "could be plainer than your words--unless it was
your face."

"Stow it," said Number 14.

"With pleasure," replied Tommy. "You're making a sad mistake--but yours
will be the loss."

"You don't kid us that way again," said Number 14. "Talking as though
you were still at the blooming Ritz, aren't you?"

Tommy made no reply. He was engaged in wondering how Mr. Brown had
discovered his identity. He decided that Tuppence, in the throes of
anxiety, had gone to the police, and that his disappearance having been
made public the gang had not been slow to put two and two together.

The two men departed and the door slammed. Tommy was left to his
meditations. They were not pleasant ones. Already his limbs felt cramped
and stiff. He was utterly helpless, and he could see no hope anywhere.

About an hour had passed when he heard the key softly turned, and the
door opened. It was Annette. Tommy's heart beat a little faster. He had
forgotten the girl. Was it possible that she had come to his help?

Suddenly he heard Conrad's voice:

"Come out of it, Annette. He doesn't want any supper to-night."

"Oui, oui, je sais bien. But I must take the other tray. We need the
things on it."

"Well, hurry up," growled Conrad.

Without looking at Tommy the girl went over to the table, and picked up
the tray. She raised a hand and turned out the light.

"Curse you"--Conrad had come to the door--"why did you do that?"

"I always turn it out. You should have told me. Shall I relight it,
Monsieur Conrad?"

"No, come on out of it."

"Le beau petit monsieur," cried Annette, pausing by the bed in the
darkness. "You have tied him up well, hein? He is like a trussed
chicken!" The frank amusement in her tone jarred on the boy; but at
that moment, to his amazement, he felt her hand running lightly over
his bonds, and something small and cold was pressed into the palm of his
hand.

"Come on, Annette."

"Mais me voila."

The door shut. Tommy heard Conrad say:

"Lock it and give me the key."

The footsteps died away. Tommy lay petrified with amazement. The object
Annette had thrust into his hand was a small penknife, the blade open.
From the way she had studiously avoided looking at him, and her action
with the light, he came to the conclusion that the room was overlooked.
There must be a peep-hole somewhere in the walls. Remembering how
guarded she had always been in her manner, he saw that he had probably
been under observation all the time. Had he said anything to give
himself away? Hardly. He had revealed a wish to escape and a desire
to find Jane Finn, but nothing that could have given a clue to his
own identity. True, his question to Annette had proved that he was
personally unacquainted with Jane Finn, but he had never pretended
otherwise. The question now was, did Annette really know more? Were her
denials intended primarily for the listeners? On that point he could
come to no conclusion.

But there was a more vital question that drove out all others. Could he,
bound as he was, manage to cut his bonds? He essayed cautiously to
rub the open blade up and down on the cord that bound his two wrists
together. It was an awkward business, and drew a smothered "Ow" of pain
from him as the knife cut into his wrist. But slowly and doggedly he
went on sawing to and fro. He cut the flesh badly, but at last he felt
the cord slacken. With his hands free, the rest was easy. Five minutes
later he stood upright with some difficulty, owing to the cramp in his
limbs. His first care was to bind up his bleeding wrist. Then he sat on
the edge of the bed to think. Conrad had taken the key of the door, so
he could expect little more assistance from Annette. The only outlet
from the room was the door, consequently he would perforce have to wait
until the two men returned to fetch him. But when they did... Tommy
smiled! Moving with infinite caution in the dark room, he found and
unhooked the famous picture. He felt an economical pleasure that his
first plan would not be wasted. There was now nothing to do but to wait.
He waited.

The night passed slowly. Tommy lived through an eternity of hours, but
at last he heard footsteps. He stood upright, drew a deep breath, and
clutched the picture firmly.

The door opened. A faint light streamed in from outside. Conrad went
straight towards the gas to light it. Tommy deeply regretted that it was
he who had entered first. It would have been pleasant to get even with
Conrad. Number 14 followed. As he stepped across the threshold, Tommy
brought the picture down with terrific force on his head. Number 14 went
down amidst a stupendous crash of broken glass. In a minute Tommy had
slipped out and pulled to the door. The key was in the lock. He turned
it and withdrew it just as Conrad hurled himself against the door from
the inside with a volley of curses.

For a moment Tommy hesitated. There was the sound of some one stirring
on the floor below. Then the German's voice came up the stairs.

"Gott im Himmel! Conrad, what is it?"

Tommy felt a small hand thrust into his. Beside him stood Annette. She
pointed up a rickety ladder that apparently led to some attics.

"Quick--up here!" She dragged him after her up the ladder. In another
moment they were standing in a dusty garret littered with lumber. Tommy
looked round.

"This won't do. It's a regular trap. There's no way out."

"Hush! Wait." The girl put her finger to her lips. She crept to the top
of the ladder and listened.

The banging and beating on the door was terrific. The German and another
were trying to force the door in. Annette explained in a whisper:

"They will think you are still inside. They cannot hear what Conrad
says. The door is too thick."

"I thought you could hear what went on in the room?"

"There is a peep-hole into the next room. It was clever of you to guess.
But they will not think of that--they are only anxious to get in."

"Yes--but look here----"

"Leave it to me." She bent down. To his amazement, Tommy saw that she
was fastening the end of a long piece of string to the handle of a big
cracked jug. She arranged it carefully, then turned to Tommy.

"Have you the key of the door?"

"Yes."

"Give it to me."

He handed it to her.

"I am going down. Do you think you can go halfway, and then swing
yourself down BEHIND the ladder, so that they will not see you?"

Tommy nodded.

"There's a big cupboard in the shadow of the landing. Stand behind
it. Take the end of this string in your hand. When I've let the others
out--PULL!"

Before he had time to ask her anything more, she had flitted lightly
down the ladder and was in the midst of the group with a loud cry:

"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Qu'est-ce qu'il y a?"

The German turned on her with an oath.

"Get out of this. Go to your room!"

Very cautiously Tommy swung himself down the back of the ladder. So
long as they did not turn round... all was well. He crouched behind the
cupboard. They were still between him and the stairs.

"AH!" Annette appeared to stumble over something. She stooped. "Mon
Dieu, voila la clef!"

The German snatched it from her. He unlocked the door. Conrad stumbled
out, swearing.

"Where is he? Have you got him?"

"We have seen no one," said the German sharply. His face paled. "Who do
you mean?"

Conrad gave vent to another oath.

"He's got away."

"Impossible. He would have passed us."

At that moment, with an ecstatic smile Tommy pulled the string. A crash
of crockery came from the attic above. In a trice the men were pushing
each other up the rickety ladder and had disappeared into the darkness
above.

Quick as a flash Tommy leapt from his hiding-place and dashed down the
stairs, pulling the girl with him. There was no one in the hall. He
fumbled over the bolts and chain. At last they yielded, the door swung
open. He turned. Annette had disappeared.

Tommy stood spell-bound. Had she run upstairs again? What madness
possessed her! He fumed with impatience, but he stood his ground. He
would not go without her.

And suddenly there was an outcry overhead, an exclamation from the
German, and then Annette's voice, clear and high:

"Ma foi, he has escaped! And quickly! Who would have thought it?"

Tommy still stood rooted to the ground. Was that a command to him to go?
He fancied it was.

And then, louder still, the words floated down to him:

"This is a terrible house. I want to go back to Marguerite. To
Marguerite. TO MARGUERITE!"

Tommy had run back to the stairs. She wanted him to go and leave her.
But why? At all costs he must try and get her away with him. Then his
heart sank. Conrad was leaping down the stairs, uttering a savage cry at
the sight of him. After him came the others.

Tommy stopped Conrad's rush with a straight blow with his fist. It
caught the other on the point of the jaw and he fell like a log. The
second man tripped over his body and fell. From higher up the staircase
there was a flash, and a bullet grazed Tommy's ear. He realized that
it would be good for his health to get out of this house as soon as
possible. As regards Annette he could do nothing. He had got even with
Conrad, which was one satisfaction. The blow had been a good one.

He leapt for the door, slamming it behind him. The square was deserted.
In front of the house was a baker's van. Evidently he was to have been
taken out of London in that, and his body found many miles from the
house in Soho. The driver jumped to the pavement and tried to bar
Tommy's way. Again Tommy's fist shot out, and the driver sprawled on the
pavement.

Tommy took to his heels and ran--none too soon. The front door opened
and a hail of bullets followed him. Fortunately none of them hit him. He
turned the corner of the square.

"There's one thing," he thought to himself, "they can't go on shooting.
They'll have the police after them if they do. I wonder they dared to
there."

He heard the footsteps of his pursuers behind him, and redoubled his own
pace. Once he got out of these by-ways he would be safe. There would be
a policeman about somewhere--not that he really wanted to invoke the aid
of the police if he could possibly do without it. It meant explanations,
and general awkwardness. In another moment he had reason to bless his
luck. He stumbled over a prostrate figure, which started up with a yell
of alarm and dashed off down the street. Tommy drew back into a doorway.
In a minute he had the pleasure of seeing his two pursuers, of whom the
German was one, industriously tracking down the red herring!

Tommy sat down quietly on the doorstep and allowed a few moments to
elapse while he recovered his breath. Then he strolled gently in the
opposite direction. He glanced at his watch. It was a little after
half-past five. It was rapidly growing light. At the next corner he
passed a policeman. The policeman cast a suspicious eye on him. Tommy
felt slightly offended. Then, passing his hand over his face, he
laughed. He had not shaved or washed for three days! What a guy he must
look.

He betook himself without more ado to a Turkish Bath establishment which
he knew to be open all night. He emerged into the busy daylight feeling
himself once more, and able to make plans.

First of all, he must have a square meal. He had eaten nothing since
midday yesterday. He turned into an A.B.C. shop and ordered eggs and
bacon and coffee. Whilst he ate, he read a morning paper propped up
in front of him. Suddenly he stiffened. There was a long article on
Kramenin, who was described as the "man behind Bolshevism" in Russia,
and who had just arrived in London--some thought as an unofficial envoy.
His career was sketched lightly, and it was firmly asserted that he,
and not the figurehead leaders, had been the author of the Russian
Revolution.

In the centre of the page was his portrait.

"So that's who Number 1 is," said Tommy with his mouth full of eggs and
bacon. "Not a doubt about it, I must push on."

He paid for his breakfast, and betook himself to Whitehall. There he
sent up his name, and the message that it was urgent. A few minutes
later he was in the presence of the man who did not here go by the name
of "Mr. Carter." There was a frown on his face.

"Look here, you've no business to come asking for me in this way. I
thought that was distinctly understood?"

"It was, sir. But I judged it important to lose no time."

And as briefly and succinctly as possible he detailed the experiences of
the last few days.

Half-way through, Mr. Carter interrupted him to give a few cryptic
orders through the telephone. All traces of displeasure had now left his
face. He nodded energetically when Tommy had finished.

"Quite right. Every moment's of value. Fear we shall be too late anyway.
They wouldn't wait. Would clear out at once. Still, they may have left
something behind them that will be a clue. You say you've recognized
Number 1 to be Kramenin? That's important. We want something against him
badly to prevent the Cabinet falling on his neck too freely. What about
the others? You say two faces were familiar to you? One's a Labour man,
you think? Just look through these photos, and see if you can spot him."

A minute later, Tommy held one up. Mr. Carter exhibited some surprise.

"Ah, Westway! Shouldn't have thought it. Poses as being moderate. As for
the other fellow, I think I can give a good guess." He handed another
photograph to Tommy, and smiled at the other's exclamation. "I'm right,
then. Who is he? Irishman. Prominent Unionist M.P. All a blind, of
course. We've suspected it--but couldn't get any proof. Yes, you've done
very well, young man. The 29th, you say, is the date. That gives us very
little time--very little time indeed."

"But----" Tommy hesitated.

Mr. Carter read his thoughts.

"We can deal with the General Strike menace, I think. It's a
toss-up--but we've got a sporting chance! But if that draft treaty turns
up--we're done. England will be plunged in anarchy. Ah, what's that?
The car? Come on, Beresford, we'll go and have a look at this house of
yours."

Two constables were on duty in front of the house in Soho. An inspector
reported to Mr. Carter in a low voice. The latter turned to Tommy.

"The birds have flown--as we thought. We might as well go over it."

Going over the deserted house seemed to Tommy to partake of the
character of a dream. Everything was just as it had been. The prison
room with the crooked pictures, the broken jug in the attic, the meeting
room with its long table. But nowhere was there a trace of papers.
Everything of that kind had either been destroyed or taken away. And
there was no sign of Annette.

"What you tell me about the girl puzzled me," said Mr. Carter. "You
believe that she deliberately went back?"

"It would seem so, sir. She ran upstairs while I was getting the door
open."

"H'm, she must belong to the gang, then; but, being a woman, didn't feel
like standing by to see a personable young man killed. But evidently
she's in with them, or she wouldn't have gone back."

"I can't believe she's really one of them, sir. She--seemed so
different----"

"Good-looking, I suppose?" said Mr. Carter with a smile that made Tommy
flush to the roots of his hair. He admitted Annette's beauty rather
shamefacedly.

"By the way," observed Mr. Carter, "have you shown yourself to Miss
Tuppence yet? She's been bombarding me with letters about you."

"Tuppence? I was afraid she might get a bit rattled. Did she go to the
police?"

Mr. Carter shook his head.

"Then I wonder how they twigged me."

Mr. Carter looked inquiringly at him, and Tommy explained. The other
nodded thoughtfully.

"True, that's rather a curious point. Unless the mention of the Ritz was
an accidental remark?"

"It might have been, sir. But they must have found out about me suddenly
in some way."

"Well," said Mr. Carter, looking round him, "there's nothing more to be
done here. What about some lunch with me?"

"Thanks awfully, sir. But I think I'd better get back and rout out
Tuppence."

"Of course. Give her my kind regards and tell her not to believe you're
killed too readily next time."

Tommy grinned.

"I take a lot of killing, sir."

"So I perceive," said Mr. Carter dryly. "Well, good-bye. Remember you're
a marked man now, and take reasonable care of yourself."

"Thank you, sir."

Hailing a taxi briskly Tommy stepped in, and was swiftly borne to the
Ritz' dwelling the while on the pleasurable anticipation of startling
Tuppence.

"Wonder what she's been up to. Dogging 'Rita' most likely. By the way,
I suppose that's who Annette meant by Marguerite. I didn't get it at the
time." The thought saddened him a little, for it seemed to prove that
Mrs. Vandemeyer and the girl were on intimate terms.

The taxi drew up at the Ritz. Tommy burst into its sacred portals
eagerly, but his enthusiasm received a check. He was informed that Miss
Cowley had gone out a quarter of an hour ago.



CHAPTER XVIII. THE TELEGRAM

BAFFLED for the moment, Tommy strolled into the restaurant, and ordered
a meal of surpassing excellence. His four days' imprisonment had taught
him anew to value good food.

He was in the middle of conveying a particularly choice morsel of Sole
a la Jeanette to his mouth, when he caught sight of Julius entering the
room. Tommy waved a menu cheerfully, and succeeded in attracting the
other's attention. At the sight of Tommy, Julius's eyes seemed as though
they would pop out of his head. He strode across, and pump-handled
Tommy's hand with what seemed to the latter quite unnecessary vigour.

"Holy snakes!" he ejaculated. "Is it really you?"

"Of course it is. Why shouldn't it be?"

"Why shouldn't it be? Say, man, don't you know you've been given up
for dead? I guess we'd have had a solemn requiem for you in another few
days."

"Who thought I was dead?" demanded Tommy.

"Tuppence."

"She remembered the proverb about the good dying young, I suppose. There
must be a certain amount of original sin in me to have survived. Where
is Tuppence, by the way?"

"Isn't she here?"

"No, the fellows at the office said she'd just gone out."

"Gone shopping, I guess. I dropped her here in the car about an hour
ago. But, say, can't you shed that British calm of yours, and get down
to it? What on God's earth have you been doing all this time?"

"If you're feeding here," replied Tommy, "order now. It's going to be a
long story."

Julius drew up a chair to the opposite side of the table, summoned a
hovering waiter, and dictated his wishes. Then he turned to Tommy.

"Fire ahead. I guess you've had some few adventures."

"One or two," replied Tommy modestly, and plunged into his recital.

Julius listened spellbound. Half the dishes that were placed before him
he forgot to eat. At the end he heaved a long sigh.

"Bully for you. Reads like a dime novel!"

"And now for the home front," said Tommy, stretching out his hand for a
peach.

"We-el," drawled Julius, "I don't mind admitting we've had some
adventures too."

He, in his turn, assumed the role of narrator. Beginning with his
unsuccessful reconnoitring at Bournemouth, he passed on to his return
to London, the buying of the car, the growing anxieties of Tuppence,
the call upon Sir James, and the sensational occurrences of the previous
night.

"But who killed her?" asked Tommy. "I don't quite understand."

"The doctor kidded himself she took it herself," replied Julius dryly.

"And Sir James? What did he think?"

"Being a legal luminary, he is likewise a human oyster," replied Julius.
"I should say he 'reserved judgment.'" He went on to detail the events
of the morning.

"Lost her memory, eh?" said Tommy with interest. "By Jove, that explains
why they looked at me so queerly when I spoke of questioning her. Bit of
a slip on my part, that! But it wasn't the sort of thing a fellow would
be likely to guess."

"They didn't give you any sort of hint as to where Jane was?"

Tommy shook his head regretfully.

"Not a word. I'm a bit of an ass, as you know. I ought to have got more
out of them somehow."

"I guess you're lucky to be here at all. That bluff of yours was the
goods all right. How you ever came to think of it all so pat beats me to
a frazzle!"

"I was in such a funk I had to think of something," said Tommy simply.

There was a moment's pause, and then Tommy reverted to Mrs. Vandemeyer's
death.

"There's no doubt it was chloral?"

"I believe not. At least they call it heart failure induced by an
overdose, or some such claptrap. It's all right. We don't want to
be worried with an inquest. But I guess Tuppence and I and even the
highbrow Sir James have all got the same idea."

"Mr. Brown?" hazarded Tommy.

"Sure thing."

Tommy nodded.

"All the same," he said thoughtfully, "Mr. Brown hasn't got wings. I
don't see how he got in and out."

"How about some high-class thought transference stunt? Some magnetic
influence that irresistibly impelled Mrs. Vandemeyer to commit suicide?"

Tommy looked at him with respect.

"Good, Julius. Distinctly good. Especially the phraseology. But it
leaves me cold. I yearn for a real Mr. Brown of flesh and blood. I think
the gifted young detectives must get to work, study the entrances and
exits, and tap the bumps on their foreheads until the solution of the
mystery dawns on them. Let's go round to the scene of the crime. I wish
we could get hold of Tuppence. The Ritz would enjoy the spectacle of the
glad reunion."

Inquiry at the office revealed the fact that Tuppence had not yet
returned.

"All the same, I guess I'll have a look round upstairs," said Julius.
"She might be in my sitting-room." He disappeared.

Suddenly a diminutive boy spoke at Tommy's elbow:

"The young lady--she's gone away by train, I think, sir," he murmured
shyly.

"What?" Tommy wheeled round upon him.

The small boy became pinker than before.

"The taxi, sir. I heard her tell the driver Charing Cross and to look
sharp."

Tommy stared at him, his eyes opening wide in surprise. Emboldened, the
small boy proceeded. "So I thought, having asked for an A.B.C. and a
Bradshaw."

Tommy interrupted him:

"When did she ask for an A.B.C. and a Bradshaw?"

"When I took her the telegram, sir."

"A telegram?"

"Yes, sir."

"When was that?"

"About half-past twelve, sir."

"Tell me exactly what happened."

The small boy drew a long breath.

"I took up a telegram to No. 891--the lady was there. She opened it
and gave a gasp, and then she said, very jolly like: 'Bring me up a
Bradshaw, and an A.B.C., and look sharp, Henry.' My name isn't Henry,
but----"

"Never mind your name," said Tommy impatiently. "Go on."

"Yes, sir. I brought them, and she told me to wait, and looked up
something. And then she looks up at the clock, and 'Hurry up,' she says.
'Tell them to get me a taxi,' and she begins a-shoving on of her hat in
front of the glass, and she was down in two ticks, almost as quick as I
was, and I seed her going down the steps and into the taxi, and I heard
her call out what I told you."

The small boy stopped and replenished his lungs. Tommy continued to
stare at him. At that moment Julius rejoined him. He held an open letter
in his hand.

"I say, Hersheimmer"--Tommy turned to him--"Tuppence has gone off
sleuthing on her own."

"Shucks!"

"Yes, she has. She went off in a taxi to Charing Cross in the deuce of a
hurry after getting a telegram." His eye fell on the letter in Julius's
hand. "Oh; she left a note for you. That's all right. Where's she off
to?"

Almost unconsciously, he held out his hand for the letter, but
Julius folded it up and placed it in his pocket. He seemed a trifle
embarrassed.

"I guess this is nothing to do with it. It's about something
else--something I asked her that she was to let me know about."

"Oh!" Tommy looked puzzled, and seemed waiting for more.

"See here," said Julius suddenly, "I'd better put you wise. I asked Miss
Tuppence to marry me this morning."

"Oh!" said Tommy mechanically. He felt dazed. Julius's words were
totally unexpected. For the moment they benumbed his brain.

"I'd like to tell you," continued Julius, "that before I suggested
anything of the kind to Miss Tuppence, I made it clear that I didn't
want to butt in in any way between her and you----"

Tommy roused himself.

"That's all right," he said quickly. "Tuppence and I have been pals for
years. Nothing more." He lit a cigarette with a hand that shook ever
so little. "That's quite all right. Tuppence always said that she was
looking out for----"

He stopped abruptly, his face crimsoning, but Julius was in no way
discomposed.

"Oh, I guess it'll be the dollars that'll do the trick. Miss Tuppence
put me wise to that right away. There's no humbug about her. We ought to
gee along together very well."

Tommy looked at him curiously for a minute, as though he were about
to speak, then changed his mind and said nothing. Tuppence and Julius!
Well, why not? Had she not lamented the fact that she knew no rich men?
Had she not openly avowed her intention of marrying for money if she
ever had the chance? Her meeting with the young American millionaire
had given her the chance--and it was unlikely she would be slow to avail
herself of it. She was out for money. She had always said so. Why blame
her because she had been true to her creed?

Nevertheless, Tommy did blame her. He was filled with a passionate and
utterly illogical resentment. It was all very well to SAY things like
that--but a REAL girl would never marry for money. Tuppence was utterly
cold-blooded and selfish, and he would be delighted if he never saw her
again! And it was a rotten world!

Julius's voice broke in on these meditations.

"Yes, we ought to get along together very well. I've heard that a girl
always refuses you once--a sort of convention."

Tommy caught his arm.

"Refuses? Did you say REFUSES?"

"Sure thing. Didn't I tell you that? She just rapped out a 'no' without
any kind of reason to it. The eternal feminine, the Huns call it, I've
heard. But she'll come round right enough. Likely enough, I hustled her
some----"

But Tommy interrupted regardless of decorum.

"What did she say in that note?" he demanded fiercely.

The obliging Julius handed it to him.

"There's no earthly clue in it as to where she's gone," he assured
Tommy. "But you might as well see for yourself if you don't believe me."

The note, in Tuppence's well-known schoolboy writing, ran as follows:


"DEAR JULIUS,

"It's always better to have things in black and white. I don't feel I
can be bothered to think of marriage until Tommy is found. Let's leave
it till then.

"Yours affectionately,

"TUPPENCE."


Tommy handed it back, his eyes shining. His feelings had undergone a
sharp reaction. He now felt that Tuppence was all that was noble and
disinterested. Had she not refused Julius without hesitation? True, the
note betokened signs of weakening, but he could excuse that. It read
almost like a bribe to Julius to spur him on in his efforts to find
Tommy, but he supposed she had not really meant it that way. Darling
Tuppence, there was not a girl in the world to touch her! When he saw
her----His thoughts were brought up with a sudden jerk.

"As you say," he remarked, pulling himself together, "there's not a hint
here as to what she's up to. Hi--Henry!"

The small boy came obediently. Tommy produced five shillings.

"One thing more. Do you remember what the young lady did with the
telegram?"

Henry gasped and spoke.

"She crumpled it up into a ball and threw it into the grate, and made a
sort of noise like 'Whoop!' sir."

"Very graphic, Henry," said Tommy. "Here's your five shillings. Come on,
Julius. We must find that telegram."

They hurried upstairs. Tuppence had left the key in her door. The room
was as she had left it. In the fireplace was a crumpled ball of orange
and white. Tommy disentangled it and smoothed out the telegram.

"Come at once, Moat House, Ebury, Yorkshire, great developments--TOMMY."

They looked at each other in stupefaction. Julius spoke first:

"You didn't send it?"

"Of course not. What does it mean?"

"I guess it means the worst," said Julius quietly. "They've got her."

"WHAT?"

"Sure thing! They signed your name, and she fell into the trap like a
lamb."

"My God! What shall we do?"

"Get busy, and go after her! Right now! There's no time to waste. It's
almighty luck that she didn't take the wire with her. If she had we'd
probably never have traced her. But we've got to hustle. Where's that
Bradshaw?"

The energy of Julius was infectious. Left to himself, Tommy would
probably have sat down to think things out for a good half-hour before
he decided on a plan of action. But with Julius Hersheimmer about,
hustling was inevitable.

After a few muttered imprecations he handed the Bradshaw to Tommy as
being more conversant with its mysteries. Tommy abandoned it in favour
of an A.B.C.

"Here we are. Ebury, Yorks. From King's Cross. Or St. Pancras. (Boy must
have made a mistake. It was King's Cross, not CHARING Cross.) 12.50,
that's the train she went by. 2.10, that's gone. 3.20 is the next--and a
damned slow train too."

"What about the car?"

Tommy shook his head.

"Send it up if you like, but we'd better stick to the train. The great
thing is to keep calm."

Julius groaned.

"That's so. But it gets my goat to think of that innocent young girl in
danger!"

Tommy nodded abstractedly. He was thinking. In a moment or two, he said:

"I say, Julius, what do they want her for, anyway?"

"Eh? I don't get you?"

"What I mean is that I don't think it's their game to do her any harm,"
explained Tommy, puckering his brow with the strain of his mental
processes. "She's a hostage, that's what she is. She's in no immediate
danger, because if we tumble on to anything, she'd be damned useful to
them. As long as they've got her, they've got the whip hand of us. See?"

"Sure thing," said Julius thoughtfully. "That's so."

"Besides," added Tommy, as an afterthought, "I've great faith in
Tuppence."

The journey was wearisome, with many stops, and crowded carriages. They
had to change twice, once at Doncaster, once at a small junction. Ebury
was a deserted station with a solitary porter, to whom Tommy addressed
himself:

"Can you tell me the way to the Moat House?"

"The Moat House? It's a tidy step from here. The big house near the sea,
you mean?"

Tommy assented brazenly. After listening to the porter's meticulous
but perplexing directions, they prepared to leave the station. It was
beginning to rain, and they turned up the collars of their coats as they
trudged through the slush of the road. Suddenly Tommy halted.

"Wait a moment." He ran back to the station and tackled the porter anew.

"Look here, do you remember a young lady who arrived by an earlier
train, the 12.50 from London? She'd probably ask you the way to the Moat
House."

He described Tuppence as well as he could, but the porter shook his
head. Several people had arrived by the train in question. He could not
call to mind one young lady in particular. But he was quite certain that
no one had asked him the way to the Moat House.

Tommy rejoined Julius, and explained. Depression was settling on him
like a leaden weight. He felt convinced that their quest was going to
be unsuccessful. The enemy had over three hours' start. Three hours was
more than enough for Mr. Brown. He would not ignore the possibility of
the telegram having been found.

The way seemed endless. Once they took the wrong turning and went nearly
half a mile out of their direction. It was past seven o'clock when a
small boy told them that "t' Moat House" was just past the next corner.

A rusty iron gate swinging dismally on its hinges! An overgrown drive
thick with leaves. There was something about the place that struck a
chill to both their hearts. They went up the deserted drive. The leaves
deadened their footsteps. The daylight was almost gone. It was like
walking in a world of ghosts. Overhead the branches flapped and creaked
with a mournful note. Occasionally a sodden leaf drifted silently down,
startling them with its cold touch on their cheek.

A turn of the drive brought them in sight of the house. That, too,
seemed empty and deserted. The shutters were closed, the steps up to
the door overgrown with moss. Was it indeed to this desolate spot
that Tuppence had been decoyed? It seemed hard to believe that a human
footstep had passed this way for months.

Julius jerked the rusty bell handle. A jangling peal rang discordantly,
echoing through the emptiness within. No one came. They rang again and
again--but there was no sign of life. Then they walked completely round
the house. Everywhere silence, and shuttered windows. If they coul