Jerry Stocking
Dawning of a New Day
A day in which your mind is rested and at peace.
You awaken energized and ready for anything.
Mind
Relief
Manuscript
Mind
Relief
Manuscript
by
Jerry Stocking

Introduction
Your mind is still the most powerful super computer on the
planet. But You aren’t using it to compute the trajectory of
comets or computing derivatives or possibilities. You don’t
break code with your mind or track terrorists or manage
millions of airplane flights. You aren’t using it to win Jeopardy
or chess.
Your mind is being used to compare cereals at the
grocery store and to try and win arguments with people
you love. It is being used to text and accumulate endless
web data. I suggest to you that the power of your mind it
is being wasted.
A mind wasted is a mind that is prone to mischief. An idle
mind gets into trouble. It focuses on things that may never
happen and worries about them. It endlessly replays the
past boring you half to death.
You are walking down the street innocently and you see an ice
cream shop. Your mind says, “You need an ice cream cone
right about now.” You, believing your mind, begin to imagine
how nice a cone would be; you ponder what flavor you might
have and how terribly good it would taste.
Almost immediately you really can’t live without an ice cream
cone so you go into the shop.
Now you are faced with a whole assortment of flavors and it
just makes good sense, to your mind, that a double dip cone
not only saves you 11 cents over the cost of two singles but it
allows you to have two different scoops. Three scoops would
be better yet but your mind lets you know “It is important to
have discipline.”
Your order caramel, fudge nugget supreme on the bottom with
maple, praline on the top.
Your mind quiets as you take delivery of the cone and begin
eating. You finish the whole thing, cone and all.
Your mind says, “I wouldn’t have done that if I were you. Now
you are going to get fat and remember you are on a diet.”
You, of course, feel awful. Your mind had promised you that
you would feel great after the cone and now you feel awful.
One more promise that your mind didn’t keep.
“You can just have a small salad for dinner, no dressing,” your
mind lies. And you and your mind walk on down the road
together.
An underutilized mind ALWAYS gets up to mischief.
Are you thinking more and enjoying it less?
It is important to discover how your mind works now more
than ever. In the old days, people didn’t think nearly so many
thoughts. Today we are thinking all the time. Our thinking has
::: 2 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
a huge influence on our quality of life. That means it is time to
up the quality of our thinking.
This manuscript will provide you with the specific tools you
need to supercharge your mind. They will relieve your mind of
what it doesn’t need be thinking about and you’ll learn to
focus in like a laser on those things that will provide a
quantum leap in your quality of thinking and quality of life.
You and your mind are in for a treat. I promise that you will
fall in love with your mind as you read this manuscript
because your mind will become your biggest asset and best
friend.
Happy thinking to you! Now let’s get on with getting to know
your mind.
A note to your mind
I am your friend, really I am. I mean you no harm; in fact I
want the best for you. I am going to show you new ways that
you can get all sorts of things done without being busier.
I am going to reveal how you can leverage your time and pay
attention to what is going on in the moment. I will show you
how you can tell when something is serious and when it isn’t.
Wouldn’t it be cool if there weren’t so many emergencies?
What would it be like if you didn’t have to take yourself
seriously? We will have an anatomy class in which you will
learn the structure of thoughts and thinking. This is really cool
stuff because it will allow you to take any thought apart. As
you take thoughts apart you will discover how they are built
and soon you will be able to create any thought you want. The
range of thoughts you can build will increase as will your
flexibility. You will get way better at thinking.
Yes, you are in for quite a party. It will be a working vacation
with plenty of free time and internal sights to see. You will
::: 3 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
meet many new friends (other aspects of you). You won’t be
obligated to do a darned thing, I do know that might sound
scary but I assure you it won’t be.
Remember when you were young, curious, open and eager to
learn? Those were the days and you will return to them. You
will return wiser, thus you will have even more fun than when
you were little.
Remember how you took on responsibility and thing got more
serious? It is no surprise that you got fearful and defensive, but
you soon won’t need to be anymore.
You are going to return to that youthful learning and curiosity,
you are going to be relieved rather than burdened by what you
know and you are going to lighten up. You won’t lighten up
because you have to, you will lighten up because that is
simply the best way to get things done. Lightening up is, by far,
the best way to be ready for the next challenge or the next
moment.
I promise that you are in for a treat here – A treat in which
each moment is better than the last. You are in for a wonderful
time in which you don’t have to be scared, in which you can
have fun thinking again.
You, dear sweet mind, are going to love this journey. Trust me,
I have worked with a lot of minds and they have all had a
wonderful time. You will too. You deserve a bit of relief and
that is exactly what you are going to get. I love you dear, hard
working mind. Now let’s remind you that you are youthful,
flexible, open, clairvoyant, and fun.
::: 4 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 1
Is it Really Your Mind?
Imagine that you believed every advertisement. That you took
what Madison Avenue says for the gospel.
Wouldn’t that make for a crazy life?
It sure would. You would believe that cigarettes make you cool
and that bad breath is what is keeping the chicks away. You
would believe that a new car can improve the quality of your
life and that a happy day is just a pill away. You could be
easily mislead in so many ways.
You don’t believe all the ads or the promises of politicians.
You continually try not to get conned.
You don’t notice that you are being conned because it is your
mind that is conning you. You are falling for the wild claims of
the least believable, dishonest, loud mouth on the planet –
Your mind.
Your mind is out of control. And you believe what your mind
tells you. Unlike a super computer your mind always has a
bias. It lies to you almost all the time and doesn’t even
apologize. It pretends to know things that it doesn’t and often
ignores what it does know.
Your mind bluffs, your mind counter punches. Your mind
fights to be right even when it knows it is wrong. If a friend
treated you the way your mind constantly treats you, that
person wouldn’t be your friend for long.
But you keep believing what your mind says to you because
until now there wasn’t really an option.
::: 5 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Finally you have a choice. Finally you can expose your mind.
You can catch it driving you crazy and stop it in its tracks.
Observing your mind, which is the first step in getting to know
your mind, will reveal secrets. These secrets will set you free
from the oppression of your mind and allow you to tap freely
into the power of your mind.
But first let’s take a look at how your mind is now. Then we
will get on with the process of relieving it and tapping into its
real power to change your life for the better.
Is Your Mind Out of Control?
At first it will probably be resistant
to the things you read in this
manuscript. Your mind is used to
being in charge. It is defensive and
scared.
It is also fast and agile, so it will
catch on quickly.
As you read this manuscript your
mind will begin to notice that there are a whole lot of things it
is doing that it doesn’t need to do. These are the things it
doesn’t do well like trying to be in control of the entire
universe.
Your mind will also experience great relief as it begins to learn
what it does well and then hones these skills.
Your mind has had it rough, and while it may resist for a while,
I promise you that it will come around. And when it does, you
will find that your stress just melts away and so does residual
tension, even extra weight. Your sleep will become deeper and
your thinking will be much more acute.
::: 6 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
You will have fewer thoughts and higher quality thoughts. Your
mind will quiet down and speak only when it needs to, ending
the frenetic, internal conversation that drives you crazy. You
will stop worrying and over-thinking.
Your Mind Doesn’t Care What Happens
Your mind creates illusions. It cares about what it thinks, not
about what really happened. If there are five eyewitnesses to
an accident, there are five different reports about what
happened. While there are similarities between the reports,
different minds perceive things differently: Always.
Often, your mind is too deeply focused on what might happen
(worrying) to notice what is happening. Or, it is agonizing
about what did happen (regretting), again, ignoring what is
happening.
Most of all, your mind is obsessed with what other minds are
thinking (mind reading). Your mind is horribly competitive and
insecure, comparing you to the neighbors, co-workers, friends,
family members and movie stars. Whether these comparisons
come out positively or negatively, they still are defensive
wastes of brain power.
Your Mind Doesn’t Really Ever Do Anything
Your mind can’t take a walk, but it can think while you are
taking a walk. It can’t make love but it can chatter away while
you are making love. Your mind can’t hold a job, but it has lots
of opinions and judgements about what you do for a living.
Your mind can’t really influence what will happen or what has
happened but continually acts as though it is in control of
practically everything. Your mind seldom shuts up!
::: 7 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Your Mind Loves Problems
Your mind defines itself by being a problem solver. It is so
proud when it figures out a math problem or what you will do
tonight or how to bring in new customers.
But it doesn’t notice something very important . . . Something
that it really doesn’t want you to know.
Each problem that your mind solved, your mind created. Your
mind is the creator of every one of your problems. Without
your mind, there aren’t any problems.
What is and what you think are often very different. That
difference presents a problem for your mind. Your mind’s
constant solution for this “problem” is to believe it.
You believe the problems are real. Problems are just illusions
created by your mind. Your mind keeps you busy creating and
solving problems, too busy to get to know yourself, too busy to
catch it spinning out its fantasies.
Your mind keeps you company, it keeps you busy and it makes
sure you are never alone. It is your constant companion but is
not yet a very good friend.
Can I Call You in the Middle of the Night?
Your mind can, and it does. It thinks from morning until night
and even, often, in the middle of the night.
Your mind wakes you up at any hour with an “important”
thought that wouldn’t wait until morning. Your mind derives its
value from the importance of each and every thought.
Thoughts grab for your attention like a spoiled child. And often
the worse the thought the more attention you give it.
::: 8 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
When your thoughts grab for attention, you are left lonely,
wanting attention and with thoughts that are negative and
unproductive. One of the primary reasons that you don’t get
enough attention is that your mind, and its thoughts, get so
much of your attention.
Time to say “Enough” to your mind. Time to get on with a new
life with a more productive, respectful mind. Time to have the
life you deserve and all this and more will be yours as you
harness the hidden powers of your mind.
::: 9 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Spread it Around!
Everyone could use a little mind relief.
Here’s how you can help spread the word:
1.Send the FREE manuscript link to a friend. Link:
http://www.selfexploratorytools.com/MRM.html
2. Print as many copies as you like.
3. Learn more about Jerry at: http://www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 2
You are a Hostage
The Terrorists
Your mind is holding you hostage. It says anything, does
anything, threatens you constantly and won’t allow you
anything but the illusion of freedom.
Your mind is immature on the best of days and oppressive on
the worst.
Being a hostage squeezes the fun out of life, but you have
been a hostage for so long that you don’t even notice as you
blindly do what you are told.
You aren’t just a hostage to your own mind, other people’s
mind’s hold you hostage too. What they expect you to do
scares you into submission.
Your mind really isn’t in control of anything but acts like it is in
control of everything: This stupendous bluff, as ridiculous as it
is, rules your life. It does so until you begin to notice that it is a
bluff.
The terrorists, your mind and other peoples’ minds, have no
teeth. They aren’t real and they have absolutely no power over
you.
Your mind says, “The meeting isn’t going to go well; you didn’t
do a good job on the project and they know it.” Your mind is
bluffing. It is threatening you with a bad meeting and so you
approach the meeting as a problem. You walk into the meeting
with your head hung low expecting the worst. If the meeting
goes poorly, your mind says, “See, I told you so.” If it goes
::: 10 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
well, your mind says, “You avoided another bullet; you were
lucky.”
Being held hostage isn’t any fun and it isn’t very productive, it
certainly isn’t rewarding.
You are a hostage as long as you believe that your
thoughts are true.
You are a hostage if you do what your mind tells
you.
You are a hostage if you are worried about what
other people will think of you.
You are a hostage if you are worried about what will
happen or what did happen.
You are being held hostage if you think there is
something wrong with you.
You are being held hostage if you aren’t having a
good time.
You are being held hostage if you think that things
don’t go your way.
You are being held hostage if you buy, even for a
moment, the limitations that your mind throws in
your way.
You are being held hostage if you are afraid,
worried, anxious or apprehensive.
You are being held hostage if you continually ignore
the moment by hiding in the past or the future.
Are you being held hostage? Most of us are and most of us
don’t know it yet. Discovering that you are a hostage is the
first vital step to setting yourself free.
::: 11 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Would you Like to Be Free?
Haven’t you been held hostage for long
enough? Haven’t you followed the mind’s
orders for long enough?
Being free is doing what you want when
you want. It is having positive, supportive
thoughts. It is continually noticing what
is happening in the moment and feeling proud, strong and
confident. Freedom is a kind of lightness and well being that
prevails no matter what happens. Being free is your birthright
and it is worth what it takes to get there. Freedom begins, as I
said earlier, by noticing that you aren’t free.
For you to be free from the threats of your mind, there are a
number of things you must do. I will tell you what they are but
you have to do them. The really good news is that your mind
really doesn’t want to hold you hostage. It just thinks it has to
in order to get its job done. The other good news is that the
job your mind thinks it has to do isn’t the job that it ought to
be doing at all.
You don’t hire a plumber to fix your roof. At least I hope you
don’t. You don’t go to the doctor to get your car fixed. That
would be ridiculous. But you do think that your mind can fix
just about anything. You want to know your mind’s opinion on
how to fix your roof, how to fix your car, what is wrong with
your health or how you can lose weight. You are a hostage to
your mind. You think that you shouldn’t do anything that isn’t
endorsed by your mind. Meanwhile your mind is reactive,
unresourceful and making all sorts of decisions that it isn’t
qualified to make and being listened to, by you, as a god.
Enough is too much
It is time to escape, time to relieve your mind of the
seriousness you have projected in its direction. It is time to set
::: 12 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
yourself free. There is nothing wrong with a mind until it is
believed. When you believe what the mind says, it starts to
believe it too.
Imagine what life would be like if you let a hormone driven
teenager rule your house. You would have a first order mess on
your hands in no time. You would have to eat pizza in the
morning and you wouldn’t ever know when you would sleep.
You would have pimples in random places and have
arguments with just about everybody about things you don’t
care about. A condition of constant mutiny would prevail and
all order would fall apart.
Your mind is more random than an adolescent teenager.
Stronger than a locomotive and able to make binding
decisions with a single thought.
Actually your mind is tired, worn out, overworked and under
appreciated.
All you need to do is start taking care of your mind, and stress
and tension will fade away. You will start have more fun more
of the time. You will laugh, you will play and you will have a
nice day.
For the moment I will be the advocate for your mind. But as
you read The Mind Relief Manuscript you will discover how to
take care of your mind. You will become its advocate and it
will become your ally.
There are a few things that you can do to begin the process of
freeing yourself. These are little steps, and these little steps add
up to much bigger steps later.
::: 13 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Baby Steps
Here are a few things you can do for your mind right now.
Remember, help is on the way. But until it arrives, you can get
started yourself.
Look Up.
Laugh a little.
Sing in the shower.
Get moving. (dance if you dare)
Notice your breath.
Notice Mother Nature.
That is it. A short list of things you can do right now, right this
moment and wherever you are. Doing these things will
provide immediate relief until the much, much deeper relief of
the easy exercises and revelations presented later in this
manuscript.
I will explain to you what I mean by each of these little things
and why they work.
Look Up
By look up I mean notice the
sky or the ceiling. Move your
eyes in an upward direction.
When you look up, things get
lighter and less serious.
Myra called me a few years
ago. I had never met her but
she was at wits end. Her
husband was not well, her
kids were half way around the world and she was in a very
dark place. She felt alone and lonely. I would go on to do
more work with Myra but she needed something right away,
something to take the pressure off.
::: 14 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
I told her to put her eyes up and she lightened up immediately.
I could tell, before I made the suggestion, that she was always
looking down. Things were looking down and she was looking
down. It is amazing how such a simple exercise as this can not
only lighten someone up but perhaps even save their life.
Part of the reason that this exercise works is because when you
put your eyes up, you are more likely to see pictures instead of
talking to yourself. A picture is worth a thousand words, and it
saved Myra from the thousands of words she was saying to
herself in her head about how awful things were. Myra had
locked into a pattern of listening to everything her mind said
and her mind had only tales of woe all day long.
Lightening up worked for Myra and it will work for you. Later,
as I got to know Myra and taught her some mind relief tools,
she lightened up at ever deeper levels.
Look up! It really works to lighten you up.
Laugh a Little
Laughing heals. Norman Cousins taught us that a long time
ago; the Marx Brother’s probably knew it long before Norman
did.
You don’t have to laugh for real, even pretending to laugh
lightens you up. Laughing has you breath more fully and it
reminds you that you have a body. Even if your laugh is a little
dry and totally fake at first, persist and, with practice, you will
find a real laugh.
Most people need an outside stimulus, something that inspires
them to laugh. They need to find something funny outside of
themselves like a comedian or a slap stick moment in a movie.
A small but important part becoming a mind advocate is to
laugh for no reason at all. Just laugh.
::: 15 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Finding the mirth within means that it is yours; you own it and
you can lighten up anywhere, anytime no matter what the
weather or what the circumstances. Gaining control of your
life can begin by gaining control of your funny bone.
Laugh a little today. Chuckle as you are stuck in traffic or when
you think that your sweetie is cheating on you. Giggle when
you get out of bed in the morning or when you slide into bed
at night.
Laugh for no reason and watch your co-workers immediately
wonder what they are missing. What they are missing is that
you can laugh anywhere, anytime without rhyme or reason.
Just laugh!
Sing in the Shower
Most people restrict their breath
when they talk. They focus all of
their attention on the words they
are saying and try and be
precise. While there is nothing
wrong with this, it will tense you
up and stress you out.
Singing, especially if it is a little
nonsense song, lightens you up and gives the lighter side of
you a voice. You become an advocate for singing not just
talking.
Much of the seriousness of being a human being comes from
language. We think we are supposed to communicate just
with words but words generate much more misunderstanding
than understanding.
Steve was a word-aholic. He spoke very, very carefully and
succinctly. He had quite a vocabulary and was terrified not to
::: 16 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
use it. He hid behind his words, never cutting lose and never
having a good time.
Steve began to ask a very serious question in a course. He
wanted to know the repercussions of quantum physics on his
relationship with time or some such heady drivel. While I love
questions in courses, I always feel free to answer the
questioner rather than the question, which is exactly what I
did here.
I interrupted Steve and suggested that he sing his question. In
fact, I suggested that each time he speaks for the rest of the
day that he sing instead of speaking. The shift in Steve
happened immediately as he started to sing. His question
melted away, his fancy words held no power and his
connection both to me and the other people in the workshop
and especially to himself tickled him. He became a new man
immediately.
You can begin by singing in the shower. But soon you might
be singing other places too. You don’t have to sing out loud, if
the context doesn’t allow it, but you can sing in your own
head anytime. Do you have something terribly serious to say?
If so, let me hear you sing it.
Get Moving (Dance if You Dare)
When you get serious, or when you believe your thoughts, or
when you think you are right or someone else is wrong, you
tend to ignore your body. Focusing your attention on your
body reminds you that you have a body and may also reveal
that your mind is up to mischief.
Your body has a different sort of reality to it than your mind
has. Your body has a physical presence that your mind doesn’t.
If you dance, even just a little bit, your attention will move to
your body and you will be reminded that your mind is only a
little part of you.
::: 17 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
While your mind seeks to take what it considers to be the
direct route, your body doesn’t have to. Dancing from here to
there reminds you that it is the journey, not the here or there
that is important.
Mike was a head hunter and a more driven man I have never
met. He was a no non-sense guy who needed a bit of nonsense
badly. I couldn’t suggest that he dance, he was too stiff
for such an assignment. Instead I asked him about his work –
His favorite subject.
But I didn’t ask him the sorts of thing he expected. I asked
what it was like when he arrived at work. He drove to work
and parked each day in the same parking space (of course).
He then walked into the building, took the elevator to the fifth
floor, got off and walked to his office.
I suggested that he back into his parking space, instead of
pulling forward into it. He looked at me oddly; he was smart
enough to know that he was in trouble. I then suggested that
he not walk directly to the building door but that he meander
a little on the way there – That he weave in and out of cars,
noticing the cars as he went and, “dancing” his way to the
front door.
By dancing I meant anything but a direct route. A couple of
days after Mike returned home, I received a call from his wife.
“What did you do to him?” she asked with genuine curiosity.
Mike, being the diligent, driven guy he was, applied the
exercise all over the place and was a lighter, more fun and
even jubilant person. His wife was blown away by her new
man. After thirty-three years of marriage, she got a new, light
and lively relationship. They both (of course) lived happily
ever after.
Yes, Mike is a real person. Yes, he really did this, and yes, it
changed his life. I have been leading courses for almost thirty
::: 18 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
years and have more stories about what works and what
doesn’t work than could fit in a dozen books.
Notice Your Breath
Eastern spiritual pursuits have known for a long time that
focusing attention on your breath tends to make you more
present. That is exactly what it does. When you are talking to
yourself in your own head, or out loud, you hold your breath.
You don’t get enough air and you slowly suffocate.
If you are unhappy, you are probably holding your breath.
Focus your attention on the inhale, then on the exhale. Learn
to love both the in and the out of your breath and you will
learn to love both the in and the outs of life. Focus on your
breath anytime.
Notice Mother Nature
Tell your concerns to a
tree. Whine to a rock.
Look at a mountain stream
or at the surface of a small
lake. Notice the natural
things around you and
you will naturally resonate
with them.
Mother Nature takes her
time. And you, though you
probably work in a building and live in a building and don’t
spend much time in the woods, are still one of Mom’s
creatures. Notice the grass, notice the trees or the clouds.
Remind yourself that there is much more going on in this
world than human concerns and you are likely to put
whatever is bothering you or what you are thinking about in
perspective.
::: 19 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
I went through a very difficult time in my life a few years ago.
People who know about such things called my crisis the dark
night of the soul. I promise you it was dark. At the time, I
would have done anything to avoid it. Now I perceive it to be
the greatest learning of my life. Isn’t it interesting how our
perspective on things changes?
When I was in the dark night, a brilliant Chi Kung teacher
came to my property. We hung out for a couple of days doing
very, very simple exercises. I live on 33 acres with lots of trees,
meadows and a couple of ponds. During his two days here,
we walked around the property investigating how sensitive we
could be to our surroundings. We wiggled our feet in the sand,
we stood under large oak trees, felt the sun on our backs and
felt the differences between walking uphill and downhill. We
explored our relationship with Mother Nature and let her take
care of us. She took care of us very well.
At one point on one of our walks, he let out a yelp. “Ouch,”
he screamed. Fire ants had crawled on to his leg. He had
never met these little pesky rascals before. I explained what
they were to him. He closed his eyes, embraced the pain of
them, converted it to pleasure and we walked on as though his
day had just gotten better. While this story may not make
much sense to you, I, with my powers of observation, watched
him move from pain and fear into pleasure and peace just by
allowing the pain to move freely through every part of him.
Watching him do this was magical to me. Much of what you
will learn in the Mind Relief Manuscript is likely to be magical
for you. You are about to learn about deep resources that you
haven’t tapped into before. You are going to learn easy ways to
lighten up and become best friends with your mind.
Play a bit with the simple things I have suggested in this
chapter, then move on to the next chapter where we will begin
the exploration of your mind. We will begin with observation,
::: 20 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
a particularly powerful tool for disarming your mind and
getting on with the fun.
Spread it Around!
Everyone could use a little mind relief.
Here’s how you can help spread the word:
1.Send the FREE manuscript link to a friend. Link:
http://www.selfexploratorytools.com/MRM.html
2. Print as many copies as you like.
3.Watch video of Jerry: http://www.youtube.com/prcourse
4. Friend Jerry on facebook:
http://www.facebook.com/jerrystocking
::: 21 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 3
Welcome to Earth
Being a hostage to your mind turns Earth from a pleasure
planet to one in which you are constantly threatened, cajoled,
mislead and abused.
Your mind doesn’t think it is safe here. It worries about both
the future and the past and is afraid of the present as well. It
doesn’t think it has enough money, enough time, enough love,
or enough attention. It thinks it has too much pressure, too
much weight, too much seriousness, too much to do, and too
many emotions.
While this is a pleasure planet, there isn’t a whole lot of
pleasure around.
Surveys indicate that most people say that they are happy, but
if you watch them closely or listen to them, they don’t look or
sound very happy.
Your mind doesn’t like it here.
I know it doesn’t like it here because most of the time, it is
imagining how things could be or should have been instead of
how things actually are. Most of the time your mind is resisting
what is here. Your mind constantly fights the way that things
are.
It complains almost incessantly. What has your mind
complained about today? Has it mentioned the weather,
politics, the economy, personal relationship problems, money,
the cost of gas?
Your mind doesn’t like it here because of a very simple
misunderstanding.
::: 22 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
While the misunderstanding is simple, clearing it up isn’t quite
so easy.
Your Mind is in Trouble, which Means You are in
Trouble
Your mind thinks that it is supposed to be in control of things
here. That is where it went wrong and things started to get
ugly.
It tries, unsuccessfully, to control practically everything. The
burden of trying to control everything has painted your mind
into a horrible corner.
Rather than perceiving what is here, your mind creates
illusions. Rather than noticing what time the mailman arrived,
your mind says, “He should have been here earlier.”
If you foot hurts, your mind says, “My foot shouldn’t hurt.”
If the doctor keeps you waiting or if there is a big traffic jam,
your mind says, “I shouldn’t have to wait” or “there shouldn’t
be this kind of traffic.”
If your kid is sleeping in, your mind says, “She should be up
by now.”
Your mind doesn’t care how things are; it just thinks that things
should be different. Your mind resists being on Earth by
spinning out illusions of what Earth “should” be like.
Your mind is busy trying to change Earth, trying to buffer you
and protect you from the way things are. I am not sure how
complaining about things makes anything better, but your
mind seems to think that it does.
Who’s Your Mind Working For?
::: 23 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
You waited a in a long line to get here. You were a spirit and
you waited patiently to incarnate on Earth. You were infinitely
excited.
When you got to Earth, things weren’t quite as you imagined.
You didn’t like being slapped on the butt, air felt harsh as it
rushed into your lungs and you discovered, too quickly, that
you were completely and
utterly dependent on a
Mom and a Dad who
had no idea what they
were doing. “. . . Honey,
you’re holding him
upside down . . .”
You learned first hand the
pain of being hungry, wet
and tired. Early on you
didn’t have your mind to buffer you from these traumas. You
just felt them and they didn’t feel good. While your body has
since grown stronger physically, your mind is still behaving
like a child.
About age two came the birth of consciousness and you were
finally able to resist. You learned to say “Why?” and you
learned to say “No.” You have been resisting ever since.
Your mind defines itself by resisting. It seeks to be right and in
control. It wants to mold Earth in its image.
The mind resists because it has too much to do and too little
time to get it done. The mind resists because it can’t do most
of what you ask it to do, and the mind resists because it thinks
it is in charge but really isn’t.
The resistance your mind has to being on Earth is all based on
a simple misunderstanding. This misunderstanding happened
back in the 1600s, but it is still influencing you today.
::: 24 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Descartes was Wrong
Many of you may know the famous Descartes quote, “I think
therefore I am.” He didn’t say this last week or a century ago,
he said this in the early 1600s. That is a long time ago and it is
when the “seeds for the weeds” that your mind is currently
tending showed up.
Descartes, of course, didn’t create the problems you have with
your mind, he just burdened your mind greatly.
Descartes was wrong. In his simple phrase he put the mind
first and centuries of serious thinking followed in which
people considered rationality and logic to be important.
People neglected the wisdom of their bodies, their intuition
and even common sense because they thought thinking was
more important.
Years ago people thought the world was flat. For a long time
that “fact” stopped them from discovering the new world. It
used to be common knowledge that nobody could run a sub
four-minute mile. Now people do it regularly. Thinking
considered to be “truth” or in control begins to define what is
possible for you. Limitations become facts and influence what
we dare try. If you don’t think you can do it, you probably
can’t. If you don’t think you can do it, you probably won’t
even try.
Do you exist because you think? Does that sound crazy to
you? I hope so, and just in case it doesn’t please let me
explain.
You do a lot of things in a day. You get out of bed, eat, go to
work, have sex, buy stuff and feel all kinds of things. You see
things throughout your day, talk with friends or co-workers,
you drive, walk, stand and do many, many, things.
::: 25 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
One of the things that you do in a day is think. You don’t exist
because you think. Existence is the sum of all the things you
do. You have gotten to the point that while you are doing
things, showering, driving or whistling Dixie, you are also
thinking. Just because you think nearly all the time doesn’t
mean that thinking causes existence. That is just crazy talk.
It would be much more sensible and even logical and
liberating to turn Descartes’ simple phrase around.
“I am therefore I think.”
Now that puts the horse ahead of the cart. I am therefore I
shower, I am therefore I make love, I am therefore I breathe
and feel and walk and talk and smile and laugh and talk to
myself in my head.
If your existence depends on what you think, you will have to
think the right thoughts. You will also have to prove you think
the right thoughts. Wearing the right clothes, being scared to
say what you mean and avoiding the things you really want
are always attempts to think the right thoughts. “I can’t do that
because _______” is the anthem of every mind trying to justify
itself.
When you start with “I am therefore I think,”you start with a
sense of self. You have a foundation for self-esteem deeper
than judgements.
“I am” is a very, very powerful thing to say. Try it. “I am” – That
is it. “I am” doesn’t have to be followed by any other words; it
is a perfect sentence with a subject and a verb.
When you have said, “I am” you have said it all.
Exercise #1 Practice “I am”
Practice throughout your day saying, “I am.”
::: 26 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
When Randy came to his first workshop, he hardly spoke. He
sat attentive but tense. He was uncomfortably thin and
actually just plain uncomfortable. He began playing the “I am”
game and a shift came over him.
I watched as he began opening up to several people in the
workshop. He was painfully shy but began to make friends
with people on the breaks. After more practice with the “I am”
exercise, it became obvious what his problem was.
He had a self-image problem. He had virtually no self-image
at all.
When I say that he had no self-image, what I really mean is
that he didn’t have any images, pictures, of himself. He
couldn’t see himself in his own pictures. He couldn’t make a
visual representation of himself.
When we began to explore the anatomy of the mind, he
perked up. He began making pictures of himself in his head
and a whole new world opened for him. I wish we had a
before and after photo of Randy. The before photo wouldn’t
even grab your attention; you wouldn’t notice this guy if he sat
next to you in class or worked in the next cubical or sat across
from you reading the morning newspaper.
The after pictures revealed that he was both interesting and
interested. His eyes came alive; his face wasn’t pale anymore.
He freely interacted with everyone in the workshop and even
spoke in front of the group revealing to us that he was both
smart and interesting.
To this day he remembers the “I am” exercise as the beginning
of the “new Randy.” He likes the new Randy and so do his
many new friends. Even his girlfriend, who didn’t know the
old Randy, reaps the benefits that began with the initial play
with the “I am” exercise.
::: 27 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Practice it several times a day. You will be very surprised at
what happens. Do it please before you read on.
A Word about Exercises
From time to time I will suggest exercises like the “I am”
exercise above. Simply do them.
I don’t care what you think of the exercise or what you think
will happen when you do it. Do the exercise and find out
what happens. As you do the simple “I am” exercise, you will
likely discover that you become more important.
Throughout your busy day, being doesn’t get much attention
and your thoughts get a lot of attention. The “I am” exercise
balances out some of the attention thinking is getting by
focusing your attention on being.
While this, and other exercises I suggest to you, may seem
small and unimportant, I promise you that they are vital to you
befriending your mind. They will help you discover how to
reclaim your run away thoughts. The more often you do an
exercise the more you will learn, and the better your results
from the exercise will be.
But please, and this is important, don’t overdo the exercise.
Don’t begin by doing the “I am.” exercise for an hour. That is
too long. You can work up to that but don’t start there.
Begin with just a few times per day and work your way up to
many more times.
Please don’t think that I am asking you to spend a lot of time
on the “I am” exercise.
The more often you do it the more likely you are to discover
that doing it frees up your time rather than consuming it.
Remember: Much of what your mind tells you simply isn’t
true. It may tell you that I am asking too much. I assure you
::: 28 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
that I am asking very little and what I ask of you will produce
huge results in every aspect of your life.
Your mind wants to look before it leaps, or better yet not leap
at all. Your mind wants to understand first and act afterwards;
the difficulty is that life doesn’t work that way.
Thinking about something can provide some useful data but it
doesn’t replace experience. Minds are interested in
understanding first, and experiencing afterward. The deeper
parts of yourself want experience and don’t care about
understanding.
It is your mind’s commitment to understanding which
continually limits the samples it can take (We will get to
samples later.) Your mind wants life to be consistent,
predictable and controllable (boring). It likes science, which is
all about consistency, predictability and control.
Your mind tends to adopt a point of view and hold on to that
point of view come hell or high water. Exercises are incredibly
useful because they provide gobs of useful data and every bit
of this data reminds your mind to lighten up, let go and trust.
Coming to Earth
Earth is not an unfriendly
planet, unless you resist the
way that it is. All your mind
needs to do to make peace
with earth is tip the scales a
little bit from imagining
how Earth may be (which
your mind does constantly),
to noticing how things
actually are.
::: 29 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Your mind has resisted the way things are on Earth and this
resistance has become a way of life for you. You can’t stop
resisting by stopping resisting, anymore than you can lose
weight just by wanting to or stop drugs by just saying “no.”
I have a trick for you which will begin allow your mind to
return to Earth. Like all of my exercises, this one is simple;
and, also, like all my exercises, it is guaranteed to work if you
do it.
This little exercise is your ticket to really living on Earth.
Exercise #2: Returning to Earth
Make a short list of observations about anything around you
right now. Your list may look something like this:
I have on a shirt.
I feel good.
It is a nice day out.
The sun is shining.
I am comfortable.
It is hot outside.
There isn’t anything for me to do.
I am tired.
Once you have your list, imagine that twelve jurors look at
your list and put a check by any of your observations that all
twelve jurors are likely to agree with. My list would look like
this.
I have on a shirt.
I feel good.
It is a nice day out.
The sun is shining.
I am comfortable.
My hair looks good.
I have on dark green shorts.
I am tired
::: 30 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Differentiate between observations, ones that twelve jurors
could make and judgements that require bias on your part in
order to make.
I have on a shirt.
I have on a nice shirt.
You arrived at 8PM.
You were late.
You had a good time.
You said, “I had a good time.”
I am happy.
I am five foot 9 inches tall.
Begin to distinguish between observations and judgements.
Observations have a tiny bit less mind involved; they are
based more in your senses, while judgements are a bit for your
mind.
Observations are statements about “what is.” Judgements are
statements about what should be or what, in the mind’s
opinion, is the case.
This is a Revolution
Imagine what it would be like if we never rebelled against
British Rule. We would all be eating fish and chips and trying
to get a peek at our queen. We would be saying “cheerio” and
“pip pip.”
I am advocating another revolution here. You have been
dominated by the provincial rule of your mind for way too
long. Your mind taxes you and offers no representation. You
don’t need to change your thinking, you need to overthrow
your mind. You have already tried to change your thinking and
that didn’t work. It is time to throw off the tyrannical rule of
your mind.
::: 31 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
In this particular revolution, not a single drop of blood will be
spilled. Nobody will be hurt and your mind will finally get the
relief that it has always needed.
Your mind isn’t having much fun. It doesn’t really want to be
in control, it just doesn’t have an alternative. Learning and
practicing the difference between observation and judgement
provides a whole new way of thinking and is the first step
toward this necessary revolution.
“Enough fish and chips,” I say. Enough defensive judgements!
And way too much thinking taken seriously! This is a
revolution! Nothing less will do.
Earth is a Nice Place
“Earth is a nice place” is a judgement.
“Earth is a planet” is an observation.
Observations bring you to this world. Judgements bring you
into a world created by your mind.
Your mind passes off judgements as observations; it does this
with you and with other people.
You probably wouldn’t print your own one hundred dollar
bills and go out and buy stuff with them. If you did, you would
try and have the bills you printed look as much like a real one
hundred dollar bill as possible.
Your mind is constantly trying to pass off counterfeit
observations: Ones that are really judgements. Your mind
creates things and passes them off as real. When it does this,
you suffer. You suffer in that you lose your grip on what is; you
suffer in that you lose your connection with other people, and
you suffer because you lose your connection with reality.
::: 32 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Fighting
Your mind has declared war on “what is.” It will never win this
war, but as long as it continues to wage this war, you will
struggle and fight. You will suffer and lose.
You will be alienated because you will be in a world of your
own. You will greatly limit the people that you can interact
with because they will need to have the same judgements you
do or you will have to fight with them.
Practicing Returning to Earth Exercise #2 will have you fight
less and enjoy Earth more. Discovering the difference between
observations and judgements has Earth be a nicer, more
friendly place.
Spread it Around!
Everyone could use a little mind relief.
Here’s how you can help spread the word:
1.Send the FREE manuscript link to a friend. Link:
http://www.selfexploratorytools.com/MRM
2. Call us to say “hello”: 706.754.7540.
3. Learn more about Jerry at: http://www.jerrystocking.com
::: 33 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 4
The Hidden Powers of Your Mind
What is Your Mind Up to Anyway?
One moment it plays nice and the next it is chattering away
about how worthless you are or how the world really “should”
be.
Do you dare believe your thoughts?
Is your mind on your side or not?
The answer my friend is anybody’s guess. The mind certainly
can seem fickle at times and at other times downright nasty.
Yet, at other times it seems loving and caring.
What is the nature of this love/don’t love relationship you have
with your mind?
Relating to your mind is tough. Your mind is so quick, not only
quick to throw a thought at you but also, if you don’t react to
that thought, it is quick to throw another thought your way – a
different thought, sometimes even a thought that seems a bit
like the opposite of the original thought.
It is tough, sometimes, to believe your mind, and things tend
to get tough rather quickly when you do. But if you don’t
believe your mind then your mind gets all shades of serious,
threatening in really reactionary tones.
Believing your thoughts is dangerous because your mind can
say anything. Not believing your thoughts is dangerous
because your mind wants so badly to be believed and will
escalate its threats if it doesn’t get attention. What is a human
to do?
::: 34 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
The answer may not be obvious, but it is always the same. The
answer is that you get to know your mind. You give it the
attention it wants and needs and you embrace each thought as
if it is your own: It is of course. Each thought is your mind’s
best possible thought each moment. Embrace each thought,
love each thought but know, too, that a thought is just a
thought, nothing more and nothing less. There will be another
thought and another and another.
I will show you how to get to know your mind.
Your mind is amazing. Your mind is flexible. Your mind is
quick and smart and wise too.
When it is open, your mind lets go and lightens up. When
your mind is closed, it defends and resists. Same mind, but it
seems so different.
The simple exercises in the next three chapters will provide a
safe environment to get to know your mind.
Just do the exercises and your mind will open, relax and
become your best friend. The exercises provide the best and
quickest relief I have found in my thirty years of working with
minds. They offer short cuts that nobody knows. Your mind
won’t be ready for how powerful they are and it won’t be able
or want to defend against them.
When you receive but don’t believe your thoughts, the very
nature of your thinking will change in wonderful ways. As
your relationship with your mind evolves, you will find that a
sense of self and well being naturally thrives, and your mind,
once open and relaxed, naturally steps down to become the
useful, friendly, wise, witty warrior it can be.
::: 35 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Possibilities and Your Mind
When your mind is open, it is curious and loves possibilities.
When you are closed, possibilities threaten the mind’s
dominance with dastardly results.
Your closed mind settles on one possibility: “He doesn’t like
me” or “I am not smart enough” or “I can’t make enough
money”or “things aren’t going my way.” Your closed mind
doesn’t care what is true as long as something is. Your mind
would rather believe and hold on to a thought or belief that
would make your life difficult or impossible rather than have
nothing to hold onto at all.
Believing something is true is sacrificing endless possibilities
which tends to make you intolerant, angry, defensive resistant
and a little less light and happy. When you do this over and
over, it makes for a bad day, exasperated friends and a less
than positive outlook on life.
There is a way out of this crazy, vicious cycle of believing your
thoughts. The solution isn’t obvious but it works every time.
The Solution
While the solution to the vicious thought cycle of an immature
mind seems to be to stop thinking or learn how to not have
your thoughts appear true, neither of these actually works.
Your mind doesn’t need the next good idea. Good ideas are all
over the place and they never work, at least not for long.
Your mind needs practice; it needs to do what an open mind
does best: get curious, lighten up and let go. That is the
shortest and perhaps the only road to having fun with your
mind.
You can’t stop thinking just because you want to stop thinking.
You can’t stop thinking “He doesn’t like me” or “She does like
::: 36 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
me” or “That meeting went poorly” or “My life sucks” or
“When I get my ducks in a row, I will finally be able to make a
whole lot more money, and when I make more money, I will
be able to buy a Lamborghini, and when I have that little
orange race car, I will finally find someone who loves me, and
once I am loved, I will finally be able to stop being insecure
and my life will be complete and remember that all of this has
to do with getting my ducks in a row.” Quack! Quack!
Somewhere in your mind’s crazy scenarios, your thought
process needs to be interrupted. You need to pause. A pause in
your thoughts refreshes you. I will teach you how to disappear
thoughts, which will result in little pauses between your
thoughts. Each pause will be a tiny step on the road to
reinventing your mind as less of an ass and more of an asset.
While some thoughts make good company and a few of them
don’t, you tend to focus attention on the ones that are bad
company. Learning how to disappear a thought is vital to
putting your mind in perspective.
I will show you two, tried and true, powerful ways to
disappear thoughts, which will free you from the crazy cycle
described above.
They will teach you how to easily:
Return to your senses
Observe your thoughts
Might it be a little better day if you don’t have to believe
everything you think today? Let’s get right to it.
Let’s find out how to please your mind and make sure that
your mind always has exactly what it wants and needs. Let’s
cut through all the mysteries of the mind and tell it just like it
::: 37 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
is. You mind wants one thing and only one thing, and until you
give it that one thing, it will continue to give you a hard time.
Your Mind Seeks Attention
Your mind will do anything to get attention. It needs attention;
it can’t operate for any length of time without it. Attention is
the equivalent of love, sex and money to the mind. It is the
mind’s heroine and the mind’s downfall as well. But knowing
this, as you become a master of attention, puts you in charge
of what the mind needs.
Your mind will dream to get attention, scheme to get attention.
It will whine to get attention, it will even shout or believe to
get attention. Your mind will jump off the Golden Gate Bridge
to get attention or break up with your spouse or yell at your
kids to get attention. Your mind will believe the unbelievable
to get attention. It will act like a fool to get attention.
Are you getting the idea? Your mind will do anything to get
attention, and if it doesn’t get attention it will try harder, get
crazier or even get meaner to get attention.
In the pecking order of life, attention is way more important
than thoughts. The mind’s motivation is getting attention. I
repeat: Your mind will do anything to get attention!
Your mind will succeed to get attention, it will get married to
get attention, your mind will have the same problem over and
over to get attention or it will come up with a new problem to
get attention. It will blow one tiny little problem up to life and
death proportions to get attention.
Your mind will get addicted to get attention or get popular to
get attention. While it may appear that your mind wants love
or money or sex or a new house, these are just metaphors for
attention.
::: 38 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Your mind is an attention addict and the kind of rehab this
addict needs is to not only get enough attention, but to realize
that attention is free, cheap, easy to get and that you are a
source of constant attention. In a world where attention is
scarce, your mind will become afraid and worried and live in
a state of stress and panic and you will suffer.
Your mind doesn’t grow up or become more open and flexible
when it is denied attention. It does so when it gets attention no
matter what. This may seem counter intuitive, but it works to
give your mind attention no matter what.
Growing up is always a battle for attention. A young child
wants his or her parents attention. It is “game on” as the child
tries different things to get it. We tried an experiment with my
daughter. We gave her unlimited attention. It wasn’t easy but it
turned out to be worth it.
No, it didn’t spoil her. Spoiling someone is giving them
attention for something you wish they wouldn’t do. Your mind
has been spoiled terribly. It has been given attention when it
did things you never, ever wanted it to do.
My daughter never needed attention because she always got
it. This made her self sufficient, self directed and loving and
caring for other people. She discovered herself as a source of
attention not as someone who needs attention. Your mind
needs and deserves attention.
Your mind also needs to get out of the control game of
receiving attention for some thoughts and not for others. If
your mind gets attention for thoughts like, “He doesn’t like
me” or “I am in trouble now” or “I screwed up” or “the other
foot is about to fall,” it will think more of those thoughts.
Whatever your mind receives attention for, it will do again,
and again and again.
::: 39 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
The thoughts you are thinking now are there because when
you thought these thoughts before, they received attention.
Attention, given to a thought, simply orders your mind to think
that thought again.
You have driven your mind crazy by the way you dole out
attention. Your mind does anything that results in attention. My
daughter just graduated Summa Cum Laude from college.
Unlike her peers, she got “A”s because she could and for the
fun of it. She didn’t do it to prove herself. She did it for the
sheer, unadulterated fun of it.
Indian gurus have told us for a long time that we already have
what we seek. But we haven’t listened because our immature
minds are bent on seeking. Your mind seeks in the morning, in
the afternoon and in the evening. Your mind will even seek
late at night or on holidays. Your mind is seeking more
attention, better attention and different attention. A seeking
mind is a crazy mind, a frantic mind – a mind out of control.
Your mind needs and deserves attention, and when it gets it,
then and only then can it relax and bask in the perfection of
things. It is time to provide your mind with the attention it
needs.
Giving Your Mind Attention
Selective attention is your mind’s worst enemy. Freely given
attention sets your mind free to open, to think incredible
thoughts and to explore possibilities. When certain thoughts
receive substantially more attention than other thoughts, your
mind keeps thinking the same thoughts over and over. If you
pay more attention to the thoughts that make you worry, you
will worry a lot.
Attention is the focusing of consciousness. And while this may
seem esoteric or spacey, it isn’t. Your attention is fast, lively
and flowing. It is a vital force in your life and usually goes
::: 40 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
unnoticed. You don’t decide to focus your attention on a
thought, it just happens.
When you walk in a room, your attention takes in certain
aspects of the room, perhaps a vase or a picture on the wall
catch your eye, faster than you can think or plan what to
notice. When you meet someone, you may notice that they
have a high voice or that they are overweight or wearing a
loud Hawaiian shirt. Your attention goes to certain aspects of
them. Your attention is much faster than your thoughts. Your
attention is the flow of information through your senses: what
you see, what you hear and what you feel (pictures, sounds
and feelings). At the same time, your thoughts are the blocking
of pictures, sounds and feelings.
The flow of pictures, sounds and feelings is vibrant and alive.
Once these sensory experiences are blocked, held constant in
a thought, they consume rather than deliver attention and
energy.
To understand what I am saying here simply think: Thoughts =
stopped, Attention = moving. Thoughts block energy; attention
allows energy to flow. Everybody wants more attention.
Your mind wants attention. Knowing what your mind wants
gives you the leverage to finally influence your mind.
If you are going to teach a dog tricks, you must give the dog
either attention or treats. Actually attention and food are both
treats for a dog. If you are going to train your mind, you will
need to give it treats in the form of attention.
Attention is the only treat that will reward a mind for very
long. Your mind tires quickly of the new car or the swimming
pool or the increase in salary. It promises that life will be
complete when it gets these but it never delivers. But attention
is different for the mind; your mind has an insatiable appetite
::: 41 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
for attention. So, if you are going to master your mind, you
will need to master attention.
Now lets get on with mastering attention and then, in the next
chapter, we will discover two simple tried and true ways of
influencing your mind and they both have to do with
mastering attention.
Master Attention or Perish
You have clamored after attention your whole life. You wanted
it from Mom or Dad; you wanted it from your teachers and
friends and your spouses and kids. You wanted it from your
family members. You have a checkered and erratic history of
getting attention and not getting attention.
Though you have pursued attention your whole life you don’t
know much about it. I am now going to teach you just enough
about attention that you can use it to tempt and train your
mind.
There are two kinds of attention:
Quantity
Quality
Quantity of attention is simply how much attention you get.
When you are focused on quantity of attention, then the more
attention you get the better. Any attention will do. You don’t
care if you are being punished or yelled at as long as you are
receiving attention.
Quality of attention isn’t about receiving attention. To explore
quality of attention is to discover that you will never, ever
receive attention unless you give it. So quantity of attention is
about getting more attention and quality of attention is about
giving attention.
::: 42 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
We are all after attention but mastering attention is about
giving attention. As long as you think you don’t have enough
attention, you will do anything to get more. Imagine that you
already have enough attention and your job, like the executor
of a will, is about doling out attention. Who will get your
attention, what thoughts will you give attention to and which
ones won’t receive attention?
The first secret about attention that nobody knows is that you
are a source of attention. In fact, you are the only source of
attention there is. Attention is a purely human gift that you get
to give, and give and give.
While it has always appeared that attention is something that
you needed to get, the only way to get it is to give it. You were
stingy with attention because you didn’t know that you were
the source of it.
Exercise #3: Attention
Touch your little fingers together and notice what you feel.
Then touch your little finger to your tongue and notice what
you feel. Do this simple exercise a couple of times.
When you touch your fingers, you feel both fingers but when
you touch your little finger to your tongue, you just feel your
tongue. That is because your tongue is closer to your brain
than your finger is. The difference is about one one-thousandth
of a second. That isn’t very long, but it makes a difference to
what you feel.
Attention Myth Number Two
The second myth about attention is that there isn’t enough
attention to go around. This is a lie that almost everyone
believes. The truth is that there is plenty of attention and you
::: 43 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
can have all of it that you want. You create attention all the
time. You are the source of attention.
Because you have been busy trying to get attention you
probably haven’t noticed what you can do with attention.
Attention can be focused on what you know, which makes
you certain and sure of what you know. Attention can also be
focused on what you don’t know, which has you become
curious and open and it keeps your attention moving and
provides you with energy and lightness. Attention focused on
what you know stops attention, converting its natural kinetic
energy to thoughts.
To discover yourself as a source of attention, focus your
attention on what you don’t know – questions, and less on
what you do know – answers.
There is so much more that you don’t know than that you do
know, so by focusing attention on what you don’t know, you
live in a much bigger world, a world of wonderment and
magic.
Pull your head out of the sand; you aren’t an ostrich. Start to
notice and fall in love with all that you don’t know. I
remember playing with clay as a kid. The clay came in five
different, bright colors. But at first the clay was stiff. It needed
to be worked, it needed to be kneaded and it needed the
warmth of your little hands. It also needed the constant awe
and curiosity of a young artist: You. Your mind needs a bit of
kneading and it needs awe and curiosity. It needs warmth and
attention from you. When it gets it, there will be a hot time in
the old town tonight.
You wouldn’t buy a three-story house and never even enter the
top two stories would you? Of course not. But there is so little
you have explored on Earth because you were just too darned
busy trying to get attention. When you get that you are the
::: 44 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
source of attention, Earth becomes your playground and your
mind becomes a kid in a candy shop.
You May Not Know What You Know
Have you heard of neuro-economics?
Scientists asked people to listen to music and determine which
songs would become hits. They did this with loads of people
as scientists are tempted to do. The songs picked didn’t
become more popular than the songs not picked. Thus it was
concluded that the subjects were not able to discern a hit from
a non-hit.
But the scientists didn’t stop there. At the time that they played
the music for the people, they also had them hooked up to a
brain scan machine, which measured the activation of the
subjects’ brains. Now this is where things get exciting.
Excitation of certain reward centers of the brain fired off much
more often during the songs that became hits – Statistically
significantly more often. The obvious conclusion that the
scientists reached is one that has been obvious to me and my
friends for a long time. The subjects didn’t know what songs
would be hits, but at a much deeper level they did “know.”
This was indicated by brain activation as to what songs would
be hits.
They knew but they didn’t know that they knew. This simple
study tapped into the depths of knowing that are possible, and
provided proof that there are parts of us we don’t know yet.
What I am saying is that this is a huge world, both inside of
you and outside of you. And when you pretend that you
already know, your world shrinks making your mind look huge
and your problems totally serious.
::: 45 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Satisfaction only comes, and stays, when your attention is free
to roam. Satisfaction is never, ever the result of finding
something in particular. It shows its sweet self when your
attention is exploring, looking for nothing in particular and
open and available.
You simply get to discover yourself as a source of attention.
When you do, genuine satisfaction, quality of attention and
unconditional love will surround you.
How difficult is your life? Very difficult for a mind seeking
attention. Very easy when you discover yourself as a source of
attention and finally your mind is flooded with attention.
When your mind has enough attention, and only when it has
enough attention, then it is set free from seeking attention.
Hiding and Seeking Yourself
You are playing a game of hide and seek with yourself. If you
think you know yourself, you stop looking, listening and
feeling and rob your mind of attention. You stop playing and
get serious. You hold to one thought of who you are, while
your mind in an effort to regain your attention, offers up
countless other thoughts. As you ignore these thoughts, you
mind gets a little upset, then more upset.
When you stop, your mind becomes instantly claustrophobic.
It needs attention and tries to get it. A shark needs to keep
moving or it can’t breath. Your mind needs to keep moving,
always moving and never settling down. Constant movement
causes your mind to be distracted, pausing has your mind
catch up with itself.
Each moment can be a creative inspiring one when you give
attention. Learning to love everything you do and finding
possibilities where others don’t will inspire you and everyone
around you. Even the simplest thing you do in a day, when
::: 46 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
done in the presence of attention, becomes fun and
interesting.
There are so many aspects of you hiding from you that the
game of hide and seek is particularly apropos.
Becoming a master of attention is a game of hide and seek.
And you are both the hider and the seeker.
Imagine that you are playing Tic-tac-toe. But there is
something you don’t know about the game. Your opponent is
aware that you are playing three-dimensional Tic-tac-toe but
you aren’t. Not only will you never understand the game, no
matter how hard you try, but you will also never win.
Discovering yourself as the source of attention opens up new
dimensions of you that your mind gets to play on.
Mastering Attention
When you master attention, you make it yours. It becomes
your attention, you own it because you can make it sit, roll
over and play dead (alive).
When it is your attention, marketers can’t grab it and use it for
their own designs. A relationship can’t numb your attention
and your mind will always have plenty of your attention.
You will always need attention, and you always have attention.
Give attention freely. Give attention to your thoughts. In the
absence of attention, your thoughts become more demanding.
In the presence of attention, your thoughts become expansive
and entertaining.
Mastering attention is about giving and receiving attention
freely. When you are just as willing to give as to receive
attention, then your mind can relax. Do the simple exercise
below to balance giving and receiving attention.
::: 47 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Exercise # 4 : Mastering attention
Begin to notice your attention. What is your attention focused
on now? And where is it now? Begin observing your attention.
Notice if a thought grabs your attention. Get curious about
where your attention is.
The first step to becoming a master of attention is noticing
your attention. Your attention is much wiser than your
thoughts. You attention will teach you about attention.
Anytime, anywhere, notice your attention.
As you notice attention, begin to feel it as a flow, as though
attention is like water flowing toward you and away from you
at the same time. Always flowing. Feel the flow of attention.
Bonus Story:
Confidence and Competence: the Twins
I used to sell real estate limited
partnerships. I had no idea what I
was doing. The first thing I did when I
got the job was walked up to the
number one sales guy in the office
and said, “Watch my tracks.” Then I
went home figuring I had set up the
game.
The next day I discovered that he,
being there for two years, had all the
good leads and leads were seldom
coming in anymore. I needed to create a game and I was a
greenhorn. Not wanting to get hurt too badly, I began calling
therapists. I figured they couldn’t be too nasty to me, and they
weren’t. I didn’t sell to any of them either.
::: 48 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Time was wasting, so I created a new game. My girlfriend at
the time, Jacki was very outgoing. She lit up a room just by
walking in to it. I printed out a bunch of cards that read, “Who
says there is no such thing as a free lunch?” I wedged that card
in the property brochures and Jacki started inviting business
owners to lunch. She would walk in an office and invite
people to a free lunch.
It wasn’t long until I had a weekly luncheon with forty or fifty
people present. I had all the leads I needed and within a
month or two and I was the number one sales person in the
office.
I began with confidence, challenging the number one sales
person and then followed up with competence, showing
ingenuity, flexibility and the unwillingness to be second best.
A small piece of the math of attention includes the two
equations below:
Confidence = time + inattention
Competence = time + attention
As you can see from these equations, the twins, confidence
and competence are almost identical except that confidence is
dependent on attention being off, and competence is
dependent on attention being on.
Quality of attention is always on as you give your attention
away. Quality of attention means that you are always and
forever building competence.
Confidence has such a big reputation and is touted as a cure
all. The whole, “just be confident” thing is just so much BS.
You don’t like people who are confident without competence
to back it up. You can’t trust them.
::: 49 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Confidence and competence had a race. Competence won,
while confidence bragged about winning.
Quantity of attention is sometimes off and sometimes on. If
you are receiving enough attention, then life is good; if you
are receiving too little, then life is bad. Good is on and bad is
off. When you try and get attention, you are hunting for
confidence; when you give attention, you are becoming more
competent.
The struggles of most people are the result of quantity seeking
attention, which results in a specific level of confidence. If you
happen to get some attention your confidence rises without
your competence rising. When this happens you become
cocky. If you happen to get less attention for a while your
confidence drops and you develop a case of low self esteem
thinking you can’t do things that you really can do.
When your confidence and competence are out of whack, you
suffer. Your mind tries to bridge the gap between confidence
and competence, defensively spinning out justifications.
“I was late because I was caught in traffic.”
“I didn’t get the project done because I had a sore throat.”
“I didn’t sleep well because I was worrying about tomorrow.”
“She wouldn’t have gone out with me even if I had asked.”
“The stock market went down because of bad economic
news.”
Your mind has what it wants or it has its reasons for why it
doesn’t have what it wants – Justifications. Notice as your
mind offers you endless justifications.
When you give attention, your competence is constantly rising
and it doesn’t really matter how much confidence you have.
Your perception of yourself is based on what you are actually
doing not on what you think you can or cannot do.
::: 50 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
When confidence is ahead of competence you think you can
do things that you can’t do – Making your mind a critic of
reality. When your competence is ahead of your confidence,
you think you can’t do things that you can do making your
mind a critic of you.
Either way you are screwed. Because either way you are a
critic and the only way out of this bind is becoming a master
of attention, which means that you both give and receive
attention freely.
Selling real estate limited partnerships, I learned a lot about
giving and receiving. I gave to my clients and I received from
them. I didn’t need their attention and I didn’t need them to
buy from me. And I gave them attention freely.
With the free flow of attention, our minds relaxed. We didn’t
need to defend ourselves. We weren’t adversaries; we were
working together. I wasn’t trying to trick them into buying and
we became friends. Sales, in the presence of giving and
receiving attention, becomes a kind, peaceful process.
What else could mastering attention change?
::: 51 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 5
Returning to Your Senses.
It is About How You Think Not What You Think
June and James had been married for 28 years. They were
happy together so I was surprised when I received a desperate
invitation to join them for breakfast. Both of them had
attended my courses and though we weren’t friends, we had
mutual respect for each other. At breakfast I quickly noticed
the problem.
June and James were intellectuals; he was highly successful in
a college theater department and she was very successful as
an English teacher and public relations coach. But breakfast
wasn’t as much fun as I would have expected. These two sat
on opposite ends of the table only physically about six feet
apart, but in their thinking they were miles apart.
While they were both liberals and shared political and
religious beliefs, they just weren’t communicating effectively.
He was silent, though it was obvious that he was upset and
she sat, almost trance like, not ever looking directly at him,
but looking past him.
The first half of breakfast, as I sat quietly, was punctuated by
June and James talking but not really connecting. He would
say something and she wouldn’t really hear him. She would
then ask a question which had nothing to do with what he had
just said.
It was as though each of them was on a cell phone, but a
different call. I wondered how it was possible that these two
highly intelligent people could have come to such an impasse.
Then, I coughed loudly and began to gag.
::: 52 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
That is right, I choked
and choked loudly as
though my life was in
jeopardy. Both June and
James focused all their
attention on me. And I
said, “Now that I have
your attention let’s get a
little work done here.”
That’s right. I wasn’t
really gagging; I was offering this unhappy couple a way to
communicate. You don’t know me but if you did this wouldn’t
surprise you a bit. Often the best way to reach people has
nothing to do with speaking or explaining things to them.
All I had to do was look around the house to learn about June.
The house was immaculate. Everything was in its place and
everything was spotlessly clean. June is one of those people
who focuses mostly on what she sees. Things need to look
right and if they don’t look right, she gets very upset.
James, on the other hand, sat at breakfast in a sweat suit that
was worn and had not only a couple of stains on it but one of
the pant legs was ripped in two places. June didn’t dare look at
James because she didn’t like how sloppy he looked. James
felt terrible because June obviously disapproved of him.
Looking at their front room, the difference between them
became even more obvious. Though the furniture wasn’t new,
it was clean and well kept up, with the exception of James’
chair which was a nearly worn out lounge chair with crumbs
on the seat and terribly worn leather arms. His oasis in the
room, his chair, was an eye sore to her.
The problems they were having were because of the way each
of them was thinking. June was very, very visual while James
didn’t see much and would focus his attention on how things
::: 53 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
felt. The purpose for my choking at the table was to generate
such a loud sound that she would be shocked out of her
pictures and he would focus his attention on the sounds I was
making rather than how he was feeling.
While these two had lived happily in different worlds for
years, they really hadn’t gotten to know each other very well.
But recent budget cuts at the university had put such pressure
on them that they really needed to communicate. He felt so
bad about his future and she was so worried about the
possibility of them losing their jobs that they were forced into
the need to communicate.
My noises were intended to draw them both into the world of
sounds, him from his world of feelings and her from her world
of pictures. It worked. The second half of breakfast was very
different from the first. June and James were talking together
and making up for years of non-communication. They were
connecting and resolving all sorts of issues that had been
making their marriage much less than it might have been.
I was pleased a week later when I met with June and James
again to discover that not only were they still talking deeply
together, but he was wearing a brand new sweat suit without
stains or holes and she was actually expressing her feelings,
something that she had never done before.
Your Thinking is Based on Your Senses
Each of your thoughts is composed of pictures, sounds and
feelings. Every thought has data from each of your senses.
But like June and James, you probably tend to focus your
attention more on pictures or more on sounds or more on
feelings. June focused almost all of her attention on pictures
while James was continually focused on his feelings.
::: 54 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Getting to know how you think is becoming familiar with the
pictures, sounds and feelings that compose your thinking.
I remember the first time I played a video game. The game, I
think, was called, “Asteroids.” The game featured little pin
pricks of light that we were supposed to perceive as alien
space ships. These ships were continually zig-zagging from the
top of the screen to the bottom. I was supposed to press a
button that would shoot and destroy these alien ships. If I did
so, I got to live to press the button again, possibly destroying
another ship. If I didn’t hit the alien ship, it hit me and after
this happened three times, I had to pay another quarter.
Your mind is throwing thoughts at you. If you can disappear
these thoughts, you won’t have to take them seriously and you
will get to live another day. If too many thoughts hit you in a
day, it is a bad day in which you are being continually
manipulated by your mind.
Learning to focus your attention on your senses will render
your thoughts powerless and open the door to a whole new
way of thinking: OBSERVATION. Observation is thinking
without bias. Another word for this powerful, radical thinking
is witnessing.
I see, I hear, I feel
Your senses are your interface with the world. Becoming
aware of your senses, will have you live more in this world
and less in the world of illusion created by your mind.
Exercise # 5a: Seeing
What do you see right now?
Close your eyes, what do you see?
::: 55 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
“Banana” what do you see when you read that
word?
Look in the distance; zoom in on something very
close to you.
Create a picture of yourself as a young kid; then
make a picture of yourself old.
See something that has never happened.
See something that happened yesterday.
Close your eyes and create a picture of yourself in
your head.
Picture yourself receiving a gold medal.
Picture yourself flying in a rocket.
Make pictures of yourself; make pictures of other people.
Notice the things around you. Watch the people in your life,
look closely.
Exercise #5b: Hearing
What do you hear right now?
Hear your mother’s voice.
Talk to yourself in your own head and listen
carefully.
Listen to music and pick out the sound of each
instrument.
Sing and listen to the tone of your voice.
Sing high, sing low, sing loudly and sing quietly.
::: 56 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Listen to others carefully when they speak. Not just
to the words but to the tone of voice.
Listen to the wind, listen to a river or the water
running from a faucet.
Listen inside yourself, are there any sounds inside?
Listen when you speak. Hear your own voice and then vary
your voice, vary pitch and volume, very timbre and tempo.
Create a little tune and hum it whenever you want.
Exercise #5c: Feeling
What do you feel right now?
Is there anywhere in your body that hurts?
Anywhere that is tight?
Rub your arm very softly and then slightly harder.
Can you smell anything, if so, what?
Shrug your shoulders, bring them up and then drop
them.
Shake your body around and notice all the
sensations.
Put a little piece of fruit in your mouth and taste it.
Anytime, anywhere, notice how you feel. Do a quick
inventory of your body. How do your legs feel, your feet, your
belly, your arms? Feel your body, close your eyes and explore
your immediate surroundings by feeling.
::: 57 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Thought and Feelings
A picture isn’t serious; it is just a picture. A sound isn’t serious;
it is just a sound. A feeling isn’t serious; it is just a feeling.
How does your mind take a group of pictures, sounds and
feelings and convert them into a serious thought?
It beats me.
How does your mind have you believe a thought?
That beats me too.
In fact, that is exactly what the mind does. It beats you. It beats
you by adding importance, relevance and seriousness where
there isn’t any. It beats you into submission. It threatens you
until you will believe every thought.
Returning to your senses is an important step in disarming a
cruel mind. Continue to notice the pictures, sounds and
feelings that compose each thought.
A turning point in Alice and
Wonderland is where Alice
says to the queen of hearts
and her whole mob, “You
are nothing but a deck of
cards.”
Find the meanest, nastiest
thought that you can and
say to it, “You are nothing
but a bunch of pictures,
sounds and feelings.”
::: 58 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Is it a Nice Day?
Focusing on your senses will take some practice but it isn’t
hard and it generates a powerful momentum toward positive
change in the moment. (momentum to the moment).
If you think the thought “It is a nice day,” first notice the
thought and then get curious about what inspired that thought.
What pictures, sounds and feelings did you have before you
thought, “It is a nice day?”
Perhaps you saw the sun shining or even felt the warmth of the
sun on your back, then, maybe, you said to yourself, “The sun
in shining; there aren’t very many clouds in the sky; it
probably won’t rain.” Then you may have had a feeling,
perhaps a softness or warmth inside.
You did all this in a fraction of a second and then the thought
“It is a nice day” seemed to appear out of nowhere. Focusing
your attention on what happened before the thought showed
up, will allow you to discover that thoughts aren’t true or false,
they are just conclusions reached from a bunch of pictures,
sounds or feelings. Peanut butter and chocolate came together
and there was’ Reese’s. Pictures, sounds and feelings came
together and you had thoughts. Actually, they had a party.
The day isn’t nice; it is just a day. Certain pictures, sounds and
feelings came together and there was the thought “It is a nice
day.”
Without sensory data, without pictures, sounds and feelings,
there wouldn’t be any thoughts. Attention focused on pictures,
sounds and feelings reveals that thoughts are not the
beginning or the end that they pretend to be. They aren’t the
first word or the last word on anything; they play just a bit part
in the dance of who you really are. Putting thoughts in
perspective relieves your mind.
::: 59 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Following the footprints
Winnie the Pooh and Piglet go heffalump hunting. On this
adventure, they mistake their own footprints for heffalump
tracks. This is a delightful metaphor for the pursuit of
becoming a friend to your mind.
Your senses leave footprints that you can follow to assist you in
the process of returning to your senses. Two brilliant men,
Richard Bandler and John Grinder discovered that when you
see pictures, you tend to put your eyes up and to the right or
up and to the left or defocused straight ahead.
When you are intent upon listening, either to your internal
dialogue, or other sounds, you tend to put your eyes sideways
and to the right or left or down and to the left. When you are
feeling, oftentimes you will put your eyes down or down and
to your right.
Begin noticing where your eyes go and where the eyes of the
people you are interacting with go when thinking or speaking.
You don’t need to figure out anything from where the eyes go,
just notice. Do they put their eyes up, sideways or down? Are
you putting your eyes up, sideways or down? Noticing the
small, and sometimes big movements of people’s eyes will
likely make it much easier to return your attention to pictures,
sounds and feelings.
We could spend many productive days exploring what
Richard called “eye access patterns.” All you need to know
now is that all thoughts are composed of pictures, sounds and
feelings.
Thoughts happen when pictures, sounds and feelings pose for
a mental snap shot. The snap shot – the thought – grabs your
attention and makes the moment it was taken particularly
relevant. Returning to your senses puts your thought, your
mind and each moment in perspective.
::: 60 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Your senses are unbiased observation; your thoughts spawn
biased judgements.
In the next chapter, you will tune in, turn on and inspire your
ability to observe.
Exercise #4: Eye Movements
Observe the eye movements that go with pictures, sounds and
feelings. Notice, too, that when your attention is on your
senses, it isn’t on your judgements.
Spread it Around!
Everyone could use a little mind relief.
Here’s how you can help spread the word:
1.Send the FREE manuscript link to a friend. Link:
http://selfexploratorytools.com/MRM.html
2. Tell a friend about mind relief and eat an M&M or two.
3. Read more from Jerry at his blog:
http://www.jerrystocking.com/blog
::: 61 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 6
Observing Responses
In the Beginning
In the beginning there was a stimulus, then there was a
response. The doctor taps your knee with a special little,
expensive hammer and your lower leg jumps. The hammer is
the stimulus and the leg jerk is the response. Another name for
stimulus/response is cause/effect.
BF Skinner was a pioneer in something he called operant
conditioning, which is the study of stimulus/response
couplings and how they define so much of what you do.
If I say the word “lake,” notice that you have a response. Your
response is likely to include making a picture of a lake. Some
people will make a picture of a specific lake while others will
picture a generic lake. If I say the word “stove” to you, again,
you are likely to see a picture. The word lake and the word
stove are stimuli followed quickly by your response.
Responses happen very quickly.
You didn’t really pick what lake or stove to picture. These were
picked for you at a much deeper, automated part of yourself,
like your leg bouncing when the doctor hits your knee.
Your mind may have a difficult time admitting that the lake or
stove you saw wasn’t really determined by the mind. Your
mind has been taught that it is in charge of everything. It, of
course, isn’t.
Feuding
Remember the old quiz show Family Feud? On the show, two
families compete for big prizes. They don’t have to guess the
capital of Mongolia; all they need to do is figure out what the
most likely response most people would give to a stimulus. So
::: 62 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
a question asked on Family Feud might be, “What are three
things someone might bring to a swimming pool?” That
question is the stimulus and the correct answer is the response
that the most people give.
This quiz show doesn’t test intelligence, rather it measures
how tuned into the automated stimulus/response couplings
one is. Most relationships, businesses and human enterprises
are less about intelligence and more about automated
stimulus/response couplings, because that is really what your
mind does best.
Your mind puts together stimuli and responses so that is what
you get if you rely on your mind.
You don’t get a creative existence; creativity is an expression
of who you really are. You get regurgitated, automatic
stimulus/response couplings. Since these couplings are
automated, they don’t need attention. They progress in
predictable ways from beginning to end without attention.
The phenomenon that I am describing is why most people
wander sleepily through their days, months and years without
noticing much. It’s because your mind is continually engaged
in its own version of Family Feud. Your mind sees, hears of
feels something and as fast as it can, which is very fast indeed,
it seeks to come up with a response. It doesn’t care what the
response is as long as there is one. Its first job is to come up
with a response; then its second job is to have a response to its
response.
When One Quiz Show isn’t Enough
The stimulus of writing about Family Feud had me think of The
Price is Right. On this show, a player is invited to pick the set
of matching his/hers motorcycles or take what is behind
curtain number two.
::: 63 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
So the choice is between something known – the motorcycles,
and the unknown – whatever is lurking behind the curtain.
Your mind is continually faced with this sort of choice. Should
it take its first response or should it risk taking the next
response? It knows what its first response is but the second
response is behind curtain number 2 and is unknown. It has to
trade the known for the unknown. It is forced to make this
kind of decision millions of times a day.
Most of the time when it makes these choices, it does so
beneath the level of attention. But, wedged between your first
known response and your second, unknown response, is the
little jewel your mind wants: Attention.
Your poor mind, it is constantly being quizzed, tested and very
seldom rewarded. On a quiz show, there is an end to this
process. There are only so many curtains that you can pick
from and at a certain point you get to go home having won or
lost. But your mind is caught in eternal quiz show hell, not
really knowing if it won or lost and having to go on choosing
and doing its best with the slimmest of feedback.
Sorry for using the quiz show example to illustrate the
dilemma of your mind but it really is apt. If you don’t know
how your mind works in relatively simple terms, you can’t
provide it with relief. Begin to tune into your mind, catching it
as it throws out responses, hoping that the responses are the
correct ones. Watch, too, as it is offered the opportunity to
trade for the unknown behind the curtain.
Relief at Last
Within the process of how the mind works, is the relief the
mind needs. The mind thinks that it is in charge of what
happens. It thinks that its answers are the determining factors
in what you say, do, accomplish and think.
::: 64 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Knowing how the mind works makes it possible for you to
observe what the mind is doing without taking the mind’s
responses seriously. When you think that your thinking is “the
truth,” there is huge pressure on your thinking. When you take
your thinking lightly, the mind becomes what it always was
meant to be: Entertaining.
Using your mind for endless entertainment, relieves your
mind. It removes the burden from the mind and thinking
becomes fun and funny instead of dead serious.
But I haven’t told you how to take the pressure off of your
mind yet. I have told you the pressure needs to be off of the
mind, and I have explained a lot about thoughts, but promised
you that life will be better. So here comes the really good stuff.
The Really Good Stuff
The incredibly good, magical and mind relieving news is that
if you don’t grab on to the first response that your mind throws
at you – the completely automatic response, there is another
response, and another and another and another. You can be
like the pitcher in baseball shaking off the sign from the
catcher (your mind).
If you are under great pressure, it is seldom your first response
that is the most useful. If you are having an argument with
your sweetheart and he/she says something truly nasty like,
“Your mother is a _____________.” (please feel free to fill in
the blank with your first response, then your second response,
then third and then fourth.)
When your spouse speaks that way about your mother, a fight
of first responses begins. First responses come fast and furious;
nobody wins when knee-jerk, insecure minds clash. It’s your
mind’s first instinct to defend itself in the presence of a
perceived threat, and your mind perceives almost everything
as a threat. Your first response is usually the dumbest, and after
::: 65 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
the forth or fifth response, you probably begin to notice that
you actually agree, at least in part, with what your spouse said
about your sainted mother.
Your first response is usually the most knee-jerk of the row of
responses – the most automated one, or you could just say, the
most jerky one.
Your mind is constantly trying to please and defend you. It
does so by throwing responses at you until you grab (believe)
one. Believing one means simply not noticing the next
response which makes the one you stopped at “true,” at least
true for you that moment.
The real beauty of the mind isn’t its accuracy at all; it is the
mind’s ability to pitch response after response tirelessly. Again,
your mind doesn’t care what responses it throws at you, it just
seeks to throw out one that gets your attention.
Art and poetry are the result of noticing later responses, while
fighting and overreacting are usually the result of grabbing at a
first response.
Not taking your first response often provides you with peaceful
pleasure. (Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee.)
When you don’t take your first response but notice what it
was, and you don’t take your second response but notice what
it was, you have taken a huge leap toward getting to know
who you really are. How does that work? When you don’t
grab onto your first response for dear life, a number of things
happen.
You mind notices that things aren’t serious.
Your mind then reacts to both the original stimulus
and your first response.
You discover that your mind isn’t really a dictator.
(there is always an alternative response)
::: 66 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
There is a strong gentle pull toward a third or fourth
or fortieth response.
Let’s explore each of these in greater detail, wallowing in the
benefits of this simple exercise, which can remove the tension
or pressure from any situation.
Your Mind Notices that Things Aren’t Serious
When you don’t take your first response, your second response
is almost always lighter and less demanding. Your third
response is even lighter, and your mind begins to lighten up
naturally. As your mind becomes less serious, so do your
thoughts and your mind doesn’t have to respond so quickly,
which lightens you up even more. Lightness builds on itself.
Your Mind then Reacts to Both the Original Stimulus
and Your First Response
As you watch the responses, each one not taken dilutes the
original stimulus, so your next response is partially from the
initial stimulus but it is also influenced by each subsequent
response.
In other words: Watching your responses without taking them,
personalizes the process of thinking. Thinking, in turn,
becomes more personal and less reactive. Your mind can
actually get the attention it needs by sharing in the experience
of observing itself, rejoicing in responses not taken and
relaxing into a new and friendly internal universe, where it is
not responsible for thinking the same thing over and over
again just to survive.
As you don’t take your early responses, your self-esteem will
rise because you will have explored broader expanses of who
you really are in the process of thinking and observing your
thoughts.
::: 67 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Exercise # 8: Responses
Practice observing your first and second and third responses,
then take your fourth response. Vary the number of the
response you grab onto. Your responses go on infinitely, so you
can observe ten, or twenty or even a hundred responses
without grabbing any of them. Predictable things show up the
more responses you observe.
1-2 You are hooked
5-6 You are unhooked
20 You are humored
32 You are peaceful
65 You are present
100 You are awakening
Infinite You are enlightened
These aren’t hard and fast numbers, but they give you an idea
of ranges of responses.
You Discover that Your Mind isn’t Really a Dictator
It may appear at first that the importance of your mind is based
on you believing each thought. That is the essence of a closed
(immature) mind. But a thought can receive attention just by
being noticed.
Your mind isn’t really trying to dictate what you do; it is just
trying to get attention. Your mind can share in the fun of you
not believing what it is thinking, freeing your mind to come up
with more creative, outrageous and entertaining responses.
::: 68 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
The essence of creativity is wandering further and further from
the normal, defensive first responses of an immature mind. As
you learn to observe responses without grabbing them, your
mind starts having fun. Your mind also is nourished by the tiny
burst of attention (the jewel) between responses.
There is a Strong Gentle Pull Toward a Third or
Fourth or Fortieth Response
As you observe responses, you will discover subtle pleasure in
the very process of observation.
Observation is attention without action.
When you don’t have to respond, you can get to know
yourself. You can discover that you aren’t one response
believed, but you are the sum of all possible responses. Not
grabbing your first response for dear life has you tap into more
and more possibilities.
My first book was about 250, arduous pages. It was tough to
write and would have been tough to read. The good news is
that nobody read it. I threw it out. Those were 250 pages that
needed to be written to clear my mind and opinions I had
about writing, so the possibility of my next book, Thinking
Clearly, could be written and published and enjoyed by a lot
of people.
Possibilities are what the mind is really great at generating. In
fact, when you used to take your first response as the gospel,
your mind couldn’t and didn’t explore other possibilities. It
was constrained and limited in ways that it, by not taking your
first response, is now rewarded. An open mind loves
possibilities; and a day well spent is a day in the land of
possibilities.
When your mind is focused on possibilities, you will come up
with new and creative ideas all over the place. You will feed
::: 69 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
yourself and those around you by being interesting and novel.
Your flexibility will sky rocket and you will get stuck much less
often. You are in for a party because you are the party. Instead
of seeking to derive value, self worth and validation for your
mind from relationship, you will bring value, self work and
validation to relationship, your job and every other aspect of
your life.
Practice, and More Practice, Provides Relief, More
Relief
Not taking your first or even second response relieves your
mind incredibly. Now it is time to practice this.
Remember that thinking about practicing isn’t the same as
experiencing it for yourself. You can think about practicing or
you can sit down with a friend and just practice.
Exercise # 9: Later Responses
Have the friend say a word and notice the first word that
comes into your mind, or the first picture or feeling. Don’t say
the first word and another word shows up. Say the second
word out loud then your friend says the first word he/she
thinks. You say your second word and the friend gives the first
word. So you are always giving your second response with the
friend giving their first response. After you have done this a
few times, go out to your fourth response while the friend
keeps giving the first response. Practice this for a few minutes
then switch roles with the friend and then you give your first
response while the friend gives the second and then fourth.
Advanced Exercise: Both of you give your fifth response back
and forth and back and forth. Notice the bond that develops
between you. Notice, too, how relaxed you become by not
having to take your first response.
::: 70 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
It’s Magical and it Works in so Many Ways!
The results from this simple observation exercise are palpable.
Can you feel them?
The more often you don’t take your first response and the
more you practice taking later responses, the more relief your
mind will experience and that is when miracles start to
happen.
If you were on a life raft in choppy seas, you probably
wouldn’t spend much time painting, would you?
Painting might be the last thing on your mind. Your mind has
been under such pressure that it has ignored the art of living
and gotten tangled up in the trauma of being right and
surviving. Not taking your first response or your second or
even your third response relieves your mind so that it can get
on with the art of living. It can create, it can entertain you and
it is free, probably for the first time in a loooooooooooooong
time, to enjoy life.
Your mind is creative; it is perhaps your best friend and ally.
You and your mind are in for a treat.
Not only will your mind reveal itself to be much more
creative, it will also get faster, more accurate and remember
things more clearly. When taken off the firing line of control,
the mind is capable of incredible feats.
As you shift from grabbing makeshift mental responses, you
will begin to discover that you don’t actually ever have to
respond!
No Response Necessary.
You don’t ever have to respond.
::: 71 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
What I am suggesting is beyond the scope of this manuscript,
but, with practice, it will happen to you.
As you begin to discover that you don’t have to respond, you
will also get to know deeper parts of yourself. When you don’t
take your first response, there is the possibility that your next
response will be from a deeper level. By the time you get out
to your tenth or twentieth response, it is way more likely that
this simple game will teach you or remind you that you have
many very interesting layers and aspects of yourself.
Discovering these layers has inherent in it, the discovery of
yourself, not as a responder but as a stimulus: Always a
stimulus.
Spread it Around!
Everyone could use a little mind relief.
Here’s how you can help spread the word:
1.Send FREE manuscript link to a friend. Link:
http://www.selfexploratorytools.com/MRM
2. Print as many copies as you like.
3. Comment about the book at Jerry’s blog:
http://www.jerrystocking.com/blog
::: 72 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 7
Time to play
Novelty
If you have done the exercises in the previous chapters, you
should feel less stress, more freedom and relief from the
pressures of your mind. If you haven’t done the exercises,
please go back and do them. Remember, the more often you
do the exercises the more relief you will feel.
Now that relief is here we get to play a little bit.
Let’s recap. Your mind wants and needs attention. All minds
need attention and they will do anything to get it. When your
mind is open and relaxed, your mind loves novelty. When
your mind is closed and defensive, it needs consistency.
It is easy to tell what state your mind is in because if novelty
(all sorts of new and different stuff) tickles you, then your mind
is opening. Isn’t it cool when a new movie comes out or a
new restaurant comes to town? Newness thrills us. If you love
habit and repetition and you try and keep everything the same
all the time, then your mind is defending itself and closing,
and chances are you find new things threatening.
It really is that simple. So now that your mind is opening, let’s
get on with some less than serious play.
Exercise # 10 Novelty
Find ways to add novelty to every nook and cranny of your
life.
Basic Examples:
Talk on the phone using the other ear.
::: 73 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Put your other pant leg on first.
Brush you teeth with the other hand.
Sleep on the other side of the bed.
Drive a different route to work.
Speak faster than usual. (New Yorkers, speak
slower.)
Advanced Examples:
Have someone feed you a meal.
Learn to write with the other hand.
Go out and sell something to someone
random.
Walk backwards for a bit.
Sneeze upward.
Share this manual with someone.
Feed your mind novelty today and I promise you a better
tomorrow.
What Protects You Makes You Weaker
In the olden days, knights wore armor. From what I hear,
armor was very hot and very, very heavy. Armor itself got in
the way of life; it restricted movement and was terribly difficult
to wear.
Your armor is your thinking.
::: 74 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Not your original thinking, but your structured, repetitious,
automatic thinking.
Spending your time believing your thoughts has you act like a
turtle that has retreated into its shell. While the turtle may
think it is safe, it can’t eat and it can’t move around. While
turtles live a very long time, they actually don’t spend much of
their life hiding in their shells. Life with head and feet exposed
make life worth living; living hiding out doesn’t.
You hide out too and you might not even be aware of it.
You are a multi-dimensional being; there are a lot of layers to
you. Often you are trapped on the surface, reacting to your
thoughts as though they were true and living a serious life. You
are virtually hiding on that superficial level.
But the surface is turbulent, like the surface of a lake. Any
breeze or disturbance influences the surface. Any piece of bad
news, a speeding ticket or even a parking ticket upsets you.
Your deeper levels are calm, peaceful and powerful.
First responses keep you in the shallows; later responses reveal
your depths. They also invite you into a magical world in
which there are no accidents, mistakes, less than productive
behaviors or threats to your well being.
What Deepens You Makes You Stronger
Imagine what it would be like if you didn’t have access to
things below the surface of Earth. Heck, you would have to
live without turnips and peanuts. There would be way less
gravel and not much gold either. Diamonds would be even
scarcer than they are. I have no idea how you would get
around because there would be no oil or gas.
::: 75 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
There would be very little metal and no coal. We would have
to live in warm climates and walk places. Life would be very
different.
I wonder what life would be like if you were able to tap into
your own depths. What wonderments you would discover
there.? As you tap into your depths, you will discover new and
profound resources that will allow play to generate more
bountiful results than you have ever produced with work.
The energies in your depths are great – the wisdom dazzling
and powerful. Most people don’t, except in brief moments of
great tragedy or insight, tap into their depths. Not taking your
first response or your second or even your third, makes it
much more likely that you will begin to tap into other levels of
you, where your real natural resources are.
This Journey Begins with the First Step
You are entering a new world –
a world in which your mind
supports you and works with
other aspects of you as an equal
partner. Your old world will still
be available, the world in which
you defended and responded,
but you won’t spend much time
there. Why would you?
You have already taken several
steps in this new world. When
you notice that thoughts are just
a bunch of pictures, sounds and
feelings, that’s an important step.
When you begin noticing the
difference between observation and judgement, that is another
important step. Yet another step is when you don’t take your
first response.
::: 76 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Yes, you have entered a new world. Now it is time to provide
you some orientation in this new world of yours. You need to
learn up from down, inside from outside and East from South.
Most people lack orientation; they wander around aimlessly.
They wonder why they don’t have what they want. You can’t
have what you want until you know where you are. If you
wanted to go to Tampa, the most important part of getting
there is knowing where you are now. If you want to be happy,
healthy, wealth or wise, the most important first step is to just
know how happy, healthy, wealthy or wise you are right now.
Knowing where you are allows you to celebrate when you
progress. Not knowing where you are has you not even notice
that you have a lot to celebrate.
Most people don’t know their ass from a hole in the ground.
Yikes, I don’t even want you to imagine the problems this
causes, but watch people and you will see people continually
not acting in their own best interest. That is because their own
best interest isn’t available when their minds are driving them
crazy.
At the beginning of a journey, before you do anything, before
you think anything, before you even decide (or choose)
anything, you must orient yourself. In the case this new world
created by the radical shift in your relationship with your
mind, you need orientation. Orientation, as I am speaking of
it, is all about attitude. Please let me explain.
What is Attitude I Hope You Ask?
Lots of people talk about attitude but few know what it is.
Attitude is your philosophical orientation. Attitude is your
answer to the question: “How friendly or unfriendly is the
world?” Your attitude about how friendly or unfriendly the
world is totally determines the quality of each moment.
::: 77 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
I define attitude as a specific orientation toward everything. I
have discovered a single attitude that provides me with more
possibilities and keeps me consistently growing no matter
what I am doing.
The attitude that I suggest here will serve you in a foreign
country, it will serve you in the depths of yourself, it will serve
you at a restaurant, it will serve you in business, it will make
your vacations more fun and rewarding and not only have
people like you, but have you like them and you like yourself
as well. Attitude will provide an overall, unchanging method
or approach to all that you meet on your journeys.
With the proper attitude, it won’t make any difference whether
you are lost or found, whether you are winning or losing or
whether you are currently thinking you are right or wrong.
Without the proper attitude, you will, at best, suffer a good
deal and, at worst, you will get in your own way over and over
again.
While some people say that attitude is everything, it isn’t. It is
a darned good start and with the proper attitude at the start,
the mood for the journey is appropriately set.
What is the Right Attitude?
I hope that at this point you are asking that question. If not,
please re-read the last few paragraphs. If so, please take a nice
comfortable breath, get curious and I will tell you a little
story . . .
Once upon a time there were two men. One of these men was
big and strong strapping fellow; the other wasn’t very big,
wasn’t very strong and lacked the smarts the good lord gave
him. While there were many differences between these two
men, the difference that made the difference was attitude. The
first man, the bigger, stronger and smarter of the two,
::: 78 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
approached each situation with confidence as though what he
knew was much greater than what he could learn. He
approached new challenges full of himself, up to the task and
certain both that he would succeed and that he already knew
everything.
The second smaller, weaker and not so bright man approached
every situation as though he missed almost everything all the
time and was grateful for anything and everything that came
his way. He was always curious, continually questioning and
attentive. He knew well that what he knew was only a small
piece of what could be known and he was thrilled each
moment, tickled by anything and everything he learned.
It didn’t take the big, smart strong guy to get into trouble, and
it didn’t take the smaller, weaker, more curious and open guy
to succeed mightily.
New Attitude – New Life
The place to begin your new attitude is with a theoretical and
then practical appreciation of one simple and incontrovertible
fact.
You miss almost everything almost all the time and
act as though you get almost everything all the time.
I invite you to read that statement a few times in hopes that
you will get it more fully, and in doing so, miss a little bit less.
You miss almost everything almost all the time and act as
though you get almost everything all the time.
This simple statement, thought and then experienced, provides
an orientation you can use now and will always need later.
The statement begins a new description of your relationship
with everyone and everything.
::: 79 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
At first it may seem like just words but as you begin to
integrate it into more and more aspects of your life, you will
discover that it assists you in letting go and lightening up just
when you need to. It is an ally which is always there, always
ready. Allow me to explain.
You miss almost everything almost all the time while thinking
that you get almost everything almost all the time.
Exercise #11 Witnessing
Ask yourself the following questions often:
What are you missing this moment?
What are you missing in this moment that could
transform your life?
What are you missing in this moment that puts you
on the defensive?
What are you missing in this moment that has you
be asleep?
What are you missing in this moment?
Here are few more questions for you. Please feel free to come
up with your own questions.
Are you missing how funny you are?
Are you missing some of your resources?
Where are you hiding?
What do you think is absolutely true?
Are you missing the fun of life?
Are you missing the agony of defeat?
Are you missing a chance to be spontaneous?
Are you missing the joke?
::: 80 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Are you missing almost everything almost all the
time?
Become endlessly curious about what you are missing. A
closed mind focuses on what it knows (what it is getting). An
open mind rejoices as it gets endlessly curious about what it is
missing.
How to Be an Ass
I assume that I am an ass. I don’t waste any energy trying not
to be an ass. Ironically, when I assume that I am an ass, I am
usually much less of an ass and I can dance with possibilities
because I don’t have to be careful.
But if I am expending energy trying not to be an ass, then I am
truly an ass’s ass. Asses want people to like them, not noticing
that the people who like them, like them and the people who
don’t like them don’t like them.
Asses continually try and influence things they can’t influence,
like the past or the future. They spend their time worrying
about what may happen or regretting what did. They believe
their thoughts to the extent that they think their thoughts are
all there is and miss out on everything else. Asses simply don’t
get the message no matter how many times it is delivered.
Asses don’t embrace the attitude or orientation that they miss
almost everything almost all the time and they think that they
get almost everything almost all the time.
Trying not to be an ass makes you an ass. Trying to be an ass
has you be an ass and know it. A wise man uses and can sit
with his “assness,” enjoying and embracing it. A fool resists
being an ass and thus, continually denies and protests his very
nature.
Knowing that you miss almost everything almost all the time
and that you act, think and believe that you get almost
::: 81 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
everything almost all the time, is your nature and thus, it is the
first step toward getting to know yourself.
Remembering that you miss almost everything almost all the
time is as close as you can come to an antidote for being
human. It allows you to forgive yourself. It even allows you to
forgive yourself in advance.
Forgiving yourself in advance is the essence of this orientation.
Exercise # 12 Opposites
You miss almost everything almost all the time and think that
you get almost everything almost all the time.
The simple, novel exercise to provide you with the attitude:
“You miss almost everything almost all the time” is:
Speak when you don’t want to speak and don’t speak when
you have to say something. Fight when you aren’t moved to
fight and wage peace when you are moved to fight. If you do
this, you will find that you not only can act independently of
what your mind is telling you to do, but that you usually aren’t
obeying your mind when you are having fun. Your thoughts
were after attention not contributing to you living a better life.
Do the exact opposite of your initial temptation.
Move in closer if you want to get away.
Whisper if you want to scream.
Stand tall if you want to curl up in a little ball.
Speak if you can’t find any words.
Be obvious if you want to hide.
::: 82 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
A friend of mine called me a few years ago. At first, I didn’t
recognize his voice. He was terrified and needed my help. He
explained that he had been working a top-secret government
facility; he couldn’t tell me what he had been working on. He
had recently quit and was absolutely certain that the FBI was
after him and that they were going to kill him.
I had known this guy for a long time and never seen him act
the least bit crazy. He truly believed what he was saying and
wanted my support in escaping alive. I was worried about
him, but I knew that telling him that he was acting crazy
would only make things worse.
“The FBI has a very difficult job,” I began, “They need to
protect and defend when it isn’t even obvious what they are
protecting and defending. They need to find people who are
hiding from them.” He confirmed that to be the case. “So, I
request that you make their job easier.”
He lived on about ten acres and right behind his house was a
large hill. I requested that at noon each day for a week he
climb the hill and stand, obvious as can be, on top of the hill.
That way the FBI can find him, making their job easier. He
knew me well enough, even though he was very scared, to do
what I said. Three days later he called me having followed my
instructions to a “T.”“They aren’t really after me, are they?” he
asked.
“No, I don’t think they are.”
Your mind can cook up all kinds of madness for you, but you
don’t have to believe it and you don’t have to act on it.
Often doing exactly the opposite of your immediate tendency
reveals that your mind was convinced of something that isn’t
the least bit true. Oddly, and humorously, doing the opposite
of what you are driven to do often leads you to deeper aspects
of yourself.
::: 83 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Living with the fact that you miss almost everything almost all
the time and act like you get almost everything all the time
will allow you to step out of your armor, it will relieve and
relax you as you discover that your defenses aren’t necessary
and weren’t working anyway.
You miss almost everything almost all the time and operate as
though you get almost everything almost all the time.
Approach your life with this attitude and you are in for a
wonderful ride. Adopt that attitude and you have taken the
first, important step toward getting to know yourself.
Baaaaaaa, Baaaaaaaaaaa
Most people are sheep. They blindly do what their mind tells
them to do.
The simple definition of a sheep is someone who looks inside
themselves when they should be looking outside of
themselves, and looks outside of themselves when they should
be looking inside themselves. You can find these people
practically everywhere.
These are the people who are driven to get better by hopes
and dreams, not by actions. These are the people who buy the
next great thing culture offers them and avoid self- knowledge
like the plague. These are the people who are the victims of
their own thoughts and dreams, always taking their first
response.
You don’t have to be a sheep.
If you have had enough of being a sheep:
Don’t take your first response.
Observe your thoughts.
::: 84 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Return to your senses.
Sing in the shower.
Become a friend of your mind.
Eat with your opposite hand.
Giggle often at nothing in particular.
Do the opposite of what you are driven to do.
Back to You Miss Almost Everything Almost All the
Time
Yes, you miss almost everything all the time. You miss feelings,
you miss opportunities, you miss thoughts, you miss romance,
you miss love, you miss respect, you miss owning everything
and being everywhere.
If you can begin to get that you miss almost everything almost
all the time, you will begin to feel the first positive rumbles of
an earthquake, which will shake up your world in a wonderful
way.
An old friend of mine used to say that the opportunity of a
lifetime comes along at least once a day. As you begin to
approach the world knowing that you miss almost everything
almost all the time, you will discover that it actually comes
along each moment.
What my old friend meant by the opportunity of a lifetime
coming along at least once a day, was that you didn’t need to
grab it when it shows up because something else will come
along again soon. What I mean, is something much deeper
and more profound. I mean that you don’t ever need to grab it.
It will grab you if you are observant and open when it shows
up.
::: 85 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
As you master attention, the more obvious it will become that
you don’t have to reach out and grab things. They will come to
you. You don’t have to end a relationship by some force of
mind. In fact, ending it that way doesn’t end it at all. It only
ends when it is time to end.
There are so many things that your mind is trying to control.
Lightening up and letting go will relieve your mind and make
every little moment a delight.
Once you discover that you miss almost everything almost all
the time and act like you get almost everything all the time,
you will lighten up. You naturally will forget that you miss
almost everything almost all the time, and when you
remember that you do, you will let go of all sorts of things and
smile or giggle more and frown less, or appear serious less
often. You simply can’t approach what your real treasure is,
seriously. Digging your way there takes too long and won’t
turn out well. Learning your way there is a bit like digging: It
won’t work either.
Notice how you hold to “the truth” which is anything that you
think in the moment. Loosen your grip on the truth; consider
that “the truth” might be only one possible truth of many. In
fact, imagine that what is the truth to you at this moment
might not be the truth to you in the next moment.
People used to think the world was flat; in fact, they were
convinced of it. Ancient medicine used to greatly value
leeches as a tool for heath. Personally I have only had a
couple of leeches on me and, believe me, I didn’t feel any
better about any aspect of life until I got them off and the
places they sucked stopped itching.
When you hold tightly to your thoughts you miss even more
than almost everything almost all the time. Imagine that you
are headed to Disney World for a day with the kids. That could
certainly be fun. But then imagine that you have to take your
::: 86 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
dresser and your refrigerator with you to Disney World. That
would make the whole day a lot harder and much less fun.
Heck, they might not even let you in the place.
Taking yourself seriously – holding on to “the truth” – is like
bringing unnecessary stuff along wherever you go. It makes
your travels very limited. If you bring along baggage about
your mother and your ex-spouse, the next relationship is way,
way more difficult.
The incredibly good news is that you can get anything you
really need from reality and reality is everywhere. You don’t
need to hold onto the truth, the truth is what is. God
remembered isn’t nearly as liberating or enlightening as God
experienced in the moment.
Love remembered, or held to or believed isn’t the same as love
in the moment. Because dinner at your favorite restaurant was
great last night doesn’t mean that the same food will be good
in a week or a month or a year. The food spoils, it doesn’t keep
indefinitely. Ideas, thoughts and beliefs spoil much, much
faster than food does.
You miss almost everything almost all the time and act, think
and believe that you get almost everything almost all the time.
Learn it! Get it! Live it! Love it!
::: 87 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Chapter 8
Rediscovering Your Mind
Working and playing with people’s minds over the past thirty
years has been quite a treat. I have watched as people
transformed their relationship with their minds, transforming
their lives at the same time.
Everyone I have worked with has gotten benefit, and often the
magnitude of the benefit they receive is in direct proportion to
how wild their mind is.
Can I tell you a couple of stories?
A number of years ago I worked with a group of school district
administrators. The superintendent of schools was among them
and I knew from the start that he was in trouble. I watched
subtle changes in him as the workshop day went on. You know
the way a spring storm comes in out of nowhere, dumps a
bunch of rain and then is gone?
Watching him was like watching a spring storm. His jaw
would tighten, his eyes would glass over a little bit and he
would frown. But before he did any of this, he would stare
straight forward with his eyes defocused. I knew from years of
experience that he was seeing a picture in his head and was
reacting to that picture even though he had no idea what it
was.
On a break, he approached me for personal help. It seems that
he was ready to quit his job and get divorced. Having watched
him with his co-workers, I could tell that they liked him and
that he was doing a good job. He had been married for 38
years. As we talked, that spring storm came through again and
I interrupted it. I stopped him mid sentence and said loudly,
“What is that?”
::: 88 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
I caught him in the act of picturing something. Caught, his jaw
went slack, his eyes grew large and round. He relaxed and
started to tear up.
Turns out that he was being haunted by a picture beneath the
level of his awareness. The content of the picture doesn’t
matter but I will tell you anyway. Two years before the
workshop, he had run over his son’s foot with a power lawn
mower. That picture had taken over his life and he wasn’t even
aware that it had. Becoming aware of the picture made all the
difference to him. I followed up with him later and he was
enjoying both his job and his marriage.
Moral: It is often what we are doing that we don’t know that
we are doing that gives us a hard time. Remember: You miss
almost everything almost all the time and act like you get
almost everything almost all the time.
Jim did a course of mine a few short years ago. He is a nuclear
physicist. Though I am a teacher, I take every opportunity to
learn. In this case, I had a lot to learn. Before the course even
started, I asked him about nuclear power. Turns out that his job
was counting atoms. He works at a nuclear plant and has to
provide an accounting of atoms to the government on a
regular basis.
Accounting for something so small seemed quite magical to
me. So did the fact that Barium atoms absorb hundreds of
times their own weight of loose electrons when it is time to
cool the core of the reactor down.
Amazing stuff. Jim was amazing too. He was tall and slim with
a big mustache and was socially cumbersome. It didn’t take
long to realize why. He had no pictures of himself in his own
head – No representation of himself at all. With a little
practice in the mirror and a bit of exploration of his feelings,
he excitedly began making pictures of himself.
::: 89 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
We didn’t stop there though. His energy flow was very small
in that long distance between his head and his toes. Like many
engineers I have worked with. he tended to lock himself way
up in his head and ignore his emotions and feelings.
While you may not like what I suggested to him, he certainly
did. In fact, with one little exercise, his whole life changed
radically. He had never been a ladies’ man. It’s not that he
didn’t like the ladies; he wasn’t able to approach them. And
though they may have noticed him, they never got a chance to
know him.
I apologize in advance for what I am going to tell you next.
The way that I work isn’t that I figure out what I am doing in
advance. I trust much deeper parts of myself to sort things out
and then I just do whatever I am told to do. I listen carefully to
those deeper parts of myself: Always. In this case, I was told to
do something outrageous.
I said to Jim, “From now on, when you talk, I want you to talk
to your penis.” If you are saying good morning to a co-worker,
I want you also saying good morning to your penis. If you are
talking about the weather, you are telling your penis about the
weather. Every time you talk, make sure that you include your
penis as part of who you are talking to.
Jim laughed uncomfortably, as you might expect. It wasn’t
until a couple of months later that I saw Jim again. He was
standing tall, had on a white shirt with the collar open and
looked like he had just walked off the set of a cowboy movie.
He was the good guy and he had stories about how the
women were chasing him. His whole life had turned around
in those few short months. He was excited, and was now
ready for more play. He had a steady girl and we explored
how to make relationship rewarding and how to make it last.
::: 90 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
You may want to attend a workshop sometime. Actually, I
would really like it if you did. We have an incredible time and
your life will never be the same in wonderful ways.
Getting Your Mind Right
Putting your mind in perspective is important. It creates a
revolution of gigantic proportions in your life. When you have
the badly needed mental relief and you have become friends
with your mind, you can get on with other kinds of really
delightful exploration.
The exercises in this manuscript are sufficient to relieve your
mind of its burdens and urge it to take on a far more
appropriate job than temperamental ruler of the known
universe.
Once your mind is relieved, it begins working for you,
harmonizing with deeper parts of you and making your life an
entertaining and inspiring symphony.
You will look back on what things were like when your mind
was out of control and marvel at how far you have come and
how much fun you are having. You will also be quite surprised
at what a great companion your mind is. It has a great sense of
humor and it is able, when not under stress and tension, to
create a life worth living.
The Little Map of You
With your mind relieved, you can lightly continue the process
of getting to know yourself.
Getting to know yourself is discovering that you are a multidimensional
being.
You range from very deep to astonishingly shallow. You are all
of these levels at the same time but your attention doesn’t have
::: 91 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
access to all the levels, in fact, it doesn’t have the ability to tap
into anything but the more shallow levels. But it is always
influenced by the depths.
Your thoughts have more restricted access than your attention
and your senses are between your attention and your thoughts.
Below your attention is energy, and even deeper than that is
who you really are.
In the pecking order of you, thoughts are very, very superficial.
If thoughts are grabbing much of our attention, then they really
aren’t likely to be very accurate, rewarding or relevant. If you
think that thoughts are relevant, then you institutionalize
missing almost everything almost all the time while thinking
that you are getting almost everything almost all the time.
Even shallower than your thoughts is your speaking. Speaking
is just the auditory component of thoughts. When you focus
your attention on what you say, then you are even less relevant
than when you focus on your thoughts.
The simple hierarchy of who you are from least to greatest
depth is as follows:
Can you see how small a part of yourself and how superficial
a part of yourself thinking is?
When you think that thinking is relevant, when you buy
Decartes’ line, “I think therefore I am,” you are taking a tiny,
insecure, partial representation to be all of you.
Sample Rate
Remember a few chapters back I said I would mention sample
rate and how useful it can be to both relieving your mind and
tapping into deeper aspects of you? Well, time has come to
speak of sample rate.
If you wanted to know who was going to win the election, you
wouldn’t just ask one random person who they were going to
::: 92 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
vote for and assume that meant who they were voting for
would be the winner.
But if you needed to know who was going to win now, you
also couldn’t wait until election day when the votes were in.
Gallup polls people by figuring out how many people, and
how diverse a sampling of people, reflects a whole group.
While the process of sampling to extrapolate a whole is both
math and science, it also has a certain degree of error built
into it. While it can be wrong, it usually won’t be.
Gallup knows that the more people it samples and the wider
population those samples are from, the more likely the
resulting projection will be accurate. In your depths, the
sampling is intense and wide, providing great accuracy. In the
shallower parts of who you are, the sampling is sparse and
narrow, meaning that its projections more closely represent
random results rather than methodical accuracy.
Thoughts contain few samples and have a very narrow range.
They, by their inaccuracy, put you in constant danger. Your
mind reacts to that danger by closing and becoming defensive
and certain. Your mind perceives that it is under attack, and it
responds accordingly.
The best defense that the mind has to fear is to become more
certain, more stuck, less flexible and that is exactly what it
does. Its defense is against its own inaccuracy. When you take
your mind seriously, you pit it against itself because its
samples are few and far between, yet it wants to be certain.
The fewer samples you take and the smaller range of samples
the less certain you should be, but a defensive, insecure mind
becomes more and more certain. It circles the wagons and
defends its right to be wrong.
What your mind needs to do, is increase both the quantity of
samples and the diversity (quality) of samples, but since it is
already scared, it shrinks instead of expanding.
::: 93 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
Training your mind to wait for more samples and taking
deeper samples is a slow arduous process. Actually, the real
game in getting to know yourself is not to make your mind
deeper; it is to use the deeper aspects of yourself – (attention,
energy and being) when your mind is overwhelmed. The
“Opposite” exercise from the last chapter accomplished this
feat effortlessly. The simple opposite for relieving any closed
mind is “Surrender when you want to fight.”
If your mind can’t surrender or really needs to be right or is
just stuck way too deeply in the mud of thought, there is
another way out.
When your mind is just way, way too stuck, scared, defensive,
righteous or lonely, all you need to do is ask a question. If you
are in the midst of an argument with someone else or if it is an
internal battle you are fighting, just ask a question. But the
question must be asked with genuine curiosity.
If your spouse says “You should have taken the trash out. I
can’t believe that you didn’t take it out already!” you might ask
“Would you like me to take it out now?” or you might say
“Was it my turn to take it out?”
Your question has to be sincere and if you are interacting with
someone else you should shift your attention from inside of
you to outside of you as you ask.
Giving Birth to Yourself
When you were first coming into the world, the closeness of
contractions indicated how imminent your birth.
In the process of getting to know yourself, and your mind, you
will experience expansions. Giving birth to yourself, getting to
know yourself, the closeness of your expansions indicate
imminent birth. They also indicate tapping into your depths,
::: 94 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
which is accompanied by awakening and possibly even
enlightenment.
You are reminded that your roof leaks when it rains. But you
don’t fix the leak when it is raining, you would get all wet.
When it is sunny and beautiful out, your roof doesn’t leak
anymore so you certainly wouldn’t fix it them. The conclusion
to this simple logic of the mind is that the roof never gets
fixed.
What I am trying to tell you is: When the going gets tough, you
get what you have practiced.
Practice when things are going well. Practice noticing the
difference between observation and judgement, practice the “I
am” exercise to build your self esteem. Practice, practice and
practice some more. Get to know your depths when you don’t
need them and they will be there as a resource when you do
need them.
Back to Sample Rate
Somebody says, “You look nice today.” They have thrown out a
stimulus. There is no tactical difference between what they
have said and them saying, “You look awful today.” Both
phrases are identical to your mind. Each is an attempt to
impose a point of view.
Notice your response when someone says, “You look nice
today.” Then notice your second response and your third and
your fourth. Like Gallup, you are taking a bigger sample of
your responses and by doing so, you are using a simple
comment as an opportunity to get to know yourself.
If you grab your first response, you have polled one voter and
jumped to a conclusion. If you take your tenth response, you
have polled ten voters and your response will be much more
::: 95 :::
Mind Relief Manuscript www.jerrystocking.com
accurate, more fun and might even yield a profound result
from a not very profound comment.
On the North pole or in Venice, in your front room or
backyard, at church or the mall, with friends or by yourself:
Anywhere, anytime, with anyone is the perfect place and time
and company to get to know yourself more fully and more
deeply.
When you have the voting results from ten voters on two or
three precincts, you don’t project a winner. But your thinking,
when you rely on it as the sole or a very important source of
data, jumps wildly to conclusions with either very little data or
manufactured data.
The two primary tools that the mind uses to extrapolate data
are rationality and logic – the two primary tools that the mind
uses to convince itself it is right are bullying and closing.
A closed mind is a terrible place and it makes your life less
worth living.
You need to open to your depths, and to open to your depths,
you need to not respond, and not respond some more. Only in
not responding can you discover what your mind has been up
to and why. When you discover this, you can finally forgive
your mind and get on with living as the multi-dimensional
being that you are. You deserve a break today and you can
only have one when your mind is relieved of stress, tension
and the need to control.
The Depths
Remember you are both shallow and deep.
As the famous fisherman Buck Perry said, “The fish are in the
shallows, in the deep or in between.”
