THE MAN IN THE TATTERED COAT STANDS IN A room of shadows, bathed in light. No, that is
wrong: the figure is not illuminated by the light, but rather is light incarnate, light folded and curved in on
itself in a holographic replica of its originator. The man speaks to the dimly lit room, unknowing and
uncaring if there is anyone present beyond the limits of his own radiance. Phantom smoke, equally
luminous, snakes up from the cigarette in his left hand.
He is a shard of the past, a bit of what had gone before, frozen in light, playing to an unseen audience.
“You know me,” says the shining figure, pausing to take a drag on his coffin nail. “You’ve seen my face
on the Universe News Network, and you’ve read the reports under my byline. Some of those were even
written by me. Some others, well, let’s say I have talented editors.” The light-starred figure gives a tired,
almost amused shrug.
The recording presents him as a small mannequin, but he looks as if in real life he would be of normal
height and proportions, if a little lanky. His shoulders slope slightly from exhaustion or age. His
dirty-blond hair is spattered with lighter striations of gray and is swept back in a ponytail to hide an
obvious bald spot. His face is worn, a bit craggier than would be permitted for a traditional newscast, but
still recognizable. It remains a famous face, a comfortable face, a well-known face across human space,
even in these later war-torn days.
But it is his eyes that demand attention. They are deep-set, and even in the recording seem to reach out.
It is the eyes that create the illusion that the shining figure can truly see his audience, and see them to the
core of their beings. That has always been his talent, connecting with his audience even when he was
light-years away.
The figure takes another pull on his cancer stick, and his head is bathed in a holy nimbus of smoke. “You
may have heard the official reports of the fall of the Confederacy of Man and of the glorious rise of the
empire called the Terran Dominion. And you may have listened to the stories of the coming of the aliens,
the hordes of Zerg and the inhuman, ethereal Protoss. Of the battles of the Sara system and the fall of
Tarsonis itself. You’ve heard the reports. As I said before, some of those reports had my name on them.
Parts of them are even true.”
In the darkness beyond the light someone shifts uneasily, unseen. The holographic projector lets out only
stray bits of light, rogue photons, but the audience remains for the moment a mystery. Somewhere behind
the darkness-shrouded audience there is the sound of dripping water.
“You read my words, then, and believed them. I’m here to tell you, in those broadcasts, that most of
them were grade-A cow patties, massaged by the powers that be into more suitable and palatable forms.
Lies were told, both small and large, lies that have led us in part to our present sorry situation. A situation
that is not going to improve unless we start talking about what really happened. What happened on Chau
Sara and Mar Sara and Antiga Prime and Tarsonis itself. What happened to me and some friends of
mine, and some enemies as well.”
The figure pauses, drawing itself up to its full height. It looks around, its sightless eyes sweeping the
darkened room. It looks into the core of its audience’s soul.
“I’m Michael Daniel Liberty. I’m a reporter. Call this my most important, perhaps final, report. Call this
my manifesto. Call it what you will. I’m just here to tell you what really happened. I’m here to set the
record straight. I’m here to tell you the truth.”

THE PRESS GANG
Before the war, things were different. Hell, back then, wewere just making our daily living, doing
our jobs, drawingour paychecks, and stabbing our fellow men and women inthe back. We had no
idea how bad things would get. Wewere fat and happy like maggots on a dead animal. Therewas
enough sporadic violence—rebellions and revolutionsand balky colonial governments—to keep
the military going,but not enough to really threaten the lifestyles we had grownaccustomed to. We
were, in retrospect, fat and sassy.
And if a real war broke out, well, it was the military’sworry. The marines’ worry. Not ours.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
THE CITY SPRAWLED BENEATH MIKE’S FEET LIKE an overturned bucket of jade
cockroaches. From the dizzying height of Handy Anderson’s office, he could almost see the horizon
between the taller buildings. The city reached that far, forming a jagged, spiked tear along the edge of the
world.
The city of Tarsonis, on the planet Tarsonis. The most important city on the most important planet of the
Confederacy of Man. The city so great they named it twice. The city so large its suburbs had greater
populations than some planets. A shining beacon of civilization, keeper of the memories of an Earth now
lost to history, myth, and earlier generations.
A sleeping dragon. And Michael Liberty could not resist twisting its tail.
“Come back from the edge there, Mickey,” said Anderson. The editor-in-chief was firmly ensconced at
his desk, a desk as far away from the panoramic view as possible.
Michael Liberty liked to think there was a note of concern in his boss’s voice.
“Don’t worry,” said Mike. “I’m not thinking of jumping.” He suppressed a smile.
Mike and the rest of the newsroom knew that the editor-in-chief was acrophobic but could not bear to
surrender his stratospheric office view. So on the rare occasions when Liberty was summoned into his
boss’s office, he always stood near the window. Most of the time he and the other drudges and news
hacks worked way down on the fourth floor or in the broadcast booths in the building’s basement.
“Jumping I’m not worried about,” said Anderson. “Jumping I can handle. Jumping would solve a lot of
my problems and give me a lead for tomorrow’s edition. I’m more worried about some sniper taking you
out from another building.”
Liberty turned toward his boss. “Bloodstains that hard to get out of the carpet?”
“Part of it,” said Anderson, smiling. “It’s also a bitch to replace the glass.”
Liberty look one last look at the traffic crawling far below and returned to the overstuffed chairs facing
the desk. Anderson tried to be nonchalant, but Mike noted that the editor let out a long, slow breath as
Mike moved away from the window.
Michael Liberty settled himself into one of Anderson’s chairs. The chairs were designed to look like
normal furniture, but they were stuffed so that they sank an extra inch or two when someone sat down.
This made the balding editor-in-chief with his comically oversized eyebrows look more imposing. Mike
knew the trick, was not impressed, and set his feet up on the desk.
“So what’s the beef?” the reporter asked.
“Have a cigar, Mickey?” Anderson motioned with an open palm toward a teak humidor.
Mike hated being called Mickey. He touched his empty shirt pocket, where he normally stashed a pack
of cigarettes. “I’m on the wagon. Trying to cut down.”
“They’re from beyond the Jaandaran embargo,” said Anderson temptingly. “Rolled on the thighs of
cinnamon-shaded maidens.”
Mike held up both hands and smiled broadly. Everyone knew that Anderson was too cheap to get
anything beyond the standardel ropos manufactured in some bootleg basement. But the smile was
intended to reassure.
“What’s the beef?” Mike repeated.
“You’ve really done it this time,” said Anderson, sighing. “Your series on the construction kickbacks on
the new Municipal Hall.”
“Good stuff. The series should rattle a few cages.”
“They’ve already been rattled,” replied Anderson, his chin sinking down to touch his chest. This was
known as the bearer-of-bad-news position. It was something that Anderson had learned at some
management course but that made him look like a mating ledge-pigeon.
Crap,thought Mike.He’s going to spike the series.
As if reading his thoughts, Anderson said, “Don’t worry, we’re going to run the rest of the series. It’s
solid reporting, well-documented, and best of all, it’s true. But you have to know you’ve made a few
people very uncomfortable.”
Mike mentally ran through the series. It had been one of his better ones, a classic involving a petty
offender who was caught in the wrong place (a public park) at the wrong time (way after midnight) with
the wrong thing (mildly radioactive construction waste from the Municipal Hall project). Said offender
was more than willing to pass on the name of the man who sent him on this late-night escapade. That
individual was in turn willing to tell Mike about some other interesting matters involving the new hall, and
so forth, until Mike had, instead of a single story, a whole series about a huge network of graft and
corruption that the Universe Network News audience ate up with their collective spoons.
Mike mentally ran through the ward heelers, low-level thugs, and members of the Tarsonis City Council
that he had skewered in print, discarding each in turn as a suspect. Any of those august individuals might
want to take a shot at him, but such a threat wasn’t enough to make Handy Anderson nervous.
The editor-in-chief saw Mike’s blank expression and added, “You’ve made a few powerful,venerable
people very uncomfortable.”
Mike’s left eyebrow rose. Anderson was talking about one of the ruling Families, the power behind the
Confederacy for most of its existence, since those early days when the first colony ships (hell, prison
ships) landed and/or crashed on various planets in the sector. Somewhere in his reporting, he had nailed
somebody with pull, or perhaps somebody close enough to one of the Families to make the old
venerables nervous.
Mike resolved to go back over his notes and see what kind of linkages he could make. Perhaps a distaff
cousin to one of the Old Families, or a lack sheep, or maybe even a direct kickback. God knew that the
Old Families ran things from behind the scenes since the year naught. If he could nail one of them . . .
Mike wondered if he was visibly salivating at the prospect.
In the meantime Handy Anderson had risen from his seat and strolled around the side of his desk,
perching on the corner nearest Mike. (Another move directly out of the management lectures, Mike
realized. Hell, Anderson had assigned him to cover those lectures once.) “Mike, I want you to know
you’re on dangerous ground here.”
Oh God, he called me Mike,thought Liberty.Next he’llbe looking plaintively out the window as if
lost in thought,wrestling with a momentous decision.
He said, “I’m used to dangerous ground, boss.”
“I know, I know. I just worry about those around you. Your sources. Your friends. Your co-workers . .
.”
“Not to mention my superiors.”
“. . . all of whom would be heartbroken if something horrible happened to you.”
“Particularly if they were standing nearby when it happened,” added the reporter.
Anderson shrugged and stared plaintively out the full-length window. Mike realized that whatever
Anderson was afraid of, it was worse than his fear of heights. And this was a man who, if office rumor
was correct (and it was), kept a locked room in the sub-basement that contained dirt on most of the
celebrities and important citizens of the city.
The pause dragged beyond a moment into a minute. Finally Mike broke. He gave a polite cough and
said, “So you have an idea how to handle this ‘dangerous ground’?”
Handy Anderson nodded slowly. “I want to print the series. It’s good work.”
“But you don’t want me anywhere in the immediate vicinity when the next part of that story hits the
street.”
“I’m thinking of your own safety, Mickey, it’s . . .”
“Dangerous ground,” finished Mike. “I heard. Here be dragons. Perhaps it would be time for an
extended vacation? Maybe a cabin in the mountains?”
“I was thinking more of a special assignment.”
Of course,thought Mike.That way I won’t have thechance to figure out whose tail I’ve
inadvertently twisted.And give those involved time to cover their tracks.
“Another part of the Universe News Network empire?” Mike said with a road smile, at the same time
wondering what godforsaken colony world he would be doing agricultural reports from.
“More of a roving reporter,” teased Anderson.
“How roving?” Mike’s smile suddenly became flinty and brittle. “Will I need shots for off-planet?”
“Better than getting shot for being on-planet. Sorry, bad joke. The answer is yes, I’m thinking definitely
off-planet.”
“Come on, spill. Which hellhole do you want to hide me in?”
“I was thinking of the Confederate Marines. As a military reporter, of course.”
“What!”
“It would be a temporary posting, of course,” continued the editor.
“Are you out of yourmind?”
“Sort of ‘our fighting men in space,’ battling against the various forces of rebellion that threaten our great
Confederacy. There are rumors that Arcturus Mengsk is rallying more support in the Fringe Worlds.
Could turn really hot at any moment.”
“The marines?” sputtered Mike. “The Confederate Marines are the biggest collection of criminals in the
known universe, outside of the Tarsonis City Council.”
“Mike, please. Everyone hassome criminal blood in them. Hell, all the planets of the Confederacy were
settled by exiled convicts.”
“Yeah, but most people like to think we grew out of that. The marines still make that one of their basic
recruiting requirements. Hell, do you know how many of them have been brain-panned?”
“Neurally Resocialized,” corrected Anderson. “No more than fifty percent per unit these days, I
understand. Less in some places. And the resocialization is more often done with noninvasive
procedures. You probably won’t notice.”
“Yeah, and they pump them so full of stimpacks they’d kill their own grandpas on the right command.”
“Exactly the sort of common misconception that your work can counter,” said Anderson, both eyebrows
raised in practiced sincerity.
“Look, most of the politicos I’ve met are naturally nuts. The marines are nuts andthen they started
messing with their heads. No. The marines are not an option.”
“It’d make for some good stories. You’d probably get some good contacts.”
“No.”
“Reporters with experience with the military get perks,” said the editor-in-chief. “You get a green tag on
your file, and that carries weight with the more venerable families of Tarsonis. In some cases even
forgiveness.”
“Sorry. Not interested.”
“I’ll give you your own column.”
A pause. Finally Mike said, “How big a column?”
“Full column-page print, or five minutes stand-up for the broadcast. Under your byline, of course.”
“Regular?”
“You file, I’ll fill.”
Another pause. “A raise with that?”
Anderson named a figure, and Mike nodded.
“That’s impressive,” he said.
“Not chump change,” agreed the editor-in-chief.
“I’m a little old to be planet-hopping.”
“There’s no real danger. And if something does flare up, there’s combat pay. Automatic.”
“Fifty percent brain-panned?” Mike asked.
“If that.”
Another pause. Then Mike said, “Well, it sounds like a challenge.”
“And you’re just the man for a challenge.”
“And it can’t be worse than covering the Tarsonis City Council,” Mike mused, feeling himself sliding
down the slippery slope to acceptance.
“My thoughts exactly,” his editor agreed.
“And if it would help the network . . .” Yep, Mike thought, he was on the edge, poised to pitch over into
the void.
“You would be a shining light to us all,” said Anderson. “A well-paid, shining light. Wave the flag a little,
get some personal stories, ride around in a battlecruiser, play some cards. Don’t worry about us back
here at the office.”
“Cush posting?”
“Cushiest. I’ve got some pull, you know. Was an old green-tag myself. Three months work, tops. A
lifetime of rewards.”
There was a final pause, a chasm as deep as the concrete canyon that yawned beyond the window.
“All right,” said Mike, “I’ll do it.”
“Wonderful!” Anderson reached for the humidor, then caught himself and instead offered Mike his hand.
“You won’t regret it.”
“Why do I feel that I already do?” Michael Liberty asked in a small voice as the editor’s meaty, sweaty
hand ensnared his own.

THE CUSH POSTING
Service in the military, for those of you unfortunate enoughnever to have experienced it
firsthand, consists of long periodsof boredom broken by mind-shredding threats to one’s lifeand
sanity. From what I can gather from the old tapes, it’salways been like that. The best soldiers are
those who canwake suddenly, react instantly, and aim precisely.
Unfortunately, none of those traits are shared by the military intelligence that controls those
soldiers.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
“MR. LIBERTY?” SAID THE PERKY MURDERESS AT THE hatchway. “The captain would like a
word with you.”
Michael Liberty, UNN reporter assigned to the elite Alpha Squadron of the Confederate Marines,
propped open one eye and found her, all smiles, standing next to his bunk. An all-night card game had
just adjourned, and he was sure the young marine lieutenant had waited until he had lain down before
barging into his quarters.
The reporter let out a deep sigh and said, “Does Colonel Duke expect me immediately?”
“No, sir,” said the murderess, shaking her head for effect. “He said you should come at your leisure.”
“Right,” said Mike, swinging his legs over the edge of his bunk and shaking the temptation of sleep from
his brain. For Colonel Duke, “at your leisure” usually meant “within the next ten minutes, dammit.” Mike
reached for his cigarettes, and only when his hand had dipped into the empty shirt pocket did he
remember he had given them up.
“Filthy habit anyway,” he muttered to himself. To the marine lieutenant he said “Need a shower. Coffee
would be good, too.”
Lieutenant Emily Jameson Swallow, Liberty’s personal assistant, liaison, minder, and spy for her military
superiors, waited only long enough to determine that Mike was serious about getting up, then beetled off
to the galley. Mike yawned, figured he must have had all of five minutes’ sleep, stripped, and padded off
to the sonic cleanser.
The sonic cleanser was a military model, of course. This meant it was similar in construction to those
high-pressure jets that lasted the meat off the bones at slaughterhouses. In the past three months Mike
had gotten used to it.
In the past three months Michael Liberty had gotten used to a lot of things.
Handy Anderson had been true to his word. The posting was posh, or at least as posh as a military
assignment could be. TheNorad II was a capital ship, one of theBehemoth -class, all neosteel and laser
turrets, as befitted the most legendary of Confederate military units, the Alpha Squadron.
Alpha Squadron’s primary mission was hunting rebels, particularly the Sons of Korhal, a revolutionary
group under the bloodthirsty terrorist Arcturus Mengsk. Unfortunately, the Sons were never where they
were supposed to be, and theNorad II and her prized crew spent a lot of time showing the flag (a blue
diagonal cross filled with white stars against a red background, the memory of a legend of Old Earth) and
keeping the local colonial governments in line.
As a result, Mike’s biggest challenge so far had been dealing with boredom and finding enough to write
about to justify his column. The flag-waving propaganda came easy for the first few stories, but when
there was a deficit of real action or achievement, Mike had to reach. A piece on Colonel Edmund Duke,
of course. Some human-interest stuff on the well-oiled crew. A bit about the travails of the neurally
resocialized that Anderson scotched (out of common decency, Handy explained). Local color on the
various planets. Just enough to remind everyone (Handy Anderson in particular) that he was still alive and
expected regular payments to his account.
And then there was a long two-parter about the wonders of theBehemoth -class battlecruisers, a story
that was decimated by military censors to a mere few paragraphs. Military secrets, it was explained.
Like the Sons of Korhal don’t know what we have already,thought Mike as he slipped into his shorts
and looked for a less rumpled shirt and pants. Hanging in his locker was a new traveling coat, a
going-away present from the guys in the newsroom. It was a long duster that made him look like a
denizen of the Old West, but the crew apparently felt that if Mike was going out to the interplanetary
sticks, he might as well look the part.
He slipped into some nondescript pants. Almost on cue, Swallow reappeared with a pot of java and a
mug. She poured as Mike buttoned up his shirt.
The brew was military style “A”—freshly made and scalding, suitable for pouring down on peasants
attacking the family castle. The coffee was another thing he had gotten used to.
Of course, he had also gotten used to three squares, sufficient time to write his columns, and a flexible
amount of privacy. As well as an ever-changing group of poker partners, all of whom were young, had
no place to spend their paychecks, and could not bluff if their lives depended on it.
He had even gotten used to Lieutenant Swallow, though her habitual positive attitude bothered him at
first. He had expected some sort of minder, of course, some military attaché who would hang over his
shoulder as he wrote and make sure he didn’t do anything stupid like drop his pen into the warp coils.
But Lieutenant Emily Swallow was like something out of a training film. A particularly cheery training film,
the type you show Mom and Dad before shipping their sons and daughters off to extended duty five star
systems away. Hell, Lieutenant Emily Swallow looked like shewrote that type of training film.
Small, petite, and always smiling, she seemed to take every request from Mike seriously, even if they
both knew that there was a snowball’s chance that it would be approved. She had no vices, except for
the occasional cigarette, accepted with a smile and a guilty shrug. Further, when he hit her up for her own
story, she demurred. Most of the crew were stoked up, talking about their lives back home, but
Lieutenant Swallow instead just stopped smiling and ran her hand back along the side of her face, as if
brushing away long hair that was no longer there.
That was when Mike noticed the small divots behind her ear, the marks of the noninvasive neural
resocialization that Anderson had mentioned. Yeah, she had been brain-panned, and good. No one
could be that perky without an electrochemical lobotomy.
Mike didn’t bring up the subject again, but instead bribed one of the computer techs for some time with
the personnel files (this cost him his two emergency packs of smokes, but by that time he was through the
worst of the cravings, and the coffin nails were better used in trade than consumption). He found out that
before she had involuntarily joined the marines, young Emily Swallow had the interesting hobby of
attracting young men in bars, taking them to her home, tying them up, and flaying the skin and meat from
their bones with a fillet knife.
Most men would be disconcerted by this news, but Michael Liberty found it reassuring. The murderess
of ten young men on Halcyon was much more understandable than the smiling, gung-ho woman who
looked like someone from a recruiting poster. Now, following her through the corridors of theNorad II
to the bridge, Mike wondered how Lieutenant Swallow felt about her medical incarceration and
involuntary transformation. He decided that she just didn’t dwell on it, and given her original nature, Mike
decided not to press the issue.
For a huge ship, theNorad II had narrow passageways, built almost as an afterthought after all the
landing bays, wardrooms, weapons systems, galleys, computers, and other necessities had been piled in.
In the hallways oncoming traffic had to press against walls to pass. Mike noticed large arrows painted on
the floor, which Lieutenant Swallow noted were for times when the ship was on alert and soldiers were in
full battle armor. Mike realized that the gangways would have been made even narrower had they not
been expected to accommodate men in powered combat suits.
They passed several large bays where technicians were already pulling out wiring and cables. The
scuttlebutt was that theNorad II was due for an overhaul, including an upgrade with the Yamato cannon.
Given the number of laser batteries,Wraith -class space fighters, and even the rumored nuclear arms
carried onboard, the huge spine-mounted cannon would be icing on the cake.
In fact, this was what Mike expected Colonel Duke to tell him—that theNorad II was going into dry
dock for repairs, and he, Michael Liberty, would be on the next shuttle back to Tarsonis. That would
make dealing with the old fossil almost worthwhile.
He revised his opinion when they stepped onto the bridge, and Duke scowled at him. Mind you, Duke
never looked particularly pleased to see a member of the press, but this was the deepest and most hostile
scowl that Mike had seen yet.
“Mr. Liberty, reporting as requested, sir,” said Lieutenant Swallow with a salute as sharp as that in any
recruiting video.
The colonel, decked out in his command brown uniform, said nothing but pointed a stubby finger toward
his ready room. Lieutenant Swallow led him there, then abandoned him for whatever tasks she did when
she wasn’t keeping tabs on him. Probably, Mike mused, something involving skinning puppies.
Mike’s initial concern grew deeper when he recognized the humanoid shape now hanging from a
wall-mounted frame in the ready room. It was a powered combat suit, not one of the standard-issue
CMC-300s but a command suit, fitted with its own portable comm system. Colonel Duke’s suit, now
shined and greased and ready for the great man to step into it.
Mike was less sure now that they were going in for that Yamato refit. Most of the marines kept their
armor handy, and drills were as common as meals. Liberty managed to avoid that duty, as he was
considered a “soft target” and wasn’t cleared for the heavier suits. It was, however, amusing to see the
rookies staggering around the narrow passages in full combat armor.
But for the colonel’s suit to be here, newly polished and ready, boded very ill indeed.
The suit itself was massive, hunched forward on the hanger under its own weight. In that way, it seemed
to Michael Liberty, the empty suit fit its owner well. Colonel Duke reminded Mike of the great apes of
Old Earth, the ones that climbed buildings and swatted down primitive aircraft. Gorillas. Duke was an old
silverback, the pointy-headed leader of his tribe, and just the way he leaned forward inspired fear in his
subordinates.
Mike knew that Duke was from one of the Old Families, the original leaders of the Koprulu Sector
colonies. But he must have done something wrong along the way: Edmund Duke was obviously long
overdue for his general’s stars. Mike wondered what nasty incident stood in the way of his promotion,
and surmised that it was loud, messy, and deeply buried in the Confederate military files. He wondered
what type of pull it would take to get that information out, and if Handy Anderson had it in his
not-so-secret vault.
The door slid open and Colonel Duke strode in like aGoliath -style armored walker scattering infantry
units before it. His scowl was even deeper than earlier. He held down a hand to indicate that Mike
shouldn’t rise (Mike had had no intention of doing so), circled his wide desk, and sat down. He rested
his elbows on the polished obsidian desktop and templed his fingers in front of him.
“I trust, Liberty, you have had an enjoyable time with us?” he asked. He had the old, faint drawl that
marked the elder Families of the Confederacy.
Mike, who had not expected small talk, managed to stammer out a general affirmative.
“I am afraid it will not last,” said the colonel. “Our original orders were to be relieved by theTheodore
G.Bilbo, and to put in for a retrofit within two weeks. Events have now overtaken us.”
Mike said nothing. He had been in enough briefings over the years, even on a civilian level, to know not
to interrupt until he had something worth interrupting for.
“We are rerouting our course to the Sara system. I’m afraid it’s in the boonies, on the butt end of
nowhere. The Confederacy has two colony worlds there, Mar Sara and Chau Sara. This is an extended
patrol over and above our initial mission parameters.”
Mike just nodded. The colonel was creeping up on the subject, acting like a dog with a chicken bone in
its throat—something he had a hard time swallowing and a worse time coughing back up. Mike waited.
“I must remind you that as a member of the press assigned to the Alpha Squadron, you are limited under
the Confederate military code in regard to what your duties are and how you perform them.”
“Yes, sir,” said Mike, sternly enough to give the impression that he gave a rat’s ass about the
Confederate military code.
“And that this extends to your current assignment as well as to future references to events that occur
during your posting here.” Duke nodded his pointed head, clearly demanding a response.
“Yes, sir.” Mike separated the words clearly to underscore his comprehension.
Another pause, during which Mike could feel the throbbing of the ship around him. Yes, theNorad II
was vibrating at a different pitch now, a bit higher, more intense, a bit more frantic. Men and women
were preparing the ship for subwarp. And perhaps for combat?
Mike suddenly wondered about the wisdom of skipping those combat suit drills.
Colonel Edmund Duke, the dog with the chicken bone in his throat, said, “You know our histories.”
It was more of a statement than a question. Mike blinked, suddenly unsure how to respond. He settled
for “Sir?”
“How we came to the sector and settled it. Took it for our own,” prompted the colonel.
“Aboard the sleeper ships, the supercarriers,” Mike said, pulling up the lessons of childhood. “The
Nagglfar, theArgo, theSarengo, and theReagan. The crews of prisoners and outcasts of Old Earth,
crashing onto a scattering of habitable worlds.”
“And they found three such worlds, right off the bat. And a double-handful nearby that were terrestrial
or close enough for army work. But they found no life.”
“Begging the colonel’s pardon, but there was extensive native life on all three original planets. Plus, most
of the colonies and Fringe Worlds have their own ecosystems. Terraforming often, but not always,
eradicates native life-forms.”
The colonel waved off the comment. “But nothing smarter than your standard watchdog. Some big
insects they domesticated on Umoja, and a lot of stuff that was burned when the world was settled and
put under the plow. But nothingsmart. ”
Mike nodded. “Intelligent life has always been one of the mysteries of the universe. We have found
world after world, but nothing to indicate that there is something else out there as smart as we are.”
“Until now,” said the colonel. “And you will be the first network reporter on the scene.”
Mike warmed a bit to the subject. “There have been numerous mysterious formations on many planets
that indicate there might have been sentient life at one time. In addition, there are space-haulers’ tales of
mysterious lights and foo-fighters.”
“These aren’t lights in the sky or old ruins. This is living proof of ET activity. That we are not alone out
here.”
Duke let that sink in, and a smirk tugged at the side of his mouth. It did not improve his appearance in
the least. Somewhere within the ship a switch closed, and the monstrous engines began to hum.
Mike stroked his chin and asked, “What do we know so far? Has there been an envoy, a
representative? Or was this a chance discovery? Did we find a colony, or was there a direct embassy?”
The colonel let out a gruff chortle. “Mr. Liberty, let me make myself quite clear. We have made contact
with another alien civilization. This contact consisted of them vaporizing the colony of Chau Sara. They
burned it to the ground, and then burned the ground beneath it. We’re going there now, but we don’t
know if the hostiles are still present.
“And you will be the first network reporter on the scene,” repeated the colonel. “Congratulations, son.”
Mike didn’t feel very good about this particular honor.

THE SARA SYSTEM
The first contact with another sentient race, and they blowup a planet. Helluva calling card.
Now, blowing up a planet is nothing new. Christ, wehumans did it ourselves not too long ago.
There was a revolt on the planet Korhal IV. The inhabitants didn’t care much for the graft and
corruption that waspart and parcel of the Confederacy. They tried to rebel. Atfirst the
Confederacy tried a soft approach: they took out therebellion’s leaders with assassins,
ghost-troopers with personal cloaking devices. Unsurprisingly, this approach justmade the people
of Korhal angrier and more rebellious. Sothe Confederacy took a harder line.
We nuked Korhal IV from orbit.
Apocalypse-class missiles. About a thousand of them.Some green-tagged idiot on Tarsonis
pressed a button, and35 million people became nothing more than vapor andtheir homes nothing
more than a memory.
Naturally, there were official justifications thereafterabout the evil, menacing nature of Korhal,
and how theywere planning to do it to us if they got even the slightestchance. It was unfortunate
that the proof of this accusationwas located on a planet covered by blackened glass.
I think that’s what really scared the military about thevaporization of Chau Sara: that there was
something else outthere that was just as crazy as we were.
And they were better at it than we were.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
MIKE TOOK ADVANTAGE OF THE TIME THE SHIP was in subwarp to pore through the open
computer archives on the Sara system. It was a fairly typical Fringe system, the ragged leading edge of
the Confederacy’s ever-increasing sphere of power.
The system had been found by a prospector before the Guild Wars, glommed onto by the Confederacy
when it eclipsed that budding rival in space, and was (according to the ship’s archives) the home of a
growing pair of colony worlds. The only thing that made the Sara system different from about a dozen
other similar worlds was that there were two worlds in its habitable band instead of just one.
Chau Sara was the smaller and more outlying of the worlds, and had the larger colony. It had been
settled, in Confederate tradition, as a penal colony, and a lot of its (now former) inhabitants had still been
serving hard time. Mar Sara had a more eclectic mix of former prospectors and soldiers, along with a
couple of religious types that didn’t agree with the Tarsonian limits of tolerance for other faiths. Both
planets had rich potential for mineral exploitation, but of course the Confederacy had dibs on those
resources. The locals would have to either work under Confederate contracts or flee to new Fringe
Worlds.
Mike checked the current UNN reports. There was a small bit about a disruption of signals from the
Sara system, but most of the broadcast was given over to the latest Sons of Korhal outrage (poison gas
in a public plaza on Haji), and a multitrain monorail pileup on Moira.
Mike composed a brief blurb, summarizing his discussion with Colonel Duke and noting that he was
under full military restrictions in future reporting. That meant that his report would be checked over
before it left the ship and then again before it was broadcast. Handy Anderson would be simultaneously
griping about military censorship and dancing around his office in joy for the scoop.
If I’m lucky,thought Mike,he’ll dance too close to thatdamned window of his.
Mike prepared a second report, this one scrambled under cipher software and burned onto a minidisk.
This one wasn’t going anywhere, but if something happened to them, and their bodies were found,
someone would know what was going on. It was a grim insurance policy.
He had just finished the second report when a large shadow blocked the light.
Mike looked up into the face of Lieutenant Swallow, now a foot taller and several hundred pounds
heavier. She was decked out in a combat suit, her natural strength boosted by servos and mechanisms.
An empty belt clip at her side would soon be filled with an 8-millimeter C-14 gauss rifle, an Impaler, for
when she went into action.
Her visor was open, and she beamed an excited smile at him. She looked like a girl expecting her first
prom dance.
“Sir? We’ll be coming out of subwarp soon. The colonel wants you on the bridge, at the soonest
possible moment.” Then she was gone..
Meaning right damned now,thought Mike, and followed Swallow out of his quarters.
The passageways were no wider now, but with the bulky suits now in preponderance they had become
one-way, with movement guided by huge arrows on the floor. At several crossings Swallow held up to
let other crewmen pass in front of them, and Mike had the sudden feeling of being the only kindergartner
in a sixth-grade class.
“I’ve got to get me one of those suits,” he commented.
“I was unaware you were trained in the CMC powered combat suit, sir,” said Swallow.
“I’ve read the manuals.”
“That knowledge would be barely sufficient for your own protection in a crisis situation, sir. However,
should something happen, it is my personal responsibility to make sure you get to safety.”
“I’m filled with confidence.” Mike smiled at Swallow’s back, just in case she had a camera trained on
him.
The ship gave a transdimensional shudder, and the engines shifted back from subwarp. They were in
Sara’s space.
The bridge was now bathed in red light, accented by the green monitors that lined the lower deck.
Colonel Duke was decked out in his own battle armor. He looked like a gorilla at the court of King
Arthur. A gorilla with a pointy head, wearing plate mail. He was surrounded by a small cluster of
viewscreens, each with a different talking head feeding data to him.
“Mr. Liberty, reporting as requested, sir,” said Swallow, managing another sharp salute, even in the
heavy armor.
“Colonel,” said Mike.
Duke did not look away from the main screen. He said simply, “We’re nearing Chau Sara.”
At first Mike thought the main screen was malfunctioning. They were approaching Chau Sara from the
night side. The large disk of the outer Saran world was a messy, rainbow smear of light, like that found
on oily water.
Then Mike realized that thiswas the surface of Chau Sara he was looking at. It glowed with rippling
bands of colors, moored at a handful of locations y bright spikes of orange.
“What . . .” Mike blinked. “What did this?”
“First contact, Liberty,” said the colonel. “First contact of the most extreme kind. How are the scans?”
One of the technicians reported, “I get no life readings. Most of the surface area has been liquefied and
sterilized. This zone looks to be between twenty and fifty feet deep.”
“The settlements?” Mike asked..
The technician continued, “The orange spikes appear to be magma breaches through the planetary
mantle. They are located at the locations of the known settlements.” A pause. “Plus at least a dozen other
locations.”
Mike looked at the swirling, deadly rainbow on the screen. The sun was cresting the horizon ahead of
them, and the world looked no better in the sunlight. Only a few dark clouds, thin as crow feathers,
dragged across the sunlight side.
“In addition, eighty percent of the atmosphere has been blown off in the attack,” continued the
technician.
“Any orbital presence?” asked Duke, an armorplated monolith in their midst.
“Working,” said the tech. Finally came the response, “Negative. Nothing of ours. Nothing of unknown
origin either. There may be some fragments on a larger scan.”
“Widen the scan,” said Duke. “I want to know if there’s anything out here. Ours or theirs.”
“Working . . . Definite fragments. Likely ours. Would need a salvage team to confirm.”
“Why did they do this?” Mike asked, but no one answered him. Techs in lighter-weight combat suits
tapped displays with gauntleted hands, and the numerous heads on the screens all talked at once to
Colonel Duke.
Finally Mike came up with a question he thought they could answer. “What did this? Nukes?”
The word seemed to reak Duke from his steady stream of information. He looked at the reporter.
“Atomic delivery systems leave blackened glass and burning forests. Even Korhal had some surviving
pockets of clear terrain, for a while at least. Chau Sara has been burned down to the liquid core in
places. This is much more deadly than even Apocalypse bombs.”
“This”—Duke pointed at the screen—“is the work of an alien race, the Protoss. From what I’m being
told, they warped in from nowhere, closer to the planet than we would ever attempt. Huge ships, and a
lot of them. Caught a few transports and scavenger ships and blew them out of the sky. Then they
unleashed whatever-it-was on the planet and sterilized it like a three-minute egg. Then they left again.
Mar Sara’s on the other side of the sun right now, and they’re in a panic that they might be next.”
“Protoss.” Mike shook his head slightly, digesting the data. Something was wrong there. He looked at
the tech’s display, showing the deep radar holes punching down to the planet’s magma.
“You have enough for your report, Mr. Liberty,” Duke said. “We will remain on station in the event of
other hostiles for the foreseeable future. You may mention in any report you file that we will be joined by
theJackson V and theHuey Long within days.”
The tech reached for his ear, then said, “Sir, we have anomalous readings.”
“Location?” snapped the colonel, turning away from Liberty.
“Zed-Two, Quadrant Five, one AU out. Numerous anomalies.”
“Bearing?”
“Working.” A pause, and then a defeated shrug crept into the tech’s words. “Heading for Mar Sara,
sir.”
Duke nodded. “Prepare to intercept anomalous readings. Launch fighters when in range.”
Mike spoke before he thought, “Are you crazy?”
Duke turned back to the reporter. “That was a rhetorical question, I hope, son.”
“We’re one ship.”
“We’re the only ship between them and Mar Sara. We will intercept.”
Mike almost said, “Easy for you, you’re in a hard-shelled battlesuit,” but caught himself. Whatever could
go through a planetary crust wouldn’t be stopped by a few layers of combat armor.
Instead Mike took a deep breath and just gripped the railing, as if he were hoping that this might ease
the eventual blow.
“Approaching visual,” said the tech. “Putting on screen.”
The main screen flickered to reveal a scattering of fireflies against the night sky. They looked almost
pretty against the darkness. Then Mike realized that there were hundreds of them, and that these were
only the main ships. Smaller gnats danced around them.
“Are we within launching range for the Wraiths?” the colonel asked.
“Mark at two minutes,” replied the tech.
“Launch as soon as possible.”
Mike took a deep breath and wished that he had joined in the combat suit drills after all.
Even at long range, the Protoss ships had form and definition. The largest were huge cylindrical
creations, similar in appearance to luminous zeppelins. They were surrounded by hungry moths, and
Mike realized these had to be their fighters, their equivalents of the A-17 Wraiths that were now in the
hangars, just waiting for them to close to within striking range. Other golden ships danced between the
larger carriers, glimmering like small stars.
Then, as Mike watched, one of the great carriers seemed to dissolve. There was a flash of light, a soft
glowing, and then it was gone. Another moment, and another flash, and another disappearance.
“Sir,” said the technician. “Anomalous reading disappearing.”
“Cloaking technology?” asked the colonel.
Despite himself, Mike said, “At this scale?”
“Working.” A huge pause, as deep as a canyon. “Negative. It appears that they are surrounding
themselves with some form of subwarp field. They are retreating.”
As Mike watched, more of the ships began to flash and vanish. The great carriers and their brood of
smaller ships, the lesser golden vessels, all vanished like fey spirits with the coming of dawn.
Fey spirits that can burn a planet down to its molten core, Mike reminded himself.
The colonel allowed himself a smile. “Good. They’re afraid of us. Have all stations stand down, but
remain alert for a trick.”
Mike shook his head. “This makes no sense. They have the power to toast a planet. Why are they afraid
of us?”
“Obvious,” said the colonel. “They’re spent. They don’t have enough force to engage us.”
“We’re only one ship.” Mike shook his head angrily. “There were dozens out there.”
“They fear possible reinforcements.”
“No, no. Something’s going on here. It doesn’t make human sense.”
“We’re not dealing with humans here,” said Duke, scowling. “Look at their firepower.”
“Exactly. These Protoss have superior numbers and firepower, andwe’re facing them down? Why they
are here?”
“Mr. Liberty, that will be enough questions for the day.” The scowl deepened, but Mike ignored the
warning.
“No, something’s not jake in all this. Look at the damage reports.” Mike pointed at one of the tech’s
monitors. “They cooked an entire planet, but some places deeper than others. Every major human city,
yes, but look.” Mike pointed at the wall of data. “There are strike zones on the other side of the planet,
far away from any recorded human settlement. I know. I was just checking the archives.”
“I said that will beenough, Mister. We have more to worry about with the Protoss than just how
effective they are in choosing their targets.”
Mike’s face lit up as a connection was made deep in his brain. “And where did we get the name
‘Protoss,’ Colonel? Is that ours, or theirs?”
“Mister Liberty!” Color was creeping up the sides of Duke’s face.
“And if it’s their name for themselves, how comewe know it? Didn’t we have to know it in advance? Or
did they send a warning before they attacked?” The reporter was raising his voice now, the way he
would for a dissembling candidate in a precinct by-election.
“Lieutenant Swallow!” Duke bit off the command.
“Yes, sir?” Another perfect salute.
“Escort Mr. Liberty off the bridge! Now!”
Mike gripped the railing firmly with both hands. A ligatured arm wrapped in metal snaked around his
waist. Mike was shouting now, “Dammit, Duke, you know more than you’re telling. This stinks to high
heaven!”
“I said now, Lieutenant!” Duke snarled.
“This way, sir,” said Swallow, breaking Mike’s hold and pulling the reporter off his feet. With her prize,
she retreated for the lift.
Still shouting questions, Michael Liberty left the bridge. The last thing he heard before the doors slid shut
was Colonel Duke ordering the opening of a comm line with the colonial magistrate of Mar Sara.

DOWN ON MAR SARA
There’s a period in any war between the first blow and thesecond. It’s a quiet moment, an almost
tranquil time, whenthe realization of what has happened is just sinking in andeveryone feels they
know what happens next. Some prepareto flee. Some prepare to hit back. But no one moves. Not
yet.
It’s a perfect moment, the time when the ball is at the highest point of the throw. The action has
been taken, and for onefrozen moment everything is moving, but everything is at rest.
Then there are those jackasses who can’t leave such thingsalone. And the ball starts downward
again, the second blowis thrown, and we plunge into the maelstrom.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
MICHAEL LIBERTY WAS NOT ALLOWED OUT OF his quarters for the remainder of the action
over Mar Sara. Lieutenant Swallow or one of her neurally resocialized comrades stood guard outside his
quarters for the next two days. After that it was an escort to the dropship and a shuttle to beautiful Mar
Sara itself.
Now, a day after that, he was in the press pool, fleecing the local reporters for most of their life savings
while waiting for something that resembled a straight answer from the powers that be.
It was not forthcoming. The official debriefings were preshaped pellets of non-news that stressed the
suddenness of the attack on Chau Sara, hailed Duke and theNorad II crew as heroes for standing up to
the enemy, and claimed that only the ever-watchful vigilance of the Confederacy could protect Mar Sara.
The Protoss (still no idea where the name came from) were portrayed as cowards who folded at the first
sign of a real fight. The delicate if impressive nature of their lightning-charged ships confirmed that notion:
they fled because they were afraid to be hit.
That was the story, anyway, and the marines were sticking with it. In fact, if anyone in the press pool
wandered too far from the official version, their reports suddenly started getting lost in transmission. That
kept most of the locals in line. They were all issued passes with bar codes that were supposed to be
presented upon demand. And, Mike knew, to keep tabs on their whereabouts.
All of the other newshounds knew Liberty’s story from aboard theNorad II, but no one had yet tried to
use any of the information in their own reports.
In the outside world, a planetary lockdown was in force. Officially a civilian protection measure (to
quote the official press release), it was effectively a military overthrow of the local government. The locals
were being herded into concentration points for supposedly easier evacuation. No mention was made of
where the evacuating ships would come from, or even if there was a timetable for abandoning the planet.
In the meantime, there were marine patrols on every corner, and those citizens who remained in the city
were looking very, very nervous.
In the absence of anything reportable, the newshounds hung out at the large café in front of the Grand
Hotel, played cards, waited for the next official news-like release, and speculated madly. Mike,
bedecked in his duster, lounged with them, looking more like a native than any of the others.
“Man, I don’t think there are any aliens at all,” said Rourke between hands of poker. Rourke was a big
redhead with a craggy scar across his forehead. “I think the Sons of Korhal finally found enough tech to
avenge the nuking of their homeworld.”
“Bite your tongue,” said Maggs, a crusty old bird from one of the local dailies. “Even joking about the
Korholes is enough to get you shot.”
“So you have a theory, man?” countered Rourke.
“They’re human, but not our type of human,” said the old reporter. “They’re from Old Earth. I figure that
while we were gone they got so wrapped up in genetic purity and such that they are nothing but clones
now, and that they’ve come after us to clear out the rest of the race.”
Rourke nodded. “I heard that one. And Thaddeus from thePost thinks they’re robots, and they have
some programming that prevents them from defending themselves. That’s why they booked out when the
Norad took them on.”
“You’re all wrong,” said Murray, a stringer from one of the religious networks. “They’re angels, and
Judgment Day has arrived.”
Both Rourke and Maggs made derisive noises, then Rourke said. “What about you, Liberty? What do
you think they are?”
“All I know is what I saw,” Mike said. “And what I saw was that whatever they are, they liquefied the
surface of the planet next door, and they could be here faster than the Confederacy could react. And
we’re here at ground zero, playing cards.”
A pall hung over the table for a moment, and even Murray the holy stringer was quiet. Finally Rourke let
out a long breath and said, “You Tarsonis boys sure know how to squelch a good party. You in or out
for the next deal?”
Mike suddenly sat up, staring intently out into the road. Despite themselves, Murray and Rourke
swiveled in their chairs but could see only the usual handful of marines in the street, some in combat
armor, some in regulation uniform.
“Quick, Rourke. Give me your press credentials,” Mike said.
The big redhead instinctively grabbed the tags around his neck as though they were a life preserver. “No
way, man.”
“Okay, then let me trade my credentials for yours.” Mike held out his own marine-issued ID.
“How come?” Rourke asked, already pulling the chain off over his head.
“You’re local press,” Mike said. “They’ll let you out of the cordon into the hinterland.”
“Yeah, but anything I put down goes through the censors anyway,” the big man protested, handing over
the tags. “Nothing gets out of here.”
“Yeah, but I’m going to go crazy hanging out here. Pack of cigs, too.”
“I thought you were quitting, man,” Rourke said.
“Come on, man.”
As soon as Mike had Rourke’s cigarettes jammed in his shirt pocket he was up and out of the café, his
own press tags still bouncing on the table.
“They breed them crazy on Tarsonis, man,” Rourke observed.
“You going to talk or deal?” Maggs asked.
“Lieutenant Swallow!” Mike shouted. He strung Rourke’s tags around his neck as he ran, his boots
kicking up plumes of dust in the street.
The lieutenant turned and smiled at him. “Mr. Liberty. It is good to see you again.” Her smile was warm,
though Mike could not tell if the warmth was heartfelt or the result of her reprogramming.
She wasn’t in her combat armor anymore, but rather in regulation khakis. That meant she wasn’t on MP
duty and it was unlikely she would be actively monitored. Still, she had a small slugthrower on one hip
and a nasty-looking combat knife on the other.
Mike reached up and pulled the cigarette pack from his pocket. Swallow smiled guiltily and pulled one
out.
“I thought you were quitting,” she said.
Mike shrugged. “I thought you were, too.”
Mike suddenly realized that he didn’t have any matches, but Swallow produced a small lighter. A tiny
laser ignited the tip’s end.