The lieutenant took a long drag and said, “I am sorry about that thing back on the ship. Duty.”
Mike shrugged again. “My job is sometimes asking tough questions. Duty. The bruises have healed. You
busy?”
“Not at the moment. Is there a problem, sir?”
“I need a lift and a driver for out into the hinterland.” Mike made it sound like a simple request. Like
bumming a cigarette.
Swallow’s face clouded for a moment. “They’re letting you out of the cordon? Nothing personal, sir, but
I thought the colonel was going to personally kick your backside to Tarsonis after that incident on the
bridge.”
“Time wounds all heels,” said Mike, pulling up Rourke’s tags. “They’re lengthening my chain a bit. Just a
bit of background stuff—talking to the potential refugees.”
“Evacuees, sir,” corrected Swallow.
“My point exactly. Have to get a line on the brave people of Mar Sara in the face of the threat from
space. You interested in shuttling me around?”
“Well, I’m off duty, sir . . .” Swallow hesitated, and Mike touched the cigarette pack again. “I can’t see
the harm. You sure the colonel is down with this?”
Mike beamed a winning, wise smile. “If he isn’t, then we get turned back at the first checkpoint, and I’ll
introduce you to my card-playing buddies at the café.”
Lieutenant Swallow wangled transport, an open-topped, wide-bodied jeep. Rourke’s tags got them
through the checkpoint, a bored MP swiping the card through the reader and getting a green light for the
“local reporter.” The authorities didn’t seem to be horribly worried about people getting out into the
hinterlands, particularly those with a military escort. They seemed to be more concerned about people
getting back in.
Mar Sara had always been only borderline habitable, in comparison to the formerly rich jungles of its
sister in farther orbit. Its sky was a dusty orange, and most of its soil varied between hard-baked mud
and stringy scrub. Irrigation had made parts of this desert bloom, but as they passed outside the city
Mike could see fields already blighted by lack of water. Watering cranes stood like lonely scarecrows
over the brown-tinged crops.
Such crops needed constant attention, Mike noted in his recorder, and the displacement of the
population was as deadly for them as an assault from space. The abandonment of the agricultural areas
was a sure sign that the Confederates expected the Protoss to return.
They came across their first concentration point for refugees (sorry, evacuees) about midafternoon. It
was a fabric city erected in one of the fields, a single Goliath walker overseeing the entire complex.
Another bored MP didn’t even bother to listen to Mike’s full story before swiping Rourke’s card through
the reader and, being informed that Mike was a local, let him in.
Swallow parked the jeep at the feet of the Goliath.
“Let me talk to the ref . . . evacuees alone,” Mike said.
“Sir, I am still responsible for your safety,” Swallow responded.
“So watch from a safe distance. People aren’t going to open up too well when one of the Confederacy’s
own is standing there in full kit.”
Swallow’s face clouded, and Mike added, “Of course, anything I get will go through your people before
it gets transmitted.” That seemed to reassure her enough to keep her near the jeep while Mike went out
to soak up the local color.
The evacuee station was only a few days old, but its facilities were already stressed. It appeared to have
been built and supplied for maybe a hundred families, and it currently housed five hundred. Already the
overflow of the population was being bundled into square-bodied buses for transportation to other,
farther sites. Trash was piling up around the fringes, and there were lines at the water buffaloes for
purified water.
The evacuees themselves were just getting over the shock of being dispossessed. Most had been
rousted from their homes and managed to take only what they could lay their hands on. As a result,
unneeded and sentimental items were being abandoned or traded away for food and warm bedding.
Now, at rest for the first time in days, the evacuees had time to take stock of their situation, and assign
blame.
Unsurprisingly, the Confederacy came in for most of the blame. After all, they were the only ones on
hand, with their Goliath walkers and combat-suited marines a very visible presence. The Protoss, on the
other hand, were a rumor, the only proof of them reports from the Confederacy itself. Mar Sara had
been on the other side of the sun, so its people missed much of the light show that had destroyed their
sister planet.
Mike cataloged the evacuees’ plight and listened to the complaints. There were stories of separations
and of valuables left behind, reports of farms and homes commandeered by the Confederate forces, and
all manner of complaints, major and minor, against the military forces that had replaced all the civilian
authorities. The local magistrate had become a refugee himself, leading one pack of refugees to another
concentration point. No one was willing to stand up to the Confederates, but the refugees were angry
enough to complain to a reporter about it.
Yet under the complaints and bluff talk, there was noticeable and definite fear. There was fear of the
Confederate forces, natch, but also fear that arose from the realization that suddenly mankind was no
longer alone. The Mar Sarans had seen the reports of the destruction of Chau Sara, and they were afraid
that it would happen here. There was a lot of anxiousness in the camp, and a great desire to be
someplace—anyplace—else.
And there was something else there as well, Mike discovered as he moved among the uprooted
populace. The sudden knowledge of the Protoss was followed by a wave of mysterious sightings. Lights
were reported in the sky, and strange-looking creatures on the ground. Cattle were found slain and
mutilated. Add to that the blanket admission that the Confederacy was definitely herding the populace out
of certain areas, as if they knew something they weren’t telling people.
The stories of aliens and undiscovered xenomorphs on the ground came up again and again. No one had
actually seen them, of course. It was always a friend of a friend of a relative in another camp who saw
them, or at least heard of them. The stories were more along the lines of bug-eyed monsters than
creatures in shining ships, but then, if someone had seen the Protoss ships, the military would be all over
the report in minutes.
After about two hours (and the last of Rourke’s cigarettes), Mike padded back to the jeep. Lieutenant
Swallow was as he had left her, alert, standing next to the driver’s side.
“We have enough,” he said. “Thanks for the chance to get out here. We can go.”
Swallow didn’t move. Instead she was staring at something.
“Lieutenant Swallow?”
“Sir,” she said, “I’ve been watching something curious. May I share it with you?”
“And this curious thing would be?”
“You see that woman over there, the red-haired one in the dark outfit?”
Mike looked. There was a woman, young, dressed in what looked like night-camo pants, dark shirt, and
a multipocketed vest. She had brilliant red hair that was bound in a ponytail at the nape of her neck. She
looked quasi-military, though not from any unit that Mike had ever seen. Maybe some planetary militia or
law-enforcement organization. Marshals, that’s what the locals called the lawmen, but she didn’t look
much like one. Mike suddenly realized that he hadn’t seen anything of the local law since the marines
landed, and had just assumed they had been sucked into the general evacuation.
“Yeah?” he said.
“She’s suspicious, sir.”
“What’s she doing?”
“The same thing you’ve been doing, sir. Talking to people.”
“Well,that’s definitely suspicious. Shall we go talk toher?”
The red-haired woman rose from her most recent conversation with an elderly man and crossed the
compound. Swallow strode off toward her, Mike in tow.
As they closed, Mike noticed something else suspicious about the woman: she looked significantly less
dusty than the rest of the refugees. And less worried.
“Excuse me, ma’am,” Swallow said.
The red-haired woman hesitated in mid-stride and looked around. “Can I help you?” she asked. Her
jade-green eyes narrowed just a hair, and Mike noticed that her lips were just a tad too wide for her
face.
“We have a few questions,” the lieutenant said, perhaps more bluntly than Mike would have liked.
The wide lips pursed, and the woman asked, “Andwho would be asking these questions?” A cold wind
seemed to pass between the women as she spoke.
Mike interposed himself between the two. “I’m a reporter for the Universe News Network. My name is
Michael . . .”
“Liberty,” finished the red-haired woman. “I’ve seen your reports. They get things right more often than
not.”
Mike nodded. “They’re always right when I finish them. If something went wrong, I blame my editors.”
The woman gave Mike a piercing stare, and he was positive she could turn those green eyes into sharp
blades that could carve deep into his soul. “I’m Sarah Kerrigan,” she said simply, to Mike, not to the
lieutenant.
Okay,thought Mike.Not local law at all.
“And where are you from, Miss Kerrigan?” asked Lieutenant Swallow. She was still smiling, but Mike
could now feel a bit of tension in that smile. Something about this Miss Kerrigan rubbed the lieutenant the
wrong way.
“University of Chau Sara,” said Kerrigan, looking intently at the officer now. “Part of a sociological team
stationed here when the attack came.”
“That’s a convenient origin,” Swallow said, “considering that no one can check on it right now.”
“I’m sorry about your planet,” put in Mike suddenly. He intended simply to blunt Swallow’s tacit
accusation, but for the first time he realized that hewas sorry for the destruction he had seen from orbit.
And embarrassed, because he hadn’t really thought of it earlier.
The red-haired woman swung her attention back to the reporter. “I know,” she said simply. “I feel your
sorrow.”
“And what are you doing here, Miss Kerrigan?” Swallow was being as blunt as Anderson’s favorite
letter opener.
Kerrigan replied, “Same as everyone else here, Corporal . . .”
“Lieutenant, ma’am,” interrupted Swallow, sharper now.
Kerrigan managed an amused smile. “Lieutenant, then. Trying to find out what’s going on. Trying to find
out if there’s really a plan for evacuation or if the Confeds are running a huge human shell game, here.”
“What do you mean by that?” snapped Swallow, but Mike was already rephrasing the question.
“Do you feel there is a problem with the current evacuations?” he put in.
Kerrigan gave a snorting laugh. “Isn’t it obvious? You’ve got bands of people shunted out of the cities
and into the hinterlands.”
“The cities are not defensible,” Swallow noted.
“And the wilderness is?” Kerrigan shot back. “It seems the Confederacy has mistaken activity for
progress. They’re content to move the refugees around like checkers on the board, without any real plan
to evacuate.”
“Such plans are in the works, I understand,” Mike said calmly.
“I’ve read the official reports, too,” Kerrigan said. “And we both know how much truth there is to them.
No, the Confederacy of Man is just chasing its tail right now, moving people around in the hopes that
they’ll be ready.”
“Ready for what?” Mike asked.
“Ready for when the next attack comes,” Kerrigan said dryly. “Ready when the next thing goes wrong.”
“Ma’am,” Swallow said. “I must tell you that the Confederacy is doing as much as is humanly possible to
aid the people of Mar Sara.”
Kerrigan interrupted hotly. “They are doing as much as is humanly possible to protect themselves,
Soldier. The Confederacy has never given a damn beyond the limits of their own bureaucracy. It
particularly has never given a damn about its people, and most of all it’s never given a damn about
anyone not on Tarsonis.”
“Ma’am, I must inform you . . .” Swallow began, her smile as brittle as glass.
“I must informyou that the Confederacy’s history damns it as surely as its current actions do. It’s willing
to write off the Sara system, just like it wrote off the colonies in the Guild Wars and Korhal itself.”
“Ma’am,” Swallow said. “I mustwarn you now that we are in a military zone, and dangerous talk will be
dealt with swiftly.” Mike noticed that Lieutenant Swallow’s hand had drifted to the grip of her
slugthrower.
“No, Lieutenant,” Kerrigan responded, her eyes blazing, “I must warnyou. The Confederacy is leading
you to the slaughter, and you won’t realize it until the knives come out.”
Color flushed along Swallow’s face. “Don’t make me do something you’ll regret, ma’am.”
“I’mmaking not you do anything,” Kerrigan hissed. “It’s the bastards in the Confederacy thatmake
people do things. They reach inside you and twist you apart until you’re their plaything! So the question
is: Are you going to follow the programming they gave you, or not?”
Mike stepped back, suddenly aware that the two women were about to come to blows. He looked
around, but it seemed that the rest of the camp was paying them no attention.
For a long moment the two women stood, their eyes locked. Finally, Lieutenant Swallow blinked,
stepped back, and pulled her hand from the gun butt.
“Imust assure you, ma’am,” said Lieutenant Swallow, her face now ashen, “that you are in error. The
Confederacy is only thinking of its people.”
“If youmust assure me, then youmust, ” Kerrigan said, snapping off the words. “Will there be anything
else, or am I free to engage in an illusion of freedom?”
“No, ma’am. You can go. Sorry to have disturbed you.”
“It’s nothing.” Kerrigan’s sharp green eyes softened for a moment. She turned to Mike. “In answer to
your next question, you’ll find some answers at Anthem Base. It’s about three klicks west of here. But
don’t go alone.” She shot a look at the lieutenant.
And then she was gone, striding across the compound and quickly losing herself among the tents.
“The woman was under stress,” Swallow said through clenched teeth. She reached up with one hand
and pulled a stimpack from her belt.
“Of course,” Mike agreed.
“Its not surprising for people to lame their rescuers for their problems,” she continued, pressing the pack
against the knobby flesh at the back of her neck. The stimpack hissed softly.
“Right.”
“And this was not the place or time for an incident.” Slowly the color returned to her face, and she
started breathing regularly.
“Not the place at all.”
“And it would be best not reported,” she said firmly.
Mike thought of Swallow’s former hobby. “Of course,” he said.
“We should go now,” said Lieutenant Emily Jameson Swallow, turning back to the jeep.
“Uh-huh,” Mike said, scratching his chin and looking at the place where Kerrigan had disappeared. He
thought of chasing after her but realized that he would probably not even find her again, unless she
wanted to be found. He wanted to ask her about a lot of things.
Particularly about how she knew what his next question was.
Hewas going to ask about the xenomorph sightings.That was the next question he was going to ask.
This Kerrigan could have known that from talking to the same people that he had been interviewing.
Or it could have been something else about Kerrigan that let her know what he was thinking.
Regardless, as he loped to catch up to Lieutenant Swallow, he resolved never to get into a card game
with Sarah Kerrigan.

ANTHEM BASE
Nature abhors a vacuum, and human nature hates a lack ofinformation. Where we can’t find it,
we go looking for it. Insome cases we just invent it.
That was the case on the Sara system. Willfully ignorant,we charged into the hinterland looking
for answers—answers that we soon realized we didn’t want to find.
We were stupid to assume that we would be all right. Wewere stupid to go off half-cocked. We
were stupid to go inundergunned. We were stupid to think that we understoodwhat we were
getting into.
And we were most stupid of all to assume that the Protosswere the first alien race that humanity
had met.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
IT TOOK SOME CAJOLING TO GET LIEUTENANT Swallow to detour to Anthem Base. He told
her what he had learned in the camp from the other evacuees, couched in neutral terms so as not to rattle
her further.
Even so, the Kerrigan woman had shaken the soldier badly, and now Swallow drove with a wordless
intensity across the back roads beyond the camp. The stimpack had given her control over her anger but
did not eliminate it entirely.
A rooster’s plume of dust churned in their wake, and Michael Liberty was sure that the inhabitants of
Anthem would see them coming.
Yet when they got there, the town was empty.
“Looks like they’ve evacuated,” Mike said, dismounting.
Lieutenant Swallow just grunted and moved to the back of the jeep. Opening a hatch, she pulled out a
gauss rifle.
“Want one, sir?” she asked.
Mike shook his head.
“Pistol, at least?”
He shook his head again and headed for the nearest building.
It was a mining town, nothing more than about a dozen buildings made of local wood and preformed
construction pods. It had become a ghost town. No livestock, no dogs, not even birds.
So why, wondered Mike, did he get the feeling he was being watched?
The first building was a claims office. Wooden floor, quarters in the back. The place looked as if its
occupants had just left it. There were still blue crystals resting on the scales on a counter-top.
Mike walked in. Swallow lingered at the door, her oversized weapon at the ready. There was an acrid
smell in the air.
“They’ve evacuated,” she said. “We should do the same.”
Mike picked up a coffeepot. It had been boiled to a solid sludge, and the pot itself was warm to the
touch.
“This is still on,” he said, pulling the plug from the hot plate.
“They left in a hurry, sir,” Swallow said, a nervous tone now creeping into her voice. “You said the
evacuees were complaining of being shuttled off.”
Mike walked behind the counter and pulled open a drawer. “There’s still money in the till. Can’t imagine
any assayer leaving his cash behind. Or the marines not giving him a chance to recover it. Odd.” He
disappeared into the back room.
Swallow shouted after him, and he reappeared.
“Somebody’s quarters. Looks like there was a struggle there,” he said.
“Unwilling evacuee,” Swallow said, looking hard at Mike. “They probably dragged him off before he
had a chance to close up his shop.”
Mike nodded. “Let’s check the other buildings. You take one side. I’ll take the other.”
Lieutenant Swallow took a deep breath. “As you wish, sir. But stay in the doorways where I can see
you.”
Mike crossed the street to the opposite line of buildings. A fresh breeze kicked up, and dust devils
swirled down the main street of Anthem. The place was completely deserted by both man and beast.
Then why, wondered Mike, did the hairs on the back of his neck still bristle?
Across from the claims office were a pair of residences. Like the assayer’s office, they seemed only
recently deserted. A video screen was active in one, flickering soundlessly with a bad transmission of a
news report. Stock footage of a battlecruiser, identified as theNorad II, cruising effortlessly through
space.
There was a spilled can of beer next to the easy chair in front of the video. Despite himself, Mike found
himself checking to see if any cigarettes had been left behind. No such luck.
The third building was a general mercantile, and it looked as if it had been ransacked. Bins had been
overturned and products pulled from the racks and strewn across the floor. Behind the register a large
glass gun case had been smashed open. The guns were missing.
Perhaps this was what Sarah Kerrigan wanted him to find, thought Michael. The signs of an armed
struggle. Against the Confederacy’s evacuation? Or against the Protoss?
Mike looked over his shoulder to see Swallow crossing to a two-story tavern on her side of the road.
He stepped into the mercantile, and his foot struck something crunchy.
Mike knelt down. The floor was covered with some type of mold or fungus. It was a dark grayish
substance, its edges crusty but slightly elastic to the touch. It contained a spiderweb pattern of darker
bands, almost like arteries.
Something had spilled here, and some type of native mold had taken quick advantage of it. Very quick,
he realized—it could not have happened more than two days ago.
There was something else about the mercantile. There was a sound from the back of the store, the sound
of something sliding over the wooden floorboards. It shifted once, then was silent.
A wild animal? Mike wondered. A snake? Or perhaps a refugee who had escaped the initial evacuation,
or returned later. Mike took another step into the room, the fungus crunching under his boots.
He was suddenly very aware that he didn’t have a weapon on him.
Swallow gave a shout from across the street. Mike looked at the door to the back room once, then
back to Swallow. He backed out of the general store and crossed over to the bar. Swallow was
plastered against the wall outside the door.
“I think there’s something over in the store—” Mike said.
“I found the inhabitants,” Swallow hissed. The veins were pounding along the scars in her neck and
thundered at her temples, and her eyes were wide. She was terrified, and the fear was eating into her
resocialization programming. It was clear that she had hit the stimpack again, as the discharged unit now
lay on the porch floorboards.
Despite himself, Mike looked through the open doorway in the bar.
It had been transformed into an abattoir. Once-human forms hung by their feet from thick ropes attached
to the ceiling. Many had been stripped of clothing and flesh. Others had had limbs removed, and three
had been decapitated. The three skulls were set along the bar, and had been neatly carved open to reveal
the brains beneath. Something had been gnawing on one of the brains.
As he watched, something like a gigantic centipede writhed around on one of the bodies. It was like a
huge, rust-colored maggot. And it was feeding on the flesh.
Mike suddenly found it very hard to breathe, and wished he had a stimpack. He took a step into the
room.
His feet crunched on the crusty fungus that covered the room. And he realized that he was not alone.
He felt its presence before he saw it. The sudden feeling of being watched returned.
He started to step back, out of the doorway. He started to turn. He started to say something to
Swallow.
Something blurred from behind the bar, bolting forward in a single impossible leap, barreling for the
doorway.
It didn’t hit Mike. Instead, something larger slammed him to one side.
Mike hit the porch floorboards with a thump and twisted to see Lieutenant Swallow, who had struck
him, firing at a large dog in the street. No, it wasn’t a dog. It had four legs, but the similarity ended there.
Patches of orange-shaded flesh were skinless, muscles showing through. Its head was adorned with a
pair of huge, underslung tusks.
And it was screaming under the barrage of metal spikes from the gauss rifle. The hypersonic rounds
riddled it in a dozen places, and it flailed in the dirt as Swallow kept her finger clenched on the trigger.
“Swallow!” shouted Mike, “It’s dead! Lieutenant Swallow, quit firing!”
Swallow let go of the trigger housing as though it were a live snake. Sweat rolled down her face, and the
sides of her mouth were flecked with foam. She was breathing hard, and despite herself, her free hand
went for her knife.
Mike realized that her resocialization had been stressed to its utmost, and she was about to lose it.
“Sweet Mother of Christ,” she said. “Whatis that!”
Mike didn’t care. Instead he shouted, “Back to the jeep! We’ll send armored troops! Come on!”
He took two steps, then realized that Swallow was still in the doorway, staring at the skinned dog-thing
in the street.
“Lieutenant! That’s an order, dammit!” bellowed Mike.
That did it. The beauty of resocialization was that it made its subject vulnerable to orders, particularly
under the effect of stims. Swallow suddenly was back in control, running toward the jeep, passing Mike.
There was movement from the mercantile as they ran. More of the dog-things were coming through the
doorway. They could leap prodigiously, Mike realized, and could strike them in the back as they fled.
The dog-things didn’t. Instead the creatures waited for them almost to reach the jeep whensomething
else rose up behind the vehicle.
To Mike it was a snake, a cobra rearing to strike. A snake with an armored head that flared out
backward in a road frill of bony chitin like a prehistoric lizard’s. It was a snake with two arms jutting from
its body, arms that ended in wicked-looking scythes.
Scythes that now drove into the hood of the jeep, pinning it to the street. The snake-creature let out a
hissing cry of victory.
Swallow cursed. “They’ve got us surrounded!”
Mike grabbed her by the sleeve. “The claims office. It has one entrance! Make for it!”
He headed in that direction, the soldier hot on his heels. Behind him he heard more gunfire and the
screams of the dog-things. Swallow was backpedaling and firing at the same time, covering their butts as
they fled.
He paused in the doorway of the office and quickly scanned the room. Nothing had changed since he
had been there moments before. He ran for the counter and came up with a primitive shotgun. He broke
it open and found a pair of rounds chambered.
Yeah, the office had been left as if its owner had been called away suddenly. Or dragged away.
Swallow was in the doorway, firing bursts. There were more inhuman screams, then silence.
He looked out the doorway to see a half-dozen bodies in the street, all of them dog-things. Now they
looked even less like normal animals than before, the uninjured portions of their bodies riven with
pustules and knotted muscles. One of them still twitched a leg in a pool of gelatin that could have been its
blood.
Of the snake-thing with the scythes there was no sign. The jeep was a crumpled husk at the end of the
street, its leaking fuel darkening the sand beneath it.
“Those were the things that killed Chau Sara?” Swallow hissed the question, her voice a strangled
whisper. Her eyes were practically orbs of pure white.
Mike shook his head. The things they had seen in space had a frightful beauty about them. They were
gold and silver and seemed to be made of lightning and elemental power itself. These things were nothing
but muscle and blood and madness. It hurt him even to look at them.
“Oh Christ, where is the big one?” Swallow asked.
Mike choked back the dust and the fear. “We have to get out of here before they regroup.”
Swallow turned toward him, wide-eyed and panicked. “Out of here? We just got here!”
“They’re going to regroup and try again.”
“They’re animals,” she snapped, and the tip of her gauss rifle rose slightly toward Mike. “Shoot a few,
the rest will run.”
“I don’t think so. Animals don’t hang up their kills. They don’t take trophies.”
Swallow gave a short, strangled cry and stepped back into the office. “No, don’t say that.”
“Swallow. Emily, I . . .”
“Don’t say that,” she said, stepping back again. “Don’t say that they’re intelligent. Because if they are,
they know we’re trapped, and they know they can take us whenever they want to. Dammit, we’re fu—”
She took another step backward, and the floorboards gave way beneath her. She let out a strangled
scream, and the gun fell from her hands as a pit opened beneath her feet.
From deep within the pit, there was the sound of angry chittering.
Swallow twisted as she fell, grabbing the floorboards to break her fall. The chittering grew louder.
Mike stepped forward, almost dropping his own weapon. “Emily, grab my hand!”
“Get out of here, Liberty!” Swallow snarled, her eyes almost all white from fear. With her free hand she
grabbed her combat knife. “Oh God, they’re right underneath us!”
“Emily, grab my hand!”
“Someone has to get back,” she said, pulling her knife free and hacking at something unseen within the
pit. “They’re going to attack from above as well. Get going! Hump it back to the camp. Warn people!”
“I can’t—”
“Move! That’s an order, dammit!” Swallow was snarling as the last of her resocialization shattered
beneath the creatures’ assault. She let out a feral scream and started flailing with her knife.
Mike turned back to the door, and there was a shadow there. Without thinking, he pulled both triggers
on the shotgun, and was splattered by ichor of the exploding dog-thing.
Then he ran. Not looking back, he ran, throwing the spent shotgun aside as he fled. Toward the jeep.
Lieutenant Swallow had pulled the rifle out of a hatch in the back. She had offered him one. It had to be
there still. Other weapons as well.
He nearly made it when the ground erupted beneath the jeep.
The armor-headed snake-thing, with the scythe arms. It had been waiting for him.
Mike sprawled out of the way of the eruption and started crawling backward, away from the
serpent-thing. He was trapped in the creature’s eyes, luminous yellow eyes set deep beneath its armored
carapace.
There was intelligence in those eyes, and hunger. But nothing that resembled a soul.
The creature rose on its tail, towering over the shattered jeep, ready to leap forward. Mike threw his
arm over his face and screamed.
His cries were drowned out by the sound of a gauss rifle on full auto.
Mike looked up to see the huge serpent-beast twist and shudder under a relentless volley of rifle spikes.
As it writhed, it shot spines from its armored body that peppered the surrounding ground like deadly rain.
Then a round found the remaining fuel in the jeep, and the entire vehicle went up, taking the serpent-thing
with it. It bellowed something that might have been a curse and might have been a cry to some unknown
god.
The explosion pressed Mike backward against the ground, and the warmth of the fire beat against his
exposed face and arms. He looked down the street. No sign of the dog-creatures. Only corpses.
There was a sound behind him, and he spun in place, still on the ground. He expected more dog-things,
but he knew he was wrong even as he turned. It was the sound of booted feet, not callused paws.
A large, thankfully human figure blocked the sunlight. Broad-shouldered, and packing a heavy
slugthrower from a belt holster worn low on his hip. Dizzily, Mike thought at first the shadow belonged to
another of Swallow’s unit, that the lieutenant had somehow managed to call in reinforcements when they
had split up.
As his vision cleared, Mike realized the figure wasn’t in marine uniform. His pants were buckskin leather,
well-worn and rough. He was wearing a denim shirt, neat but faded, rolled up at the sleeves. A
lightweight combat vest, made of some open, leathery weave, pegged him as some kind of military. So
did the gauss rifle he was packing. His boots were well-made but as worn as the rest of his outfit.
“You all right, son?” The silhouette held out a hand.
Mike grabbed the hand and gently rose to his feet. He felt like one great ruise, and the figure’s voice
sounded distant and tinny in his ears.
“Fine. Alive,” he gasped. “You’re not a marine.”
He could see his rescuer’s face now. A head of sandy blond hair and a neatly trimmed mustache and
beard.
The figure spat into the dust. “Not a marine? I guess I’ll take that as a compliment. I’m the local law in
these parts. Marshal Jim Raynor.”
“Michael Liberty. UNN, Tarsonis.”
“Newsman?” Raynor asked. Mike nodded. “Kind of far from home, aren’t you?”
“Yeah. We were checking out a report. . . . Oh God.”
“What?”
“Swallow! The lieutenant! I left her in the claims office!” Mike staggered toward the assayer’s office.
The lawman followed close behind, his weapon ready. In the aftermath of the explosion, there was no
further sign of the dog-things.
Mike found Lieutenant Swallow facedown, still half in the pit, one hand still gripping her combat knife,
the other clutched tightly to a loose floorboard.
The marshal looked at the room and said, “Son.” It had a warning tone.
“Give me a hand here,” Mike said, grabbing Swallow’s knife arm, “We can haul her up and . . . Oh
God.”
Lieutenant Emily Jameson Swallow no longer existed below the waist. Her flesh ended in stringy tatters
of meat, and a few vertebrae dangled from a torn spinal cord like beads on a broken string.
“Oh God.” Mike let go of the body. It slid back into the pit with a sick, slithering sound. There was a
squishy thump, and the sound of something else moving below.
Mike fell to his knees, leaned forward, and puked his guts out. Then a second time and a third, until all
he had was dry heaves. His head spun, and he felt as if something had sucked all the blood out of his
brain.
“Not to interrupt,” said Raynor, “but I think we need to go. I think all I did was take out one of their
officers. Fragging the captain, if you take my meaning. They’re regrouping. We’d better go. I got a bike
outside.” He paused for a moment, then said, “Sorry about your friend.”
Mike nodded, and felt his stomach make one last attempt to empty itself.
“Yeah,” Mike gasped at last. “Me, too.”

CREEPS
War is easy to understand on paper. It seems so distant andacademic in black and white. Even
the vid reports have acool, detached manner that keeps the viewer from understanding how
horrible it really is.
This is nothing more than a sanity filter, allowing thosethat take in the information to separate
the reports andnumbers from the awful reality. It’s why those who leadarmies can do all sorts of
terrible things to their troops thatno sane man would think of if he had to look them in theeye.
Which is one reason they don’t.
But when you’re confronted with death, when you’reconfronted with having to deal out death or
die yourself,then everything changes.
The filters drop away, and you have to deal with theinsanity directly.
THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
“THEY CALL ’EM THE ZERG,” SAID MARSHAL Raynor, climbing onto his hover-cycle. “The little
ones are called zerglings. The snaky one we blew up is called a hydralisk. They’re supposed to be
slightly smarter than the small ones.”
Mike’s mouth still felt as if he had been gargling garbage water, but he said, “Who calls them those
things? Who named them the Zergs?”
Raynor replied, “The marines. That’s where I heard it from.”
“Figures. Those marines mention anything about something called the Protoss?”
“Yep,” Raynor said, strapping the reporter in. “They have shining ships and blew up Chau Sara. May be
coming here, too, I understand. That’s why everyone is beating feet for the exits.”
“Think they’re one and the same?”
“Don’t know. You?”
Mike shrugged. “I saw their ships over Chau Sara. I’d be surprised to discover that these . . . things . . .
were at the helm. Maybe their allies? Maybe slaves?”
“Possible. It’s better than the alternative.”
“And that is?”
“That they’re enemies,” said the lawman, firing up the hover-cycle’s main plant. “That would be much
worse for anybody caught between them.”
They circled the dead town of Anthem Base one last time. Liberty recorded the devastation on his
comm unit as Raynor fired fragmentation grenades into the wooden structures. They left a pillar of smoke
behind them.
Raynor explained that he was riding scout for a group of refugees. Local government types. They were
another few klicks farther along, heading for a place called Backwater Station.
“There’s a refugee camp about three klicks back that way.” Mike motioned toward the rear. “Aren’t
you heading that way?”
“Nope. There was a report of trouble up at Backwater, and we went to investigate it.”
“No mention of a refugee camp at all in your report?” Mike asked.
“Nope. Of course,does it seem like the Confederacy wants to have most of the planetary population
running around like chickens with their fool heads cut off.”
“Somebody else said that to me just before we came here.”
“Whoever told you that,” Raynor said approvingly, “has his head screwed on right.”
They flew smoothly over the rough terrain, Raynor changing course only to veer around the larger
obstacles. The Vulture hover-cycle was a long-nosed bike with limited gravity hover technology that kept
it a foot above the ground. The onboard computer and sensors in the nose kept it at a steady pace,
ignoring the smaller boulders and scrub trees.
Strapped in on the back, Mike thought,I gotta get . . .one of theseand a decent set of battle armor.
He thought again of Lieutenant Swallow and wondered how she would have fared had she been wearing
her insulating cocoon of neosteel.
They caught up with Raynor’s pack of refugees within the hour. The marshal was right: this particular
gathering had been the local government types, conveniently sent into the wilderness on marine orders.
Mike could imagine Colonel Duke’s delight in issuingthat particular communication. The march had been
brought to a halt, and Raynor accosted one of the rear guard.
“Something ahead we hadn’t counted on,” said the soldier, one of the colonial troops in CMC-300
armor. “Looks like an old command post.”
“One of ours?” Raynor asked.
“Kinda. It wasn’t on any maps of the area. We sent the rest of the scout unit up to check it out.”
Raynor twisted around in his seat. “You want off?” he asked Mike.
“Off the planet, yeah,” Mike said. “But as long as I have to be here I want to take a look. It’s the job.
Duty.” He thought of Anthem Base and didn’t trust old buildings all of a sudden.
Raynor grunted an agreement and gunned the bike forward. They crested a low hill and found the
command post on the other side.
Michael knew what to expect from command posts. They were ubiquitous, even on Tarsonis.
Halfdomes filled with sensor equipment and computers, they were little more than small automatic
factories that ground out construction vehicles to work the local mines, and would not have much in the
way of either a staff or a defense. Some brilliant developer along the way put jumpjets on the bottom of
the structures to move them where needed, but if you ever had to move them, you had to shut everything
else down.
This one was, well, different. It seemed a bit mashed along one side. Not damaged from without, but
rather shrunken from within, like an apple that had been left in the sun too long. The sides were
overgrown with riers and tangles. In a half-circle around it, the colonial forces, green local troops in worn
combat armor, were cautiously approaching.
“Never saw anything like that before,” Raynor said. “All overgrown and such. For it to look that bad, it
would have to have been here before the colony was settled.”
Mike looked at the ground around the base of the command post. He pointed. “Look there!”
“What?”
“The ground. It’s got that creeping gray stuff around it. We found it in Anthem before the Zergs
attacked.”
“Think it’s connected?”
“Oh, yeah.” Mike nodded in agreement.
“Good enough for me,” said the marshal, flipping over the comm mike on his bike. “That building’s been
infested with Zerg, boys. Let ‘em have it!”
Mike kept his own recorder open and said, “Tell them to look out for the zerglings. They like to
burrow.”
He didn’t need to give the warning. The ground in front of the command center opened up and spilled
forth a double-handful of the skinned-dog creatures. The colonial forces were prepared, and mowed
them down as soon as they appeared. The zerglings didn’t stand a chance, and were reduced to pulpy
husks in the first volleys. Having dealt with the initial threat, the local militia then fired incendiary rounds
into the command post itself. The building started to burn.
Raynor stayed on the bike, firing fragmentation grenades from a stubby launcher until the roof cracked
open like a shattered eggshell. Mike got a good look within: the entire structure was nothing more than a
tangle of pestilent vines, a riot of orange, green, and violet. Sacs of messy proto-somethingswere
hanging along one wall. They screamed as the fire reached them.
“You’re getting all that?” Raynor asked as the roof caved in, burying the smoking relics of the infested
building beneath it.
“Yeah.” Mike closed his recording unit. “Now I need someplace to patch in for a report.”
Raynor smiled. “I told you, this band of refugees are government types. If anyone has a decent comm
system, it’ll be them.”
Marshal Raynor was right. The refugees did have a more-than-adequate comm link, and in normal times
it would be a smooth link. But as he logged on, it was obvious to Mike that parts of the system were
going down worldwide. There were obvious holes in the net, and a high level of background noise. Like
the farms, the communications network was being forcibly ignored, with immediate ramifications.
He crafted the tale as best he could, wondering what the military censors would pull out before giving it
to UNN, and what Handy Anderson would change. The viewing populace, and all the steps in between,
needed to know what was going on, regardless.
He packed most of the material from the refugee camp as a sidebar, but said nothing of the altercation
between Swallow and Kerrigan. He went into detail about the situation at Anthem Base and provided
footage of the firing of the command post. He closed with a note that the command post was not on any
colonial maps, confident that the censors would pull that line, if they felt they had to pull anything.
He was also sure they would let run the shots of the brave colonial forces mowing down the zerglings.
Triumphant actions like that always played well with the military censors.
As the report percolated through the buffer into the general net, Mike pounded the orange dust out of his
coat. Then he hunted down Raynor in the mess tent. The sandy-haired man offered him a cup of coffee.
It was military style “B”—boiled to a thickened sludge and allowed to cool. It was like drinking soft
asphalt.
“You get off your report?” asked the lawman.
“Uh-huh,” Mike replied. “Even remembered to spell your name right.” He flashed a brittle grin.
“You okay?” Raynor asked. It came out “yokay.”
Mike shrugged. “I’ll hold up. Writing helps me work through it.”
“You’ve seen death before, right?”
Mike shrugged again. “On Tarsonis? Sure. Random shootings. Suicides. Gang hits and auto accidents.
Even some things that would rival those bodies hung up in the tavern.” He took a deep breath. “But I’ll
admit, never anything like this. Not like the lieutenant.”
“Yeah, it’s tough when you were talking to the victim moments before it happened,” said Raynor, taking
another slug of asphalt. “And when it’s sudden. And just so you know, the answer is no, it wasn’t your
fault.”
“How could you know that?” Mike asked, suddenly irritated. He had been thinking exactly that: that he
was responsible for ringing Swallow to Anthem and to her death.
“I know because I’m a marshal. And while I’ve never seen anything quite like Anthem Base, I’ve been
in situations where some people live, and some die. And the living feel guilty about still being alive.
Afterwards.”
Mike sat there for a moment. “What do you recommend, then, Doctor Raynor?”
Raynor shrugged. “Pretty much what you’re doing. Get on with your life. Do what you have to do.
Don’t get strung out. You got rattled, but you’re shaking it off.”
Mike nodded. “You know, speaking of getting on with life, there’s one thing I’ve been meaning to do.”
“And that is . . . ?”
“Learn to use that combat armor. I passed on the chance when I was flying around with the fleet, and
I’ve been regretting it ever since. Seems like it might be a survival skill around here.”
“That it is.” Raynor looked over his mug at the reporter. “Yeah, I think we got a spare
two-hundred-level suit. And we’re going to be encamped here until we hear from the marines. It might be
a good time to learn.”
A half hour later Mike was suited up outside the mess tent. It had taken ten minutes to scare up the suit
from all the cargo that the evacuees had brought along, and another twenty to suit him properly. He knew
that Swallow could slip into her suit in three minutes, tops.Crawl before you can walk, Mike told
himself.
The suit itself was similar to the powered combat suits used by theNorad II crew. It was invulnerable to
small-arms fire, had limited life-support (as opposed to the full space-traveling suits of the marines), and
packed basic nuclear/biological/chemical shielding. Still, it was an earlier model than standard marine
issue, practically an antique. Apparently the local law got hand-me-downs from the Confederate
government.
The complete suit raised Mike’s height by a full foot, the oversized boots containing their own
stabilization computers to keep him upright. The suit also rode a little high in the crotch, as well, until
Raynor showed him where the lever was to raise the foot supports. The suit could be sealed, and it
would run for seven days on its own recycled waste. That was a thrill that Mike could pass on for the
moment.
The shoulders were oversized as well, housing ammunition reloads and sensor arrays. The backpack
was an oversized air conditioner, shunting away heat from the body. The more advanced models carried
mufflers to cut down the noise and heat signature, but this was an ancient model, battered and repatched
numerous times.
Parts of it seemed a bit tight, snug around the arms and legs in wide bands. Other places seemed loose
and open.
“The tight spots are part of the salvage system,” said Raynor, strapping him in. “You take a big hit to an
arm or leg, the suit seals off in a tourniquet. One piece goes but the rest survives.”
“Feels like a hollow spot under the arms,” said Mike.
“Yeah, well, this is marine surplus. That’s where the stimpacks would be. We don’t use them in the
colonial militias. Too many people get addicted to the drugs in them.” He closed the last latch and sealed
Mike in. The reporter swayed back and forth, feeling like a turtle on stilts.
Raynor was in his own suit, looking equally battered and worn. The lawman nodded behind his open
visor and said, “The armor will stop most common slugthrowers, though a good needle-gun can still
punch through. That’s why most front-line troops carry C-14 Impalers, gauss rifles that fire
eight-millimeter spikes.”
“What now?”
“Now you walk,” said Raynor. Several other soldiers were now watching as well, and a small crowd
was forming at the entrance to the mess tent. The lawman nodded again. “Go ahead.”
Mike looked at the telltales along the rim of his visor. Hehad read the manuals earlier, on the ship, and
knew that the small lights meant that everything was hunky-dory. He took a step forward.
He expected the step to be like pulling out of mud, since he was lifting the huge weight of a booted foot.
Instead the foot, tethered into sensors and backed by a ton of cabled ligature, came up almost to his
waist. High-stepping, Mike overbalanced, leaning backward. The servos whined in response, and he
twisted, falling on his side with a resounding thump.
Raynor put a hand to his face, trying to look sage but barely covering the grin that blossomed beneath
his fingers. Mike saw that several of the other militiamen were trading money back and forth.Great,
they’re,betting on this thought Mike. The telltales along his visor flashed a warning yellow. He looked at
them, consulted the manual in his memory, and decided that they all meant “Hey, dummy, you’ve fallen
over.”
“A hand here?” Mike said.
“You’re better doing it on your own.” There was a smile in Raynor’s voice.
Wonderful,thought Mike, slowly rolling onto his belly. He found he could push himself up on one hand,
but moving the oversized legs underneath him was a tight fit. At last he pulled himself up to a near-vertical
position.
“Good,” Raynor said. “Now walk. Go ahead.”
Mike tried shuffling this time, and the armor responded by slogging forward, churning up a cloud of
orange dust. He shuffled ahead ten feet, then turned, and shuffled another ten. By the second turn he was
confident enough to take real steps, and when he didn’t fall down, started moving normally. The telltales
winked green at him again, and he was relieved that he hadn’t damaged the suit. He was also glad he
hadn’t laughed too hard at the new crewmen during the drills on theNorad II.
Raynor went over to the colonial militia and came back with the gauss rifle. He handed it to Mike, and
his armored hand closed over the larger of two grips. The smaller grip, used by nonarmored shooters,
required the firer to use both hands to steady its long barrel. In the armor, Raynor could heft it easily.
“Take a shot at that boulder,” he said, trying valiantly to keep a smile from his face.
At first Mike thought the marshal was only amused by his performance, but as he leveled the gun, he
thought about what he was doing. The armored turtle on stilts was about to fire a gun.
“Hang on,” he said. “How does this thing handle recoil?”
Raynor turned to the other militiamen. “See? I told you he was smarter than he looked!” Some of the
colonial soldiers reached for their wallets.
To Mike he said, “You brace, go into a broad-legged stance. The suit knows the maneuver. It
compensates along the gun arm.”
Mike turned back toward the boulder, braced himself, and let off a burst. A volley of spikes erupted
from the muzzle of the rifle and peppered the boulder. Splinters of rock flew everywhere, and Mike saw
that he had carved a white scar across the surface of the stone.
“Not bad,” said Raynor, smiling fully now. “That’s one rock that’s going to think twice about attacking
good God-fearing people.”
Mike felt as though a load had been lifted from his shoulders. Swallow was dead, and there were
strange xenomorphs all over a wilderness filled with refugees. But at least he was doing something about
it.
As far as he was concerned, he had made an important, armored, first step.
Raynor’s evacuees were supposed to hold tight until the marines contacted them. Mike figured he could
hang with Raynor’s crew for about a day, maybe two, then either catch a lift back to the city with the
marines or find his own ride back. Heck, once news of the colonial marines fighting the Zerg got on the
local news, their group might even be bumped forward in the queue.
He didn’t worry about the report until late the next day, when the real marines arrived.
They howled down out of the orange sky like steel-shod furies. The Confederate dropships deployed at
the cardinal points around the refugee camp, preventing easy escape. As soon as they landed, heavily
armored marines in full, modern combat gear piled out, accompanied by firebats, specialty troops armed
with plasma-based flame throwers. A single Goliath strode out of the belly of one of the dropships and
stood guard over the far end of the camp.
The marines quickly surrounded the encampment and advanced into the refugees’ midst. Wherever they
met colonial troops, they called for their disarmament and surrender. Surprised and unsure, the colonials
complied.
Mike, now dressed in his civilian gear and long duster, headed for Raynor’s tent. He got there just as the
marshal was shouting at his vidscreen.
“Are you out of your mind? If wehadn’t burned that damned factory this entire colony could have been
overrun! Maybe if you hadn’t taken your sweet time in getting here . . .”
“Now I asked you nice the first time, boy,” came a familiar voice over the screen that froze Mike’s soul.
He could not see the face, but he knew that Colonel Duke was at the other end of that vid-link. “I didn’t
come here to talk with you. Now throw down them weapons!”
Raynor muttered, “Guess you wouldn’t be a Confederate if you weren’t acomplete pain in the ass.”
Only then did he toggle the link off. To Mike he said, “Typical Confed thinking. We do their jobs for
them, so naturally they’re peeved at the competition.”
A pair of marines in full kit appeared in the doorway. “Marshal James Raynor, we have a warrant for
your arrest for treasonous activities—”
“Yeah, yeah,” sighed Raynor. “I got the love note from your colonel.” He placed his sidearms on the
table. They vanished into the possession of the marine.
“There was also a Michael Liberty of the Universe News Network present at the time of the assault on
the command post,” said the marine, turning toward Mike.
“Well, he’s—” Raynor began.
“Gone,” said Mike, holding up his press tags. “Name’s Rourke. Local press. Mickey booked out
yesterday after filing his report.”
The marine swiped the swapped ID card across a reader, then grunted. Mike hoped that the patchiness
of global communications prevented Rourke’s picture from coming up.
The marine said, “Mr. Rourke, you are as of this moment in a restricted area. You must leave at once.”
Raynor said, “What the—”
Mike interrupted him. “Of course, sir. I’m gone.”
The marine continued, “I must remind you that under martial law, anything you report of this will be
reviewed by military censors. Any treasonous writings will be reported, and the writer will be punished to
the full extent of the law.”
“Right you are, man. I mean, sir,” said Mike.
Raynor shouted at Mike, “Hey, ‘Rourke,’ you’d better take my bike.” He tossed the reporter the keys.
“It doesn’t look like I’m going to be needing it for a while.”
“Sure thing, Marshal,” said Mike.
The lawman looked hard at Mike. “And if you see that Liberty jasper,” he said in a stony voice, “tell him
I expect him to do something about this mess. You hear?”
“Loud and clear, man,” said Mike. “Loud and clear.”
Even so, Mike didn’t let himself relax until he was a good five klicks from the refugee encampment.
When he left, Raynor’s men were being herded into the dropships. If Duke followed standard
Confederate military procedure, they would be lifted to a prison hulk in high orbit.
Mike consoled himself with the fact that at least in orbit they would have some protection from the Zerg
and the Protoss.
Originally Mike’s plan was to get back to the city, catch a ship off-planet, and then let Handy Anderson
sort out the details of his unauthorized sojourn once Mike got back to Tarsonis. But the idea of leaving
Raynor to rot in some marine prison churned at him. The marshal was one of the aw-shucks
good-old-boys who seemed to thrive out here on the Fringe Worlds, but he wasn’t a bad sort. And he
had saved Mike’s bacon at Anthem.
Briefly the face of Lieutenant Swallow rose in his memory. She had helped him, and he had failed her.
Despite what Raynor had said, he felt responsible. Would he fail Raynor as well?
“Fail is such an ugly word,” he muttered, but he knew he couldn’t leave the lawman to Duke’s tender
mercies. By the time he hit the city limits, he knew he had to get a shuttle to theNorad II and have it out
with the colonel.
Hell, maybe we’ll get adjoining cells,he thought.
The city was completely evacuated now, and there wasn’t even a cordon at the main entrances. The
streets were abnormally empty, and not even other Confederate troops were present. Flying down the
empty streets, Mike wondered what had happened to the café crowd at the press pool. Were they still
there, or had they been evacuated to some dump in the wilderness as well?
There was awhump, and the Vulture hover-cycle rocked beneath him. Looking back, he saw that
another Vulture had crept up on him and nudged his left rear bumper. Behind the polarized window,
Mike saw the silhouette of the driver point to his ear. The universal symbol for “Turn on your radio,
idiot.”
Mike toggled on the comm unit, and Sarah Kerrigan’s face appeared on the screen. “Follow me,” she
said.
“You trying to get me killed?”
“That’s a stupid question, considering you’re already dead.”
“What?!” Mike sputtered.
“A report went out an hour ago. Said that some terrorists in stolen firebat armor strafed a bus full of
reporters. They identified the victims by their badges. Congrats, you got top billing in the obituary.”
“Oh, God.” Mike felt the weight shift in his stomach. Rourke had his press badge. The idea that the
construction scandal had finally caught up with him, this far out, crossed his mind.
Kerrigan laughed. “This is no building-supplies scandal back on Tarsonis, newshound. Somebody here
wanted you dead. You know too much, Mr. Liberty.”
Mike’s stomach churned. “What do you mean?”
Frustration crackled over the link. “I mean that your report from the field rought the house down on the
local forces. The fact that they are fighting the Zerg and the marines aren’t is painfully obvious, so Duke
had the local troops arrested and shipped off-planet. He wants the place defenseless. Isn’t it obvious? If
you really want to help the locals, follow me.”
Mike shook his head. “And if I refuse?”
“I’ll run you off the road and drag you off,” crackled the comm link. “Jeez, you drive like someone’s
grandmother.”
With that Kerrigan pulled her Vulture ahead and took a quick left. Liberty followed, suddenly painfully
aware that he took the corners much too wide.
They headed for a district full of warehouses, some of them now nothing more than empty husks.
Kerrigan’s Vulture slipped into the open door of one of them. Mike pulled his inside as well, and
Kerrigan ran down the door behind him.
“Bumping me like that was pretty dangerous,” Mike said, dismounting from the Vulture. “You must think
yourself a pretty good driver.”
“I am. I’malso very good with knives. And guns, too. You steal that?” she asked, looking at the bike.
“Got it from a friend.”
“Your friend is hard on his equipment. This is a safe house. There’s one more thing before we go on.”
Before Mike could react, Kerrigan snaked out a hand and grabbed his press tags. With a single smooth
motion she tossed them in the air, pulled a hand-held laser, and fried the tags at the top of their arc. The
melted remains landed with a soddensplot on the concrete floor.
“We think the press tags can be traced. That would explain why bad things happened to the guy with
your original tags. Eventually they’ll figure out that they left a reporter alive, and they’ll come after you
then. Now come back here. I have to set up some equipment.”
She turned, leaving Mike sputtering. She started moving some equipment in the back.
“Look, you know you can’t trust Duke’s forces right now, so will you listen to my side, at least?” She
bent over to check some plugs.
Mike recognized the equipment. “That’s a full holo setup.”
“State of the art,” Kerrigan said with a smile. “My commander has been fortunate enough to get the
best.”
“The best indeed, if he can afford to keep his own telepaths.”
Kerrigan froze for only a fraction of a second, but enough to make Mike smile. “Yeah, well,” she said. “I
don’t do enough to hidethat, do I?”
“I was willing to buy your being a big fan of mine,” Mike said, “but justhappening to find me while I was
coming into the city, well, that was a bittoo much to believe. I thought that only Confederate Marine
ghost-troopers were telepaths.”
“Well, I did that job once. Got tired of it and left.”
“I don’t need to be a telepath to know there’s more to the story than that.” Mike shrugged in a
disarming way, then added, “It’s not a job you retire from. I also thought that telepaths had inhibitors on
them to protect us normal folk.”
“It’s the other way around,” said Kerrigan, a taste of bitterness in her voice. “The inhibitors also keep
your nasty little thoughts out ofmy mind. It’s tough when you know everyone around you is untrustworthy
at some level.” She looked hard at Mike, her green eyes flashing. “The bathroom’s in the back corner.
No, it doesn’t have a window you can sneak out of. I don’t want to shoot your knees out to keep you
here, but you know I will.”