Tuppence nodded.

"That's what we're after her for. You know old man Rysdale?"

Albert shook his head.

"Peter B. Rysdale, the oil king?"

"It seems sort of familiar to me."

"The sparklers belonged to him. Finest collection of emeralds in the
world. Worth a million dollars!"

"Lumme!" came ecstatically from Albert. "It sounds more like the
pictures every minute."

Tuppence smiled, gratified at the success of her efforts.

"We haven't exactly proved it yet. But we're after her. And"--she
produced a long-drawn-out wink--"I guess she won't get away with the
goods this time."

Albert uttered another ejaculation indicative of delight.

"Mind you, sonny, not a word of this," said Tuppence suddenly. "I guess
I oughtn't to have put you wise, but in the States we know a real smart
lad when we see one."

"I'll not breathe a word," protested Albert eagerly. "Ain't there
anything I could do? A bit of shadowing, maybe, or such like?"

Tuppence affected to consider, then shook her head.

"Not at the moment, but I'll bear you in mind, son. What's this about
the girl you say is leaving?"

"Annie? Regular turn up, they 'ad. As Annie said, servants is some one
nowadays, and to be treated accordingly, and, what with her passing the
word round, she won't find it so easy to get another."

"Won't she?" said Tuppence thoughtfully. "I wonder----"

An idea was dawning in her brain. She thought a minute or two, then
tapped Albert on the shoulder.

"See here, son, my brain's got busy. How would it be if you mentioned
that you'd got a young cousin, or a friend of yours had, that might suit
the place. You get me?"

"I'm there," said Albert instantly. "You leave it to me, miss, and I'll
fix the whole thing up in two ticks."

"Some lad!" commented Tuppence, with a nod of approval. "You might say
that the young woman could come in right away. You let me know, and if
it's O.K. I'll be round to-morrow at eleven o'clock."

"Where am I to let you know to?"

"Ritz," replied Tuppence laconically. "Name of Cowley."

Albert eyed her enviously.

"It must be a good job, this tec business."

"It sure is," drawled Tuppence, "especially when old man Rysdale backs
the bill. But don't fret, son. If this goes well, you shall come in on
the ground floor."

With which promise she took leave of her new ally, and walked briskly
away from South Audley Mansions, well pleased with her morning's work.

But there was no time to be lost. She went straight back to the Ritz and
wrote a few brief words to Mr. Carter. Having dispatched this, and Tommy
not having yet returned--which did not surprise her--she started off
on a shopping expedition which, with an interval for tea and assorted
creamy cakes, occupied her until well after six o'clock, and she
returned to the hotel jaded, but satisfied with her purchases. Starting
with a cheap clothing store, and passing through one or two second-hand
establishments, she had finished the day at a well-known hairdresser's.
Now, in the seclusion of her bedroom, she unwrapped that final purchase.
Five minutes later she smiled contentedly at her reflection in the
glass. With an actress's pencil she had slightly altered the line of her
eyebrows, and that, taken in conjunction with the new luxuriant growth
of fair hair above, so changed her appearance that she felt confident
that even if she came face to face with Whittington he would not
recognize her. She would wear elevators in her shoes, and the cap and
apron would be an even more valuable disguise. From hospital experience
she knew only too well that a nurse out of uniform is frequently
unrecognized by her patients.

"Yes," said Tuppence aloud, nodding at the pert reflection in the glass,
"you'll do." She then resumed her normal appearance.

Dinner was a solitary meal. Tuppence was rather surprised at Tommy's
non-return. Julius, too, was absent--but that to the girl's mind was
more easily explained. His "hustling" activities were not confined
to London, and his abrupt appearances and disappearances were fully
accepted by the Young Adventurers as part of the day's work. It
was quite on the cards that Julius P. Hersheimmer had left for
Constantinople at a moment's notice if he fancied that a clue to his
cousin's disappearance was to be found there. The energetic young
man had succeeded in making the lives of several Scotland Yard men
unbearable to them, and the telephone girls at the Admiralty had learned
to know and dread the familiar "Hullo!" He had spent three hours in
Paris hustling the Prefecture, and had returned from there imbued with
the idea, possibly inspired by a weary French official, that the true
clue to the mystery was to be found in Ireland.

"I dare say he's dashed off there now," thought Tuppence. "All very
well, but this is very dull for ME! Here I am bursting with news, and
absolutely no one to tell it to! Tommy might have wired, or something. I
wonder where he is. Anyway, he can't have 'lost the trail' as they say.
That reminds me----" And Miss Cowley broke off in her meditations, and
summoned a small boy.

Ten minutes later the lady was ensconced comfortably on her bed,
smoking cigarettes and deep in the perusal of Garnaby Williams, the Boy
Detective, which, with other threepenny works of lurid fiction, she had
sent out to purchase. She felt, and rightly, that before the strain
of attempting further intercourse with Albert, it would be as well to
fortify herself with a good supply of local colour.

The morning brought a note from Mr. Carter:

"DEAR MISS TUPPENCE,

"You have made a splendid start, and I congratulate you. I feel, though,
that I should like to point out to you once more the risks you are
running, especially if you pursue the course you indicate. Those people
are absolutely desperate and incapable of either mercy or pity. I feel
that you probably underestimate the danger, and therefore warn you
again that I can promise you no protection. You have given us valuable
information, and if you choose to withdraw now no one could blame you.
At any rate, think the matter over well before you decide.

"If, in spite of my warnings, you make up your mind to go through with
it, you will find everything arranged. You have lived for two years with
Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly, and Mrs. Vandemeyer can apply to
her for a reference.

"May I be permitted a word or two of advice? Stick as near to the truth
as possible--it minimizes the danger of 'slips.' I suggest that you
should represent yourself to be what you are, a former V.A.D., who has
chosen domestic service as a profession. There are many such at the
present time. That explains away any incongruities of voice or manner
which otherwise might awaken suspicion.

"Whichever way you decide, good luck to you.

"Your sincere friend,

"MR. CARTER."


Tuppence's spirits rose mercurially. Mr. Carter's warnings passed
unheeded. The young lady had far too much confidence in herself to pay
any heed to them.

With some reluctance she abandoned the interesting part she had sketched
out for herself. Although she had no doubts of her own powers to sustain
a role indefinitely, she had too much common sense not to recognize the
force of Mr. Carter's arguments.

There was still no word or message from Tommy, but the morning post
brought a somewhat dirty postcard with the words: "It's O.K." scrawled
upon it.

At ten-thirty Tuppence surveyed with pride a slightly battered tin trunk
containing her new possessions. It was artistically corded. It was with
a slight blush that she rang the bell and ordered it to be placed in a
taxi. She drove to Paddington, and left the box in the cloak room.
She then repaired with a handbag to the fastnesses of the ladies'
waiting-room. Ten minutes later a metamorphosed Tuppence walked demurely
out of the station and entered a bus.

It was a few minutes past eleven when Tuppence again entered the hall
of South Audley Mansions. Albert was on the look-out, attending to his
duties in a somewhat desultory fashion. He did not immediately recognize
Tuppence. When he did, his admiration was unbounded.

"Blest if I'd have known you! That rig-out's top-hole."

"Glad you like it, Albert," replied Tuppence modestly. "By the way, am I
your cousin, or am I not?"

"Your voice too," cried the delighted boy. "It's as English as anything!
No, I said as a friend of mine knew a young gal. Annie wasn't best
pleased. She's stopped on till to-day--to oblige, SHE said, but really
it's so as to put you against the place."

"Nice girl," said Tuppence.

Albert suspected no irony.

"She's style about her, and keeps her silver a treat--but, my word,
ain't she got a temper. Are you going up now, miss? Step inside the
lift. No. 20 did you say?" And he winked.

Tuppence quelled him with a stern glance, and stepped inside.

As she rang the bell of No. 20 she was conscious of Albert's eyes slowly
descending beneath the level of the floor.

A smart young woman opened the door.

"I've come about the place," said Tuppence.

"It's a rotten place," said the young woman without hesitation. "Regular
old cat--always interfering. Accused me of tampering with her letters.
Me! The flap was half undone anyway. There's never anything in the
waste-paper basket--she burns everything. She's a wrong 'un, that's what
she is. Swell clothes, but no class. Cook knows something about her--but
she won't tell--scared to death of her. And suspicious! She's on to you
in a minute if you as much as speak to a fellow. I can tell you----"

But what more Annie could tell, Tuppence was never destined to learn,
for at that moment a clear voice with a peculiarly steely ring to it
called:

"Annie!"

The smart young woman jumped as if she had been shot.

"Yes, ma'am."

"Who are you talking to?"

"It's a young woman about the situation, ma'am."

"Show her in then. At once."

"Yes, ma'am."

Tuppence was ushered into a room on the right of the long passage. A
woman was standing by the fireplace. She was no longer in her first
youth, and the beauty she undeniably possessed was hardened and
coarsened. In her youth she must have been dazzling. Her pale gold hair,
owing a slight assistance to art, was coiled low on her neck, her eyes,
of a piercing electric blue, seemed to possess a faculty of boring into
the very soul of the person she was looking at. Her exquisite figure was
enhanced by a wonderful gown of indigo charmeuse. And yet, despite her
swaying grace, and the almost ethereal beauty of her face, you felt
instinctively the presence of something hard and menacing, a kind of
metallic strength that found expression in the tones of her voice and in
that gimlet-like quality of her eyes.

For the first time Tuppence felt afraid. She had not feared Whittington,
but this woman was different. As if fascinated, she watched the long
cruel line of the red curving mouth, and again she felt that sensation
of panic pass over her. Her usual self-confidence deserted her. Vaguely
she felt that deceiving this woman would be very different to deceiving
Whittington. Mr. Carter's warning recurred to her mind. Here, indeed,
she might expect no mercy.

Fighting down that instinct of panic which urged her to turn tail and
run without further delay, Tuppence returned the lady's gaze firmly and
respectfully.

As though that first scrutiny had been satisfactory, Mrs. Vandemeyer
motioned to a chair.

"You can sit down. How did you hear I wanted a house-parlourmaid?"


"Through a friend who knows the lift boy here. He thought the place
might suit me."

Again that basilisk glance seemed to pierce her through.

"You speak like an educated girl?"

Glibly enough, Tuppence ran through her imaginary career on the lines
suggested by Mr. Carter. It seemed to her, as she did so, that the
tension of Mrs. Vandemeyer's attitude relaxed.

"I see," she remarked at length. "Is there anyone I can write to for a
reference?"

"I lived last with a Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly. I was with
her two years."

"And then you thought you would get more money by coming to London,
I suppose? Well, it doesn't matter to me. I will give you
L50--L60--whatever you want. You can come in at once?"

"Yes, ma'am. To-day, if you like. My box is at Paddington."

"Go and fetch it in a taxi, then. It's an easy place. I am out a good
deal. By the way, what's your name?"

"Prudence Cooper, ma'am."

"Very well, Prudence. Go away and fetch your box. I shall be out to
lunch. The cook will show you where everything is."

"Thank you, ma'am."

Tuppence withdrew. The smart Annie was not in evidence. In the hall
below a magnificent hall porter had relegated Albert to the background.
Tuppence did not even glance at him as she passed meekly out.

The adventure had begun, but she felt less elated than she had done
earlier in the morning. It crossed her mind that if the unknown Jane
Finn had fallen into the hands of Mrs. Vandemeyer, it was likely to have
gone hard with her.



CHAPTER X. ENTER SIR JAMES PEEL EDGERTON

TUPPENCE betrayed no awkwardness in her new duties. The daughters of the
archdeacon were well grounded in household tasks. They were also experts
in training a "raw girl," the inevitable result being that the raw girl,
once trained, departed elsewhere where her newly acquired knowledge
commanded a more substantial remuneration than the archdeacon's meagre
purse allowed.

Tuppence had therefore very little fear of proving inefficient. Mrs.
Vandemeyer's cook puzzled her. She evidently went in deadly terror of
her mistress. The girl thought it probable that the other woman had some
hold over her. For the rest, she cooked like a chef, as Tuppence had
an opportunity of judging that evening. Mrs. Vandemeyer was expecting a
guest to dinner, and Tuppence accordingly laid the beautifully polished
table for two. She was a little exercised in her own mind as to this
visitor. It was highly possible that it might prove to be Whittington.
Although she felt fairly confident that he would not recognize her, yet
she would have been better pleased had the guest proved to be a total
stranger. However, there was nothing for it but to hope for the best.

At a few minutes past eight the front door bell rang, and Tuppence went
to answer it with some inward trepidation. She was relieved to see that
the visitor was the second of the two men whom Tommy had taken upon
himself to follow.

He gave his name as Count Stepanov. Tuppence announced him, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer rose from her seat on a low divan with a quick murmur of
pleasure.

"It is delightful to see you, Boris Ivanovitch," she said.

"And you, madame!" He bowed low over her hand.

Tuppence returned to the kitchen.

"Count Stepanov, or some such," she remarked, and affecting a frank and
unvarnished curiosity: "Who's he?"

"A Russian gentleman, I believe."

"Come here much?"

"Once in a while. What d'you want to know for?"

"Fancied he might be sweet on the missus, that's all," explained the
girl, adding with an appearance of sulkiness: "How you do take one up!"

"I'm not quite easy in my mind about the souffle," explained the other.

"You know something," thought Tuppence to herself, but aloud she only
said: "Going to dish up now? Right-o."

Whilst waiting at table, Tuppence listened closely to all that was said.
She remembered that this was one of the men Tommy was shadowing when she
had last seen him. Already, although she would hardly admit it, she was
becoming uneasy about her partner. Where was he? Why had no word of any
kind come from him? She had arranged before leaving the Ritz to have
all letters or messages sent on at once by special messenger to a small
stationer's shop near at hand where Albert was to call in frequently.
True, it was only yesterday morning that she had parted from Tommy, and
she told herself that any anxiety on his behalf would be absurd. Still,
it was strange that he had sent no word of any kind.

But, listen as she might, the conversation presented no clue. Boris and
Mrs. Vandemeyer talked on purely indifferent subjects: plays they had
seen, new dances, and the latest society gossip. After dinner they
repaired to the small boudoir where Mrs. Vandemeyer, stretched on the
divan, looked more wickedly beautiful than ever. Tuppence brought in the
coffee and liqueurs and unwillingly retired. As she did so, she heard
Boris say:

"New, isn't she?"

"She came in to-day. The other was a fiend. This girl seems all right.
She waits well."

Tuppence lingered a moment longer by the door which she had carefully
neglected to close, and heard him say:

"Quite safe, I suppose?"

"Really, Boris, you are absurdly suspicious. I believe she's the cousin
of the hall porter, or something of the kind. And nobody even dreams
that I have any connection with our--mutual friend, Mr. Brown."

"For heaven's sake, be careful, Rita. That door isn't shut."

"Well, shut it then," laughed the woman.

Tuppence removed herself speedily.

She dared not absent herself longer from the back premises, but she
cleared away and washed up with a breathless speed acquired in hospital.
Then she slipped quietly back to the boudoir door. The cook, more
leisurely, was still busy in the kitchen and, if she missed the other,
would only suppose her to be turning down the beds.

Alas! The conversation inside was being carried on in too low a tone
to permit of her hearing anything of it. She dared not reopen the
door, however gently. Mrs. Vandemeyer was sitting almost facing it, and
Tuppence respected her mistress's lynx-eyed powers of observation.

Nevertheless, she felt she would give a good deal to overhear what was
going on. Possibly, if anything unforeseen had happened, she might get
news of Tommy. For some moments she reflected desperately, then her
face brightened. She went quickly along the passage to Mrs. Vandemeyer's
bedroom, which had long French windows leading on to a balcony that ran
the length of the flat. Slipping quickly through the window, Tuppence
crept noiselessly along till she reached the boudoir window. As she
had thought it stood a little ajar, and the voices within were plainly
audible.

Tuppence listened attentively, but there was no mention of anything
that could be twisted to apply to Tommy. Mrs. Vandemeyer and the Russian
seemed to be at variance over some matter, and finally the latter
exclaimed bitterly:

"With your persistent recklessness, you will end by ruining us!"

"Bah!" laughed the woman. "Notoriety of the right kind is the best way
of disarming suspicion. You will realize that one of these days--perhaps
sooner than you think!"

"In the meantime, you are going about everywhere with Peel Edgerton.
Not only is he, perhaps, the most celebrated K.C. in England, but his
special hobby is criminology! It is madness!"

"I know that his eloquence has saved untold men from the gallows," said
Mrs. Vandemeyer calmly. "What of it? I may need his assistance in that
line myself some day. If so, how fortunate to have such a friend at
court--or perhaps it would be more to the point to say IN court."

Boris got up and began striding up and down. He was very excited.

"You are a clever woman, Rita; but you are also a fool! Be guided by me,
and give up Peel Edgerton."

Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head gently.

"I think not."

"You refuse?" There was an ugly ring in the Russian's voice.

"I do."

"Then, by Heaven," snarled the Russian, "we will see----" But Mrs.
Vandemeyer also rose to her feet, her eyes flashing.

"You forget, Boris," she said. "I am accountable to no one. I take my
orders only from--Mr. Brown."

The other threw up his hands in despair.

"You are impossible," he muttered. "Impossible! Already it may be too
late. They say Peel Edgerton can SMELL a criminal! How do we know what
is at the bottom of his sudden interest in you? Perhaps even now his
suspicions are aroused. He guesses----"

Mrs. Vandemeyer eyed him scornfully.

"Reassure yourself, my dear Boris. He suspects nothing. With less than
your usual chivalry, you seem to forget that I am commonly accounted a
beautiful woman. I assure you that is all that interests Peel Edgerton."

Boris shook his head doubtfully.

"He has studied crime as no other man in this kingdom has studied it. Do
you fancy that you can deceive him?"

Mrs. Vandemeyer's eyes narrowed.

"If he is all that you say--it would amuse me to try!"

"Good heavens, Rita----"

"Besides," added Mrs. Vandemeyer, "he is extremely rich. I am not one
who despises money. The 'sinews of war,' you know, Boris!"

"Money--money! That is always the danger with you, Rita. I believe you
would sell your soul for money. I believe----" He paused, then in a
low, sinister voice he said slowly: "Sometimes I believe that you would
sell--us!"

Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled and shrugged her shoulders.

"The price, at any rate, would have to be enormous," she said lightly.
"It would be beyond the power of anyone but a millionaire to pay."

"Ah!" snarled the Russian. "You see, I was right!"

"My dear Boris, can you not take a joke?"

"Was it a joke?"

"Of course."

"Then all I can say is that your ideas of humour are peculiar, my dear
Rita."

Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled.

"Let us not quarrel, Boris. Touch the bell. We will have some drinks."

Tuppence beat a hasty retreat. She paused a moment to survey herself in
Mrs. Vandemeyer's long glass, and be sure that nothing was amiss with
her appearance. Then she answered the bell demurely.

The conversation that she had overheard, although interesting in that
it proved beyond doubt the complicity of both Rita and Boris, threw very
little light on the present preoccupations. The name of Jane Finn had
not even been mentioned.

The following morning a few brief words with Albert informed her that
nothing was waiting for her at the stationer's. It seemed incredible
that Tommy, if all was well with him, should not send any word to her.
A cold hand seemed to close round her heart.... Supposing... She choked
her fears down bravely. It was no good worrying. But she leapt at a
chance offered her by Mrs. Vandemeyer.

"What day do you usually go out, Prudence?"

"Friday's my usual day, ma'am."

Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted her eyebrows.

"And to-day is Friday! But I suppose you hardly wish to go out to-day,
as you only came yesterday."

"I was thinking of asking you if I might, ma'am."

Mrs. Vandemeyer looked at her a minute longer, and then smiled.

"I wish Count Stepanov could hear you. He made a suggestion about
you last night." Her smile broadened, catlike. "Your request is
very--typical. I am satisfied. You do not understand all this--but
you can go out to-day. It makes no difference to me, as I shall not be
dining at home."

"Thank you, ma'am."

Tuppence felt a sensation of relief once she was out of the other's
presence. Once again she admitted to herself that she was afraid,
horribly afraid, of the beautiful woman with the cruel eyes.

In the midst of a final desultory polishing of her silver, Tuppence was
disturbed by the ringing of the front door bell, and went to answer it.
This time the visitor was neither Whittington nor Boris, but a man of
striking appearance.

Just a shade over average height, he nevertheless conveyed the
impression of a big man. His face, clean-shaven and exquisitely mobile,
was stamped with an expression of power and force far beyond the
ordinary. Magnetism seemed to radiate from him.

Tuppence was undecided for the moment whether to put him down as an
actor or a lawyer, but her doubts were soon solved as he gave her his
name: Sir James Peel Edgerton.

She looked at him with renewed interest. This, then, was the famous K.C.
whose name was familiar all over England. She had heard it said that he
might one day be Prime Minister. He was known to have refused office in
the interests of his profession, preferring to remain a simple Member
for a Scotch constituency.

Tuppence went back to her pantry thoughtfully. The great man had
impressed her. She understood Boris's agitation. Peel Edgerton would not
be an easy man to deceive.

In about a quarter of an hour the bell rang, and Tuppence repaired to
the hall to show the visitor out. He had given her a piercing glance
before. Now, as she handed him his hat and stick, she was conscious of
his eyes raking her through. As she opened the door and stood aside to
let him pass out, he stopped in the doorway.

"Not been doing this long, eh?"

Tuppence raised her eyes, astonished. She read in his glance kindliness,
and something else more difficult to fathom.

He nodded as though she had answered.

"V.A.D. and hard up, I suppose?"

"Did Mrs. Vandemeyer tell you that?" asked Tuppence suspiciously.

"No, child. The look of you told me. Good place here?"

"Very good, thank you, sir."

"Ah, but there are plenty of good places nowadays. And a change does no
harm sometimes."

"Do you mean----?" began Tuppence.

But Sir James was already on the topmost stair. He looked back with his
kindly, shrewd glance.

"Just a hint," he said. "That's all."

Tuppence went back to the pantry more thoughtful than ever.



CHAPTER XI. JULIUS TELLS A STORY

DRESSED appropriately, Tuppence duly sallied forth for her "afternoon
out." Albert was in temporary abeyance, but Tuppence went herself to the
stationer's to make quite sure that nothing had come for her. Satisfied
on this point, she made her way to the Ritz. On inquiry she learnt that
Tommy had not yet returned. It was the answer she had expected, but it
was another nail in the coffin of her hopes. She resolved to appeal to
Mr. Carter, telling him when and where Tommy had started on his quest,
and asking him to do something to trace him. The prospect of his
aid revived her mercurial spirits, and she next inquired for Julius
Hersheimmer. The reply she got was to the effect that he had returned
about half an hour ago, but had gone out immediately.

Tuppence's spirits revived still more. It would be something to see
Julius. Perhaps he could devise some plan for finding out what
had become of Tommy. She wrote her note to Mr. Carter in Julius's
sitting-room, and was just addressing the envelope when the door burst
open.

"What the hell----" began Julius, but checked himself abruptly. "I beg
your pardon, Miss Tuppence. Those fools down at the office would have it
that Beresford wasn't here any longer--hadn't been here since Wednesday.
Is that so?"

Tuppence nodded.

"You don't know where he is?" she asked faintly.

"I? How should I know? I haven't had one darned word from him, though I
wired him yesterday morning."

"I expect your wire's at the office unopened."

"But where is he?"

"I don't know. I hoped you might."

"I tell you I haven't had one darned word from him since we parted at
the depot on Wednesday."

"What depot?"

"Waterloo. Your London and South Western road."

"Waterloo?" frowned Tuppence.

"Why, yes. Didn't he tell you?"

"I haven't seen him either," replied Tuppence impatiently. "Go on about
Waterloo. What were you doing there?"

"He gave me a call. Over the phone. Told me to get a move on, and
hustle. Said he was trailing two crooks."

"Oh!" said Tuppence, her eyes opening. "I see. Go on."

"I hurried along right away. Beresford was there. He pointed out the
crooks. The big one was mine, the guy you bluffed. Tommy shoved a ticket
into my hand and told me to get aboard the cars. He was going to sleuth
the other crook." Julius paused. "I thought for sure you'd know all
this."

"Julius," said Tuppence firmly, "stop walking up and down. It makes me
giddy. Sit down in that armchair, and tell me the whole story with as
few fancy turns of speech as possible."

Mr. Hersheimmer obeyed.

"Sure," he said. "Where shall I begin?"

"Where you left off. At Waterloo."

"Well," began Julius, "I got into one of your dear old-fashioned
first-class British compartments. The train was just off. First thing I
knew a guard came along and informed me mighty politely that I wasn't
in a smoking-carriage. I handed him out half a dollar, and that settled
that. I did a bit of prospecting along the corridor to the next coach.
Whittington was there right enough. When I saw the skunk, with his big
sleek fat face, and thought of poor little Jane in his clutches, I felt
real mad that I hadn't got a gun with me. I'd have tickled him up some.

"We got to Bournemouth all right. Whittington took a cab and gave the
name of an hotel. I did likewise, and we drove up within three minutes
of each other. He hired a room, and I hired one too. So far it was all
plain sailing. He hadn't the remotest notion that anyone was on to him.
Well, he just sat around in the hotel lounge, reading the papers and so
on, till it was time for dinner. He didn't hurry any over that either.

"I began to think that there was nothing doing, that he'd just come on
the trip for his health, but I remembered that he hadn't changed for
dinner, though it was by way of being a slap-up hotel, so it seemed
likely enough that he'd be going out on his real business afterwards.

"Sure enough, about nine o'clock, so he did. Took a car across the
town--mighty pretty place by the way, I guess I'll take Jane there for
a spell when I find her--and then paid it off and struck out along those
pine-woods on the top of the cliff. I was there too, you understand.
We walked, maybe, for half an hour. There's a lot of villas all the way
along, but by degrees they seemed to get more and more thinned out, and
in the end we got to one that seemed the last of the bunch. Big house it
was, with a lot of piny grounds around it.

"It was a pretty black night, and the carriage drive up to the house was
dark as pitch. I could hear him ahead, though I couldn't see him. I
had to walk carefully in case he might get on to it that he was being
followed. I turned a curve and I was just in time to see him ring the
bell and get admitted to the house. I just stopped where I was. It was
beginning to rain, and I was soon pretty near soaked through. Also, it
was almighty cold.

"Whittington didn't come out again, and by and by I got kind of restive,
and began to mouch around. All the ground floor windows were shuttered
tight, but upstairs, on the first floor (it was a two-storied house) I
noticed a window with a light burning and the curtains not drawn.

"Now, just opposite to that window, there was a tree growing. It was
about thirty foot away from the house, maybe, and I sort of got it into
my head that, if I climbed up that tree, I'd very likely be able to see
into that room. Of course, I knew there was no reason why Whittington
should be in that room rather than in any other--less reason, in fact,
for the betting would be on his being in one of the reception-rooms
downstairs. But I guess I'd got the hump from standing so long in the
rain, and anything seemed better than going on doing nothing. So I
started up.

"It wasn't so easy, by a long chalk! The rain had made the boughs mighty
slippery, and it was all I could do to keep a foothold, but bit by bit I
managed it, until at last there I was level with the window.

"But then I was disappointed. I was too far to the left. I could only
see sideways into the room. A bit of curtain, and a yard of wallpaper
was all I could command. Well, that wasn't any manner of good to me, but
just as I was going to give it up, and climb down ignominiously, some
one inside moved and threw his shadow on my little bit of wall--and, by
gum, it was Whittington!

"After that, my blood was up. I'd just got to get a look into that
room. It was up to me to figure out how. I noticed that there was a long
branch running out from the tree in the right direction. If I could only
swarm about half-way along it, the proposition would be solved. But it
was mighty uncertain whether it would bear my weight. I decided I'd
just got to risk that, and I started. Very cautiously, inch by inch, I
crawled along. The bough creaked and swayed in a nasty fashion, and it
didn't do to think of the drop below, but at last I got safely to where
I wanted to be.

"The room was medium-sized, furnished in a kind of bare hygienic way.
There was a table with a lamp on it in the middle of the room, and
sitting at that table, facing towards me, was Whittington right enough.
He was talking to a woman dressed as a hospital nurse. She was sitting
with her back to me, so I couldn't see her face. Although the blinds
were up, the window itself was shut, so I couldn't catch a word of what
they said. Whittington seemed to be doing all the talking, and the nurse
just listened. Now and then she nodded, and sometimes she'd shake
her head, as though she were answering questions. He seemed very
emphatic--once or twice he beat with his fist on the table. The rain had
stopped now, and the sky was clearing in that sudden way it does.

"Presently, he seemed to get to the end of what he was saying. He got
up, and so did she. He looked towards the window and asked something--I
guess it was whether it was raining. Anyway, she came right across and
looked out. Just then the moon came out from behind the clouds. I
was scared the woman would catch sight of me, for I was full in the
moonlight. I tried to move back a bit. The jerk I gave was too much for
that rotten old branch. With an almighty crash, down it came, and Julius
P. Hersheimmer with it!"

"Oh, Julius," breathed Tuppence, "how exciting! Go on."

"Well, luckily for me, I pitched down into a good soft bed of earth--but
it put me out of action for the time, sure enough. The next thing I
knew, I was lying in bed with a hospital nurse (not Whittington's one)
on one side of me, and a little black-bearded man with gold glasses,
and medical man written all over him, on the other. He rubbed his hands
together, and raised his eyebrows as I stared at him. 'Ah!' he said. 'So
our young friend is coming round again. Capital. Capital.'

"I did the usual stunt. Said: 'What's happened?' And 'Where am I?' But
I knew the answer to the last well enough. There's no moss growing on
my brain. 'I think that'll do for the present, sister,' said the little
man, and the nurse left the room in a sort of brisk well-trained way.
But I caught her handing me out a look of deep curiosity as she passed
through the door.

"That look of hers gave me an idea. 'Now then, doc,' I said, and tried
to sit up in bed, but my right foot gave me a nasty twinge as I did so.
'A slight sprain,' explained the doctor. 'Nothing serious. You'll be
about again in a couple of days.'"

"I noticed you walked lame," interpolated Tuppence.

Julius nodded, and continued:

"'How did it happen?' I asked again. He replied dryly. 'You fell, with
a considerable portion of one of my trees, into one of my newly planted
flower-beds.'

"I liked the man. He seemed to have a sense of humour. I felt sure that
he, at least, was plumb straight. 'Sure, doc,' I said, 'I'm sorry about
the tree, and I guess the new bulbs will be on me. But perhaps you'd
like to know what I was doing in your garden?' 'I think the facts do
call for an explanation,' he replied. 'Well, to begin with, I wasn't
after the spoons.'"He smiled. 'My first theory. But I soon altered my mind. By the way,
you are an American, are you not?' I told him my name. 'And you?' 'I am
Dr. Hall, and this, as you doubtless know, is my private nursing home.'

"I didn't know, but I wasn't going to put him wise. I was just thankful
for the information. I liked the man, and I felt he was straight, but
I wasn't going to give him the whole story. For one thing he probably
wouldn't have believed it.

"I made up my mind in a flash. 'Why, doctor,' I said, 'I guess I feel
an almighty fool, but I owe it to you to let you know that it wasn't
the Bill Sikes business I was up to.' Then I went on and mumbled out
something about a girl. I trotted out the stern guardian business, and a
nervous breakdown, and finally explained that I had fancied I recognized
her among the patients at the home, hence my nocturnal adventures. I
guess it was just the kind of story he was expecting. 'Quite a romance,'
he said genially, when I'd finished. 'Now, doc,' I went on, 'will you
be frank with me? Have you here now, or have you had here at any time,
a young girl called Jane Finn?' He repeated the name thoughtfully. 'Jane
Finn?' he said. 'No.'

"I was chagrined, and I guess I showed it. 'You are sure?' 'Quite sure,
Mr. Hersheimmer. It is an uncommon name, and I should not have been
likely to forget it.'

"Well, that was flat. It laid me out for a space. I'd kind of hoped
my search was at an end. 'That's that,' I said at last. 'Now, there's
another matter. When I was hugging that darned branch I thought I
recognized an old friend of mine talking to one of your nurses.' I
purposely didn't mention any name because, of course, Whittington might
be calling himself something quite different down here, but the doctor
answered at once. 'Mr. Whittington, perhaps?' 'That's the fellow,' I
replied. 'What's he doing down here? Don't tell me HIS nerves are out of
order?'

"Dr. Hall laughed. 'No. He came down to see one of my nurses, Nurse
Edith, who is a niece of his.' 'Why, fancy that!' I exclaimed. 'Is he
still here?' 'No, he went back to town almost immediately.' 'What a
pity!' I ejaculated. 'But perhaps I could speak to his niece--Nurse
Edith, did you say her name was?'

"But the doctor shook his head. 'I'm afraid that, too, is impossible.
Nurse Edith left with a patient to-night also.' 'I seem to be real
unlucky,' I remarked. 'Have you Mr. Whittington's address in town?
I guess I'd like to look him up when I get back.' 'I don't know his
address. I can write to Nurse Edith for it if you like.' I thanked him.
'Don't say who it is wants it. I'd like to give him a little surprise.'

"That was about all I could do for the moment. Of course, if the girl
was really Whittington's niece, she might be too cute to fall into the
trap, but it was worth trying. Next thing I did was to write out a wire
to Beresford saying where I was, and that I was laid up with a sprained
foot, and telling him to come down if he wasn't busy. I had to be
guarded in what I said. However, I didn't hear from him, and my foot
soon got all right. It was only ricked, not really sprained, so to-day I
said good-bye to the little doctor chap, asked him to send me word if
he heard from Nurse Edith, and came right away back to town. Say, Miss
Tuppence, you're looking mighty pale!"

"It's Tommy," said Tuppence. "What can have happened to him?"

"Buck up, I guess he's all right really. Why shouldn't he be? See here,
it was a foreign-looking guy he went off after. Maybe they've gone
abroad--to Poland, or something like that?"

Tuppence shook her head.

"He couldn't without passports and things. Besides I've seen that man,
Boris Something, since. He dined with Mrs. Vandemeyer last night."

"Mrs. Who?"

"I forgot. Of course you don't know all that."

"I'm listening," said Julius, and gave vent to his favourite expression.
"Put me wise."

Tuppence thereupon related the events of the last two days. Julius's
astonishment and admiration were unbounded.

"Bully for you! Fancy you a menial. It just tickles me to death!" Then
he added seriously: "But say now, I don't like it, Miss Tuppence, I sure
don't. You're just as plucky as they make 'em, but I wish you'd keep
right out of this. These crooks we're up against would as soon croak a
girl as a man any day."

"Do you think I'm afraid?" said Tuppence indignantly, valiantly
repressing memories of the steely glitter in Mrs. Vandemeyer's eyes.

"I said before you were darned plucky. But that doesn't alter facts."

"Oh, bother ME!" said Tuppence impatiently. "Let's think about what can
have happened to Tommy. I've written to Mr. Carter about it," she added,
and told him the gist of her letter.

Julius nodded gravely.

"I guess that's good as far as it goes. But it's for us to get busy and
do something."

"What can we do?" asked Tuppence, her spirits rising.

"I guess we'd better get on the track of Boris. You say he's been to
your place. Is he likely to come again?"

"He might. I really don't know."

"I see. Well, I guess I'd better buy a car, a slap-up one, dress as a
chauffeur and hang about outside. Then if Boris comes, you could make
some kind of signal, and I'd trail him. How's that?"

"Splendid, but he mightn't come for weeks."

"We'll have to chance that. I'm glad you like the plan." He rose.

"Where are you going?"

"To buy the car, of course," replied Julius, surprised. "What make do
you like? I guess you'll do some riding in it before we've finished."

"Oh," said Tuppence faintly, "I LIKE Rolls-Royces, but----"

"Sure," agreed Julius. "What you say goes. I'll get one."

"But you can't at once," cried Tuppence. "People wait ages sometimes."

"Little Julius doesn't," affirmed Mr. Hersheimmer. "Don't you worry any.
I'll be round in the car in half an hour."

Tuppence got up.

"You're awfully good, Julius. But I can't help feeling that it's rather
a forlorn hope. I'm really pinning my faith to Mr. Carter."

"Then I shouldn't."

"Why?"

"Just an idea of mine."

"Oh; but he must do something. There's no one else. By the way, I forgot
to tell you of a queer thing that happened this morning."

And she narrated her encounter with Sir James Peel Edgerton. Julius was
interested.

"What did the guy mean, do you think?" he asked.

"I don't quite know," said Tuppence meditatively. "But I think that, in
an ambiguous, legal, without prejudishish lawyer's way, he was trying to
warn me."

"Why should he?"

"I don't know," confessed Tuppence. "But he looked kind, and
simply awfully clever. I wouldn't mind going to him and telling him
everything."

Somewhat to her surprise, Julius negatived the idea sharply.

"See here," he said, "we don't want any lawyers mixed up in this. That
guy couldn't help us any."

"Well, I believe he could," reiterated Tuppence obstinately.

"Don't you think it. So long. I'll be back in half an hour."

Thirty-five minutes had elapsed when Julius returned. He took Tuppence
by the arm, and walked her to the window.

"There she is."

"Oh!" said Tuppence with a note of reverence in her voice, as she gazed
down at the enormous car.

"She's some pace-maker, I can tell you," said Julius complacently.

"How did you get it?" gasped Tuppence.

"She was just being sent home to some bigwig."

"Well?"

"I went round to his house," said Julius. "I said that I reckoned a car
like that was worth every penny of twenty thousand dollars. Then I told
him that it was worth just about fifty thousand dollars to me if he'd
get out."

"Well?" said Tuppence, intoxicated.

"Well," returned Julius, "he got out, that's all."



CHAPTER XII. A FRIEND IN NEED

FRIDAY and Saturday passed uneventfully. Tuppence had received a brief
answer to her appeal from Mr. Carter. In it he pointed out that the
Young Adventurers had undertaken the work at their own risk, and had
been fully warned of the dangers. If anything had happened to Tommy he
regretted it deeply, but he could do nothing.

This was cold comfort. Somehow, without Tommy, all the savour went out
of the adventure, and, for the first time, Tuppence felt doubtful of
success. While they had been together she had never questioned it for
a minute. Although she was accustomed to take the lead, and to pride
herself on her quick-wittedness, in reality she had relied upon Tommy
more than she realized at the time. There was something so eminently
sober and clear-headed about him, his common sense and soundness of
vision were so unvarying, that without him Tuppence felt much like a
rudderless ship. It was curious that Julius, who was undoubtedly much
cleverer than Tommy, did not give her the same feeling of support. She
had accused Tommy of being a pessimist, and it is certain that he
always saw the disadvantages and difficulties which she herself was
optimistically given to overlooking, but nevertheless she had really
relied a good deal on his judgment. He might be slow, but he was very
sure.

It seemed to the girl that, for the first time, she realized the
sinister character of the mission they had undertaken so lightheartedly.
It had begun like a page of romance. Now, shorn of its glamour, it
seemed to be turning to grim reality. Tommy--that was all that mattered.
Many times in the day Tuppence blinked the tears out of her eyes
resolutely. "Little fool," she would apostrophize herself, "don't
snivel. Of course you're fond of him. You've known him all your life.
But there's no need to be sentimental about it."

In the meantime, nothing more was seen of Boris. He did not come to the
flat, and Julius and the car waited in vain. Tuppence gave herself over
to new meditations. Whilst admitting the truth of Julius's objections,
she had nevertheless not entirely relinquished the idea of appealing to
Sir James Peel Edgerton. Indeed, she had gone so far as to look up his
address in the Red Book. Had he meant to warn her that day? If so, why?
Surely she was at least entitled to demand an explanation. He had looked
at her so kindly. Perhaps he might tell them something concerning Mrs.
Vandemeyer which might lead to a clue to Tommy's whereabouts.

Anyway, Tuppence decided, with her usual shake of the shoulders, it was
worth trying, and try it she would. Sunday was her afternoon out. She
would meet Julius, persuade him to her point of view, and they would
beard the lion in his den.

When the day arrived Julius needed a considerable amount of persuading,
but Tuppence held firm. "It can do no harm," was what she always came
back to. In the end Julius gave in, and they proceeded in the car to
Carlton House Terrace.

The door was opened by an irreproachable butler. Tuppence felt a little
nervous. After all, perhaps it WAS colossal cheek on her part. She
had decided not to ask if Sir James was "at home," but to adopt a more
personal attitude.

"Will you ask Sir James if I can see him for a few minutes? I have an
important message for him."

The butler retired, returning a moment or two later.

"Sir James will see you. Will you step this way?"

He ushered them into a room at the back of the house, furnished as a
library. The collection of books was a magnificent one, and Tuppence
noticed that all one wall was devoted to works on crime and criminology.
There were several deep-padded leather arm-chairs, and an old-fashioned
open hearth. In the window was a big roll-top desk strewn with papers at
which the master of the house was sitting.

He rose as they entered.

"You have a message for me? Ah"--he recognized Tuppence with a
smile--"it's you, is it? Brought a message from Mrs. Vandemeyer, I
suppose?"

"Not exactly," said Tuppence. "In fact, I'm afraid I only said that to
be quite sure of getting in. Oh, by the way, this is Mr. Hersheimmer,
Sir James Peel Edgerton."

"Pleased to meet you," said the American, shooting out a hand.

"Won't you both sit down?" asked Sir James. He drew forward two chairs.

"Sir James," said Tuppence, plunging boldly, "I dare say you will think
it is most awful cheek of me coming here like this. Because, of course,
it's nothing whatever to do with you, and then you're a very important
person, and of course Tommy and I are very unimportant." She paused for
breath.

"Tommy?" queried Sir James, looking across at the American.

"No, that's Julius," explained Tuppence. "I'm rather nervous, and that
makes me tell it badly. What I really want to know is what you meant by
what you said to me the other day? Did you mean to warn me against Mrs.
Vandemeyer? You did, didn't you?"

"My dear young lady, as far as I recollect I only mentioned that there
were equally good situations to be obtained elsewhere."

"Yes, I know. But it was a hint, wasn't it?"

"Well, perhaps it was," admitted Sir James gravely.

"Well, I want to know more. I want to know just WHY you gave me a hint."

Sir James smiled at her earnestness.

"Suppose the lady brings a libel action against me for defamation of
character?"

"Of course," said Tuppence. "I know lawyers are always dreadfully
careful. But can't we say 'without prejudice' first, and then say just
what we want to."

"Well," said Sir James, still smiling, "without prejudice, then, if I
had a young sister forced to earn her living, I should not like to see
her in Mrs. Vandemeyer's service. I felt it incumbent on me just to give
you a hint. It is no place for a young and inexperienced girl. That is
all I can tell you."

"I see," said Tuppence thoughtfully. "Thank you very much. But I'm not
REALLY inexperienced, you know. I knew perfectly that she was a bad lot
when I went there--as a matter of fact that's WHY I went----" She broke
off, seeing some bewilderment on the lawyer's face, and went on: "I
think perhaps I'd better tell you the whole story, Sir James. I've a
sort of feeling that you'd know in a minute if I didn't tell the truth,
and so you might as well know all about it from the beginning. What do
you think, Julius?"

"As you're bent on it, I'd go right ahead with the facts," replied the
American, who had so far sat in silence.

"Yes, tell me all about it," said Sir James. "I want to know who Tommy
is."

Thus encouraged Tuppence plunged into her tale, and the lawyer listened
with close attention.

"Very interesting," he said, when she finished. "A great deal of what
you tell me, child, is already known to me. I've had certain theories
of my own about this Jane Finn. You've done extraordinarily well so
far, but it's rather too bad of--what do you know him as?--Mr. Carter to
pitchfork you two young things into an affair of this kind. By the
way, where did Mr. Hersheimmer come in originally? You didn't make that
clear?"

Julius answered for himself.

"I'm Jane's first cousin," he explained, returning the lawyer's keen
gaze.

"Ah!"

"Oh, Sir James," broke out Tuppence, "what do you think has become of
Tommy?"

"H'm." The lawyer rose, and paced slowly up and down. "When you arrived,
young lady, I was just packing up my traps. Going to Scotland by the
night train for a few days' fishing. But there are different kinds of
fishing. I've a good mind to stay, and see if we can't get on the track
of that young chap."

"Oh!" Tuppence clasped her hands ecstatically.

"All the same, as I said before, it's too bad of--of Carter to set you
two babies on a job like this. Now, don't get offended, Miss--er----"

"Cowley. Prudence Cowley. But my friends call me Tuppence."

"Well, Miss Tuppence, then, as I'm certainly going to be a friend. Don't
be offended because I think you're young. Youth is a failing only too
easily outgrown. Now, about this young Tommy of yours----"

"Yes." Tuppence clasped her hands.

"Frankly, things look bad for him. He's been butting in somewhere where
he wasn't wanted. Not a doubt of it. But don't give up hope."

"And you really will help us? There, Julius! He didn't want me to come,"
she added by way of explanation.

"H'm," said the lawyer, favouring Julius with another keen glance. "And
why was that?"

"I reckoned it would be no good worrying you with a petty little
business like this."

"I see." He paused a moment. "This petty little business, as you call
it, bears directly on a very big business, bigger perhaps than either
you or Miss Tuppence know. If this boy is alive, he may have very
valuable information to give us. Therefore, we must find him."

"Yes, but how?" cried Tuppence. "I've tried to think of everything."

Sir James smiled.

"And yet there's one person quite near at hand who in all probability
knows where he is, or at all events where he is likely to be."

"Who is that?" asked Tuppence, puzzled.

"Mrs. Vandemeyer."

"Yes, but she'd never tell us."

"Ah, that is where I come in. I think it quite likely that I shall be
able to make Mrs. Vandemeyer tell me what I want to know."

"How?" demanded Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide.

"Oh, just by asking her questions," replied Sir James easily. "That's
the way we do it, you know."

He tapped with his finger on the table, and Tuppence felt again the
intense power that radiated from the man.

"And if she won't tell?" asked Julius suddenly.

"I think she will. I have one or two powerful levers. Still, in that
unlikely event, there is always the possibility of bribery."

"Sure. And that's where I come in!" cried Julius, bringing his fist down
on the table with a bang. "You can count on me, if necessary, for one
million dollars. Yes, sir, one million dollars!"

Sir James sat down and subjected Julius to a long scrutiny.

"Mr. Hersheimmer," he said at last, "that is a very large sum."

"I guess it'll have to be. These aren't the kind of folk to offer
sixpence to."

"At the present rate of exchange it amounts to considerably over two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds."

"That's so. Maybe you think I'm talking through my hat, but I can
deliver the goods all right, with enough over to spare for your fee."

Sir James flushed slightly.

"There is no question of a fee, Mr. Hersheimmer. I am not a private
detective."

"Sorry. I guess I was just a mite hasty, but I've been feeling bad about
this money question. I wanted to offer a big reward for news of Jane
some days ago, but your crusted institution of Scotland Yard advised me
against it. Said it was undesirable."

"They were probably right," said Sir James dryly.

"But it's all O.K. about Julius," put in Tuppence. "He's not pulling
your leg. He's got simply pots of money."

"The old man piled it up in style," explained Julius. "Now, let's get
down to it. What's your idea?"

Sir James considered for a moment or two.

"There is no time to be lost. The sooner we strike the better." He
turned to Tuppence. "Is Mrs. Vandemeyer dining out to-night, do you
know?"

"Yes, I think so, but she will not be out late. Otherwise, she would
have taken the latchkey."

"Good. I will call upon her about ten o'clock. What time are you
supposed to return?"

"About nine-thirty or ten, but I could go back earlier."

"You must not do that on any account. It might arouse suspicion if you
did not stay out till the usual time. Be back by nine-thirty. I will
arrive at ten. Mr. Hersheimmer will wait below in a taxi perhaps."

"He's got a new Rolls-Royce car," said Tuppence with vicarious pride.

"Even better. If I succeed in obtaining the address from her, we can
go there at once, taking Mrs. Vandemeyer with us if necessary. You
understand?"

"Yes." Tuppence rose to her feet with a skip of delight. "Oh, I feel so
much better!"

"Don't build on it too much, Miss Tuppence. Go easy."

Julius turned to the lawyer.

"Say, then. I'll call for you in the car round about nine-thirty. Is
that right?"

"Perhaps that will be the best plan. It would be unnecessary to have two
cars waiting about. Now, Miss Tuppence, my advice to you is to go and
have a good dinner, a REALLY good one, mind. And don't think ahead more
than you can help."

He shook hands with them both, and a moment later they were outside.

"Isn't he a duck?" inquired Tuppence ecstatically, as she skipped down
the steps. "Oh, Julius, isn't he just a duck?"

"Well, I allow he seems to be the goods all right. And I was wrong about
its being useless to go to him. Say, shall we go right away back to the
Ritz?"

"I must walk a bit, I think. I feel so excited. Drop me in the park,
will you? Unless you'd like to come too?"

"I want to get some petrol," he explained. "And send off a cable or
two."

"All right. I'll meet you at the Ritz at seven. We'll have to dine
upstairs. I can't show myself in these glad rags."

"Sure. I'll get Felix help me choose the menu. He's some head waiter,
that. So long."

Tuppence walked briskly along towards the Serpentine, first glancing at
her watch. It was nearly six o'clock. She remembered that she had had no
tea, but felt too excited to be conscious of hunger. She walked as
far as Kensington Gardens and then slowly retraced her steps, feeling
infinitely better for the fresh air and exercise. It was not so easy to
follow Sir James's advice, and put the possible events of the evening
out of her head. As she drew nearer and nearer to Hyde Park corner, the
temptation to return to South Audley Mansions was almost irresistible.

At any rate, she decided, it would do no harm just to go and LOOK at the
building. Perhaps, then, she could resign herself to waiting patiently
for ten o'clock.

South Audley Mansions looked exactly the same as usual. What Tuppence
had expected she hardly knew, but the sight of its red brick stolidity
slightly assuaged the growing and entirely unreasonable uneasiness
that possessed her. She was just turning away when she heard a piercing
whistle, and the faithful Albert came running from the building to join
her.

Tuppence frowned. It was no part of the programme to have attention
called to her presence in the neighbourhood, but Albert was purple with
suppressed excitement.

"I say, miss, she's a-going!"

"Who's going?" demanded Tuppence sharply.

"The crook. Ready Rita. Mrs. Vandemeyer. She's a-packing up, and she's
just sent down word for me to get her a taxi."

"What?" Tuppence clutched his arm.

"It's the truth, miss. I thought maybe as you didn't know about it."

"Albert," cried Tuppence, "you're a brick. If it hadn't been for you
we'd have lost her."

Albert flushed with pleasure at this tribute.

"There's no time to lose," said Tuppence, crossing the road. "I've got
to stop her. At all costs I must keep her here until----" She broke off.
"Albert, there's a telephone here, isn't there?"

The boy shook his head.

"The flats mostly have their own, miss. But there's a box just round the
corner."

"Go to it then, at once, and ring up the Ritz Hotel. Ask for Mr.
Hersheimmer, and when you get him tell him to get Sir James and come on
at once, as Mrs. Vandemeyer is trying to hook it. If you can't get him,
ring up Sir James Peel Edgerton, you'll find his number in the book, and
tell him what's happening. You won't forget the names, will you?"

Albert repeated them glibly. "You trust to me, miss, it'll be all right.
But what about you? Aren't you afraid to trust yourself with her?"

"No, no, that's all right. BUT GO AND TELEPHONE. Be quick."

Drawing a long breath, Tuppence entered the Mansions and ran up to the
door of No. 20. How she was to detain Mrs. Vandemeyer until the two men
arrived, she did not know, but somehow or other it had to be done, and
she must accomplish the task single-handed. What had occasioned this
precipitate departure? Did Mrs. Vandemeyer suspect her?

Speculations were idle. Tuppence pressed the bell firmly. She might
learn something from the cook.

Nothing happened and, after waiting some minutes, Tuppence pressed the
bell again, keeping her finger on the button for some little while.
At last she heard footsteps inside, and a moment later Mrs. Vandemeyer
herself opened the door. She lifted her eyebrows at the sight of the
girl.

"You?"

"I had a touch of toothache, ma'am," said Tuppence glibly. "So thought
it better to come home and have a quiet evening."

Mrs. Vandemeyer said nothing, but she drew back and let Tuppence pass
into the hall.

"How unfortunate for you," she said coldly. "You had better go to bed."

"Oh, I shall be all right in the kitchen, ma'am. Cook will----"

"Cook is out," said Mrs. Vandemeyer, in a rather disagreeable tone. "I
sent her out. So you see you had better go to bed."

Suddenly Tuppence felt afraid. There was a ring in Mrs. Vandemeyer's
voice that she did not like at all. Also, the other woman was slowly
edging her up the passage. Tuppence turned at bay.

"I don't want----"

Then, in a flash, a rim of cold steel touched her temple, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer's voice rose cold and menacing:

"You damned little fool! Do you think I don't know? No, don't answer. If
you struggle or cry out, I'll shoot you like a dog."

The rim of steel pressed a little harder against the girl's temple.

"Now then, march," went on Mrs. Vandemeyer. "This way--into my room. In
a minute, when I've done with you, you'll go to bed as I told you to.
And you'll sleep--oh yes, my little spy, you'll sleep all right!"

There was a sort of hideous geniality in the last words which Tuppence
did not at all like. For the moment there was nothing to be done, and
she walked obediently into Mrs. Vandemeyer's bedroom. The pistol never
left her forehead. The room was in a state of wild disorder, clothes
were flung about right and left, a suit-case and a hat box, half-packed,
stood in the middle of the floor.

Tuppence pulled herself together with an effort. Her voice shook a
little, but she spoke out bravely.

"Come now," she said. "This is nonsense. You can't shoot me. Why, every
one in the building would hear the report."

"I'd risk that," said Mrs. Vandemeyer cheerfully. "But, as long as you
don't sing out for help, you're all right--and I don't think you will.
You're a clever girl. You deceived ME all right. I hadn't a suspicion
of you! So I've no doubt that you understand perfectly well that this
is where I'm on top and you're underneath. Now then--sit on the bed. Put
your hands above your head, and if you value your life don't move them."

Tuppence obeyed passively. Her good sense told her that there was
nothing else to do but accept the situation. If she shrieked for help
there was very little chance of anyone hearing her, whereas there was
probably quite a good chance of Mrs. Vandemeyer's shooting her. In the
meantime, every minute of delay gained was valuable.

Mrs. Vandemeyer laid down the revolver on the edge of the washstand
within reach of her hand, and, still eyeing Tuppence like a lynx in case
the girl should attempt to move, she took a little stoppered bottle from
its place on the marble and poured some of its contents into a glass
which she filled up with water.

"What's that?" asked Tuppence sharply.

"Something to make you sleep soundly."

Tuppence paled a little.

"Are you going to poison me?" she asked in a whisper.

"Perhaps," said Mrs. Vandemeyer, smiling agreeably.

"Then I shan't drink it," said Tuppence firmly. "I'd much rather be
shot. At any rate that would make a row, and some one might hear it. But
I won't be killed off quietly like a lamb."

Mrs. Vandemeyer stamped her foot.

"Don't be a little fool! Do you really think I want a hue and cry for
murder out after me? If you've any sense at all, you'll realize that
poisoning you wouldn't suit my book at all. It's a sleeping draught,
that's all. You'll wake up to-morrow morning none the worse. I simply
don't want the bother of tying you up and gagging you. That's the
alternative--and you won't like it, I can tell you! I can be very rough
if I choose. So drink this down like a good girl, and you'll be none the
worse for it."

In her heart of hearts Tuppence believed her. The arguments she had
adduced rang true. It was a simple and effective method of getting her
out of the way for the time being. Nevertheless, the girl did not take
kindly to the idea of being tamely put to sleep without as much as one
bid for freedom. She felt that once Mrs. Vandemeyer gave them the slip,
the last hope of finding Tommy would be gone.

Tuppence was quick in her mental processes. All these reflections
passed through her mind in a flash, and she saw where a chance, a very
problematical chance, lay, and she determined to risk all in one supreme
effort.

Accordingly, she lurched suddenly off the bed and fell on her knees
before Mrs. Vandemeyer, clutching her skirts frantically.

"I don't believe it," she moaned. "It's poison--I know it's poison.
Oh, don't make me drink it"--her voice rose to a shriek--"don't make me
drink it!"

Mrs. Vandemeyer, glass in hand, looked down with a curling lip at this
sudden collapse.

"Get up, you little idiot! Don't go on drivelling there. How you ever
had the nerve to play your part as you did I can't think." She stamped
her foot. "Get up, I say."

But Tuppence continued to cling and sob, interjecting her sobs with
incoherent appeals for mercy. Every minute gained was to the good.
Moreover, as she grovelled, she moved imperceptibly nearer to her
objective.

Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sharp impatient exclamation, and jerked the girl
to her knees.

"Drink it at once!" Imperiously she pressed the glass to the girl's
lips.

Tuppence gave one last despairing moan.

"You swear it won't hurt me?" she temporized.

"Of course it won't hurt you. Don't be a fool."

"Will you swear it?"

"Yes, yes," said the other impatiently. "I swear it."

Tuppence raised a trembling left hand to the glass.

"Very well." Her mouth opened meekly.

Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sigh of relief, off her guard for the moment.
Then, quick as a flash, Tuppence jerked the glass upward as hard as she
could. The fluid in it splashed into Mrs. Vandemeyer's face, and during
her momentary gasp, Tuppence's right hand shot out and grasped the
revolver where it lay on the edge of the washstand. The next moment
she had sprung back a pace, and the revolver pointed straight at Mrs.
Vandemeyer's heart, with no unsteadiness in the hand that held it.

In the moment of victory, Tuppence betrayed a somewhat unsportsmanlike
triumph.

"Now who's on top and who's underneath?" she crowed.

The other's face was convulsed with rage. For a minute Tuppence thought
she was going to spring upon her, which would have placed the girl in an
unpleasant dilemma, since she meant to draw the line at actually letting
off the revolver. However, with an effort Mrs. Vandemeyer controlled
herself, and at last a slow evil smile crept over her face.

"Not a fool, then, after all! You did that well, girl. But you shall pay
for it--oh, yes, you shall pay for it! I have a long memory!"

"I'm surprised you should have been gulfed so easily," said Tuppence
scornfully. "Did you really think I was the kind of girl to roll about
on the floor and whine for mercy?"

"You may do--some day!" said the other significantly.

The cold malignity of her manner sent an unpleasant chill down
Tuppence's spine, but she was not going to give in to it.

"Supposing we sit down," she said pleasantly. "Our present attitude is
a little melodramatic. No--not on the bed. Draw a chair up to the table,
that's right. Now I'll sit opposite you with the revolver in front of
me--just in case of accidents. Splendid. Now, let's talk."

"What about?" said Mrs. Vandemeyer sullenly.

Tuppence eyed her thoughtfully for a minute. She was remembering several
things. Boris's words, "I believe you would sell--us!" and her answer,
"The price would have to be enormous," given lightly, it was true,
yet might not there be a substratum of truth in it? Long ago, had not
Whittington asked: "Who's been blabbing? Rita?" Would Rita Vandemeyer
prove to be the weak spot in the armour of Mr. Brown?

Keeping her eyes fixed steadily on the other's face, Tuppence replied
quietly:

"Money----"

Mrs. Vandemeyer started. Clearly, the reply was unexpected.

"What do you mean?"

"I'll tell you. You said just now that you had a long memory. A long
memory isn't half as useful as a long purse! I dare say it relieves your
feelings a good deal to plan out all sorts of dreadful things to do to
me, but is that PRACTICAL? Revenge is very unsatisfactory. Every one
always says so. But money"--Tuppence warmed to her pet creed--"well,
there's nothing unsatisfactory about money, is there?"

"Do you think," said Mrs. Vandemeyer scornfully, "that I am the kind of
woman to sell my friends?"

"Yes," said Tuppence promptly. "If the price was big enough."

"A paltry hundred pounds or so!"

"No," said Tuppence. "I should suggest--a hundred thousand!"

Her economical spirit did not permit her to mention the whole million
dollars suggested by Julius.

A flush crept over Mrs. Vandemeyer's face.

"What did you say?" she asked, her fingers playing nervously with a
brooch on her breast. In that moment Tuppence knew that the fish was
hooked, and for the first time she felt a horror of her own money-loving
spirit. It gave her a dreadful sense of kinship to the woman fronting
her.

"A hundred thousand pounds," repeated Tuppence.

The light died out of Mrs. Vandemeyer's eyes. She leaned back in her
chair.

"Bah!" she said. "You haven't got it."

"No," admitted Tuppence, "I haven't--but I know some one who has."

"Who?"

"A friend of mine."

"Must be a millionaire," remarked Mrs. Vandemeyer unbelievingly.

"As a matter of fact he is. He's an American. He'll pay you that
without a murmur. You can take it from me that it's a perfectly genuine
proposition."

Mrs. Vandemeyer sat up again.

"I'm inclined to believe you," she said slowly.

There was silence between them for some time, then Mrs. Vandemeyer
looked up.

"What does he want to know, this friend of yours?"

Tuppence went through a momentary struggle, but it was Julius's money,
and his interests must come first.

"He wants to know where Jane Finn is," she said boldly.

Mrs. Vandemeyer showed no surprise.

"I'm not sure where she is at the present moment," she replied.

"But you could find out?"

"Oh, yes," returned Mrs. Vandemeyer carelessly. "There would be no
difficulty about that."

"Then"--Tuppence's voice shook a little--"there's a boy, a friend of
mine. I'm afraid something's happened to him, through your pal Boris."

"What's his name?"

"Tommy Beresford."

"Never heard of him. But I'll ask Boris. He'll tell me anything he
knows."

"Thank you." Tuppence felt a terrific rise in her spirits. It impelled
her to more audacious efforts. "There's one thing more."

"Well?"

Tuppence leaned forward and lowered her voice.

"WHO IS MR. BROWN?"

Her quick eyes saw the sudden paling of the beautiful face. With an
effort Mrs. Vandemeyer pulled herself together and tried to resume her
former manner. But the attempt was a mere parody.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"You can't have learnt much about us if you don't know that NOBODY KNOWS
WHO MR. BROWN IS...."

"You do," said Tuppence quietly.

Again the colour deserted the other's face.

"What makes you think that?"

"I don't know," said the girl truthfully. "But I'm sure."

Mrs. Vandemeyer stared in front of her for a long time.

"Yes," she said hoarsely, at last, "I know. I was beautiful, you
see--very beautiful--"

"You are still," said Tuppence with admiration.

Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head. There was a strange gleam in her
electric-blue eyes.

"Not beautiful enough," she said in a soft dangerous voice.
"Not--beautiful--enough! And sometimes, lately, I've been afraid....
It's dangerous to know too much!" She leaned forward across the table.
"Swear that my name shan't be brought into it--that no one shall ever
know."

"I swear it. And, once's he caught, you'll be out of danger."

A terrified look swept across Mrs. Vandemeyer's face.

"Shall I? Shall I ever be?" She clutched Tuppence's arm. "You're sure
about the money?"

"Quite sure."

"When shall I have it? There must be no delay."

"This friend of mine will be here presently. He may have to send cables,
or something like that. But there won't be any delay--he's a terrific
hustler."

A resolute look settled on Mrs. Vandemeyer's face.

"I'll do it. It's a great sum of money, and besides"--she gave a curious
smile--"it is not--wise to throw over a woman like me!"

For a moment or two, she remained smiling, and lightly tapping her
fingers on the table. Suddenly she started, and her face blanched.

"What was that?"

"I heard nothing."

Mrs. Vandemeyer gazed round her fearfully.

"If there should be some one listening----"

"Nonsense. Who could there be?"

"Even the walls might have ears," whispered the other. "I tell you I'm
frightened. You don't know him!"

"Think of the hundred thousand pounds," said Tuppence soothingly.

Mrs. Vandemeyer passed her tongue over her dried lips.

"You don't know him," she reiterated hoarsely. "He's--ah!"

With a shriek of terror she sprang to her feet. Her outstretched hand
pointed over Tuppence's head. Then she swayed to the ground in a dead
faint.

Tuppence looked round to see what had startled her.

In the doorway were Sir James Peel Edgerton and Julius Hersheimmer.



CHAPTER XIII. THE VIGIL

SIR James brushed past Julius and hurriedly bent over the fallen woman.

"Heart," he said sharply. "Seeing us so suddenly must have given her a
shock. Brandy--and quickly, or she'll slip through our fingers."

Julius hurried to the washstand.

"Not there," said Tuppence over her shoulder. "In the tantalus in the
dining-room. Second door down the passage."

Between them Sir James and Tuppence lifted Mrs. Vandemeyer and carried
her to the bed. There they dashed water on her face, but with no result.
The lawyer fingered her pulse.

"Touch and go," he muttered. "I wish that young fellow would hurry up
with the brandy."

At that moment Julius re-entered the room, carrying a glass half full of
the spirit which he handed to Sir James. While Tuppence lifted her head
the lawyer tried to force a little of the spirit between her closed
lips. Finally the woman opened her eyes feebly. Tuppence held the glass
to her lips.

"Drink this."

Mrs. Vandemeyer complied. The brandy brought the colour back to her
white cheeks, and revived her in a marvellous fashion. She tried to sit
up--then fell back with a groan, her hand to her side.

"It's my heart," she whispered. "I mustn't talk."

She lay back with closed eyes.

Sir James kept his finger on her wrist a minute longer, then withdrew it
with a nod.

"She'll do now."

All three moved away, and stood together talking in low voices. One
and all were conscious of a certain feeling of anticlimax. Clearly any
scheme for cross-questioning the lady was out of the question for the
moment. For the time being they were baffled, and could do nothing.

Tuppence related how Mrs. Vandemeyer had declared herself willing
to disclose the identity of Mr. Brown, and how she had consented to
discover and reveal to them the whereabouts of Jane Finn. Julius was
congratulatory.

"That's all right, Miss Tuppence. Splendid! I guess that hundred
thousand pounds will look just as good in the morning to the lady as it
did over night. There's nothing to worry over. She won't speak without
the cash anyway, you bet!"

There was certainly a good deal of common sense in this, and Tuppence
felt a little comforted.

"What you say is true," said Sir James meditatively. "I must confess,
however, that I cannot help wishing we had not interrupted at the minute
we did. Still, it cannot be helped, it is only a matter of waiting until
the morning."

He looked across at the inert figure on the bed. Mrs. Vandemeyer lay
perfectly passive with closed eyes. He shook his head.

"Well," said Tuppence, with an attempt at cheerfulness, "we must wait
until the morning, that's all. But I don't think we ought to leave the
flat."

"What about leaving that bright boy of yours on guard?"

"Albert? And suppose she came round again and hooked it. Albert couldn't
stop her."

"I guess she won't want to make tracks away from the dollars."

"She might. She seemed very frightened of 'Mr. Brown.'"

"What? Real plumb scared of him?"

"Yes. She looked round and said even walls had ears."

"Maybe she meant a dictaphone," said Julius with interest.

"Miss Tuppence is right," said Sir James quietly. "We must not leave the
flat--if only for Mrs. Vandemeyer's sake."

Julius stared at him.

"You think he'd get after her? Between now and to-morrow morning. How
could he know, even?"

"You forget your own suggestion of a dictaphone," said Sir James dryly.
"We have a very formidable adversary. I believe, if we exercise all due
care, that there is a very good chance of his being delivered into our
hands. But we must neglect no precaution. We have an important witness,
but she must be safeguarded. I would suggest that Miss Tuppence should
go to bed, and that you and I, Mr. Hersheimmer, should share the vigil."

Tuppence was about to protest, but happening to glance at the bed she
saw Mrs. Vandemeyer, her eyes half-open, with such an expression of
mingled fear and malevolence on her face that it quite froze the words
on her lips.

For a moment she wondered whether the faint and the heart attack had
been a gigantic sham, but remembering the deadly pallor she could hardly
credit the supposition. As she looked the expression disappeared as by
magic, and Mrs. Vandemeyer lay inert and motionless as before. For a
moment the girl fancied she must have dreamt it. But she determined
nevertheless to be on the alert.

"Well," said Julius, "I guess we'd better make a move out of here any
way."

The others fell in with his suggestion. Sir James again felt Mrs.
Vandemeyer's pulse.

"Perfectly satisfactory," he said in a low voice to Tuppence. "She'll be
absolutely all right after a night's rest."

The girl hesitated a moment by the bed. The intensity of the expression
she had surprised had impressed her powerfully. Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted
her lids. She seemed to be struggling to speak. Tuppence bent over her.

"Don't--leave----" she seemed unable to proceed, murmuring something
that sounded like "sleepy." Then she tried again.

Tuppence bent lower still. It was only a breath.

"Mr.--Brown----" The voice stopped.

But the half-closed eyes seemed still to send an agonized message.

Moved by a sudden impulse, the girl said quickly:

"I shan't leave the flat. I shall sit up all night."

A flash of relief showed before the lids descended once more. Apparently
Mrs. Vandemeyer slept. But her words had awakened a new uneasiness in
Tuppence. What had she meant by that low murmur: "Mr. Brown?" Tuppence
caught herself nervously looking over her shoulder. The big wardrobe
loomed up in a sinister fashion before her eyes. Plenty of room for a
man to hide in that.... Half-ashamed of herself, Tuppence pulled it open
and looked inside. No one--of course! She stooped down and looked under
the bed. There was no other possible hiding-place.

Tuppence gave her familiar shake of the shoulders. It was absurd, this
giving way to nerves! Slowly she went out of the room. Julius and Sir
James were talking in a low voice. Sir James turned to her.

"Lock the door on the outside, please, Miss Tuppence, and take out the
key. There must be no chance of anyone entering that room."

The gravity of his manner impressed them, and Tuppence felt less ashamed
of her attack of "nerves."

"Say," remarked Julius suddenly, "there's Tuppence's bright boy. I guess
I'd better go down and ease his young mind. That's some lad, Tuppence."

"How did you get in, by the way?" asked Tuppence suddenly. "I forgot to
ask."

"Well, Albert got me on the phone all right. I ran round for Sir James
here, and we came right on. The boy was on the look out for us, and was
just a mite worried about what might have happened to you. He'd been
listening outside the door of the flat, but couldn't hear anything.
Anyhow he suggested sending us up in the coal lift instead of ringing
the bell. And sure enough we landed in the scullery and came right along
to find you. Albert's still below, and must be just hopping mad by this
time." With which Julius departed abruptly.

"Now then, Miss Tuppence," said Sir James, "you know this place better
than I do. Where do you suggest we should take up our quarters?"

Tuppence considered for a moment or two.

"I think Mrs. Vandemeyer's boudoir would be the most comfortable," she
said at last, and led the way there.

Sir James looked round approvingly.

"This will do very well, and now, my dear young lady, do go to bed and
get some sleep."

Tuppence shook her head resolutely.

"I couldn't, thank you, Sir James. I should dream of Mr. Brown all
night!"

"But you'll be so tired, child."

"No, I shan't. I'd rather stay up--really."

The lawyer gave in.

Julius reappeared some minutes later, having reassured Albert and
rewarded him lavishly for his services. Having in his turn failed to
persuade Tuppence to go to bed, he said decisively:

"At any rate, you've got to have something to eat right away. Where's
the larder?"

Tuppence directed him, and he returned in a few minutes with a cold pie
and three plates.

After a hearty meal, the girl felt inclined to pooh-pooh her fancies of
half an hour before. The power of the money bribe could not fail.

"And now, Miss Tuppence," said Sir James, "we want to hear your
adventures."

"That's so," agreed Julius.

Tuppence narrated her adventures with some complacence. Julius
occasionally interjected an admiring "Bully." Sir James said nothing
until she had finished, when his quiet "well done, Miss Tuppence," made
her flush with pleasure.

"There's one thing I don't get clearly," said Julius. "What put her up
to clearing out?"

"I don't know," confessed Tuppence.

Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully.

"The room was in great disorder. That looks as though her flight was
unpremeditated. Almost as though she got a sudden warning to go from
some one."

"Mr. Brown, I suppose," said Julius scoffingly.

The lawyer looked at him deliberately for a minute or two.

"Why not?" he said. "Remember, you yourself have once been worsted by
him."

Julius flushed with vexation.

"I feel just mad when I think of how I handed out Jane's photograph to
him like a lamb. Gee, if I ever lay hands on it again, I'll freeze on to
it like--like hell!"

"That contingency is likely to be a remote one," said the other dryly.

"I guess you're right," said Julius frankly. "And, in any case, it's the
original I'm out after. Where do you think she can be, Sir James?"

The lawyer shook his head.

"Impossible to say. But I've a very good idea where she has been."

"You have? Where?"

Sir James smiled.

"At the scene of your nocturnal adventures, the Bournemouth nursing
home."

"There? Impossible. I asked."

"No, my dear sir, you asked if anyone of the name of Jane Finn had been
there. Now, if the girl had been placed there it would almost certainly
be under an assumed name."

"Bully for you," cried Julius. "I never thought of that!"

"It was fairly obvious," said the other.

"Perhaps the doctor's in it too," suggested Tuppence.

Julius shook his head.

"I don't think so. I took to him at once. No, I'm pretty sure Dr. Hall's
all right."

"Hall, did you say?" asked Sir James. "That is curious--really very
curious."

"Why?" demanded Tuppence.

"Because I happened to meet him this morning. I've known him slightly on
and off for some years, and this morning I ran across him in the street.
Staying at the Metropole, he told me." He turned to Julius. "Didn't he
tell you he was coming up to town?"

Julius shook his head.

"Curious," mused Sir James. "You did not mention his name this
afternoon, or I would have suggested your going to him for further
information with my card as introduction."

"I guess I'm a mutt," said Julius with unusual humility. "I ought to
have thought of the false name stunt."

"How could you think of anything after falling out of that tree?" cried
Tuppence. "I'm sure anyone else would have been killed right off."

"Well, I guess it doesn't matter now, anyway," said Julius. "We've got
Mrs. Vandemeyer on a string, and that's all we need."

"Yes," said Tuppence, but there was a lack of assurance in her voice.

A silence settled down over the party. Little by little the magic of
the night began to gain a hold on them. There were sudden creaks of the
furniture, imperceptible rustlings in the curtains. Suddenly Tuppence
sprang up with a cry.

"I can't help it. I know Mr. Brown's somewhere in the flat! I can FEEL
him."

"Sure, Tuppence, how could he be? This door's open into the hall. No