The Heart of a King by Candace Christine Little ***** Copyright 2011 Candace Christine Little Smashwords Edition Cover art by Billee Kae Little ***** Smashwords Edition, License Notes Thank you for downloading this free e-book. Although this is a free e-book, it remains the copyrighted property of the author and may not be reproduced, copied, or distributed for commercial or non-commercial purposes. If you enjoyed this book, please encourage your friends to download their own copies at Smashwords.com. Thank you for your support. ***** Chapter 1: A Secret Meeting Light, shining out from the edges of the doors to the throne room, pierced the midnight darkness of the palace hallway and caught my attention. Not quite an hour before, I had set foot in Windsal for the first time in many months, and as much as I was looking forward to the happy reunions a long absence always brings, I was looking forward even more to the incomparable comfort of a good night’s sleep in my own bed. But I found myself drawn to the light, and curiosity triumphed over comfort. I opened one of the doors and peeked in. My brother, the king, was pacing back and forth in front of the thrones, hands clasped behind his back. I stepped into the room. “King Artemerio,” I said. With a start, Artemerio turned toward me. He strode forward, a smile spreading across his face as he drew near. “Welcome back, Prince Barto,” he said. But then, rather than stopping when he reached me, he rushed past, his royal robes flapping wildly around his feet. “Follow me,” he said over his shoulder. With hardly a pause, he threw open the throne room doors and charged outside, leaving me in stunned silence. “Follow you where?” I asked as I caught up with him. “You are acting very strangely. And why are you awake at this hour? Has something happened?” He glanced at me, and I could see, even in the dim lamplight, that he was extraordinarily pleased. “I have been waiting, Prince Barto—waiting for answers—waiting for you—and now you have returned. At last!” “Oh—it all makes sense to me now. Did someone spot my ship and bring word to you that I would be arriving tonight? Is that why you are awake? Please don’t tell me you want to hear a report on the Unconquered Lands at this hour. Ordinarily, I might be persuaded to give such a report.” I softened my tone. “I know how much it means to you. But honestly, I could lie down right here on this cold, hard, drafty floor and be sound asleep in minutes. That sounds perfect, in fact.” I stopped walking. Artemerio took a few steps beyond me, but then he stopped and looked back. “I received no word of your return. I was not expecting you at all. I am awake because I am having trouble sleeping. I have had trouble sleeping for this entire month. And the Unconquered Lands are the last thing on my mind. We have something much more important to discuss.” I started walking again, alert with concern. “What has happened? Are you ill? Perhaps a trip to Lagal—” “No, I am not ill. I am perfectly fine in every way, except...” He paused and glanced around. “Except?” In almost a whisper, he said, “Except that I’ve had strange dreams.” He looked at me and seemed to be studying my reaction to his words. “Strange dreams?” “Yes. Very, very strange.” He said nothing more, and I got the impression that I should save my questions until we reached whatever destination he had in mind. A few hallways later, I began to have some idea of where he was taking me, and my guess was proven right when he pushed open the door to the library, crossed the room to a particular bookshelf, and triggered the secret panel behind the bookshelf to open. After grabbing a torch from the library wall, he led the way into the secret room, where the charts and maps of Windsal and of the known world were kept. “Take that map—there,” King Artemerio said, pointing, as he lit lamps in the room and set his torch in its place. I unrolled the map that was on the large table in the middle of the room. It was a map of islands I had never seen before. “What is this place?” I asked. “I don’t know where the islands are or what they are called. I have only dreamt of them—but in such detail that I could draw this map.” “Have you discussed this with Prince Vestero? Surely in his role as chief of the Royal Guard he’s learned—” “Prince Vestero says he knows nothing about these islands.” “I suggest again to you a trip to Lagal. Perhaps the elders or...” I let my suggestion trail off. Artemerio was shaking his head. “The map is to be kept a secret. Only you, Queen Folasade, and Prince Vestero are to know for now.” He gestured toward a chair and, once the two of us were seated, continued. “The Great King has an important quest for me—for us. We are to sail for these islands as soon as the time is right.” He paused and looked at me very strangely, as if I were not reacting as he’d expected. “I was to draw this map exactly as I’d seen it in my dreams. And I was to wait for your return. And now you have returned. So...go ahead. Tell me everything. Explain away. I am eager to hear what you know.” “I don’t know anything,” I said. “That can’t be right. Here, have another look at the map. I’m sure you must know something.” His tone expressed a surprising level of certainty; he seemed so certain, in fact, that for a moment I wondered if I might actually know the things he expected me to know. But his certainty was not powerful enough to give me answers I simply did not have. “This is the first I’ve heard of any of this,” I said. He studied my face as if he did not believe me. Then he frowned slightly. “So it appears,” he said. “Queen Folasade and Prince Vestero have also had strange dreams. You are sure you have had no strange dreams? Perhaps you just weren’t paying attention to them. Any little detail may be important.” He stared at me expectantly. I waited a moment before answering, trying to recall anything that might help. I could see how desperate Artemerio was for some small clue. But I had none to give. “Who doesn’t have a strange dream now and then?” I said. “But I know the difference between dreams that are the bizarre creations of the imagination and disagreeable foods and dreams that are...dreams that feel like they are an answer to a question one hasn’t yet thought to ask. I haven’t had any of the sort of dreams you are interested in for quite some time—not since I left on this last journey, anyway.” Again he studied my face. Then he frowned a little more deeply. “So you haven’t.” An uncomfortable silence followed. “I don’t understand. Why were you so certain I would know something?” I said, anxious to learn the reason for his obvious distress. He raised his downcast eyes and stared at me as he struggled to explain. “Everything I’ve told you has…has come to me in the strange dreams I mentioned…including the part about waiting for your return. You’ve been the first part of it all that could be…that could be tested, and if your part proved true, then—” “Then you would take it as a sign that you could trust the rest of it. I see,” I said. Artemerio nodded glumly and looked away. “I’m going to make a guess here that the dreams are not keeping you awake,” I said. “Your doubts and questions about them are.” Artemerio shifted his gaze toward me. “Funny…Prince Vestero said much the same thing. And he reminded me of Black Rock Forest and said something about trusting and not seeing and...something...something...” He shook his head and waved away the thought. “I have forgotten. He says so many things. But Barto, what you don’t understand is the tremendous risk involved in this...dreaming. No—I can guess at the objection you are about to make. You had those strange dreams, too, before we were sent to solve that riddle. I remember. But without those dreams, we would still have gone on the quest; they were a confirmation, not a call to action. In this case, the dreams are the only reason I have for setting sail for these mysterious islands. So…what if I’m wrong about…about everything? The map, the…the secrecy...” He paused. “I was wrong about you, apparently.” “What about Prince Vestero and Queen Folasade? You said they’ve had dreams, too.” I hoped his answer would have a stabilizing effect on both of us. In my desire to make sense of the situation, I had begun to question whether his old longing to be an adventurer was really the source of whatever dreams he’d been having. As strongly as I’d been affected by his certainty, so I was affected by his doubt. I did not like the back-and-forth feeling at all. “None of our dreams are anything alike. And I am the only one who has seen the map and been told about the quest. I—” He stopped speaking and sat still, staring off beyond my shoulder. Then he looked at me. “I can’t not do the things I’ve seen. The dreams will not let go of me, and I cannot let go of them. But there is nothing at all outside of my own thoughts that validates them. I was hoping you...” He smiled half-heartedly. “You know what I was hoping. But I’ve kept you awake long enough. You’ve humored me beyond what kindness demands at such a late hour. I trust I will see you at breakfast? I am eager to hear your stories of the Unconquered Lands.” “I’ll be there,” “My Queen,” he said, gazing at her adoringly. The queen curtsied elegantly in response, still holding the king’s hand, and said, “My King.” Prince Vestero bowed and walked toward the table. “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty…we have much to discuss.” He pulled out a chair at the table but remained standing, signaling, through his posture and unwavering stare, his intent for the king and queen to join him. “Of course,” said Artemerio. He and the queen moved toward the table, and I took my seat. Prince Vestero pulled off the wig and the mask with the wart while King Artemerio and Queen Folasade settled into their chairs. “The Elders of Lagal will be here tomorrow for a secret meeting with the four of us,” said Prince Vestero. “The elders?” said Artemerio. “Coming here? Why?” Then he smiled, and excitement lit up his eyes. “Do you think it has something to do with the dreams?” “I don’t know,” said Prince Vestero. “A Lagalian warrior brought the message, and he did not say. And such an air of secrecy surrounds the whole affair that I am not to share information regarding the time and place of the elders’ arrival even with you.” King Artemerio seemed ready to object, but before he could, Prince Vestero said, “Your Majesty, I am under orders.” “Then of course you must keep your secrets,” said Artemerio, somewhat begrudgingly. But then a new thought seemed to take hold of him. “Should we be alarmed by such secrecy?” “Secrecy is hardly a thing to be feared,” said Prince Vestero. “Think how it builds an appetite for discovering what has been hidden. Think how it deepens the joy of…” He glanced at Artemerio’s face and must have noticed the confused slant of the king’s eyebrows and the impatient pursing of his lips. “We would be wise to behave with extra caution. I’ve assigned extra guards to you and the queen, and I will personally oversee your protection from now until the meeting. Prince Barto, you should stay close to us at all times.” “Extra guards? Personal protection? I have a feeling you know more about the danger than you have revealed,” said King Artemerio. “Dunley is on the move,” said Prince Vestero. “Something about all of this has caught his attention. I know no more than that.” Chapter 2: The Wooden Box “Dunley!” said Artemerio. “Yes,” said Prince Vestero. “We must be careful. And we should keep the map and scrolls locked in their box. We cannot trust that even this room is safe from Dunley or his spies. And with the elders visiting! I’m sure you understand. So if there is nothing pressing that you need to discuss with me, King Artemerio, I would like to go finish preparations for the elders’ visit.” “Of course,” said King Artemerio. “But first, you should know that Prince Barto had dreams about the islands last night. I’m sure you must be as eager as I to hear what he has to say about them.” “Ah, yes!” said Prince Vestero. He turned to look at me. His face was serious. “Then do you know why we were to wait for your return, Prince Barto?” He and Artemerio stared at me intently. “No,” I said. Both men exhaled heavily, as if each had been holding his breath. “Well, we won’t be discouraged, will we, Your Majesty?” said Prince Vestero as he offered King Artemerio a cheerful smile. “Not yet does not mean never. Dictionaries and clocks both attest to that.” Prince Vestero’s good humor, as always, was infectious, and I felt the doubts I still had from my first talk with Artemerio slipping away. In one swift movement, Prince Vestero rose from his chair and pushed it back into place at the table. “But speaking of clocks...I will have to hear about the dreams at a later time. I must finish the preparations for the elders. King Artemerio, if I may be so bold—” “You usually are,” said Artemerio. “Quite right,” said Prince Vestero, “but I do try to phrase my boldness respectfully, Your Majesty. Therefore—if I may be so bold, I suggest that you and the queen spend no more time in here than is absolutely necessary. You should do nothing out of the ordinary that might draw unwanted attention to yourselves. And we should have Prince Barto read the scrolls of our dreams and study the map. Perhaps the elders will address them. Or perhaps the dreams and map will trigger some memory or thought for him that will unlock the mystery. And we mustn’t let our expectations limit what we are willing to accept as an answer.” Artemerio seemed to be thinking about something. He didn’t answer right away, but when he noticed Prince Vestero looking at him, he said, “Yes, of course. Expectations are quite confining, I suppose.” “And dangerous,” said Prince Vestero. “Would you like for me to write down the dreams I had last night?” I said. “A very good idea,” said Prince Vestero. “I will be off now.” He looked at King Artemerio. “If I may be so bold, that is.” Artemerio nodded. “I do intend to take your advice about doing nothing out of the ordinary. But I think it would be more out of the ordinary for me to pass up the chance to hear about the Unconquered Lands than for me to stay too long in the secret room. What will I tell the poor souls who have listened to me rattle on about Prince Barto’s return? They will expect me to be fully informed by the end of the day. I know they will.” Prince Vestero chuckled. “Oh, yes. I have been one of those poor souls. You are correct. You must have something to tell about the Unconquered Lands after this meeting.” “But of course I will only stay long enough to learn enough to…to satisfy the people,” said King Artemerio. “Of course,” said Prince Vestero with an only half-suppressed smile of amusement. He bowed. Then he turned to me and said, “Welcome back, Prince Barto,” before he nimbly and quickly disappeared through the secret panel, again wearing his silver-haired wig and his mask with the wart. King Artemerio lifted a dark wooden box from a shelf—the box he’d been searching through the night before—and set it on the table in front of me. As I stared at the intricate designs carved into the wood, Artemerio produced a key from some hidden spot and laid it beside the box. “Before you begin your stories…here. Keep this key with you at all times,” he said. His face took on a grave look. “All of our dreams have been recorded and stored in this box. The map I showed you is also rolled up inside, along with blank scrolls you may use to record your dreams.” The grave look passed. “Now then, what can you tell me about the Unconquered Lands? The people—and my darling wife—desperately want to know.” “Is that so?” I asked, turning to Queen Folasade. Queen Folasade smiled and said, “The people and his darling wife desperately want you to tell him your tales, Prince Barto, though I think the king misunderstands the reason.” “I can guess the reason,” I said, laughing softly at the thought of what Artemerio must have been like while he waited for my return. But then, in the most serious tone I could maintain, I said, “Have you considered that he may be worse once he has been told? That he will impose on listeners with endless repetitions of the stories he learns?” “I have considered it,” said the queen, mimicking my tone. “But I have decided we may grow wiser from the repetitions of the stories.” She silently reached for the hand of the king. Her voice softened as she said, “But perhaps you have misunderstood my deepest motive. I so desperately want you to tell him your tales because I know how much he wanted to see the lands for himself. I have not forgotten what he gave up to become king.” “A small price to pay for what I’ve gained,” said King Artemerio, and he gazed at the queen with loving admiration. “Prince Barto, you heard the queen. We both agree that I should hear of the Unconquered Lands. So begin your stories.” *** The king and queen asked question after question about all I had seen long after I’d finished my tales. At last, Queen Folasade reminded King Artemerio that they would be expected in the throne room soon. “And I think you’ve learned enough to satisfy the people,” she said with a teasing, charming smile. Artemerio nodded. “Thank you, Prince Barto. That was an excellent account of the journey. I could almost feel the steamy air of the forests you described. And I can picture the strange broad leaves of the trees.” He sighed happily. “I almost feel I have been there myself.” “Filimo sketched examples of the landscape and of a number of the animals, flowers, and trees we saw,” I said. “He hoped to submit his drawings to your library by the end of next week.” “Perfect,” said King Artemerio. He and the queen moved toward the secret panel. “Stay in here as long as you like. We will most likely be in the throne room when you finish.” “It is good to have you back with us, Prince Barto,” said Queen Folasade. She extended her hand to me, and I clasped it between both of mine with great affection. She was as dear to me as any sister ever could have been. “Thank you, my Queen,” I said. “Is there anything you need from us?” asked King Artemerio. “If it’s not too much trouble, will you send me some lunch?” I asked. “Those cold cuts Prince Vestero was serving earlier today looked delicious.” *** Writing down all I could remember from my dreams didn’t take long, and Prince Vestero, still playing the part of the silver-haired servant, brought lunch to me shortly after I finished. “I didn’t mean for King Artemerio to send you,” I said to Prince Vestero as he set the tray down near me. “I’m sure you have more important things to do.” “Nothing more important than keeping your work in here a secret,” said Prince Vestero. “Not even the most trusted member of the Royal Guard can have a hint of what is in that box. But while I have a chance, I want to hear about the dreams you had about the islands.” He sat down. “I can’t stay long, so please—summarize succinctly.” “Easy enough,” I said. “In my first dream, I saw the islands as they are on the map King Artemerio showed me. In fact, my entire dream was a view of the map. The view kept changing as something like a dark cloud—or perhaps a shadow—spread over the drawn islands. The dark cloud spread and grew until it covered all the islands, completely blocking them from my view. In my next dream, I saw the islands as though I were hovering above them from a great height. As I watched from above, something like a dark cloud again spread over the islands. Somehow I knew that the dark cloud was a terrible thing. I also had the impression that I was seeing...something of the past...something that had happened long ago. That dream ended when I could no longer see the islands for the darkness covering them. In my final dream, I was on one of the islands—in a huge crowd of people, standing in the darkness. And it was no longer the past. Then, suddenly, Dunley was holding all of us—the whole huge crowd—all of us—in the palm of his hand, and he was closing his fist. I knew he planned to crush us. That was the end. My distress was so great that it woke me.” “Troubling,” Prince Vestero said as he rose from his seat. “Have you read through any of the other scrolls yet?” “No, not yet,” I said. “They all have a feeling of urgency about them. I have dreamt of some sort of battle or war.” “And you think the dreams are...” I wasn’t sure how to express what I wanted to say. “Perhaps I dreamt of the islands because King Artemerio showed me the map last night. And perhaps King Artemerio has dreamt of these islands because he so wanted to travel to the Unconquered Lands.” I paused, still trying to collect my thoughts. “What I mean is, I can explain many things—perhaps even this whole box of scrolls—away. Do you think we are—” “Do I think we are imagining things? Making too much of these dreams?” said Prince Vestero. I nodded, and Prince Vestero continued. “Doubt is a dark window that will filter out even the most miraculous of sights and make them appear to be less than they are. Those who prefer such windows will find what they want to find and little else: justification for their doubt. But those who want to find truth will insist on a window that lets in plenty of light.” “But—how does one know the difference between seeing a sight that is altered by a dark window and seeing a sight that is exactly as it appears?” I asked. He hesitated a moment before answering, not as if he didn’t know the answer but as if he were choosing his words with great care. “Those who like their dark windows will not dare to ask for light.” He nodded in the direction of the wooden box. “Read the scrolls for yourself. And dare to ask for light.” Prince Vestero bowed and left. *** I stayed in the secret room pacing and reading, reading and pacing well into the night. Prince Vestero brought me dinner and returned to remove the dishes and trays of food, but he did not stay long or interrupt my reading other than to point out one or two particularly intriguing dreams. After I’d read through all the scrolls once, I felt compelled to read them again and again, as if memorizing the details would make them all fit together and make sense. I formed one theory after another about what they might mean, but each new theory canceled out the last until none of them remained. An answer to the mystery presented by the dreams seemed to be just out of reach—like when a word is on the tip of one’s tongue waiting to be spoken but one’s mind struggles to release that word. “What is the answer, Great King? Are these dreams from you?” I found myself asking aloud as I sorted through the pile of scrolls on the table. I read through a few more scrolls again, but I was so tired that the words no longer made any sense at all. I put everything back in the wooden box and was about to turn the key in the lock when I realized I had begun to hum pieces of a song I did not recognize. But somehow I knew the song’s words. They were the clearest thoughts I’d had since reading of the dreams. Taking a blank scroll, I began to write: The hopeless shall hope. The songless shall sing. My people shall know The heart of their King. I sat for several minutes, waiting, but nothing more came to me. I added those last strange words to what was already in the box, and then I locked the box and returned it to the shelf where King Artemerio had insisted it be kept. Weary and wondering how much of the evening remained, I opened the secret panel—and instantly drew back in surprise. I was face to face with King Artemerio, who was leading Prince Vestero, Queen Folasade, and several men with long, white beards. The Elders of Lagal had arrived. Chapter 3: Elders of Lagal “Already here, Prince Barto?” said Artemerio. I stepped aside, and he walked past me toward the large table. “Good to see you again, Prince Barto,” said one of the elders as he passed me on his way into the room. “Good to see you, sir,” I said. Another elder stood near me and said, “I hear you have just returned from a journey to the Unconquered Lands. I would love to hear some of your stories.” “And I would love to tell them,” I said. “But I’ve made the great mistake of sharing nearly all of them with King Artemerio. I don’t know how you will avoid hearing them first from him, sir.” The elder chuckled. “Certainly true. Nonetheless, I would like to hear your personal account of things. One must always go to the source, I say, if one wants to avoid the dangers of muddled details.” With a polite nodded bow, he left to take his seat at the table. King Artemerio and Queen Folasade greeted the elders individually and waited until all of them were comfortably seated before they took their own places at the table. “I thought you said they were coming tomorrow,” I whispered to Prince Vestero, who had stayed in the doorway and was glancing around the outer room, most likely for any sign of trouble but possibly for any stray elders. “It is tomorrow,” said Prince Vestero. He closed the secret panel. “Elders of Lagal, welcome,” said King Artemerio. “I remember well how little you enjoy wasted words, so I will get to the point.” A few of the elders chuckled, and I could not help but smile as I thought of the time when Artemerio had not been so careful with words and had left the elders no choice but to take his voice. He had improved very much since those days and was in no real danger that it might happen again. But ever since that time, he had handled his speeches with extra care whenever the elders were his audience. “Yes…the point. Now…the point,” he said after allowing a pause for the quiet laughter. “We don’t know why you are here, but we are sure you must have something terribly important to say. So, please speak. We are very curious to hear what brings you to meet with us.” “Thank you, King Artemerio. Excellent speech,” said one of the elders. The other elders chuckled again, and Artemerio nodded his acceptance of the compliment with mock humility and a hint of relief. The elder continued. “The Great King sent us to you…to explain your dreams.” “Then the dreams are from the Great King!” said King Artemerio. “I knew it. I mean, I desperately hoped it.” He glanced at the elders. “Very well, I had my doubts.” The elder nearest to Artemerio nodded knowingly. “You will learn, my boy, you will learn.” King Artemerio acknowledged the elder’s words with a grateful smile. Then he rose and lifted the wooden box from its spot on the shelf. “Gentlemen, this box contains a map, drawn by me, and scrolls describing the many strange dreams Queen Folasade, Prince Vestero, Prince Barto, and I have had of late. You are welcome to look through all that the box contains.” He unlocked the box and lifted the lid. “We don’t need to see any of that,” said one of the elders. Artemerio snapped the lid shut. “Then please put an end to the torture; I can bear this wondering no longer. I am desperate to hear what you have to say. I am desperate to discover what all of this means.” “I’m so happy to hear you say that,” said the elder nearest to King Artemerio. “You are learning already, my boy. Who can expect to find what he is unwilling to seek?” He nodded to the elder next to him and said, “Go ahead.” “You should understand that no dream makes complete sense until you see for yourself what it describes as it comes to pass,” said the elder who had received the nod. “So even our explanations will not tell you the full tale of what is happening or what is to come, and you should be careful that you are not led astray by your own interpretations of our words.” He turned to me. “Prince Barto, you have dreamt of darkness—of darkness covering the islands. It is the work of Dunley, and many people on the islands have welcomed it, knowingly or unknowingly.” “Prince Vestero,” said another elder, “you have dreamt of battle. There will be a great battle—a battle for the islands, a battle against the darkness. But the battle cannot be won by soldiers with weapons of war.” “King Artemerio,” said a different elder,” you have dreamt of light—a bright, blazing light. You have dreamt of carrying torches, lanterns, and lamps through the islands. And so you will carry light to the islands.” “Queen Folasade,” said another elder,” you have dreamt of finding treasure—treasure of immeasurable value. The people of the islands are that treasure.” The words of the elders hung in the air, heavy with truth. “I’m sure these explanations are very helpful,” said King Artemerio, sounding polite but not sounding as if he thought the explanations were helpful at all. “But I’m still not clear on what exactly we are supposed to do.” “Sail for the islands,” said an elder. “But when?” asked King Artemerio. “And why were we to wait for Prince Barto’s return? And what route should we take to reach the islands? And what exactly are we to do once we reach them? And how long will it take? And—will we ever come back to Windsal? Am I to give up the throne? Am I no longer to be king?” He looked from face to face. “We don’t know the answers to any of those questions,” said an elder. “But you raise a good point about the throne. A kingdom must have a king.” “But if there is to be a new one, we have not yet been told,” said another elder. “Since the four of them are to go, should King Artemerio not call upon Syroton and Athalia to serve as regents? Is that not what is done in situations where the king and queen must be away?” said a different elder. “Yes, the former kings and queens of Windsal have often returned to serve when needed during extraordinary times. And this has all the appearances of being a most extraordinary time, I must say,” said the first elder. “Unparalleled,” said another elder. “Well, then, I think we have settled that issue. Syroton and Athalia it shall be,” said an elder at the far end of the table. “Who agrees?” After a chorus of yeses and I do’s, the elder said, “Then it is settled. There you go, King Artemerio. The kingdom will be in very good hands while you are away. You need not trouble yourself about the throne.” A chorus of oh yeses and very good hands followed. But I could see from the look on Artemerio’s face that he was still troubled—very troubled, indeed. “Let me be sure I understand,” said King Artemerio. The elders all turned their heads to look at him. “Are we to make this journey with no more information than what you’ve given us—with only the brief explanations of our dreams that you’ve provided—with nothing more than that?” “Well, actually, there may be something more,” I said. The unfamiliar tune I’d hummed earlier went through my mind almost as soon as Artemerio had begun to ask his question. “Does this mean anything to any of you?” I recited the words: “The hopeless shall hope. The songless shall sing. My people shall know The heart of their King.” The eyes of all of the elders were on me for a moment after I’d spoken. Then the stillness and silence erupted in frantic whispering. Some of the elders gestured wildly in their conversations with their neighbors; others merely nodded as they listened. One thoughtfully tugged at his long, white beard. Another stared at the ceiling, mumbling to himself as he counted something off on his fingers. Two rose from their seats and began pacing the floor, nearly bumping into each other each time they crossed paths. Prince Vestero, Queen Folasade, and King Artemerio stared at me with questioning looks. I shook my head and shrugged in response. But once the shock of the scene wore off, the comedy became apparent. Queen Folasade raised one delicate eyebrow in what seemed to be a look of mild surprise, and her lips curled in a smile notable for its elegant mirth. Prince Vestero burst out laughing. I chuckled. King Artemerio, however, glanced at each of the elders one by one with wide eyes, seemingly immune to the humor of the situation. “Were there any other words?” one of the elders asked me. The room became still and silent instantly. Again all the eyes of the elders were on me. “No,” I said. The whispering erupted once more. “Can such a thing be true?” one of the elders exclaimed. “What is happening here?” asked King Artemerio, standing to his feet. “Why are you all so excited? What does it mean? Is this good news or bad?” “To think that we would see such a thing in our lifetime!” an elder said without answering Artemerio. “Quite beyond my wildest hopes!” said the elder who was still tugging at his long, white beard. Those comments stirred the whisperers to wilder gestures and more impassioned conversations. King Artemerio opened his mouth to speak, but Queen Folasade laid a hand on his arm and shook her head. She rose and whispered something in his ear that caused him to nod and settle back in his chair. At last, the pacing elders returned to their seats, and the whispered conversations drew to a close. “Excuse us, please, King Artemerio. We are all quite overcome with happy surprise,” said an elder. “Do those words mean anything to us, Prince Barto? Yes, indeed! What an exciting time to be alive! What happy news!” “Gentlemen,” said Prince Vestero laughing, “your enthusiasm was extraordinary. I applaud you!” He clapped slowly two or three times. “Yes,” said King Artemerio. “If only you would tell us the reason for it.” The elder sitting across from me opened his mouth as if to speak, but Prince Vestero spoke first. “What were those words again, Prince Barto?” Prince Vestero asked. As I repeated the phrases, I realized there was something familiar about them, after all. “Where have I heard that before?” I asked. “It does sound familiar,” said King Artemerio. “It can’t be!” said Prince Vestero. “No, it really does remind me of something,” said King Artemerio. “It must be!” said Queen Folasade. At her words, Prince Vestero’s eyes caught hers, and he began nodding slowly. She pulled the map of the islands out of the box. “Must be what?” asked King Artemerio. “Did I hear it at sea?” I asked no one in particular as I stared up at the ceiling. “No, that doesn’t seem right.” “Must be what?” King Artemerio asked again. “My, my,” said one of the elders, “this is certainly entertaining. I only hope we were as interesting to watch.” “Much more so,” said Prince Vestero, chuckling. “King Artemerio, Prince Barto—you have both heard those phrases before. They were part of a song I sang when we were in Black Rock Forest…when we led the Crevtonians to Lagal.” “Of course,” I said. “But…maybe they are not as special as I thought. Maybe I just...remembered them on my own last night. I hope I haven’t caused this excitement for nothing.” “No, my boy,” said the elder nearest to Artemerio. “The Great King speaks in many ways. A reminder of one of his songs is no less special than unfamiliar words. Do you not sense his voice behind it? Do you not sense that it was more than just remembering?” “I thought I did at first, but...but it’s so easy to question these things and explain them away,” I said. “You’ll learn, my boy, you’ll learn,” said the elder nearest to Artemerio. “Prince Barto, the Great King gave that song to the people of Windsal long ago,” said Queen Folasade. She held King Artemerio’s map in her hands and studied it as she spoke. “The song told of the future the Great King had planned for the kingdom, and it was given to the people to ease their heartbreak after—” Queen Folasade looked up from the map and paused. “After a time of great sadness. But it is a waiting song—the words of hope have yet to be fulfilled.” “Words of hope?” I said. “Yes,” said an elder. “I don’t understand,” said King Artemerio. “Hope for what?” “Hope that things will be set right,” said Queen Folasade. “But my dear, you have yet to ask the elders the most important question about sailing to the islands.” “What question is that?” said King Artemerio. “Where are we going?” said Prince Vestero, laughing. He nimbly and quickly jumped to his feet. “What are these islands we’ll be sailing to? Do these islands have a name?” Excitement built in his voice with each question. “Where are we going? That is the question yet to be asked.” “Very well,” said King Artemerio. “Where are we going?” A smiling elder answered, “It seems that Prince Vestero and Queen Folasade have guessed.” “Then you know the guess we have in mind? Are we correct?” asked Prince Vestero. He gripped the back of his empty chair so tightly his knuckles turned white, and he stared without blinking at the elder who had spoken. “I cannot read your mind, of course,” said the elder, “but I daresay yes.” “So where are we going?” King Artemerio asked again. “Windsal,” said Queen Folasade. The elders nodded. Chapter 4: The Story “Windsal?” I said. “But we’re already in Windsal.” “We’re in the second Windsal,” said Queen Folasade. “We shall return to the first.” “Return to the first? Return to King Ralo’s homeland?” asked King Artemerio. “King Ralo left for a reason, you know. I’m not sure why we would want to go back. In fact, I think we’re making a very big mistake. I think we have misunderstood. The Great King would never expect us to go there.” Prince Vestero spoke. “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty, how long has it been since you heard the story of King Ralo’s departure from his homeland?” “I suppose it has been some time since I studied that particular part of Windsal’s history, but I do remember the gist of what happened. And it was bad. Very bad,” said King Artemerio. “That’s why King Ralo came here.” “Oh, the gist is not at all sufficient,” said Prince Vestero. “Hear, hear! I heartily agree,” said the elder who had asked me to tell him my stories. He leaned forward and said with great passion, “One must always go to the source, I say, if one wants to avoid the dangers of muddled details.” “A fine point,” said the elder next to me. “Indeed,” said another elder. “Perhaps I could persuade one of you elders to recite the tale of Ralo and Milant?” said Prince Vestero. “You are, after all, those in the land most familiar with the many songs and tales of Windsalian history. And you are the best storytellers I know.” The heads of the elders turned toward the elder who, earlier, during the elders’ excitement, had been tugging at his long, white beard. That elder looked from face to face. Then he laughed, tugged on his long, white beard for a moment, and said, “It appears I have been chosen to do the telling. Very well.” The other elders began whispering again. An elder next to me leaned over and said, “Excellent storyteller. Excellent. None better.” The storyteller took a deep breath, and the other elders fell silent. Eyes closed, the storyteller began to recite. “In ages far beyond our reach, In days beyond the days of old, Before the foot of man was set Upon the land we now behold, Another land, Windsal by name, Across the sea did shine and gleam— A noble nation, bright and fair, A kingdom favored by the King. A treasure far beyond compare, The people knew the Great King’s heart And sought to serve and love and give To honor, reverence, thanks impart.” As the storyteller spoke, I saw wispy images appear above his head. They became more and more solid until I recognized the islands I had seen on King Artemerio’s map. The recitation continued. “And so the kingdom grew and lived, Untouched by worries, wants, or needs, Devoted to the One Great King, Kept safe by wisdom’s words and deeds. But favor often draws the gaze Of those who thrive on greed and hate, And so the eye of Dunley fell Upon the kingdom’s lovely gate. Unnumbered times he sought to turn The favored people from the King, But wisdom’s caution did its work, And Dunley felt rejection’s sting. At last he settled on a plan Four generations in its length. He’d wait as all those lifetimes passed And then attack the children’s strength. In waiting, he withdrew from sight And spared the people from his hand To disprove wisdom’s cautious words And falsely question wisdom’s stand.” The storyteller paused, and the elders began whispering. The wispy images floating above the storyteller disappeared. “This next part is very sad,” the elder next to me whispered. “Very sad, indeed.” The storyteller stood and moved away from the table. As he continued the story, new images appeared with his words. “When time had passed as he had planned And people lived who knew him not, He came again with dark intent, With evil words, with hateful thought: ‘If Dunley and his ‘evil’ works Are never seen and never heard, Might wisdom’s warnings teach a myth And, therefore, just be empty words? ‘And if, in fact, that is the case, What does the Great King hope to do? His words, it seems, are heavy chains To bind, misguide, and weary you. ‘So I advise: Throw off the chains! Forget the wisdom you now hold. You cannot trust the Great King’s heart, His teachings, or the songs of old.’ So Dunley spread both doubt and fear Among the people in the land. But there was more he hoped to do To bring to fullness all he planned. As two more generations passed, His words took root and broke apart The teachings of the Great King’s love, The knowledge of the Great King’s heart. But this was not enough for him, For he was more than just a thief. Destruction for this treasured land Would bring the Great King much more grief. And so his eye fell on the throne, And on the princes who would reign. With proper training, they could bring Destruction and tremendous pain. His evil plan was well in place. The king and queen, his witless tools, Had wandered far from wisdom’s path, And so would raise two selfish fools. But one thing Dunley could not change. A law that irked him grievously Said royal sons were to be taught By Lady Wisdom—only she. So even with his careful schemes, A tiny seed of hope got through. The Lady Wisdom did the job The law said she was bound to do. The Lady Wisdom taught the sons. She taught them well and taught them right. She taught them of the Great King’s heart And how to walk in wisdom’s light. The older, Ralo, listened well, Embracing all the Lady taught. Milant, the younger, scorned her words. And Dunley soon began to plot. If Ralo never took the throne, Milant could still fulfill the plan. His heart was selfish, cruel, and cold. He would become a foolish man.” Leaning toward me, the elder next to me whispered, “This next part is sadder still.” The storyteller began to pace, and then he began to speak again. “So Dunley, with a desperate strength, Attacked the law with new deceit. Relentlessly he made the case The irksome law was incomplete: ‘Dear king, the princes have to learn To judge, to rule, to reign, to war. Think you one teacher is enough? Why not, I ask you, add one more? ‘Fulfill the law, indeed you should But more is better, I would think.’ Persisting thus, he got his way. ‘You know of someone?’ asked the king. ‘I do,’ he said with quiet glee. ‘I’ll send to you the perfect one.’ Disguised, he then went to the king, Who hired him to teach the sons. But Ralo held to wisdom’s path And saw through Dunley’s thin disguise. He tried to warn the king and queen, But still they trusted Dunley’s lies. Worse yet, they told that Ralo warned Against his teacher’s evil ways. And so the teacher knew he knew And sought to make his student pay. The time had come, so Dunley thought, To draw Milant into his schemes, And so he had a talk with him And fed Milant’s self-centered dreams.” The storyteller cleared his throat, and the elder next to me whispered, “He’s about to do the voices. Very impressive. But still very sad.” Rubbing his hands together and smiling wickedly, the storyteller continued. “‘If only you could take the throne! How excellent your reign would be! It seems unfair your brother’s first Though you excel exceedingly.’ ‘I know,’ Milant forlornly said. ‘It is a shame I have to wait. I fear he’ll live a long, long life— Have many children—seal my fate.’ ‘But did we not just read a law That spoke of how you could be king? What did it say? What were those words?’ Milant was carefully listening. ‘If Ralo dies, I take the throne. But still no answer do I see. Should I but raise a hand to him, Well—that would be the end of me.’ ‘Ah, no,’ said Dunley, craftily. ‘It could be done in such a way That none would guess at your small part. Why, I was thinking just today— ‘An arrow shot amidst the trees At some supposed fleeing deer Might find its way to Ralo’s heart. An accident! He was too near. ‘A shove at just the perfect time Atop a canyon’s lonely rim. A drop or two into his drink— Let poison put an end to him.’ ‘Enough!’ Milant said with a sigh. ‘How could I do this wicked thing?’ ‘It is your duty,’ he replied, ‘For who would make the better king?’ ‘It is my duty? Yes, it is. I know I’d make the better king. What is his life compared to all The people’s loss and suffering? ‘For surely he would cause such grief! More than the kingdom long could bear. Compared to that, his life is—what? So I must kill—because I care.’” The storyteller returned to his seat, and the images faded away. “That’s the end of the voices,” whispered the elder next to me. “More sadness to come—but also an escape.” “So Dunley and Milant began To put in place their evil schemes. But Ralo fled the palace then— The Great King warned him in his dreams. Good Ralo was to leave the land And sail with others far away To plant Windsal on distant shores, And on those shores, he was to stay. The king then died by Dunley’s hand, And if good Ralo hadn’t fled, By Dunley’s and Milant’s dark plans, That night he, too, would have been dead. Good Ralo sought the Lady’s help, And she procured the needed ships For those who served the Great King still To join him on his daring trip. For Dunley’s evil plan was this, Now that his prince would rule on high: For those who loved the Great King still, There was no hope—they all would die. But all who listened sailed away. They had been spared this tragic fate. And those who didn’t, hid themselves On nearby islands, just to wait. Milant, indeed, then took the throne, But neither he nor any since Was ever truly fit to rule— For by the law, he stayed a prince. When Dunley killed the foolish king, On Ralo royal kingship fell. And since he lived and sailed away, The royal kingship left, as well. A new Windsal would rise afresh From remnants of the fallen land. And there good Ralo would be king, And all would see the Great King’s hand. The first Windsal no longer shined, Because of Dunley’s evil work. Where once a noble kingdom gleamed, Dark shadows and deep evil lurked. Those sailing felt the pain of loss From leaving what they’d loved so long. And so the Great King touched their ears And bid the stars to sing a song— A song of hope, a song of peace A song of promise as they sailed. For Old Windsal a day will come When all of Dunley’s plans will fail.” The storyteller stopped reciting. He used his long beard to wipe the tears from his eyes. Prince Vestero started humming softly. “Yes, Prince Vestero,” said the storyteller, “that is the song. And the words given to Prince Barto were very important words from the song. And they mean that the time has finally come. The promise will be fulfilled.” He wiped his eyes again and took a deep breath. “There is just a bit more of the recitation.” He continued. “In Old Windsal, the darkness grows, And hope and song are there no more. But ever lives the Great King’s love, So Old Windsal shall be restored. One day a king will take the throne With strength such power to decline. And Old Windsal shall be renamed— Restored, renewed, reborn—to shine.” “Excellent storytelling,” said the elder next to me. He wiped at his tears and then clapped his hands. The other elders joined him. “Now, now,” said the storyteller. “You are very kind, but I hardly consider this to be worth applause. Not my best work, I’m afraid. I almost couldn’t finish! Oh, very well. Thank you. Thank you. But we have important matters to discuss.” The applause began to taper off with his reminder. “We certainly do,” said King Artemerio softly. “I suppose—I suppose we weren’t mistaken. I suppose the promise is the reason for the strange events of late.” He smiled. “So tell me. Where exactly is the first Windsal?” The elders looked back and forth at each other all around the table until all eyes again rested on the storyteller. “No one actually knows,” he said. Chapter 5: A Clandestine Departure “No one knows?” said King Artemerio. “No one?” “No,” said an elder. “That knowledge was lost many generations ago.” Artemerio looked at the elder as if the elder were speaking madness. “Then how—then what—then—” “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty, King Ralo did not know the way to the place he was to go, either,” said Prince Vestero. “Yes, but—” King Artemerio began. But he seemed uncertain how to continue and gave up his argument. “Perhaps we should hear the song sung by the stars,” I said. “Prince Vestero, will you sing it for us?” “Excellent suggestion. I think it will be just the thing to encourage...any among us who may need encouragement,” said Prince Vestero, glancing at King Artemerio, who again looked troubled. Prince Vestero hummed a few different notes, trying different pitches, before he stood and stepped away from the table. “It is a song within a song,” he said, and he began to sing. “The people of Windsal set sail Upon a vast and lonely sea Without a map, without a guide, But with the Great King’s own decree That they should sail and start anew, Upon a far and distant shore And He would bless and carry them And for their loss would give them more. Oh, sing, you servants of the King! Forever bear His name! For though the times some sadness bring, His love remains the same. And so the people sailed and sailed And passed such lovely lands That they would be content to stop But for the Great King’s plans. Obeying Him, they sailed away From crystal lakes and streams, From flowered trees and golden sand. They listened to their dreams. Oh, sing, you servants of the King! Forever trust His hand! For though He leads you onward still, He leads to better lands. And when they reached the end of all— The end of all they knew, They left the broad-leaved trees behind And sailed into the blue. No land in sight and nothing known To rise up from that sea, They sailed along with only faith That land there soon would be. Oh, sing, you servants of the King! Forever seek His will! For though you cannot see your way, The Great King guides you still. And yet their hearts were broken for The land they left behind. The Great King saw and felt their grief, And so He gave a sign. He caught their tears and dried their eyes And bid the stars to sing. And then He touched the people’s ears To hear these words we bring.” Prince Vestero stopped singing. “Good elders, will you help with this part? It will need harmony to give the full effect.” “Yes, yes,” said an elder. “Of course,” said two or three others. A few elders cleared their throats. “Remember, King Artemerio, Prince Barto—the stars sang this,” said Prince Vestero. “So imagine a black night sky dotted with tiny points of light, the rhythmic sloshing of waves against the sides of the ships, and the magnificent voices of the stars echoing off of the sea.” Prince Vestero raised his arms and directed the elders like a choir. The dramatic shift in the melody and rhythm of the song, along with the layered harmonies provided by the elders, gave me chills. “Oh, do not despair! The Great King is near! He promises this To those who will hear: ‘The hopeless shall hope. The songless shall sing. My people shall know The heart of their King. ‘The darkness shall flee. My plans shall prevail. A mountain shall move, And Dunley shall fail. ‘Windsal shall be saved The Old made like New. It shall be redeemed— I promise to you.’ Oh, sing, you servants of the King! Forever trust His heart! His words will always come to pass And life and truth impart. And so the people reached the land Appointed for their stay And found that all was good, indeed, As darkness turned to day. Oh, sing, you servants of the King! Forever sing His praise! For who can match the Great King’s love, His goodness, or His grace?” The elders and Prince Vestero sang the last verse with a very moving flourish. None of us spoke for a few moments. Several of the elders dabbed at their eyes with their beards, wiping away tears. Prince Vestero quietly took his seat. “What about the servants of the Great King who stayed behind?” I asked, daring to break the silence. “What happened to them? And what happened with Milant and the kingdom after Ralo left?” “We have no songs or tales that answer your questions,” said an elder. “All we know is what Ralo and the others who traveled with him were faithful to pass on. And, of course, they were not witnesses to anything that happened in their homeland once they left.” “Well,” said another elder, “we have stayed here much longer than we expected to, and though you may have many more questions, I am afraid we do not have many more answers.” A different elder spoke. “Indeed. We really should be going.” He stood. “Yes,” said another elder. “And Dunley’s interest in all this has now been explained. You must all be careful.” “Thank you, Elders of Lagal, for the story, for the song—for all you have explained to us,” said King Artemerio. Prince Vestero walked toward a large trunk near the wall. “Good elders, Lagalian warriors are waiting in the courtyard to take you back to Lagal. If I may be so bold, I recommend you wear disguises as we wander through the palace halls to meet them. I’m sure you understand.” He opened the trunk. Inside were white, stiffly starched servant uniforms, like the ones the kitchen staff wore. Prince Vestero began to hand the uniforms to the elders. “I realize not much can be done about your beards—unless some of you might be willing to shave...” Prince Vestero stopped speaking and glanced at the faces of the elders. Before the mention of shaving, the elders looked mildly amused. After the mention of shaving, the elders’ faces registered some variation of absolute unwillingness, horrified shock, or barely contained indignation. Two or three of the elders clutched at their beards as if to protect them. Prince Vestero continued. “I sense mutiny. Never mind. I suppose we don’t have all that far to go to make my suggestion worthwhile. Just slip the uniform on over your cloak.” He handed out the last two uniforms. “I will have to ask you to march in two orderly columns, like the staff does. You’ve seen them, haven’t you?” Prince Vestero put on his silver-haired wig and the mask with the wart. The elders formed their lines. An elder at the front turned back toward where King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and I stood. “Before Prince Vestero marches us out, we really should bid the four of you a proper farewell.” The other elders turned to face us. The cloaks they wore under the perfectly starched, white, belted uniforms added strange bulges to their shapes. One or two of them might have looked ridiculous, but in their group of twenty or so, they looked impressively nondescript—hardly worth a glance. Prince Vestero’s eye for disguises was unmatched. The elder continued. “Though we have the reassurance of the Great King’s promise regarding Windsal, we do not know what challenges lie ahead for us. But wherever our paths take us and your paths take you, we wish you well. And above all, we say to you, Prince Barto, King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and Prince Vestero—go in the name of the Great King.” “In the name of the Great King,” we repeated. “Wait here for me,” Vestero said to Artemerio, Folasade, and me. He opened the secret panel, and the elders marched out following him. *** “The elders are safely on their way,” said Prince Vestero when he returned. “Very good,” said King Artemerio. “Although I hope you didn’t scare the elders with your insistence on disguises.” “Scare them? Not at all! Who doesn’t enjoy the thrill of a clandestine departure?” said Prince Vestero as he removed his wig and mask. “More people than you might think,” said King Artemerio. “But the ridiculous argument we are on the verge of having reminds me of an idea I had while you were away. I would like to review as many of the songs and tales of old as I can. We all should. I assume they can be found somewhere in the royal library—correct?” “Yes,” said Prince Vestero. “In fact…wait just a moment.” Prince Vestero put on his wig and mask and darted into the library on the other side of the secret panel. He returned moments later with a few books and scrolls. “These will get you started. The tale of Ralo and Milant, the one the elder recited, is in here.” He set a book in front of me and opened it to the page containing the tale. Flipping through another book, he found the page he was looking for and set it in front of Artemerio. “This is the song you heard today.” Artemerio stared down at the book in front of him. “I’m curious what this has to do with clandestine departures,” said Prince Vestero. “Are you expecting us to sail away secretly? Because, actually, I think we may do just that. I—” “No, no, no. Nothing like that. It has to do with King Ralo’s clandestine departure and how even if I once knew what he thought about it, I have long since forgotten—along with many other details about his journey. Therefore, a thorough study of what has been written about it might...Ah, ha!” said King Artemerio. He slapped the table with his open hand. Then he looked at Prince Vestero. “Well, I think you see the connection now. That’s enough of that. But listen to this! I knew it sounded like something I’d heard recently. Prince Barto…read this. Out loud.” He set his book in front of me and pointed to a section of the song. “This paragraph and this paragraph. Not like a poem—like a description.” “‘Obeying Him, they sailed away from crystal lakes and streams, from flowered trees and golden sand. They listened to their dreams.’ And which one?” I said. Artemerio pointed to the one he wanted me to read, and I continued. “‘And when they reached the end of all—the end of all they knew, they left the broad-leaved trees behind and sailed into the blue.’” “Oh—one more. Read the next,” said Artemerio. I read aloud. “‘No land in sight and nothing known to rise up from that sea, they sailed along with only faith that land there soon would be.’” “Well?” said Artemerio. “Well…what?” I asked. “Doesn’t that sound like your description of the Unconquered Lands? The golden sand? The broad-leaved trees? The miles and miles of open ocean between here and there?” Artemerio’s eyes were wide as he stared at me. I read through the words again. “Of course it does!” said Queen Folasade. “And it is well known that King Ralo and the others landed on the side of Windsal—our Windsal—that lies in the direction of the Unconquered Lands.” “Yes, my dear queen. Exactly,” said King Artemerio. He returned his stare to me. “Well, Prince Barto? What do you think?” Chapter 6: Wild Waves “I do think this sounds like what I’ve seen in the Unconquered Lands, except for the flowered trees. I never saw those. But they might have been farther out than I explored,” I said. King Artemerio seemed satisfied. He turned to Prince Vestero. “Are there other songs about the journey? Songs that might provide a few more details?” “I know of none,” said Prince Vestero, shaking his head. “There are no others,” said Queen Folasade. “What about tales?” asked Artemerio. “Perhaps there are clues in some of the stories.” “There are no other tales that mention the journey,” said Queen Folasade. “Or at least no others that have been handed down to us.” “I see,” said Artemerio. His excitement faded. “The only song we have, then, gives us a starting point and a general direction, at best. It seems a great risk to take.” Artemerio’s extreme alternations between excitement and hesitation reminded me of my time at sea, where the wild waves toss around anything less powerful than they and give life an unsettling, disorienting, up-and-down, back-and-forth feeling—as if the whole world were unsteady instead of just the waves. I wondered if I were being tossed around as he was. And I suddenly felt very tired. “Knowing which direction to set sail in is no small thing,” said Prince Vestero. “Ages and ages have passed since any Windsalian knew even that much.” “True,” said King Artemerio. “But there must be some way we can discover exactly what course we are to take. Prince Barto, can we get the drawings from Filimo any sooner than next week? And could he also sketch a simple map for us of the places you saw? And, now that I think about it, perhaps you could write up your full report on the trip and sketch a simple map yourself—and chart the course you took and the exact spots where you landed.” As Artemerio spoke, I realized I was yawning more and more and having a difficult time paying attention. He continued. “Oh—and perhaps—” Silence settled around me. “Prince Barto! Barto!” King Artemerio said as he nudged my shoulder. I lifted my head and rubbed my eyes. “Sorry,” I said, realizing I’d been asleep and wishing I still were. The conversation that followed consisted of Prince Vestero’s inquiry about my health, my admission that I had not yet been to bed, and the queen’s insistence that I be sent off to rest at once. Happily, I went. *** In what felt like no time at all, I found myself waking to the sound of birds chirping. As I opened my eyes, I saw that I was not in my bed; I was lying on hard, grassy ground and surrounded by tall trees. I stood up and looked around. Besides the tall trees, which were the tallest trees I’d ever seen, I saw a large cluster of shrubs or bushes nearby. The cluster was the size of a small house, and in between the dark green leaves of the shrubs, I saw bright berries of some kind. Suddenly hungry, I wondered if the berries were edible. I drew nearer to the strange plants to see if I could identify them, and as I did so, I realized that all the leaves were hiding a house. The plants seemed to be intended to hide the house—a trellis that extended up beyond the roof guided and supported the shrubbery. And to my delight, the berries were the same delicious, crimson berries I’d eaten at breakfast with King Artemerio a day or so before: patience. Between the leaves, I could see the wooden walls of the house, and as I walked around the perimeter, I noticed a window. A small patch of it was not hidden by leaves, and I thought it might be part of a door. I moved closer to investigate. A young woman’s pleasant face appeared in that small corner of glass and then moved away. Startled and embarrassed, I turned to go. I heard the sound of a door being flung open. “Wait!” said a woman’s voice. I turned again. The young woman whose face I’d seen in the window stood near the house. Her golden hair was pulled back in a long braid, and she wore brilliantly shining armor. She carried a long sword, and soft light radiated out from her. Only then did I realize how dark the forest was. “Help us,” she said. A man, also wearing armor, came out of the house and stood next to her. Another woman joined them. Then two men came out. People continued coming out of the small house for what seemed like a long time, until a small army stood before me. It seemed impossible that such a large group could have fit in the house, but my wondering about that was interrupted by the woman’s words. “Help us,” the young woman said again. “The time is now. You will know the way.” “Do we sail for the Unconquered Lands?” I asked. Total darkness fell. Everything went black. I sat up in my bed, my heart pounding. In the fading light of the afternoon, I could see the familiar walls and furniture of my bedroom in the palace. The trees, the house, the people—all had been part of a dream. But the woman’s words came back to me sharply: The time is now. I dressed quickly and went in search of King Artemerio. *** “So you had a dream about the islands—about the first Windsal?” King Artemerio asked when I met with him alone in the secret room. “I believe so,” I said. I described the dream. By the time I finished, Artemerio wore a slight frown. Shifting his vacant stare between various points in the room, he brought the fingertips of one hand to the opposing fingertips of the other and formed a shape that resembled a mountain peak, the highest point of which he brought to rest against his deepening frown. But he did not respond. “Artemerio? What are you thinking?” I asked. After a lengthy pause, he looked at me, the vacant stare replaced with solemn focus. “It seems we have come to a moment of truth, a deciding point, when all of the hopefulness and excitement of the meeting with the elders must begin to take some physical form—or be swept away as foolishness. Until now, the trouble has been that I was unsure if the dreams we’d been having were from the Great King. But the elders have confirmed that they were. And now I find that I rather enjoyed being in doubt about the source of the dreams and what they meant—because now that I know, I must act. I thought it would be so much easier than this. And I still think it would be, if only I knew the exact course we are to take...and what we are to do once we reach our destination...and whether we will return...” He sighed. “Those hardly sound like the words of one who once wanted nothing more than to live the life of an adventurer. I can’t think of a life full of more uncertainty than the one you used to long for.” “But I am not an adventurer, Barto. I am a king. And kings think much of responsibilities and duties. They must. So I cannot help but wonder what is to become of this Windsal. What will happen to this kingdom if we do not return? Could any king love it as I do? Could the Great King really mean for me to leave behind the throne he gave me? And what will be the outcome of our quest? Is the potential good worth more than the potential harm? What if we sail all that way for nothing and both kingdoms fall to ruin? Or what if we sail all that way only to discover we lack the means to do whatever it is we are sailing there to do—because we do not know exactly why we are going and cannot, therefore, adequately prepare? Or what if we misunderstand some small detail in a dream or a song and…and take a wrong turn and fail to reach the other kingdom entirely? What if, what if, what if?” He frowned and settled deeper into his chair. “Does this not strike you as foolishness, Prince Barto? To go with no idea of the course we are to take? If only we knew that much…the course…but…” He shook his head. “Such considerations seem appropriate,” I said, “but allow me to propose a few more possibilities—a few more what ifs. What if your heart for adventure is part of why you were chosen to be king? What if you were not called to give up your dreams of the Unconquered Lands? What if those dreams, which led you to your throne, were always meant to be fulfilled? I commend you for your commitment to your responsibilities and duties as king—and for your love and concern for your kingdom. But what if the legacy of your kingship depends on your willingness to let it go? What if this throne is only one small part of the good works you were intended to do? What if your kingship is not an end in itself but is a means to a larger, more magnificent end than you can now imagine? But how much are any of our what ifs worth? We are trying to guess about a future that is impossible for us to see. But the One who sees all—who knows all—has told you that you are to go. If you do not value and honor that one clear word, if you do not cling to it with all your might, how can you be trusted with the words that may follow? You must settle in your mind the answer to this one question: Do you trust the Great King? If the answer is yes, I expect he will straighten out whatever ways seem twisted and mysterious and get you to where you need to be—and take care of the kingdom he’s called you to leave behind. But if the answer is no, I think all of your ways will be twisted and take you to wrong places.” “The answer is yes, of course,” said King Artemerio with no hesitation. “Of course I trust him.” Something about him seemed steadier once he said those words, and something like a shadow left his eyes. “I have made my decision. We will set sail as soon as possible. If the time is now, we dare not linger here much longer.” *** “What are our plans? King Artemerio has told you of the dream, I suppose?” I said as I took my seat at the table in the secret room. Following an early breakfast, Artemerio requested that Folasade, Vestero and I meet. “Yes, he told us,” said Vestero, removing his silver-haired wig as casually as if it were a hat. “Last night,” said Artemerio to me. “We met without you—I thought it best not to disturb your sleep in case…” He looked at me questioningly. “I had no other dreams,” I said. “I’ve spoken with Syroton and Athalia,” said Vestero. “They are ready to serve whenever we are ready to leave, they said. But I should mention, since you were not with us last night, Prince Barto, that Syroton and Athalia do not know where we are going and will not be told, although I think they would be as overjoyed as the elders to know. Since we have not yet been given permission to speak of where we are going and since Dunley is no doubt crouching somewhere near, waiting for his moment to pounce, we should be quite cautious in all of our actions. As I told King Artemerio and Queen Folasade last night, I anticipate the need for many, many disguises. And, for a time, continued secrecy.” “I understand,” I said. “Were you able to find us a ship and crew?” King Artemerio asked Prince Vestero. “A crew—yes. A ship—yes and no,” said Prince Vestero. “I’m still working out the arrangements for the ship I have in mind.” “How did you explain our voyage to the crew?” asked Queen Folasade. “I assume you have kept our destination a secret from them, too.” “I didn’t explain anything to them,” said Prince Vestero. “There are those in the service of the king—noblemen and noblewomen, with or without that title—who risk their lives for the king and the kingdom every day. They need no explanations. They only need to know the mission serves the Great King.” “Then our crew will be members of the Royal Guard?” said Queen Folasade. “I can’t imagine a better escort. Well done, Prince Vestero.” “Thank you. I am honored that you think so highly of them, my Queen,” said Vestero. He looked genuinely pleased by the compliment, but pleased for the Royal Guards, not for himself. “I can understand having to find a crew, but what’s this about having to find a ship?” I asked. “Are we not taking a ship from the royal fleet?” “No,” said Artemerio. “The unexpected arrival of a royal envoy may be unsettling to the people of...to the people of the other Windsal. But a trade ship will not be feared. And we won’t attract unwanted attention at sea.” “And all of us will have disguises,” said Prince Vestero. “Not even the Royal Guards will know who we are…at least not at first, though once we are safely away, they will likely be told.” “A clandestine departure,” I said. Prince Vestero looked positively gleeful. “Quite,” he said. “So when do we leave?” I asked. “We will sail for the islands within the week, as soon as all the final arrangements have been made,” said King Artemerio. “Within the week? That’s the soonest we can—” I began to protest. “We can’t leave without a ship, Barto,” said Artemerio. “I suppose not,” I said. But even a few days seemed too long to wait, and I hoped, for the sake of those waiting for us, that whatever issues had hindered the making of arrangements for a ship would be resolved quickly. “And besides the ship, we will want to take with us copies of the songs and tales that mention the first Windsal,” said Prince Vestero. “I have my fastest scribes working on that for us, but it will take a day or two.” “Very well,” I said. “If you insist on being sensible, I suppose I should not object. What remains to be done?” “For you—nothing,” said Queen Folasade. “Enjoy your time on land. Before too long, you will be back on a ship.” “What about going to visit Father?” I asked, looking at Artemerio. “Only if you go today,” said Prince Vestero. “The exact time of our departure may come at any moment within the week.” “Then if we are finished here, I’ll leave immediately,” I said. “Are you coming with me, King Artemerio?” “No,” he answered. “I visited him a few days ago, and I have work to do here before we leave. Besides, if we show up together so unexpectedly, especially since I’ve so recently visited, Father will suspect that something is wrong. You know Father. He will start asking questions—questions we can’t answer.” Artemerio paused. “Prince Barto, I know you know of our need to keep our trip and the islands a secret, but please be careful not to mention anything about any of this to Father. He does not have the protections we do against Dunley, remember.” “I know,” I said. I sighed. “I know. And even if we could speak of returning to the first Windsal, he would try to talk us out of it. ‘Foolishness!’ he’d say.” I stared at my hands as I imagined the conversation. “Prince Vestero, will you have the scribes send a copy of the songs and tales of old to our father? He may never read them. Or he may dismiss all of the promises and hope they contain as empty, flowery words of bygone days. But he cannot read what he does not have. And perhaps he will dare to ask for light.” “I will have them sent,” said Prince Vestero. “Your brother has already requested it.” Artemerio nodded silently. “You may be right. He may never read them,” said Artemerio. “But he might. We must not forget that stranger things have happened.” Chapter 7: Only Sand My father was out at sea in his fishing boat when I arrived to visit him. I waited on the shore for him to return, but I didn’t have long to wait. “What brings you to see me?” he asked. He hummed a cheerful tune as we tied up his boat. “It has been a long time.” “Yes—I’ve been away on a long trip. I sailed to the Unconquered Lands.” Father smiled, pride shining in his eyes. “My son, the adventurer. No fisherman’s life for you.” “You’ve had a good life as a fisherman,” I said. “And you know you don’t have to be a fisherman anymore if you don’t want to be one. You know Artemerio and I would gladly take care of you—move you into the palace, buy a new house for you closer to us—whatever you would like.” “I know. And I’m grateful for the offer. But I make my own way.” Father and I walked the short distance to his small seaside hut. He had built it himself to be closer to his work. Though it seemed well built, the many sticks of wood bound tightly together and insulated with palm leaves, I could not imagine that it offered any real protection from the frequent storms that approached from the sea. One strong storm would completely sweep away this house, whose foundation was made of only sand. “Come in, come in,” said Father as he held open the door of woven reeds. I stepped inside and sat at his small table. “So—the Unconquered Lands, eh? And you’ll be leaving on another voyage soon, I suspect. Where to this time?” “I don’t know all the details yet,” I said. “Don’t know the details? What kind of way is that to plan? A man has to know where he’s going if he ever hopes to get there.” He filled a cup with water for me. “You are not still relying on the Great King to lead you, are you? No wonder you don’t know where you are going.” His teasing tone had a sharp edge to it. He handed me the cup. I took a sip of water and braced myself for what was sure to follow. “I will never understand how two levelheaded sons of mine could put their trust in these…these…myths! These fantastical legends that feed the folly of so many! How could I have failed you so, my son, that you would turn to fairy tales as a guide?” He sat down at the table with me. Despite his words, I knew he meant well. In an almost pleading tone, he said, “What happened to you, my son? I still don’t understand. What happened on that quest you went on for King Syroton? When you solved the riddle for him?” “I’ve told you. We—” He held up one hand to stop me from talking. “I know, I know! You said you met the Great King. But that’s not possible. Why can’t you see that?” He stood and stepped to the small window that looked out toward the water. “We are alone.” His voice was firm. “There is no Great King. It’s us against the waves, us against the storms. But we make our own way, because we are strong.” He kicked at the sand floor of the hut, smoothed over the holes he made with his foot, and looked back toward me. “I’m sorry, Barto, I don’t mean to lecture you. I just don’t understand, and I hate to see you waste your life listening to such…foolishness.” “I’ve done more than listen to it; I’ve lived it, foolish as it may seem to you. And I can tell you nothing more than what I already have—because it is the truth. I cannot change the story to suit—” He interrupted me, the tension around his eyes confirming his impatience. “Yes, well—I’ve lived through some things, too, and nothing in my experience has convinced me that what you’ve described is possible.” His lips parted as if he were about to say more, but then he paused. His expression relaxed. “But let’s not spend the short time we have arguing.” His words sounded gruff, but he offered me a fleeting smile. I forced myself to sound cheerful as I said, “Of course. Show me what you’ve carved while I’ve been away. Or lead me to one of the projects you’ve been putting off. I’m happy to help mend nets—or whatever chore it might be. And I’m sure you have an entertaining story or two you’ve been waiting to tell me.” Father patted my shoulder. “I’m glad you mentioned the nets. I do have some repairs to make, but first let me show you this ship I’m carving. You won’t believe me when I tell you what I had to do to retrieve this particular piece of driftwood.” I reached for the small ship he held out and settled back in my chair to listen. *** No messenger had come for me during my visit with my father, so I returned, as planned, after two days with him. I climbed the palace stairs that night with an absentminded slowness. I couldn’t stop thinking about my father. I had almost reached the top of the stairs when I decided to go down to the secret room. I thought reading might quiet my mind, and in the past I had found the solitude of the secret room to be comforting. Queen Folasade was coming out of the library as I was going in. “Welcome home, Prince Barto. Have you just returned? How was your visit?” she said. “How is your father?” “Good evening, Queen Folasade. I arrived not long ago. The visit was fine. Father is well. And the same,” I said. “I know the king’s heart is heavy for him, too,” Queen Folasade said gently. “But there is only so much you can do. Your father has to make his own choices.” “In my head I know that, but in my heart, I feel there must be something more I could do to reach him—something more I could say to help him understand. Why can’t he see?” “His story is not done,” said Queen Folasade. “Don’t lose hope, and don’t lose heart. Think of the surprising path that led you to the Great King. Your father may already be hearing the gentle whisper that calls to him, and his day for answering may come soon.” I smiled slightly. “Not yet does not mean never, as Prince Vestero might say. And to quote King Artemerio, ‘Stranger things have happened.’” Queen Folasade nodded. “Exactly.” She smiled encouragingly, and then she curtsied. “Good night, Prince Barto. I will leave you to whatever has drawn you here at this late hour.” “Good night, Queen Folasade,” I said, and I bowed. Queen Folasade left the library, and I walked to the secret panel. Inside the secret room, I sat at the long table and leaned my head on my hands. “Oh, Great King—my father—my father—please help my father.” I waited silently, desperately hoping to hear some reassurance that the Great King would help or some encouragement that all would be well. My thoughts turned to King Ralo and the grief he and the others must have felt over all those they left behind. I wanted to read the tale and song about their journey, but I couldn’t find the books that contained them. Giving up that search, I picked up a book I hadn’t noticed before, Ancient Tales of Old, from a shelf near King Artemerio’s wooden box. The dates in it indicated it was from long before the days of the second Windsal. King Ralo and the others must have brought it with them on their journey to found our kingdom, I concluded. It was instantly dear to me, and I sat at the table with it, flipping through the pages and wishing I had time to read every word. But then one page in particular caught my attention, and I stopped my restless turning and began to read. The words on the page glittered, as if written in gold, and said the following: As all the moments of the world Go spinning quickly past, There is one moment that remains— One moment that will last. One moment that will not be moved, Untouched by time’s advance. And on this moment hangs the world— Thus anchored, freed to dance. This moment started quietly, Unnoticed in its time, As nations rose and nations fell, Progressed and then declined. A Mighty King left crown and throne To right an ancient wrong. Left honor, glory, riches, praise— To Him all this belonged. But He took on a servant’s form Far from His royal throne, And He took on the world’s great debt And paid it all alone. For in the early days of time When life was new and fresh, One living fell for Dunley’s lies And so condemned all flesh. This ancient choosing of a wrong Unleashed unending loss. Destruction, suffering, death, decay— All this was wrong’s great cost. But worse by far than all of that, A chasm opened wide And kept the Maker from His world Far on the other side. And so to right the ancient wrong And gain back what was lost, The Great King paid with His own life And made a way to cross. For wayward, broken wanderers, The Great King left His throne. In all the history of the world, This moment stands alone. The words were not the specific reassurance I’d hoped for, but they seemed meant for me, just the same. As Queen Folasade had said, my father had to make his own choices. But in that moment, I knew the Great King’s heart: I knew that the Great King’s heart was as broken as mine over my father—if not more so. And I knew that the heart of the Great King is for his people, whether loyal or lost, and the great lengths he would go to in order to reach his people have no limit. Content to save the reading of the rest of the book for the long journey ahead, I left the secret room. *** As I stood outside the door of my bedroom, a moment away from turning the knob and entering, I heard footsteps approaching from down the hall. I paused and glanced in the direction of the sound. From the opposite direction, a voice said, “Prince Barto.” Startled, I turned. Prince Vestero, wearing his silver-haired wig and the mask with the wart, stood before me holding a silver tray. “Yes?” I said after a quick study of what the tray contained. Silver coverings topped what I guessed were one large plate and two smaller ones. A silver goblet held water. “Here is your dinner,” he said. “If you find you are not hungry, I hope you will at least have a bite of bread.” He tapped one of the silver covers. Then he walked into my room, set the tray down on my bed, bowed, and left. I shut my door and lifted the lid he had tapped, expecting to find a note or some sort of secret message. But all I saw was a small loaf of bread. “Well…I am hungry,” I said, reaching for the bread. But upon lifting it, I discovered a folded slip of paper underneath. Chapter 8: The Bread The slip of paper said the following: B.— You were followed from your father’s house to the palace. Don’t worry about your father: more guards—in disguise—have been sent to keep watch over him. But be cautious and alert. Your follower is believed to be one of Dunley’s servants. You will notice that your traveling clothes—the ones meant for public appearances with the king and queen—have been pressed and hung near your door. Wear them to breakfast with the king tomorrow. And please be prompt. The time has come. —V. P.S. Burn this note. I held the note over a candle and watched the fire blot out the words of the message, but before the task was completed, someone knocked at my door. I put out the flames racing toward my fingers and set the small, blank scrap of the paper’s edge on my desk. “Who is it?” I asked through the door. “Prince Vestero.” As I turned the knob, I felt pressure against the door. Vestero, wearing his silver-haired wig and the mask with the wart, burst into the room, pushing me aside. Then he grabbed the doorknob and quietly shut the door behind him. “Is something wrong?” I asked, as alarmed by his actions as by the fact that he’d used his name instead of the silver-haired servant’s. “Hmmm?” He glanced around the room as if he were looking for something. “Oh…no, forgive the intrusion. You know me—always in a hurry.” “Then…have you come for the tray?” I asked. “I haven’t had time to eat anything from it. But I suppose you only meant for me to have the bread.” “Yes…the bread. Hope you enjoyed it. Yes, I’ve come for the tray. Tell me, have you spoken with King Artemerio recently?” His gaze found the closet, the bed, the nightstand. “Not since our meeting two days ago. Why? Has something happened?” “Oh—no, no. I was wondering if he had given you the map or explained the course we will be taking when we go to—” Abruptly, his attention turned to me, and he seemed to be studying me as carefully as he had been studying my room. “What is the name of that place again?” I laughed. “Always joking. As if you could forget the name. No, I don’t have the map, and he’s told me nothing beyond what all of us have already discussed.” “Oh. Well, do you think the map is where he normally keeps it?” “I suppose so,” I said. “Why?” “I can’t find it. I’ve looked on the…the desk?” He studied my face as he spoke. “What desk?” “I mean, the shelf? Yes, the shelf. And the…the table? Of course, the table.” He seemed to be taking his cues from whatever unintentional reactions to his suggestions he was able to discern from studying me. “I think we should wake King Artemerio at once. If he has moved the map, he can put our fears to rest. And if he has not, he needs to know it is missing.” I reached for the door. “Wait, Prince Barto. Calm yourself. There is no reason to wake the king. Perhaps he has taken the map to his chambers. If so, I don’t want to bother him until you have confirmed my fear that it is missing. Why disturb the king when there is already so much on his mind?” He said the words so sensibly and authoritatively that his tone almost hid the strangeness of his message. Almost. “Go to the room where the map is kept and start the search without me. I have one small matter to take care of before I join you,” I said, feeling a pang of alarm. “I have already performed a thorough search. Another search by myself would clearly accomplish nothing. Do what you need to do. I’ll go with you—or wait here.” As Prince Vestero spoke, his eyes rested on something on my desk. Casually, he walked toward the desk and picked up the remaining fragment of the note I’d burned, the narrow strip of blank paper singed along one edge. “Burned something recently?” he asked, his back turned to me. I was glad he could not see my face at that moment. I broke out in a cold sweat as I began to wonder if the reason for Prince Vestero’s strange behavior was that this person before me was not Prince Vestero. He turned to look at me, his expression questioning, and he held up the singed paper. I hoped that laughing would mask whatever subtle differences he might perceive in me. It was all I could think to do. So with an exaggerated chuckle, I said, “Ah, yes. One can’t be too careful, all things considered, Prince Vestero. I would think you would approve of such diligence. You have trained me well.” Prince Vestero eyed the fragment of paper curiously for a moment, but then he set it down. “Indeed. Shall I go with you or wait here?” “Actually, speaking of training me...I fear you have failed when it comes to secret messages. Did you hide one somewhere on this tray for me? I thought when you brought it that you must have, since I did not send for anything to eat. But I suppose King Artemerio might have had it sent. Anyway, if there is a message on there somewhere, I don’t suppose we should leave it behind where anybody might discover it.” Prince Vestero’s eyes focused on the tray, and the corners of his mouth twitched as if he were holding back a smile. “The tray. Of course. It was...yes, it was King Artemerio who sent it, so we should most definitely search for a message. I’d hate for it to fall into the wrong hands.” He sat on my bed and balanced the tray on his knees. One by one, he lifted the tops off of the plates and examined each silver top for several seconds before setting each aside. Then he lifted the plates to look under them. Grasping the folded napkin, he shook it open and examined both sides. He tossed it aside, picked up my fork, and slowly and methodically dug through the food. “What was on that?” he asked, pointing to the empty plate. “A small loaf of bread. It’s over there, on the desk,” I said as I carefully positioned myself nearer to where I had laid my sword. Prince Vestero set aside the tray to examine the bread. He picked it up, looked over each side of it, and ripped it in half. “Nothing.” He tore it into smaller pieces, scattering crumbs all around where he stood. Dropping the remaining bits of bread he held, he said, “It seems there was no secret message.” He glanced down at the scrap of singed paper on the desk and picked it up again. “Unless—” I reached for my sword. “Who are you?” I asked. “I know you are not Prince Vestero.” “I think you know who I am,” said a voice that filled me with dread. Dunley pulled off the wig and mask and tossed them onto the desk. “I am not done with you,” he said. His eyes briefly focused on something beyond me. I glanced back, but all I saw that might catch his attention was the royal traveling attire, which hung by the door. “Have a pleasant journey, Prince Barto,” Dunley said with an evil smile. Then he vanished. I rushed to the king and queen’s private suite. *** “Is the king here?” I asked one of the guards posted at the entrance of the private suite. The guard seemed to take forever to answer. “No, Prince Barto. He said he was going to be in the throne room.” “Alone?” I asked. “He was alone when he left here. He ordered us to stay with Queen Folasade,” said the other guard. “Has something happened? Is the king in danger?” “The king and queen may both be in great danger. Stay with the queen. And consider yourselves on high alert until further notice.” Without waiting for a response, I turned and ran to find the king. “Follow me!” I called out to soldiers standing guard in the hallway. Though I didn’t look back, I could hear them running behind me. Our footsteps echoed loudly through the palace halls. As I neared the doors of the throne room, I slowed and gestured to the soldiers to follow quietly, and when I reached the room, I drew my sword. Nudging one door open a crack, I surveyed the scene inside. Artemerio was pacing in front of the thrones. “King Artemerio!” I said as I bounded into the room. “Prince Barto! What…what are you doing here?” he asked. He glanced behind me toward the soldiers. “Have you seen Dunley or any other intruder?” I asked him. “No. I have been alone,” said Artemerio. “All is well,” I said to the soldiers. “Return to your posts.” The soldiers bowed and left, but I waited until I was sure none could hear before I told Artemerio what had happened. “Where is Prince Vestero?” I asked when I had finished my story. “How could Dunley have gotten his mask and wig? I stopped by your suite, by the way, and told the guards to protect the queen.” “Queen Folasade must hear of this at once,” King Artemerio said as he walked, in a great hurry, toward the throne room doors. “And we should retrieve the map and—” His steps slowed and then stopped. “No…perhaps it’s safer where it is. Dunley obviously doesn’t know where it is hidden.” He started off again, and I had to speed up to match his long, rapid strides. “Prince Vestero is away from the palace. He left just after…” Artemerio began to whisper. “He left just after he delivered his message to you. He is making a few last-minute arrangements for the…for us.” He paused as if he were thinking. “But I feel sure he must have taken all the necessary precautions. I feel sure he would not fall for one of Dunley’s tricks.” “But should we look for him? Try to warn him?” I asked. Artemerio stopped walking, his forehead furrowed slightly. Then he threw his hands upward. “I wouldn’t know where to begin.” He resumed his brisk pace. “Tracing his steps could take us all night and could endanger all that he has prepared, which, come to think of it, may have been part of Dunley’s plan—to get us to tip our hand. No, sending out a search party might lead Dunley right to the very places Prince Vestero has tried to keep secret, just as retrieving the map might only expose it to more danger. We must not let our fears drive us to make desperate and unwise moves. Our best option is to wait.” “I can’t stop thinking of Dunley’s expression after he saw the traveling clothes. He was too pleased.” “But what could that have told him?” “I don’t know—that we plan to leave imminently?” Artemerio was silent for a moment. “Even so, we can neither postpone the journey nor leave any earlier than planned. And Dunley may only have been pretending the sight of the clothes was significant. Of course he would wish us to think he knows something more than he does. Again, we must not let our fears drive us to make desperate moves.” “I suppose you are right.” We walked in silence. When the entrance to the king and queen’s suite was within view, I said, “If there is nothing more to be done, then…” “Good night, Prince Barto,” said King Artemerio. “Be careful. I’ll send for you if I find...if I find our hopes for Prince Vestero’s safety have been too optimistic or if Dunley tries anything else. And I will tell Vestero all that you have told me.” I reached for Artemerio’s arm and stopped both of us. “Artemerio, the danger is great, and I was easily fooled by Dunley’s disguise. I nearly told him exactly what he wanted to know. Be on your guard. What Prince Vestero said—about Dunley being crouched somewhere near and waiting to pounce—I think it was not an exaggeration.” He nodded gravely. “But despite my concern, I think Dunley doesn’t yet know where we are going,” I said. “There is a great difference between a map and a suit of traveling clothes. That is some comfort.” “But Dunley needs merely a name to know everything about our destination. We have a name but little else.” “And that troubles you still?” I asked. “I thought you had settled such matters. Are you having doubts again? Is that what keeps you from sleeping?” “The matter is settled,” he said, but the look on his face indicated otherwise. “I just think...I just think a man has to know where he is going if he ever hopes to get there, that’s all. But I must go to the queen. Good night, Prince Barto.” He walked away. I stayed where I was for a moment, staring after him and wondering whether Dunley or Artemerio was the source of Artemerio’s renewed restlessness and doubt. Chapter 9: Imposters “Good morning, Prince Barto,” said Queen Folasade as I joined her and King Artemerio for breakfast. “Good morning,” I said. “How was your night?” asked King Artemerio. He stopped buttering a blueberry muffin and stared at me. “Nothing exceptional to report,” I said. “No memorable dreams. No questionable visitors.” Artemerio returned his focus to the meal before him. “The queen and I are so happy you are willing to accompany us on our journey. Were you persuaded by the fine weather or the pleasant company? Or perhaps you were tempted by the delectable treats the royal chef is packing for us?” Artemerio caught my eye. His odd comments and his louder than usual tone of voice gave me the impression he was trying to stage a conversation for someone. “Could it not be for all three reasons?” I said, pretending I knew what he was talking about. I chose a muffin but discovered I had no appetite. “Sumada is lovely this time of year, don’t you think?” Queen Folasade asked. “I am quite fond of Sumada at any time of year, but I think you are right,” I said. “Indeed. Sumada never fails to delight,” said King Artemerio. “How pleased I am that our present affairs will lead us to that dear little town.” That settled it. Never before had Artemerio referred to Sumada as anything close to dear or delightful. I felt sure he was trying to have our plans overheard. “Good news!” said Prince Vestero as he entered the dining room. He wore his Royal Guard uniform, which was solid navy blue with the royal crest of Windsal embroidered in shiny gold thread on the cloak and sleeves. He bowed to the king and queen. “Our ship is waiting. The luggage is aboard. Syroton and Athalia have begun receiving visitors in the throne room. All is prepared.” “Very good. And I suppose this is your way of telling us it is time to leave?” said King Artemerio. He turned to me. “Prince Vestero insists on a swift departure. ‘True leisure requires great effort,’ he says. Or it was something like that, anyway.” “That was almost sensible, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero. “But that’s not what I said at all. And I don’t see any way that your misquoted statement applies to a swift departure, which I have not mentioned, much less insisted upon.” “Oh. What am I thinking of, then? I know you said something about a departure and about something being swift. And I’m positive you said something about leisure. And—” King Artemerio stopped talking and glanced at our faces, all of which registered confusion. “Well, you say so many things, Prince Vestero. And I do have a great deal on my mind. I can’t be expected to listen to every word on a day such as this. I mean...” He paused, as if he realized he had almost said something he shouldn’t. Then, for the benefit of the imagined eavesdroppers, I assume, he continued in a louder voice, “I mean, with the promise of Sumada hanging in the air. Terribly...exciting...Sumada.” He took a bite of his food and put an end to his part of the conversation. “Have you eaten, Prince Vestero?” said Queen Folasade. “You are welcome to join us.” She gestured toward an empty chair. “Thank you, Your Majesty, but I have already had my breakfast,” said Prince Vestero. “And...if I may be so bold, I recommend that the three of you make the most of yours. And pack up whatever is left to take with you.” “You sound as if you expect us to starve on our journey,” said Artemerio. “To Sumada,” he added in a slightly louder tone. “What a ridiculous suggestion.” He looked at Prince Vestero questioningly and then whispered, “It is a ridiculous suggestion, isn’t it?” “We won’t starve, Your Majesty.” Prince Vestero chuckled. “Of course not. However...” He seemed to be carefully thinking through what he was about to say. “The cook we are to take with us will do an...adequate...job, but...” His grimace expressed more than any words could have. I reached for the blueberry muffin I’d rejected and forced myself to eat. *** “Remember our first trip on the Lady Lucinda?” I asked Artemerio as we stood on her deck staring at the coastline. “She carried us to Sumada then, as well.” “How could I forget?” said Artemerio. “What wild adventures we had once we left that port! Everything changed. And everything has changed yet again.” He was silent for a moment. Then he breathed in sharply and exhaled. “But so be it. We shall not turn back. This is the right course, Barto. I feel it. A strange peace calls me forward into the unknown.” Before I could respond, I heard the sound of someone approaching. Artemerio and I both turned. Prince Vestero’s quick, authoritative gait caused his navy blue cloak to swing rhythmically behind him as he walked. “King Artemerio, Prince Barto.” He bowed. “May I have a word with you in private?” King Artemerio nodded, and we followed Prince Vestero back to his cabin. Queen Folasade was already inside, waiting for us. Once Prince Vestero had closed and bolted the door behind us, he began to speak. “We are nearing Sumada. It’s time to prepare for the second phase of our journey,” he said. “Four members of the Royal Guard will impersonate us and leave this ship. They are preparing now.” “Now I understand the reason for the royal traveling clothes—and why you chose a uniform over a disguise,” I said. “Who will dress as the queen?” asked King Artemerio. “The members of the Royal Guard I’ve seen are all too…too…muscular and bulky…and—” “Male?” said Prince Vestero. “Well, yes,” said Artemerio. “Hardly believable as our lovely queen.” “The royal cloaks are particularly effective at hiding faces, but besides that—Your Majesty, even you have not seen all of the members of the Royal Guard. The woman I chose to masquerade as the queen is particularly gifted in dealing with disguises. She is, in fact, my sister.” “Your sister!” I said. I tried to imagine what Prince Vestero’s sister might be like, but the best I could do was to picture Prince Vestero with long hair. Poor girl, I thought. Though Prince Vestero was often described as being “uncommonly handsome” by giggling palace maidservants, a woman resembling him would not be so favorably regarded. I hoped for her sake she was clever and lively like he was, as well; I hoped her personality made up for any physical resemblance to Prince Vestero she might have. “I thought you had a brother,” said Artemerio. “Having the one does not mean one cannot have the other,” said Prince Vestero. “I have both. But we are far off of the topic that must be addressed before we reach Sumada. As I was saying, the others will leave the ship pretending to be us, and we will change into our first set of disguises. Our clothing and luggage will be stored—” He reached under the bed. A board near where I was standing made a popping noise as he did so. “In here,” said Prince Vestero as he lifted the board near me and several others beside it. Beneath that part of the floor was a shallow storage hold. “Or, more correctly, in the hidden compartments in your own cabins. The Lady Lucinda has many secrets.” “That was not there before,” said King Artemerio. He knelt down and examined the storage hold. “Was that there before? No, it was not there before.” He looked up at Prince Vestero. “Was it?” “It was not,” said Prince Vestero. “I made a few changes to the ship in preparation for our journey.” “I approve,” said Artemerio with a broad grin. “Ingeniously clever of you to think of such a thing.” “I can’t take credit for the idea,” said Prince Vestero. “But you’ll understand more about that later. In your cabins, you will find similar hiding places, which open the same way. Your disguises are inside. Change, put your clothes and luggage inside the hidden storage holds, and go to the cabin two doors down from this one on the left. We cannot return to our rooms once we’ve changed. And be careful you are not seen coming out of your cabins in disguise.” “The games begin,” said King Artemerio. He turned to leave but then faced Prince Vestero again. “It is such a pity that true amusement requires great effort, don’t you think?” He watched hopefully for Prince Vestero’s reaction. Prince Vestero shook his head. “That’s not what I said at all, Your Majesty. Not even close. And to be honest with you, if I may be so bold, I don’t think your variation of my quotation even makes much sense.” Artemerio frowned. “Well, you say so many things...” *** The four of us, all wearing masks and all dressed as members of the Royal Guard, waited in the cabin until we heard the call for all hands to assist with the ship’s docking. “It won’t be long now,” said Prince Vestero. “Follow me.” Prince Vestero led us back to his cabin and knocked on the door. “Your Majesty, your guards are here to escort you off of the ship,” said Prince Vestero through the door. The Prince Vestero imposter opened the door. I could not help but stare at the faces of the four inside. They resembled the four of us remarkably well, except for the hair on the one who was supposed to be me. “That is amazing,” I whispered to Prince Vestero. “Excellent job. But my hair is not quite right.” “Take it up with my sister,” he whispered back. “This is all her work.” He chuckled softly. “Actually, I pointed out the difference to her, and she said she intentionally improved the style of your hair. She hoped you might see the wig and take her hint.” He chuckled again. “I suppose boldness runs in the family.” I was trying to figure out how to object tactfully to his sister’s work when Prince Vestero said, “But we must all play our roles now. No more out-of-character comments.” The four imposters, after donning their cloaks, joined us in the hall. Together, we all made our way out onto the deck and off of the ship. Prince Vestero and Queen Folasade walked in front of our four imposters, and King Artemerio and I followed behind them. I had witnessed the work of the Royal Guards often enough to imitate them reasonably well, and Vestero had instructed the three of us regarding protocol and other significant details. But still I felt as if anyone watching would know I was merely pretending. And whether it was the result of being so conscious of pretending to be a Royal Guard or of being in the position of desiring not to be noticed, suddenly everyone seemed too watchful. In particular, a cloaked figure seemed to be waiting for us when we stepped onto the pier, and I had the feeling the man was either following us or intended to follow us. At the least, he was staring in our direction with a little too much interest. Prince Vestero led us from the docks to a waiting carriage. For our short ride to the inn, the imposters rode inside, and we Guards rode standing on the steps on either side of the carriage, tightly gripping the silver bars above the doors. From that perch, again I saw a cloaked figure, like the man I’d seen at the pier, and he was following us on foot. And the pace of the carriage was so leisurely that he could easily manage to keep us in sight the entire way to the inn—if that was what he hoped to do. The point of this charade was to be seen, I reminded myself. But I could not dismiss the thought that being seen and being followed are two very different things. Inside the inn, the imposter Prince Vestero approached the innkeeper and inquired about rooms. Servants led us all upstairs, where the imposters went to their rooms. We pretended to stand guard outside until the servants had gone. Then the real Prince Vestero carefully glanced up and down the hallway, ushered King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and me into a room, and bolted the door behind us. He walked to the bed, lifted the cover and blankets, reached under the mattress, and pulled out four cloth satchels. After glancing inside of the satchels, he handed one to each of us. “On to the third phase,” he said. “Queen Folasade, you may change behind the partition over there. The beard may be a little tricky, but I can help with that part.” “Beard?” said Artemerio. “What is all this, Prince Vestero? And just how many phases are there?” “We need to disappear without a trace, Your Majesty. Our imposters were for the benefit of casual observers; anyone intent on following us would not have been fooled.” Prince Vestero tugged on one stubborn boot as he spoke. “There are ten phases. And the sooner you get changed, the sooner we may continue on with them.” “Ten?” said Artemerio, sounding dismayed. But he began to change. Chapter 10: Disguises We left the inn as soon as we had put on our next set of disguises. Then we made our way to the marketplace, where, in a series of complicated steps that almost defy description, we changed our disguises yet again. First, a beard disappeared into an inner pocket of one cloak. Then, a hood was raised and lowered to reveal an added wig. A cape was removed to expose a gown. A cloak was turned inside out to display a different fabric. A hat was purchased and later discarded. A limp and a cane appeared. On and on the alterations continued. And throughout the whole process, we stayed in sight of each other but alternated between walking alone and walking in constantly shifting pairs. During one such pairing, I asked Prince Vestero what had happened to our imposters. I was curious to hear what plan he had concocted to get them away from the inn. “By now they will have removed those disguises and become...us...the Guards who accompanied them,” said Prince Vestero. “Oh. That’s it? Well, they must be well hidden. I haven’t seen them at all since we left.” I glanced around, expecting to see one of them following behind. “And you will not. They could not come with us,” he said. “None of the Guards could. It was too risky for anyone to know of our plans.” “You mean...” “We are on our own,” said Prince Vestero. *** Every detail of the remainder of our day had been precisely planned. Everything we needed for each phase was exactly where it ought to have been, whether it was in Sumada or in one of the nearby villages along the sea. We spent much of our time traveling up and down the coast until we arrived again, several disguises and several hours later, in Sumada. “I have lost count. Are we on the tenth phase yet?” asked King Artemerio. “Not yet,” said Prince Vestero tensely. His uncharacteristically solemn demeanor and the extraordinary amount of trouble we were going to in order to disappear without a trace convinced me that the threat to us was greater than I had dared to imagine. I glanced around as we stood waiting to board a small ship, the next step in whatever phase we were on, and noticed a cloaked man watching us. No matter where we had gone or what disguises we had worn, a cloaked follower had not been far away. The experiences of the day had wearied us all, and the ship we knew was waiting to take us to the first Windsal had been transformed in our expectations, from something that would carry us to our destination to something that would mark the end of a lengthy, harrowing chase. “Look to my left,” I whispered to Prince Vestero. Artemerio, who must have overheard, looked, but Vestero did not. “Yes, I saw him,” said Prince Vestero. “How could he still be with us?” said Artemerio. “How could anyone keep track of all—” “That is why there are ten phases,” said Prince Vestero. He looked in the direction of the cloaked man and a moment later said, “Now is our chance. Hurry along to the ship with the red flag.” We pushed through the crowd and, at Prince Vestero’s urging, trotted toward a ship a short distance away. I looked over my shoulder toward our follower and saw that he was busy speaking with a man who looked surprisingly familiar. They seemed to be deep in conversation. After we were safely aboard the ship with the red flag, I looked back again. Our follower was alone, and he was staring toward the crowd where we had been. He seemed not to have seen where we had gone. The other, familiar-looking man was ambling off toward the marketplace. And then I realized it was not the man who was familiar; it was the hat he wore and the cane he carried that I had seen—and discarded—before. “Come away from this side of the ship,” Prince Vestero said to me. “A hat and cane will provide only a small distraction, I’m afraid. We’re not safe just yet.” *** The ship we boarded in Sumada carried us a couple of hours away to a port city I didn’t even know existed. “Where are we?” I asked Prince Vestero as we left the dock. In the darkness of the very late evening, I could not see any signs. “You don’t want to know,” he said. “And we won’t be here long. But stay close.” He led us up a narrow, winding street to a crumbling, old house. The other houses we’d passed seemed to be in no better condition than this one. After looking up and down the cobblestone street, he pulled out a key and unlocked the door. “Quickly,” he said. “Go in.” He lit a small lamp. The inside of the house was as dilapidated and depressing as the outside. Rubble from the crumbling walls littered the otherwise bare wooden floor. “The wood is rotten,” Prince Vestero said as he crossed the floor to the fireplace. “Watch your step.” He lifted one of the large stones from the hearth and set it gently behind him. Then he lifted another and set it beside the first. He knelt down and reached into the hole in the floor where the stones had been and lifted out a sturdy wooden chest. “The tenth phase?” asked King Artemerio. “Eleventh,” said Prince Vestero. “I added an extra step along the way, since we have been followed.” Artemerio nodded, his expression grim. Prince Vestero opened the locked chest and began handing various clothing items to each of us. “These are the disguises we will wear to board the last ship. Queen Folasade, you may change in the next room. There is a mirror in there, and the floor is more stable.” Queen Folasade lit a lamp and, with her disguise draped over one arm, disappeared into the next room. “What are we to be this time?” King Artemerio asked. “I am the owner of the ship we’ll be taking,” said Prince Vestero. “The three of you are my servants.” “Servants?” Artemerio held up the pair of pants and the shirt Vestero had handed to him. “This is something a ship’s owner would wear himself.” I looked closely at my own disguise. It was made of expensive fabrics of the finest quality. “What must the ship be like that will carry such well-dressed servants?” I said. “It is a very fine ship. Very fine, indeed,” said Prince Vestero. “But we are not dressing this way because of the ship. It’s for the sake of the Royal Guards. I had to appear to be the sort of person who would need their protection, the sort of person who might have an undisclosed but believable connection to the king. That is the sort of person the Royal Guards are waiting to meet. Once we are safely underway, we will reveal all.” After the three of us had changed, Queen Folasade returned wearing a magnificent royal blue gown. Prince Vestero handed her a long-haired, golden blonde wig and passed around beards for us. “No masks this time?” asked Artemerio. “Just for me. These final touches will do for you,” said Vestero. The four of us took turns in front of the small mirror in the next room. As Artemerio straightened his beard, he glanced at Vestero. “I have recalled your saying: ‘True ease often requires great effort.’ Until today, I don’t think I have properly appreciated all the effort that goes into what you always make appear to be so easy.” Prince Vestero put on a hat and, as he positioned it on his head, began to recite: “Such noble words, said easily, Break many hearts and lead astray When those who like their happy sound Think easy words mean easy way. But what is grace without its need? And what is love without its cost? And what is faith when one can see? And what is hope but risk of loss? Though rare the virtue or the feat Unmarked by beauty seen as ease, Such ease results from efforts great, Where words take form in noble deeds.” Prince Vestero stopped fiddling with his hat and stepped away from the mirror. He turned to King Artemerio and bowed. Then he walked toward the next room. “Come along. We have no time to lose.” When our old disguises were all put into the chest, Prince Vestero and I lowered the chest back into the hole where it had been hidden. We were replacing the stones in the hearth when King Artemerio said, “Ah...Prince Vestero, didn’t you lock the door?” “Yes, of course,” said Prince Vestero. “Why would you even have to ask?” He rubbed his hands together and shook off the dirt, and then he stood and turned at nearly the same time I did. And so the four of us stood staring at the cloaked, hooded person who had not been kept out by the locked door of the small, crumbling house. Chapter 11: The Royal Guard “Do not fear,” said the man in the cloak. He lowered his hood. “I am here to help you.” He did not at all resemble whoever had been following us. He had the look of a Lagalian warrior, but the longer I looked at him, the more I realized he was unlike any Lagalian warrior I had ever seen: he was the mightiest by far. “Welcome,” said Prince Vestero, who was the first to move or speak and who seemed much less intimidated by the sight of our visitor than the rest of us—although he did appear startled. “What sort of help are you here to give?” “Let that be my concern,” said the warrior. “But know that Dunley is desperate to find you and stop you, whatever it takes.” “What are we to do, then?” asked King Artemerio. The Lagalian warrior looked at Artemerio silently for a moment. But then a gleam of merriment shone from his eyes—a gleam that made Prince Vestero’s merriest moments seem melancholy by comparison, and he said, “Follow me, King Artemerio. You must simply follow me.” “If you don’t mind, sir,” said Artemerio, “I have another question for you.” The warrior looked at Artemerio and nodded. “Once we reach the Unconquered Lands, how will we know how to get where we are going?” asked Artemerio. “What will our next step be? What course do we take? Should we expect a more complete map or another song? Perhaps a dream? Or maybe there will be other Lagalian warriors for us to follow? And what exactly are we supposed to do once we reach the first Windsal?” “King Artemerio, do you not know the dangers of looking too far beyond the step in front of you?” asked the warrior. “No, I don’t,” said King Artemerio. “But the dangers of not looking beyond the next step seem quite apparent. How can a man get where he is going if he does not know the way?” “By following someone who does know the way,” said the warrior. “Follow me, King Artemerio. Simply follow me.” He turned to leave. As the warrior opened the door, a fierce light blazed out from him. And then I knew who had come to save us; I knew that I knew our Defender and Guide. All along the path we took, I heard unnatural shrieks and the sound of desperate escapes. I could see nothing beyond the shadowy, gray edges of the magnificent, blazing light, but the awfulness I glimpsed among the shadows convinced me to be glad of my limited view. “Prince Vestero,” I whispered. “A thought has occurred to me about your love of disguises.” “Yes?” he said. “The Great King has been known to wear a disguise or two—or maybe disguise is not the proper term. What I mean is that when he appears, he is seldom recognized.” “Yes,” said Prince Vestero. “I find disguises delightful because they remind me of so many things at once—the glorious joke that the greatest has been the least, the humbling truth that what is seen is often very far from the complete picture, and the beautiful promise that one day we will cast aside our own frail disguises—the limps and wrinkles and brokenness—and be what we were meant to be.” He glanced at me. “But is there a particular reason you are raising such a topic?” I hesitated before answering him. “You know who leads us, do you not?” I finally said. Prince Vestero smiled. “I do.” Ahead of us, King Artemerio whispered something in Queen Folasade’s ear, and Queen Folasade whispered something back. Then she took his hand and pulled him toward the warrior, until the three were walking side by side. I saw Queen Folasade nudge King Artemerio, and then King Artemerio turned to the warrior and said something I could not hear. The mighty warrior stopped walking and faced Artemerio. For a single, brief moment, time seemed to hold its breath. The disguise fell away—or perhaps my eyesight was set free from its normal constraints—and I saw the Great King as I had seen him once before: resplendent and powerful beyond words. I stopped in my tracks and knelt. King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and Prince Vestero did the same. In the next instant, the Great King appeared as the mighty warrior again. But it seemed then that his appearance was more than a disguise and something different than when the greatest had become the least. It was a revelation of himself: the Great King is a Mighty Warrior. “A man demands full accountings, complete explanations, and carefully outlined plans only from those he does not trust. Do you trust me, King Artemerio?” said the Great King. “Yes,” said Artemerio with no hesitation. The Great King smiled. Merriment returned to his eyes, and he said gently, almost teasingly, “I know that you do. But you seem to keep forgetting it. Remember that you trust me, Artemerio. You must remember it.” After a short conversation with the king and queen, a conversation I could not hear, he disappeared. But a bright light encircled and guided us all the way to our ship as the invisible battle continued to rage all around us. *** “Hello! Please stop! Who are you?” a crew member shouted down as the four of us approached the ramp that led up to the ship Prince Vestero had arranged for us to take. “Please stop where you are and answer my question.” His voice projected authority, his posture projected strength, and the look in his eyes projected courage. He was unmistakably a member of the Royal Guard. Under his breath, Prince Vestero said, “My apologies, Toserto. We simply haven’t the time.” To us, he whispered, “We are few in number. He will not use force against us unless we provoke him. But stay near me. And don’t provoke him.” Then he snapped into character and, with a slight accent, shouted, “Excellent question.” He did not stop or even slow down as he led us forward and up the ramp. “Who are any of us, really? Quite a mystery. But I will guess who you are, and you may guess who I am. You are Commander Toserto, correct?” Upon hearing his name, the man’s firm expression relaxed a bit. “Yes,” said the commander. “Might you be the owner of this fine ship?” The four of us reached the deck and walked toward him. Though his tone was friendly, he eyed us suspiciously. “You are correct,” said Prince Vestero. “I am the ship’s owner. And I was told to say this when I met you to confirm my identity: Wallwren.” Vestero stood in front, and the rest of us stood silently behind him, trying not to draw any attention to ourselves. “Wallwren. Yes. Very well,” said Commander Toserto, at last withdrawing his questioning gaze from our direction. “What are your orders, sir?” “We must leave this port immediately. Prepare the ship to leave the dock. Then—and this is very important—assemble the crew below deck, and, all of you—hold on,” said Prince Vestero. “Yes, sir,” said Commander Toserto, bowing. He stared at us again, briefly, but then he jumped to action, calling out commands. *** Prince Vestero thought his large cabin would be the best place for us to secure ourselves for the rough departure we expected. Before we could settle in, however, a knock at the door interrupted our efforts. Prince Vestero nodded toward King Artemerio, and King Artemerio quickly crossed the room to answer the knock. Toserto stood outside the cabin, his eyes wide. “I beg your pardon, sir, but I had to ask—what’s happening?” Prince Vestero rose from his chair. “What do you mean, Commander? Come in. Is something wrong?” “I—I—I don’t know, sir,” Toserto said, entering the cabin. Artemerio closed the door. “Look for yourself!” Toserto pointed toward a porthole. Queen Folasade poured a glass of water for the commander and offered him a chair. He waved away the chair but took the glass of water with trembling hands. Prince Vestero quickly crossed to the porthole and looked outside. King Artemerio and I followed him and looked out over his shoulders. The ship raced along at an extraordinary speed. Remarkably, I felt no movement. We seemed to be gliding over the water, unaffected by the waves. Prince Vestero laughed and said, “Yes, something is wrong, Commander. I mistakenly told you to have the crew hold on. Apparently, that’s not necessary. You may tell them to go about their business.” Prince Vestero turned away from the porthole. His happy look disappeared, replaced by a look of concern. “Commander Toserto! You are exceptionally pale! Are you ill?” “I am fine.” Toserto’s voice cracked as he spoke. He took a sip of water and cleared his throat. “Excuse me. Fine, sir.” He set the glass of water down on the small table near him. “Please forgive my lack of composure. Rest assured: I know my duty.” He bowed and opened the door. “I will convey your message to the crew,” he said. Then he left. Queen Folasade spoke. “The poor Commander seemed quite shaken—just as we would be if the Great King had not told us what was going to happen. Should we call him back in and tell him who we really are? And explain to him what is happening?” “He is no more shaken than the rest of the crew, I am sure,” said Prince Vestero. “We should gather them all together and explain things at once.” *** Prince Vestero, still in disguise, entered the meeting room below deck where the entire crew was assembled. King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and I entered behind him. We no longer wore our wigs and beards, but we wore our hooded cloaks to hide our faces. “Members of the Royal Guard,” said Commander Toserto, “I present to you the owner of this ship. He wishes to speak to us.” The crew members who were seated at the long table rose to honor Prince Vestero; most of the other crew members had no chairs and were already standing. “Thank you,” said Prince Vestero. “Please, make yourselves as comfortable as you can. I will be brief.” He paused. “No doubt you have noticed the strangeness surrounding the circumstances of our travel. No doubt you have many questions, even if you are too well trained to ask them. I applaud your self-control, your courage, and your devotion to your duty. You accepted this mission with no questions asked all because you knew it was a mission for the Great King. Let me assure you, much is at stake. I daresay none of you have guessed the importance of this mission. But let me also assure you that this is not a time for fear. It is a time for great excitement and great joy. And if you will not take the word of an unknown ship owner—” He removed his wig and mask. “Perhaps you will take the word of the chief of the Royal Guard.” The atmosphere changed entirely; what had been well-restrained fear turned to relief and even delight. “I can see that some of the tension is gone already,” Prince Vestero said, laughing. “Good. But there is more. You are accompanied on this mission by King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and Prince Barto.” The three of us stepped forward and removed our hoods as he said our names. Every member of the crew knelt, head bowed. Prince Vestero nodded to King Artemerio. “You may rise,” said King Artemerio. “I know well the reputation of the members of the Royal Guard, and I am honored to serve with you on this mission for the Great King. Before I explain the nature of this mission, let me first address two issues you’ve probably all been wondering about. First—” The crew members began looking all around. “What’s happening?” asked King Artemerio. “Voices,” said Prince Vestero. “There is a noise coming from outside that sounds like voices.” “Voices? But how is that—” King Artemerio began. “Guards!” shouted Commander Toserto. “The king and queen!” In an instant the Guards had drawn their swords and charged into motion. Those nearest to us formed a barrier, an outward-facing circle, around the king, the queen, and me. The Guards’ hulking frames blocked my view of what was happening beyond them. “Wait—I know that sound,” said King Artemerio. “Yes,” I said, straining to hear over all the noise the Guards were making. “It sounds like singing.” “The stars,” said Queen Folasade. Chapter 12: A Question “Prince Vestero!” King Artemerio shouted. “Prince Vestero!” “He went with the others out onto the deck, Your Majesty,” said one of the Guards in the circle around us. “We should be out there, too,” said King Artemerio. “Guards—” “King Artemerio!” Prince Vestero shouted as he ran into the room. “Guards, all is well! The king and queen are in no danger, and they are needed on deck at once. The stars are singing a new song!” The circle of Guards split open to let us pass, and Artemerio, Folasade, Vestero, and I rushed out to the deck. The speed of the ship was dizzying. Only the stars weren’t blurred by our pace, so I stared straight up at the tiny points of light piercing the dark night sky as I listened to the song. “Put fear aside and greet your path With joy and hope and trust. What grand adventures wait for you, But travel on, you must! The Great King called you to this course. Yes, know that you are here To carry out His perfect plan— So travel with no fear! Remember songs and tales of old, Oh, servants of the King, And when dark battles you must face, Oh, noble servants—sing!” The stars repeated those words three times, and then silence fell, like a curtain signaling the end of a performance. We all stayed where we were for a few moments. I hoped the singing would start again, but when it did not, I looked away from the sky and noticed King Artemerio whispering something to Prince Vestero. I also noticed that the wooden deck of the ship reflected the brilliance of the starlight as a gentle radiance. I’d never seen anything like it. King Artemerio stopped whispering, and Prince Vestero nodded and took one of the crew members with him below deck. “Royal Guards,” King Artemerio shouted, “enjoy the fresh sea air. I will send for you when it is time to reassemble. But prepare yourselves for a story and a feast!” Artemerio leaned toward me and said softly, “Go quickly, please, and write down the words to the song while they are still fresh in your mind.” I nodded and left, hurried along by my great interest in what was to follow for the Guards. *** I finished my task in plenty of time to join the others in the meeting room. Platters of fruit covered the large table, and the crew members were milling about and filling their plates. I intended to grab a plate, too, but Prince Vestero called the meeting to order before I had a chance. King Artemerio then stepped forward, and all motion in the room stopped. “I will begin where I left off,” said King Artemerio. “I want to address the two issues I thought would weigh most heavily on your minds. First, regarding the remarkable speed of our travel, Lagalian warriors are pushing the ship. We have very much distance to cover, you see. We will be traveling beyond the Unconquered Lands. And that brings me to the second issue, which is where we are going. But before I tell you, Prince Vestero is going to entertain and enlighten us with a recitation and a song.” Prince Vestero finished the recitation of the tale of Ralo and Milant without missing a word, and his performance was nearly as gripping and passionate as the story-telling elder’s had been. Like the elder, he even did the voices. And the Royal Guards made a fine audience, responsive and enthusiastic—although, unlike the elders, none were moved to tears. But when Prince Vestero began the song, the Guards hardly moved. Commander Toserto, who stood near me, held a piece of fruit inches away from his mouth, as if he were about to take a bite but the song had absorbed his attention so completely that he forgot what he was doing. Others were similarly engrossed. But since few, if any, had not heard Vestero sing at one time or another, I guessed that they were so deeply moved not by the singer but by the song. After Prince Vestero finished, a moment of solemn silence briefly lingered. Then the Guards began to cheer and applaud; those sitting stood to their feet. Prince Vestero offered a humble nod instead of a bow and looked toward King Artemerio. The Royal Guards followed his gaze and respectfully quieted themselves. “Thank you, Prince Vestero,” said King Artemerio. “Royal Guards, I will keep you in suspense no longer. Our destination is the first Windsal. The time has come for the promise mentioned in that song to be fulfilled.” A youngish officer, a captain by the looks of his uniform, stood and began clapping slowly. One by one, the rest of the crew joined him until the sound of thunderous applause, interrupted by the occasional whistle or shout, filled the room. When the cheering had died down, Artemerio began to speak again. “I am pleased with your response,” he said. He seemed about to say more, but the youngish captain who had started the applause raised his hand. King Artemerio looked toward him. “Yes? You may stand and speak. What is your name, sir?” “Captain Sutaniro,” said the officer. “If you don’t mind, Your Majesty, I have a question. May I ask it?” “You may,” said King Artemerio. Captain Sutaniro smiled pleasantly. “Thank you, Your Majesty. I have heard many times the song and tale Prince Vestero so movingly performed for us. Those works never lose their charm. But I am quite curious. Where exactly is the fabled land located?” Only because I knew Artemerio so well could I tell that he was unsettled by the question. Prince Vestero responded before King Artemerio could. “Captain Sutaniro, I wonder at your choice of words,” said Prince Vestero. “Fabled? Do you mean to imply that you believe the first Windsal to be fictitious?” “Not at all, sir,” said Captain Sutaniro in a tone that exuded politeness and dismay at being misunderstood. “But since it is not fictitious, where on a map might the land be found? If the question troubles you, then I beg you not to answer it. In fact, Your Majesty, I withdraw my question. Forgive me for interrupting, please.” He smiled good-naturedly and sat down. But the question, once asked, could not be withdrawn. Whether Artemerio answered or not, the question, or perhaps the timing of it or the captain’s particular wording, succeeded in dampening the excitement over Artemerio’s news. “It is a fair question,” said King Artemerio. “And I will give you a fair answer. I do not know where on a map the land might be found, although I have seen a map of the land—a grouping of islands, to be precise. But, in a ship driven along at unthinkable speeds by the unseen hands of Lagalian warriors, I think it is also fair to ask you to trust that we will most certainly reach our destination. The Great King will see to it.” Artemerio’s words seemed to help ease some of the awkwardness of the moment, but the mood remained strangely subdued, even as the Guards were dismissed from the meeting and told to enjoy what remained of the feast. Vestero, Folasade, Artemerio, and I left for our cabins together. “How did it all go so terribly wrong?” said Artemerio as we walked. “I think the excitement made it worse,” I said. “For such a moment of joy to be followed by such a moment of doubt...and Sutaniro’s unfortunate choice of words...” “But my dear king—and Prince Barto, it did not go so terribly wrong,” said Queen Folasade. “It might have, if you had tried to hide the truth or if you had expressed doubt in response to the question. But you answered well, King Artemerio, and made a difficult moment go right.” “You really think so, my dear?” asked King Artemerio. “Yes, I do,” said Queen Folasade. She looked at him intently. “But what are you thinking, my dear king, that causes you so much doubt?” “I suppose Sutaniro’s question was a natural enough question to ask, but it is the one question I have wrestled with the most myself. And to tell you the truth, I was quite disappointed that even after our talk with the Great King, we still know nothing more about how to get to the first Windsal. So Sutaniro’s question struck me as...as a flaming arrow that shocks and wounds and burns all at once.” “Prince Vestero, you are strangely quiet,” I said. “Mmmm. Yes,” Prince Vestero said. “It happens now and then.” “It is unlike you to keep your thoughts to yourself,” said King Artemerio. “On the contrary, Your Majesty. I keep very many thoughts to myself,” said Prince Vestero. “If you knew just how many, you would be very, very grateful.” He offered a half smile but seemed to be distracted by whatever thoughts he was not sharing. “Ah, but we have reached our cabins. If I may be so bold, Your Majesty, I suggest the largest cabin—the one the ship’s owner was to have—for the queen. The very small bed in that room is no more comfortable than the rest, but the queen will have a more comfortable amount of space. And the best lock of any door on the ship.” “Yes, of course she must have it,” said King Artemerio. “If she agrees, that is.” Prince Vestero turned to Queen Folasade. “I will take the cabin you suggest, Prince Vestero. But I hope the king will have a sturdy lock, too,” she said. “He shall have something better than a lock,” said Prince Vestero. “He shall have Prince Barto.” Prince Vestero opened a door to one side of us. “Here is their cabin. Not far at all from yours, Queen Folasade.” He opened the door to her cabin, and she stepped inside. “I just remembered—we brought nothing with us. Do we have any other clothes?” I asked. “Of course,” said Prince Vestero. “You’ll find a variety of clothing in the trunks in your cabins. Oh—that reminds me…” He turned sharply toward Queen Folasade, who had stepped out of her cabin to join us again. “If you can avoid it, my Queen, I recommend not lifting the lamp on the small table beside the bed. It will trigger a secret compartment to open, and…well—it would be best if it stays shut for now.” The queen nodded. “So this ship was the inspiration behind the changes you made to the Lady Lucinda?” said Artemerio with a gleam in his eye. “What fun to explore—” “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero in a tone that was dramatically quiet and commanding, “part of the beauty of the ship is that not all her secrets are known. So little is private on a ship. I suggest you not disturb our few hiding places before it is time. You never know who might be watching.” “Understood,” said King Artemerio. But I knew that was his way of sounding agreeable without actually agreeing to follow the suggestion. And the look on Prince Vestero’s face told me that he was not fooled, either. “Oh, very well,” said Prince Vestero. He walked silently into the cabin Artemerio and I were to share and signaled for us to join him. Queen Folasade followed. When the door was closed, Prince Vestero leaned down heavily on the small wooden table beside our bunk beds. Floor boards popped loose under the table. “Under there you will find the wooden box—still carefully locked. Guard this secret well. And please, Your Majesty, be satisfied for now with knowing only of this one hiding place.” “Understood,” said King Artemerio. Prince Vestero sighed. Queen Folasade, meanwhile, had been running her hand over the paneling of one of the walls. “I have never seen anything like this. Look at the way the wood catches the lamplight and magnifies the brightness. Where did you find this ship, Prince Vestero?” “I bought her from some questionable fellows, Queen Folasade. To be honest, I doubt the many hiding places she contains were used for good purposes. But, no matter—they will now be used for good.” Prince Vestero patted the wall near him affectionately. “Wait until you see the ship in the daylight. She’s a beauty. I rescued her from her wayward life, and now she will be quite a prize among the king’s fleet.” Prince Vestero moved toward the door. “On that happy thought, I leave you. Good night.” Prince Vestero bowed and left. Queen Folasade left not long after. From one pocket of my cloak, I pulled out the scroll that contained the song the stars had sung that night, and from another pocket, I pulled out the key to the wooden box. Artemerio went to work moving objects in the room: pulling on table legs, pushing on hooks, and lifting whatever could be lifted. I had already replaced the boards over the wooden box, changed into clothes I found in the trunk at the foot of Artemerio’s bed, and climbed up to my top bunk before Artemerio gave up. “I do not think the ship has as many hiding places as Prince Vestero led us to believe,” he said. “How disappointing.” “Just because you can’t find them, it doesn’t mean they aren’t there. But—wait. I don’t mean to encourage you. Vestero said to leave them alone.” “Understood,” said Artemerio. He knelt down and began tapping on floorboards. Chapter 13: Doubt “Ahhh, breakfast,” I said as I cut into my stack of pancakes. Artemerio, Folasade, Vestero, and I had met for breakfast in Folasade’s cabin. Prince Vestero winced. “You may want to temper your enthusiasm just a bit,” he said. Disregarding his suggestion, I took a large bite—and almost instantly regretted it. I grabbed my cup of water, which helped wash down the bite but didn’t help wash away the taste. “Prince Vestero, your warning was woefully inadequate,” I said. “Something is terribly wrong with this food.” “Oh, come on, Prince Barto,” said King Artemerio. “It can’t be that bad.” He took a bite, chewed, and reached for a napkin, into which he spit his bite half a moment later. “I take it back. It can be that bad.” He reached for the bowl of fruit. “Is there any hope for lunch? Please tell me we are not doomed to inedible meals.” “Doom is a very strong word and entirely inappropriate for our situation,” said Prince Vestero. “I think it very likely that neither lunch nor any of the meals that follow will be…much worse than this one. But that is the most hope I can offer you, I’m afraid. Given all that is at stake, Your Majesty, I had to select a cook based on trustworthiness rather than culinary skill. She is an excellent Guard and a brilliant spy. We won’t need to worry that anyone will be able to tamper with any of the food.” “It won’t matter if anyone tampers with the food. No one will eat it. I see now why you thought we might starve,” said Artemerio. “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty, you most certainly will not starve. And you will grow accustomed to the taste. That has been my experience, anyway. I am hardly ever bothered by it anymore. I suggest you give this meal another try.” Prince Vestero took a bite of his pancake and forced a smile as he chewed. A knock at the door put an end to our discussion. King Artemerio looked at Prince Vestero questioningly. Prince Vestero shook his head and took a great gulp of water. Then he said softly, “I am not expecting anyone.” Nimbly and quickly, he rose and answered the door. “Pardon me, Prince Vestero,” said Commander Toserto. “I’m sure you noticed, but the ship is slowing. We are approaching land.” Queen Folasade and I stood and walked to the porthole. I could see that the ship had slowed, but the limited view from the porthole did not afford a glimpse of anything besides water. “Have the crew take their positions and wait for further instructions,” said Prince Vestero. Commander Toserto bowed and left. “Does anything look familiar?” Prince Vestero asked me. “Have we reached the Unconquered Lands?” “The Unconquered Lands?” said Artemerio. “Already?” “This view tells me nothing,” I said. “Well, then, we should get up to the deck at once.” Prince Vestero glanced at the stacks of pancakes on the table. “Yes, at once.” *** From the deck, the land was clearly visible, and we were nearer to it than I had assumed. “We have reached the Unconquered Lands and are very near where I landed before,” I said, as moved by the rugged beauty of the spot as I had been the first time I’d seen it months before. Some distance from the shore, gray-brown rocks rose up out of turquoise water in a majestic arrangement that resembled a castle. The sprays of white foam, ever changing as the sea met the rocks, gave the scene the appearance of a castle continuously under assault. But it seemed another, more severe assault had taken place since my last visit. “The shoreline is different—probably the effect of a fierce storm,” I said. “But the rock formations over there are unaltered. They are exactly as I remember. Filimo made a sketch of them.” “Are you sure, Prince Barto?” asked King Artemerio. He leaned over the rail and stared toward the rocks. Then he looked back at me. “I have no question of the fact,” I said. “Shall I send for the sketch?” “No. What I meant was, ‘Are you sure we have reached the Unconquered Lands?’ I have seen the sketch. It is similar, but…” He frowned as he squinted toward the rocks. “I knew what you meant. I am sure we have reached the Unconquered Lands,” I said. King Artemerio looked at Prince Vestero. “What do you think?” Vestero chuckled. “I think we may either take the word of a man who has seen the Unconquered Lands for himself or we may come up with some wild theory of our own regarding where in the world we are, Your Majesty.” “Consider, my dear king, why the warriors stopped pushing us. Does it not seem likely they would know of Prince Barto’s familiarity with the spot?” said Queen Folasade. “What you say sounds reasonable, as always, my Queen. But I do wish there were a way to be sure.” King Artemerio stared toward the rocks. I noted with some surprise that the ship had completely stopped and that not even a slight breeze stirred, and I had the strange thought that the wind, the movement of the sea—all that surrounded us—seemed to be hanging on King Artemerio’s every word and waiting for his decision. “Very well. Where to from here, Prince Barto?” said Artemerio. “We need to follow the coastline in that direction,” I said, pointing. “Depending on the wind—or depending on the strength of the crew members rowing, since we have no wind—we can probably reach the farthest island I explored in two or three days. That is where I saw the golden sand and the broad-leaved trees.” A gentle wind began to blow. Prince Vestero held up his hand against it. “Perfect. We must put up our sails at once. If I may be so bold, Your Majesty, I should give orders to the crew.” King Artemerio nodded, and Prince Vestero bowed and left. “Strange that the wind would begin to blow just when we needed it,” said King Artemerio. “My dear king, that is not strange at all,” said Queen Folasade. I clapped my hand on Artemerio’s shoulder. “Look around you and take in the sights you have longed to see for so long. The Unconquered Lands are before you! And in a short time, you will have the chance to explore the lands yourself.” “Yes—the Unconquered Lands.” Artemerio’s indifferent tone puzzled me. But then he said, “Are you sure? This is nothing like what I expected.” “I’m sure,” I said, not knowing how else to convince him of what was right before his eyes. *** Two days later, we reached the farthest island I had explored. “The sand really looks golden,” said Artemerio as the two of us stood on deck and studied the coastline. “Amazing.” “You are surprised?” I said. “You must admit, the description sounds rather…poetic,” said Artemerio. “A description can sound poetic and still be precise. How else would you describe the scene before you? I can think of no words more accurate. The sand is the color of gold.” “So it is. I suppose poetic descriptions may be precise,” said Artemerio. “King Artemerio!” called Prince Vestero as he nimbly and quickly crossed the deck to join us. “King Artemerio,” he said again as he reached us, “have you decided? Will we stop here or keep going?” “Keep going,” said Artemerio. “According to Prince Barto, there are no flowered trees here. Those must lie ahead of us, farther out—perhaps on the islands Prince Barto was only able to view from a distance. We should sail on.” “I will give orders to the crew,” said Prince Vestero. He bowed and left. Artemerio and I had a moment or two to continue our discussion of poetic descriptions, but then, almost out of nowhere, Sutaniro crept up beside us. “Excuse me, Your Majesty,” Sutaniro said. He bowed. “Prince Vestero has sent me to ask if Prince Barto has any idea how long it will be before we reach the islands we expect to find.” “Prince Vestero sent you?” I said. “Yes, sir,” said Sutaniro. “He forgot to ask.” “But why would he ask for my guess when he has the official records from my journey?” I said, uneasy but not sure why. Sutaniro said nothing; he stood staring at me, clearly waiting for an answer and clearly unwilling to leave without one. “Very well. It is difficult to say,” I said. “As I recall, it took us something like a week of sailing before we saw them. But we may not have had the same wind. And our position in the current is most certainly different. We had to turn back at the time because of a storm. The conditions were much different then than now. So it could be a matter of days, or it could be a full week—or maybe even two.” “Really?” said Sutaniro with exaggerated incredulity. He put his hand up to his forehead as if to shade his eyes and, after a moment of motionless staring toward the horizon, turned back to King Artemerio. “Since there is no storm now, should it really take as long as Prince Barto suggests? Especially with this fine wind? Should we not be able to see something of the land already? I would expect to see at least a speck on the horizon. But I see nothing.” Artemerio put his hand up over his eyes in an imitation of Sutaniro and stared toward where Sutaniro had been looking. “Surely—” Sutaniro began, but he bit his lip and paused as if he had reservations about continuing. “Surely what?” said Artemerio. Sutaniro looked down coyly. King Artemerio glanced at him and said, “I command you to tell me, Captain Sutaniro.” Then he looked back out across the sea. “Surely the capable Prince Barto and his crew were not too disoriented by the storm to properly document the location of the islands,” said Sutaniro. “Surely we are not mistaken in our course.” “Surely we are not,” I said. “How much time have you spent at sea, Captain Sutaniro? It is far too soon for us to see an island that lies two days away from us—if it is even so near. And my crew and I have documented courses and made accurate contributions to the drawing of maps after much worse storms. The islands are exactly where we expect them to be.” “If you say so, Prince Barto. I’m sure you know much more about these things than I.” Sutaniro bowed. “I will take the message to Prince Vestero.” Without another word, he turned and left. Artemerio stared out across the water. I watched Sutaniro until he was out of sight. “I don’t think Prince Vestero sent Sutaniro to ask that question,” I said softly to Artemerio. “How often does Prince Vestero send messengers? And how often does he forget...anything? Hardly ever. I think Sutaniro meant to trouble you.” “Perhaps, but has he not succeeded in troubling you?” said King Artemerio. He was still looking out across the water, but I thought I saw him glance at me out of the corner of his eye. “What do you mean? Are you suggesting you think we are mistaken in our course? You think my records are leading us in a wrong direction?” Sutaniro’s suggestion did not affect me, but even the hint that Artemerio doubted me stung viciously. The conversation at the rock formations took on a new significance and began to replay in my mind, colored by this new offense. “I didn’t say that,” said Artemerio. But still he stared out at sea, and his expression betrayed his thoughts. “You didn’t have to,” I said. In the silence that followed, I couldn’t help but reflect on the insulting nature of doubt. But even as I planned a punishing speech for Artemerio, the thought occurred to me that this, too, might have been one of Sutaniro’s aims: turning Artemerio and me against each other. I took a deep breath and exhaled slowly. “Artemerio, even if I am wrong about our course—and I do not think I am…not at all—but even if what Sutaniro suggested turns out to be true, do you not think the Great King would intervene? He has not brought us this far only to see us fail. Either we will reach the islands, or else the Great King will show us a better course to take. Think what you will of me, but do not let Sutaniro’s analysis of the situation disturb you.” At last, Artemerio turned away from the water. “You have never disappointed me, Barto. I would choose your maps and charts above anyone else’s I know…except maybe for Vestero’s. But don’t tell him I said that. And I only mention him in an effort to show you how truthful and sincere I am in what I am saying. But I do mean this as a great compliment to you…even if it has started to go strangely wrong and sound like…oh…never mind.” He paused. “What I’m trying to say is that I trust you. If you say you are not mistaken, then I will believe it.” I turned away from him and stared down at the water, unconvinced by words that were so clearly at odds with his behavior. *** During the course of the next two weeks, King Artemerio spent a large amount of time staring out where he hoped to see land, and his face took on a look of greater desperation as each day passed. But toward the end of the second week, a bright morning came when Artemerio and I woke early to the sound of someone pounding on our cabin door. Through the door, Prince Vestero shouted, “King Artemerio! Prince Barto! The wind has died down, and we are nearing an island!” Chapter 14: The Last Entry King Artemerio was up and out the door before I had managed to climb down from my bunk. I found him moments later up on the deck, staring toward the island and grinning delightedly. “You were right, Prince Barto,” King Artemerio said. “Your records led us straight to the place you said they would.” He turned to Prince Vestero. “Select a small team to stay on board—but have the crew rotate that responsibility. I think we could all use some time on land. We’ll get as close to the island as we can and then drop anchor. The rest of us will take the small rowboats to shore. Oh, for a few relaxing days of hiking and climbing and exploring and—” “Cooking our own meals,” I said. “Excellent,” said Prince Vestero. “I will make the arrangements.” *** “Is that a flowered tree?” I asked pointing ahead of us. “See? I think those are orange flowers—or flames—but there is no smoke.” “They are flowers,” said Queen Folasade. She inhaled deeply. “I can smell them from here.” She inhaled deeply again. “Wonderful. So refreshing.” “But what happened to the others?” said Artemerio. “The song said ‘flowered trees’ not ‘flowered tree.’” “A commendable observation, Your Majesty,” said Vestero. “But even if this is not the place mentioned in the song, I think this must be the type of tree mentioned.” We walked toward the tree. At its base was a rock with words etched into it: Two seeds were planted here. The first will yield a magnificent tree. Breathe deeply of its fragrance. Rest securely in its shade. The second will yield Truth and Freedom. Break ground that it may live and spread from shore to shore to shore. ~Ralo, a Royal Son of Windsal “What could that mean?” I asked. Artemerio fell to his knees. He grabbed a jagged rock that lay nearby and began using it to dig into the ground in front of the monument. “What are you doing?” I asked. “Breaking ground, as the rock says,” King Artemerio replied. Prince Vestero, Queen Folasade, and I knelt down to help. We hadn’t been digging long when Artemerio said, “I hit something solid.” With a little more work, we uncovered the rectangular top of a wooden chest. I swept the dirt away to examine our find. “That looks like the wood our ship is made of,” said Queen Folasade. “It is,” said Prince Vestero. “How interesting.” We dug around the sides of the chest until Artemerio and Vestero were able to lift it out by its handles. “It is much lighter than I expected,” said Vestero. The chest had no lock, and Artemerio was easily able to open the lid. He reached inside and pulled out a scroll, which he unrolled and quickly glanced over. Then he handed the scroll to Prince Vestero. “Scroll after scroll after scroll—that is all I see in here,” said King Artemerio. He stuck both arms into the chest and dug down to the bottom. “Wait. What’s this? I think I feel…a book.” He pulled out a book and wandered a few steps away as he flipped through the pages. Prince Vestero handed the scroll he held to Queen Folasade and took King Artemerio’s place in front of the chest. “This is an ancient tale,” said Queen Folasade, looking up in surprise. “Parts of it I have heard before, but parts of it I have not.” King Artemerio looked up from the book he’d been examining. “And this is King Ralo’s journal.” He looked back down at the book. He had stopped flipping through and seemed instead to be taking in every word. For a while the four of us sat under the shade of the orange-flowered tree. Artemerio read the journal, and Vestero, Folasade, and I read the scrolls. But then Prince Vestero stood and said, “We have here the most valuable historical find of our lifetime. But we cannot take it with us.” “We can’t?” said Artemerio. “We don’t know what other wanderers might need to read these ancient songs and tales and be encouraged by the teachings of the Great King. King Ralo meant for them to stay here. But I will return to the ship for blank scrolls and ink. If we work very hard, I think we will be able to copy all of them before we have to go,” said Prince Vestero. “But the journal is many pages long. I am sure we could not copy it in time,” said King Artemerio. “King Ralo’s personal writings are not quite the same as the scrolls. I see no harm in taking that with us. But read a few more pages and judge for yourself. I will return shortly.” Vestero bowed and started walking in the direction of the ship. *** The three of us sat reading by the orange-flowered tree until Prince Vestero returned. “Look at this!” King Artemerio said as Prince Vestero approached. “It is the last entry King Ralo made.” He handed the journal to me. I turned to the last entry and read: 108th day. I leave these scrolls of the ancient songs and tales so that you, Reader of this journal, might learn of the Great King. In knowing the truth, you will find freedom. Why I leave this journal is another matter. When the Great King told me to leave Windsal, I sailed away, heartbroken at the circumstances of my leaving. My grief has not lessened since the first day I began wandering across the sea, and I still hope that at any moment, the Great King will tell me to return to Windsal—that all will be well there. But for now, the will of the Great King is clear: I am to sail on. I have become convinced that my grieving has become a hindrance to my journey onward. And so, here, among the scrolls containing great and lasting truths, I bury this humble journal. I bury my grief. That burial is for my good, Reader, not for yours. But so that there is some value in the time you have invested in reading this humble journal, I offer you this one bit of advice—wise words on which I have staked my very life: Obey the Great King and trust Him completely, whatever your circumstances, whatever the cost. ~Ralo, a Royal Son of Windsal I handed the journal to Queen Folasade and said, “It reminds me of Prince Vestero’s rhyme about great efforts. The weighty choices that have been made in history sometimes sound easier to make than they really were.” “What are you talking about, Prince Barto?” said King Artemerio. “How does any of that relate to the map?” “What map? I read King Ralo’s last entry,” I said. “No—not the last written entry,” said Artemerio. “The last entry in the journal—the last page. There is a map.” Queen Folasade turned to the last page and moved near enough for me to see. “A map is not…” I let my words trail off as I stared at the last page. King Ralo had sketched what he could of the course he had taken from Windsal to the island. “What a help this will be! And now you know the way to the place you are going, King Artemerio.” Prince Vestero was excited to see the map, too, but he set us to work right away copying the scrolls. “I brought back some food from the galley. The cook prepared it especially for us,” Prince Vestero said. “Is anyone hungry?” “No,” said King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and I all together. *** “Our time on the island went by very quickly,” I said the next day as Artemerio and I lowered the wooden chest back into the hole. We replaced the dirt we’d removed. “I wish we’d had time for more exploring, but the wind has shifted again, and I don’t think we should waste it,” said Prince Vestero. He picked up a large, smooth rock and knelt down in front of the monument. With the rock, he began flattening and smoothing the dirt over the chest. “What is the point of that?” asked King Artemerio. “The point of what?” said Prince Vestero without looking up from his task. “Whatever you are doing there...playing in the dirt,” said King Artemerio. “I am trying to hide the signs of our digging.” Prince Vestero set the rock aside and stood. “But I thought the scrolls were meant to be found. Wouldn’t our digging be a helpful clue—if it is still noticeable by the time anyone else lands on this deserted island, I mean?” said King Artemerio. “The island is not presently deserted. There are crew members who may stumble upon the site in the next little while before we all return to the ship,” said Prince Vestero. “But why should the—” Artemerio began. “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero, “I suggest we return to the ship for any further discussion of the topic. I have some news.” While Prince Vestero and King Artemerio had been having their conversation, I had been looking around one last time, taking in the sights of the forest. And I noticed that something looked different about the orange-flowered tree. “What is that?” I asked. I reached up to one of the flowered branches and found an orange piece of fruit. The smell of it made my mouth water. “This was not here before. There were only flowers.” Artemerio came toward me. “Ah, yes! King Ralo spoke of that fruit in his journal. This is called a fiducia tree, and according to King Ralo, the fruit is delicious.” Artemerio pulled a dagger from its sheath at his waist, and I handed him the fruit. Queen Folasade and I searched the tree for more. “Faith,” said Prince Vestero as he sampled a piece. We ate the delightful fruit until we were no longer hungry. Then we gathered more of the fruit to take back with us and began our return to the ship. *** Halfway to the ship, I saw the back of a man among the trees ahead. “Is that Captain Sutaniro?” I said quietly. A whisper of danger stirred the air around me like a sudden, mysterious breeze, and instinctively I adjusted the satchel of scrolls I carried so that I could more easily reach for my sword. “It is,” said Prince Vestero. He held up a hand and motioned for us to stop. “Perhaps we should let him stay ahead of us...where we can see him.” “But why?” said King Artemerio. “The answer is part of the conversation that must wait until we are on the ship,” said Prince Vestero softly. “He seems to be lingering,” said Queen Folasade. “Perhaps we should find another way back to the ship,” I said, eager to keep Sutaniro and Artemerio apart. “I think it would be wise,” said Prince Vestero. “Follow me—quietly. I know of another way.” “Your news must be very serious,” said King Artemerio. “You don’t think…you don’t think he is lying in wait for us or planning to cause some sort of harm, do you?” Vestero put a finger to his lips to silence Artemerio. Then he whispered, “I don’t know what he is up to at this moment, but in general, I can assure you that he is up to no good.” He took the lead, and nimbly and quickly, he guided us through the woods and back to the shore. After we reached our rowboat and began carrying it to the water, King Artemerio said, “I hope you plan to explain yourself soon, Prince Vestero. I think you must be keeping a very interesting secret.” “We can’t trust that the sound of the waves will hide our words, Your Majesty,” said Vestero. “We dare not speak of anything more serious than the weather until we reach the ship. And speaking of the weather...the wind is picking up.” He dipped the oars into the water and began to row. Though he said nothing more, he seemed as impatient to tell his news as King Artemerio was to hear it. Chapter 15: Ralo and Milant “Mutiny,” King Artemerio said softly once the four of us were hidden away safely in a secret room on the ship. It was the first time Prince Vestero had taken us there. Artemerio had been pleased to learn of another of the ship’s many secrets, but once Prince Vestero had given us his news, Artemerio’s happiness had faded considerably. “It may not come to that, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero. “Who would not be discouraged by the rumors and doubts someone has been spreading among the crew? But the crew members have shown no signs of being persuaded to act on those doubts and rumors.” “Then there is still time for us to feed their courage and counteract their fears,” said Queen Folasade. “We should tell them of the scrolls we’ve found. And of the map. Perhaps you could recite for them again the tale of Ralo and Milant and sing for them the song of hope. I think we should all keep those words firmly planted in our thoughts.” “You have suggested all that was in my heart to do, my Queen,” said Prince Vestero. “If the cook is so sure Sutaniro is behind it all, why can we not arrest him? Inciting mutiny is a violation of the code of the Guards and of Windsalian law,” I said. “Mutiny,” said King Artemerio. He grimaced. “Not if we can help it, King Artemerio,” said Prince Vestero. “Prince Barto, the cook has only suspicions. Sutaniro has been very crafty with his words. Recall how masterfully he manipulated the mood of the ship with his question that first night at sea.” “Prince Vestero, how is it possible that someone with Captain Sutaniro’s qualities could rise up through the ranks of the Royal Guards as he has apparently done?” asked Queen Folasade. “That question has troubled me greatly, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero. “But I assure you, we have had no sign of such troublesome behavior from him until now.” “Mutiny,” said King Artemerio. He sighed. *** “Are you coming with me to the dining hall?” I asked Artemerio. He had been poring over King Ralo’s journal and various scrolls for the whole last week and had scarcely left the room, even for meals. Artemerio looked up. “What? Did you say something?” “Lunch?” I said. He snapped the journal shut. “Already? I am supposed to meet Queen Folasade on the deck.” He stood and reached for his cloak. His expression was quite serious, and he seemed to be thinking very hard about something: after fumbling with his cloak for several moments, he draped it across his shoulders with the wrong side out. “What’s on your mind, Artemerio?” I asked. “Hmmm?” He looked at me while he tried to fasten the cloak’s top button. “Oh.” He realized his mistake and corrected it. “Much better. Let’s go.” He moved toward the door, but I stayed where I was. As he reached for the bolt, he looked back at me and paused. “I have things on my mind I hardly know how to express. Did you know King Ralo dealt with rumors of a mutiny during his journey? Where he was going, what course he would take to get there, and what would happen once he arrived were all entirely unknown by him, despite his unshakable belief that his arrival at the promised place was a certainty. You were right when you said that the weighty choices of history were more difficult to make than we, with our knowledge of a more complete story, sometimes assume. It’s tempting to think that the great men of the past had some inkling of what their futures held; their stories become so familiar to us that we assume the endings were always part of the stories. But they were not—at least not from the perspective of the men living them out. King Ralo’s steadiness of temper, his bold leadership, his fearlessness in leaving behind all he knew for a land he had never seen—these were only possible because he had lashed himself to his decision to trust the Great King, as a sailor might lash himself to a mast to survive a fierce storm. These ideas are what occupy my thoughts, Barto.” He offered me a slight smile and slid the bolt. “Along with Vestero’s rhyme about great efforts. I can’t put it out of my mind. In fact, I can recite it now as easily as he could. But don’t tell him I said so. He is right about things much too often for his own good.” I smiled. “I won’t say a word.” “I trust you, Prince Barto,” said King Artemerio solemnly, and the look on his face told me he meant it both as a statement of fact and as an apology for his previous doubt. We left the cabin, with no further conversation between us, and parted when he turned toward the deck and I toward the dining hall. *** The smell coming from the galley was not encouraging, and the sight of the strange-colored stew that was to be my meal confirmed that the cook was experimenting again. I took my bowl without comment from the crew member serving the food and looked around for a place to sit. “Prince Barto!” someone called out. It was Captain Sutaniro. He motioned toward an empty seat at his table. I walked toward him, surprised at the invitation and instantly uneasy. “How’s the stew?” I asked. “Is it as bad as it looks?” Captain Sutaniro laughed. “Despite the strange color and consistency, it is tolerable. I think I might even be able to stomach another bowl.” I stirred my stew and attempted to eat a few spoonfuls. “Prince Barto, the stories about your adventures in the Unconquered Lands are all any of the crew talks about. I’m very anxious to hear a personal account of your time there, if you would be so kind as to indulge me.” Sutaniro sounded genuinely interested. I set my spoon in the bowl of stew, glad to postpone taking it up again, and looked at him. Despite his amiable demeanor and respectful tone, I could not bring myself to trust him. “Where should I start?” I asked. But before he could answer, I began a tale about the exploration of the caves on the island I had named Rinn—an island too far away and too difficult to find for any of the information to be misused by Sutaniro. “Simply astounding. And I had not yet heard that one,” said Sutaniro when I’d finished. A strange look came over his face. “Tell me, Prince Barto. Is it difficult…how shall I put this?” He paused. “Is it difficult living in your brother’s shadow?” “Living in my brother’s shadow?” I repeated. A warning sounded in my thoughts. “Yes. It can happen even to a great man—even to a great adventurer— if a brother, whether through force of personality—or luck—attains a more visible public role. It is not your fault. But it must be very difficult.” He spoke in a sympathetic tone. “How do you do it? How do you manage not to resent your brother when you know, as you must, that you would make a better king?” Sutaniro’s words turned my stomach more violently than the stew had. “Watch yourself, Captain Sutaniro. You are suggesting the same wickedness Dunley suggested to Milant.” “I...I beg your pardon?” said Sutaniro, sounding surprised and even hurt. “You wish to pretend you don’t recognize that portion of the tale of Ralo and Milant? Very well. I will answer your question. Perhaps my brother does cast a broad shadow. Perhaps that is true. But King Artemerio’s success takes nothing away from me—and it does not prevent me from casting my own shadow. I would defend my brother—my king—with my last breath. Your sympathy is entirely wasted on me.” I stood. Sutaniro smiled pleasantly. “I have suggested nothing to you, Prince Barto. If you will fault me for my sympathy, I cannot stop you. Good day, sir.” He stood and bowed. Then he walked away. Stunned by what had taken place, I left to find Prince Vestero. *** “I understand why the cook’s suspicions are so difficult to confirm,” I said to Prince Vestero after I’d told him the story. “Sutaniro says it all so pleasantly, and he speaks in hints, as if to guide a person toward the despicable things he dares not name directly. And if I were not so familiar with the tale of Ralo and Milant, I’m sure I would wonder if I really were faulting him for sympathy and nothing else.” Prince Vestero frowned and nodded. “Your report is much like the one the cook gave me. We should warn King Artemerio and Queen Folasade. I am surprised Sutaniro would approach you. But perhaps he is desperate. Perhaps he has found no one else to join his plans for mutiny, and perhaps those plans are falling apart. Enough speculation. We should go find the king.” “You don’t suppose Sutaniro might be...” I paused. “Might be what?” asked Prince Vestero. “Before we left, Dunley tried to fool me with your silver-haired servant disguise, remember. What if…” I didn’t need to finish explaining. Vestero had begun to nod. “I have entertained similar thoughts since our first night on the ship, Prince Barto, and after some investigation, the cook and I have formed the theory that Sutaniro’s entire existence may have been as a disguise.” “Then you mean…there is a real Captain Sutaniro somewhere who has been…replaced?” A number of awful ideas regarding the fate of the real Sutaniro came to mind. “No, we have reason to believe Sutaniro is himself as real as the silver-haired servant—a character created to serve a purpose. Or like the tutor Dunley convinced King Ralo’s father to hire. He was at all times an enemy pretending to be a friend—which would explain the need for such extreme secrecy as the Great King required before we left.” “Then Dunley is—” “Not necessarily Dunley—likely one of his servants. But we should all be on guard. Dunley and his servants have had centuries to dread and prepare for these days.” *** Artemerio looked up from the scroll he had been reading. “Thirty-six days we have sailed and sailed, and still the wind pushes us on with no land in sight. I’m beginning to think it may take us all 108 days to reach the first Windsal.” “At least we know from King Ralo’s map that the next island we reach should be the island with the flowered trees,” I said. “And given how long King Ralo stopped along the way, I think we must be very close.” Artemerio seemed ready to speak, but a knock at the door distracted him from responding. He put down his scroll and rose to answer the door. Commander Toserto bowed. “Yes, Commander?” said King Artemerio. “Good afternoon, Your Majesty. We have sighted land. Prince Vestero waits for you on deck,” said Toserto. In an instant, Artemerio had tossed his collection of scrolls aside and was on his way to the deck. I followed after him. On the deck, Prince Vestero and Queen Folasade alternated between discussing something and staring out at the land in front of us. “Prince Barto! King Artemerio!” said Prince Vestero as we approached. He bowed. “As you can see, the wind has driven us near land. And the queen and I believe these may be the flowered trees—and the place—mentioned in the song.” Patches of purple, bright pink, blue, and red colored the upward-sloping landscape beyond the sand. A row of trees with orange-flowered tops—more fiducia trees—formed a shield in front of the other trees. As the wind moved through the fiducia trees and caused the leaves and petals to dance, the trees looked as if they were on fire—as if they were giant torches. I nodded. “Are we stopping?” The striking beauty of the fiducia trees drew my eyes, and I did not want to look away from them. “King Artemerio?” said Prince Vestero, turning to look at him. “We’ll maneuver as close as we can before dropping anchor,” said King Artemerio. “Then I want half of the crew to wait on board and half of the crew to come with us. I want to have a look around, and we should take this opportunity to replenish our water supplies.” As I stared at the flowered trees, I began to think it was not the sight of them that held my attention so completely: something about the island itself would not let me turn away. “I would like to explore the island first, before the others,” I said. “I mean…if I may be so bold as to suggest—” Artemerio interrupted me. “Of course you may suggest such a thing. You may not use Prince Vestero’s phrase, however. I hear those words far too often already. But I like your idea. I’ll go with you. The two of us will—” “Two?” said Prince Vestero. “Just two?” “Very well,” said King Artemerio. “The three of us will—” “Three?” said Queen Folasade. “Just three?” Artemerio laughed. “Very well—four. But that’s where I draw the line. The four of us will take one of the small boats up onto the beach and do some exploring before the crew joins us.” Chapter 16: Fiducia Trees “What a delightful fragrance,” Queen Folasade said as King Artemerio and I dragged the rowboat up the shore and into a thicket of trees where it would be safe from the tide. The orange-flowered trees we’d seen from the ship swayed in the wind, and the breeze carried their wild, sweet fragrance to us. “I wonder if these trees contain any fruit,” said Artemerio. He tore at some bushes and dragged their branches over to cover and hide our boat. “We should have a look before we search for water. All that rowing has made me hungry.” When the rowboat was suitably hidden, Artemerio led us nearer to the fiducia trees. He playfully plucked a flower and, bowing, gave it to Queen Folasade. “For my darling queen,” said King Artemerio. He reached up again, plucked a piece of fruit, and tossed it to Prince Vestero. Vestero turned it over in his hands, pulled a knife out of the satchel he’d brought with him, and cut into the fruit, releasing a spray of juice. He offered a slice to Queen Folasade first and then to me. “This fruit would not be growing here by itself,” said the queen. “According to King Ralo, no fiducia trees grow fruit on their own.” “Quite right, my Queen,” said Prince Vestero. He tasted the slice of fruit he held. “This island must be inhabited. And while I think the sort of people who would cause this fruit to grow would likely mean us no harm...” He let the thought trail off as he looked more closely at the fruit. “You will notice the taste of this fruit is much richer, much deeper, much more vibrant than what we tasted of it before. I would guess that this fruit has been enriched by severe trials. Whatever or whoever caused the trials might still be here. We should be cautious in our exploration.” “Let’s get started, then,” said King Artemerio. “That’s all the more reason to be back on the ship before dark.” As we walked, I noticed Prince Vestero tearing and bending leaves here and there. I moved ahead on the trail until I was beside him. “What are you doing?” I asked softly. “Leaving a trail,” he said. “Yes, but for whom? You would not need such obvious marks to lead us back.” “I left orders for the Guards to search for us if we take too long to return. These marks not only point the way, they also tell our story—or as much of a story as leaves and twigs can.” “You expect to find trouble here, then?” I said. “You will recall I dreamt of battle regarding the islands, Prince Barto. I’ve had a feeling for some time now that the days of battle are not far off.” *** “Where are those crystal lakes and streams?” asked King Artemerio. “Or regular lakes and streams? I’d settle for those, too.” We had walked quite a distance, well away from the shoreline, and had found no water. “Perhaps we should listen for water again,” said Queen Folasade. We stopped walking and listened intently for any sounds. “I only hear birds,” said Artemerio. He started walking again. “Wait,” I said. I listened, barely daring to breathe. “What did you hear?” Prince Vestero asked after a few moments. “It must have been nothing,” I said. “I suppose I was mistaken. I thought I heard words.” “From the birds?” asked King Artemerio. Vestero looked at Artemerio and raised one eyebrow. “Talking birds?” he said. “I’ve read about parrots,” said King Artemerio. “Some birds do talk.” Prince Vestero laughed. “Of course, Your Majesty. So they do.” “It sounded like a person’s voice. It sounded like a person singing. But all I can hear now are the birds.” I looked around. “These are the tallest trees I’ve ever seen! I was so busy looking at the ground for water that I didn’t notice.” Something about the scene gave me an odd feeling. All of it seemed strangely familiar. “Those aren’t so tall,” said Artemerio, pointing at a cluster of shrubs. “But those aren’t trees,” said Prince Vestero. “Those are shrubs…or bushes.” “Are those berries?” asked Queen Folasade. “Some kind of fruit? Let’s take a look.” As we walked forward, I glanced all around. “This feels familiar somehow,” I said, trying to imagine how it could. My first thought was that it might have resembled some part of the Unconquered Lands, but I could not think of any place similar to it. Slowly and in fragments, I began to anticipate details in the scene surrounding me before my eyes found them, and I realized the familiarity was not based on a similarity but on my having been there—in that exact spot—and having seen it all before. Prince Vestero pulled a berry from between the dark green leaves. “It looks like—” he squeezed the berry softly and smelled it. “Patience,” I said, without examining the berry. I was transfixed by the familiar scene before me, and the truth, far stranger than any answer I’d imagined, flooded over me. Prince Vestero nodded, sniffed again, and took a bite. “It is patience,” said Prince Vestero. “But how did you...” I pushed aside some leaves and discovered that the plants were growing on a trellis. On the other side of the trellis was the outer wall of a house. “I have seen this—all of this—before.” “Who are you?” said a young woman’s voice behind us. I turned to face the speaker and recognized her at once. She was the pleasant-faced young woman I had spoken with in my dream about this island, only she was not wearing armor or carrying a sword. “I—I know you,” she said after she had glanced at each of us. “I beg your pardon, but that is...impossible,” said King Artemerio. With a warm smile, the woman said, “The line between the possible and the impossible is often misjudged, and the things I’ve seen in my lifetime have caused me to believe such a line may not exist at all, sir. I may not know your names or where you come from, but I do know you.” She stared at my face for a moment. “I should not be so surprised, I think, but...” Hesitantly, she raised one hand. “May I touch your face?” I didn’t know what to say, so I simply nodded. Her gentle hand warmed my cheek, and then she took my hand and kissed it. She smiled. “You have not disappeared. You are really here—this is not a dream! I knew you would come.” She released my hand and looked at the others. “Please—come with me.” She walked beside the leaf-covered trellis until she came to a place where she reached through the leaves and opened a hidden door. She ushered us inside and quickly lit a lamp, which scattered the darkness of the small house and revealed that we stood in a small sitting room. “I should introduce myself,” said the young woman. “I am Elana. What are your names?” I saw Prince Vestero and King Artemerio exchanging a look. I knew they must be concerned about how much Elana should be told, so I spoke. “I have seen you in a dream, as well, Elana,” I said. “You have?” said King Artemerio. I looked at him. “Yes. She is the one who asked me to help her and said that the time had come.” “She was the girl?” King Artemerio said to me. He turned to Elana before I could answer. “You were the girl?” Elana laughed lightly. “I suppose I might have been, but it was his dream, not mine. I wish I could answer you—I can’t help but wonder what sort of dream could cause such a look of amazement to appear on your face, sir.” She smiled at King Artemerio, but then she turned her attention to the rest of us. After a moment of studying our faces one by one, she curtsied deeply, in the most decorous and sincere gesture of reverence I had ever seen. “I could not help myself. There is something about you that requires it,” she said after she rose. “Are you hungry? I have a meal prepared for you. We have much to discuss, and I think you might long for a bite of food before we are done.” “Are you in the habit of preparing meals for strangers?” said King Artemerio. “I suppose you must have visitors often. You are very kind to offer us such hospitality.” “I have never once had visitors since I have been here,” said Elana. “I prepared the meal for you.” “For us? You prepared it for me and my companions?” King Artemerio looked puzzled. “Of course. I have prepared a meal for you each day since the day the Great King showed me you were coming,” Elana said lightly. She smiled. “I think a meal would be just the thing,” said Prince Vestero. “Perhaps I could help? I could set the table.” “The table is set, sir,” said Elana. “There is nothing left but to serve the food.” “Then I will help serve,” said Prince Vestero. The four of us followed Elana into the next room, where a table, set for five, was waiting. “For us,” said King Artemerio softly. *** After our hands were washed and we’d taken our seats at the table, Prince Vestero began to serve us. He eyed the food somewhat suspiciously at first and stared us all down to keep us from taking a bite of anything until Elana had sampled each item. But her lack of hesitation to eat what he had served her seemed to set him at ease. The delicious meal consisted of some sort of cold soup, fresh bread, cheese, and fruit from the fiducia trees. I had not eaten so well since we’d left Windsal, and I think the others enjoyed the meal as much as I did, because we were too busy eating to engage in any conversation apart from commenting on the flavor of the cheese or asking each other to pass any of the various serving plates. And then, of course, the dishes had to be cleaned. The kitchen was too small for all four of us to help Elana, so Queen Folasade and King Artemerio volunteered while Prince Vestero and I carried trays with our tea to the sitting room. Prince Vestero set down his tray, came near to me, and whispered, “You are sure she is the girl? Do you think we should tell her who we are? Do you think she can be trusted?” “Yes—to all of your questions,” I said. “The sword she held in my dream was a sword of the Great King. Whoever she is, wherever she is from, she is for the Great King. And we are to help her.” Prince Vestero smiled. “I am glad. I like her very much. There is such an incredible lightness to her. She is like a faint beam of sunlight brightening the shadowy corners of a dim room. I would have been so disappointed if you had said otherwise.” He reached for a steaming teacup and settled into a chair. But just as he took his first sip, Queen Folasade and Elana entered the room, followed by King Artemerio. Prince Vestero stood and, as the others took their seats, began serving them their tea. I looked down at the chair nearest to me and noticed that it seemed to reflect the light from the lamp. I looked more closely at the grain of the wood. It appeared to be the same wood our ship was made of. “This is a remarkable piece of furniture,” I said. “What is it made of?” “I don’t know what it’s called, but the wood comes from the trees with the orange flowers,” said Elana. “At one time, long ago, they grew all over Windsal, I have been told. I think the chair probably came from there. The orange-flowered trees here would not have been much more than seedlings when this island was last inhabited.” “Those trees—the ones with the orange flowers—they are called fiducia trees, are they not?” King Artemerio said to Elana. “I have never heard the name, sir,” Elana said. “Fiducia trees.” She smiled as if the name pleased her. “Fiducia trees. I could not think of a better name for them.” Prince Vestero finished serving us. The sound of spoons lightly clinking against the sides of the teacups as we all stirred added a strange sort of musical accompaniment to the discussion. “Do you have the orange-flowered trees—the fiducia trees—where you are from, sir? Is that how you know what they are called?” Elana asked. She set down her spoon and looked at King Artemerio. King Artemerio glanced at Prince Vestero before answering. “We...do not have such trees,” said Artemerio. He looked down at his tea and stirred forcefully. “Was the chair a gift?” I asked Elana. “A gift?” she said. “You said you are not sure if it is from Windsal,” I said. “Sometimes the origins of gifts are unknown, so I thought...” Elana nodded, not as if she were answering but as if she were acknowledging that she understood my question. She took a small sip of her tea and then set the teacup aside on a nearby table. “It is a sort of gift, I suppose,” said Elana. “I found all of this just as you see it now. It is a remnant of a very great escape by a very great prince of my people. Ralo was his name.” She paused. “We have arrived at the point of having a conversation from which there is no turning back. Shall I continue?” At the mention of Ralo’s name, King Artemerio had moved to the edge of his seat, where he seemed to be more precariously balanced than the cup and saucer he had awkwardly positioned on one of his knees. With wide eyes, he whispered loudly, “Yes.” Chapter 17: Letters “I am from Windsal, a kingdom very near to this island,” said Elana. “King Roddol rules Windsal, but he can only do what the wicked, wicked Advisor Dunley allows.” “Dunley?” said Prince Vestero. “Deceptive? Cruel? Vicious? Calculating? Destructive? Enemy of all that is good? Source of all darkness? That Dunley?” “You know him, then?” said Elana. “Unfortunately, yes,” said Prince Vestero. “Please continue.” “All this is part of a much longer story, but I will trouble you only with what I must to explain the sort of help I need from you. In short, it is this: I think something has happened to King Roddol. Since the time he helped me escape, which was three years ago, he has not failed to deliver some gift, along with a letter and supplies, every two weeks. But I have had nothing from him for the last two months, and according to his most recent letters, the situation in Windsal has grown increasingly bleak...which is almost unimaginable, considering how bad things already were.” Elana stood. “Excuse me, please. I shall retrieve the letters and show you.” She went into the next room. When she returned, she carried a stack of folded papers, neatly bound together with ribbon. She untied the letters, selected a few, and after a quick glance at each of us, handed them to King Artemerio. Queen Folasade moved nearer to King Artemerio on the small couch, and Prince Vestero was up in a flash and leaning over his left shoulder. I leaned over his right. The first letter said the following: My Dear Elana, Your words were such a comfort to me. I fear that the days have taken an even darker turn. I have stumbled across Dunley’s plans for Lady Justice’s new court. I do not think it is a court at all. We should ask the Great King for wisdom to know what to do. I have little time to write more. Dunley waits for me even now. But know that you are always in my thoughts. I will find a way to bring you back, or else the two of us will set sail on Ralo’s path. Love always, Roddol Artemerio folded up the letter and opened the next: My Dear Elana, Of course you are right that we should not run away unless, like Ralo, the Great King tells us to go. And of course you are right that if I were to leave, Dunley would appoint a new king of his choosing and exert even more control over our people. And of course you are right that I am not the sort of man who could ever have any peace knowing that I had turned away from what I knew to be right. But how I wish you were wrong! I should warn you that what I feared regarding Dunley’s plans is true. I have seen the great court for myself. It is a frightful structure, and Dunley is far too pleased with it for it to be meant for anything good. I take heart, my love, in knowing that you and I are allies in this fight. Love always, Roddol The next few letters were similar: they contained vague but worsening hints about Dunley’s plans and assurances of Roddol’s affection for Elana. The final letter, though not the longest, contained the most information: My Dearest, Dearest Elana, Do you remember when we met as children? You were the only daughter born to any family from which a king could choose a wife. How I dreaded our introduction! But you were like a ray of sunlight—full of such warmth and good cheer that I could not be distressed in your presence. And you told me of your dream, little imagining that you were endangering and saving our lives at once. I will always remember. Do you remember when we met years later? You carried my heart with you when you left the palace that day. How could I not entrust it to one whose every word and deed were graced with such warmth and kindness? By law, you were destined to be my queen, but I would have chosen you alone of all the women in the world. I will always remember. Do you remember when we met most recently of all? I should have known you would be one of the people of the light, but it was a delight too great for me to imagine. And so I discovered that your warmth and kindness and beauty were bested only by your courage. I will always remember. And now, my love, you must take heart. Lady Justice has determined with finality that Milant’s law cannot be rewritten or undone. The penalty for speaking of the Great King in Windsal shall for all time be death. It is a grievous blow. But my news is still worse. Dunley’s new court exists for the people of the light, and Dunley has already begun rooting out our secret group. Many of our friends have been captured and are awaiting trial. It appears that Dunley intends for all to be taken before Lady Justice at one time in a dramatic display of force that will strike fear into the hearts of those who might otherwise be eager to join us. I am doing all I can to find a way of escape for them, as I found for you. But Dunley is hindering all my efforts. I hope you are right that help is on the way, my love. But even if it is not, we must stay strong: The Great King—forever! Dunley—never! Any law that opposes the knowledge of the Great King is a perversion that will uproot the entire moral order of a society and doom its followers to the worst sort of ignorance and to injustice. Therefore, to the end, we will not fail to share the Light. Love always (always!), Roddol When the four of us had all looked up from reading the letter, Elana said, “That is the last I heard from him. Apart from my concern for King Roddol, I have wondered if...” She paused and seemed to be searching for words. Prince Vestero and I returned to our chairs. King Artemerio returned his cup and saucer to their perilous position on his knee and stirred idly, not taking his eyes from Elana’s face. Queen Folasade reached over and took Elana’s hand. “Whatever you have to say, my dear, you may say it.” Elana nodded solemnly. “Besides the dreams I have had of all of you, there is a song that has come to me. It is a sort of promise—not specifically for me but for my people. I have wondered if you have been sent as part of the promise.” A single tear rolled down her cheek, and she bravely wiped it away. In an instant, Prince Vestero was at her side with a handkerchief. Elana looked up at him and smiled. “Such silliness, these tears. I do not want you to think I am sad or troubled. No, these tears come from a tremendous longing for all to be made right—from a sense of the beauty of what it will mean for the words of the song to come true.” “What is this song?” asked King Artemerio. “Will you sing it for us?” “Yes,” said Elana. She began to sing: “Oh, do not despair! The Great King is near! He promises this To those who will hear: ‘The hopeless shall hope. The songless shall sing. My people shall know The heart of their King. ‘The darkness shall flee. My plans shall prevail. A mountain shall move, And Dunley shall fail. ‘Windsal shall be saved The Old made like New. It shall be redeemed— I promise to you.’” Artemerio’s cup and saucer clattered to the floor. “My apologies,” he said, and he leaned over to pick them up. “I suppose Ralo left the song written down somewhere. I suppose that is how the song came to you.” He glanced at Elana. “Ralo?” said Elana. “No. No such song was ever written by Ralo. Or if it was, it has not yet been discovered. I dreamt of the song.” “I love it! I love it!” said Prince Vestero. He laughed. “My dear Elana, it is the song of the stars that was given to Ralo and the others as they traveled away from Windsal. And now the time has come for us to tell you what we know of why we are here and to properly introduce ourselves. But before all that, I have to tell you that your singing was beyond compare—pure but rich, thrilling but soothing, warm but ethereal. It was exquisite. During the course of our explanation, I shall more than likely sing for you. But I beg you not to hold me to the standards of musicality to which you must be accustomed.” As always, Prince Vestero’s cheer was contagious; Elana’s eyes had brightened at Prince Vestero’s reaction, and she smiled at his speech. “Sir, I have been alone on this island for three years,” she said. “You cannot disappoint me.” “Alone? For three years?” said King Artemerio. “But the letters...” “The letters and the gifts were left on the beach, in a chest that King Roddol buried there for that purpose shortly before he smuggled me here. He slips away whenever he can, usually at night, to make his deliveries, but he dares not be gone from the palace too long. Dunley does not know King Roddol helped me escape. King Roddol feared that Dunley might have him followed, so we agreed never to meet together. The risk was too great,” said Elana. “But what about the others?” I said. “The others?” said Elana. “There were others with you on the island in my dream,” I said. “You were leading what looked like a small army, in fact.” “There are no others here. I am this island’s sole inhabitant,” said Elana. “Well, such dreams are rarely straightforward,” said Prince Vestero. “If they were, we might miss their point entirely. Perhaps we shall have more help than we anticipate once we reach your Windsal. Perhaps the army waits for us there.” “Perhaps King Roddol...” said Elana with a distant, wistful look in her eye. But then her attention returned to Prince Vestero. “I am eager to hear your introduction and explanation, sir.” And so Prince Vestero began his explanation with a recitation of the tale of Ralo and Milant and followed that with the song within a song, which the stars had sung so long ago. *** “King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, Prince Barto, Prince Vestero...all from another Windsal,” said Elana after all had been told to her. “How small are our windows into the happenings in the world. Even the imagination fails to supply the many missing pieces of our view.” “Indeed. Well put,” said Vestero. “Speaking of windows…” Something outside had caught his attention, and he rose and moved toward the window across from him. “I am surprised at how quickly the day has flown. We must return to our ship soon, or the crew will come looking for us.” He turned away from the window. “But first, perhaps you could tell us more of what is happening in Windsal—your Windsal. Who might these others be—the others Prince Barto mentioned from his dream? And if Milant’s law forbade the knowledge of the Great King, how is it that you and King Roddol know of him?” He returned to his seat. “I suppose the others might be the followers of the Great King. They were mentioned in one of the letters I gave you—King Roddol called them the people of the light. But they are the ones Dunley was rounding up for the trial in his court. And many of them know of the Great King despite Milant’s law because Ralo left hidden scrolls scattered across the kingdom before he escaped. They have been discovered slowly through the years, and there is a secret collection of them that has been copied and recopied and recopied again. But some of us know because the Great King has appeared to us. “When I was a child and had no knowledge of the Great King at all, he appeared to me in a dream. In the dream, he said to me, ‘Child, how do you like the darkness of Windsal?’ I should add that for as long as I could remember, all of Windsal had been a very dark place and that it frightened me. I had longed for light. I said to him, ‘I do not like it at all.’ And he said, ‘Then follow me, my child, and you will never walk in darkness. You will always have light.’ ‘How do I follow you? I have only ever seen you in this dream,’ I said. And then he told me he was the Great King who would never leave me and who would always lead me, even if I could not see him. ‘Listen for my voice, my child,’ he said. “I met King Roddol not long after that. His father had died, and he had just taken the throne. He was a child, not much older than I. And he seemed very, very sad. So I told him about my dream. I don’t think it meant much to him at the time—except as a delicious secret he could keep from Dunley, who had stayed on as an advisor from King Roddol’s father’s reign. But years later, as King Roddol tells the story, he was out for a walk one day when he heard a sound like someone singing. He said it was the happiest sound he had ever heard, and he followed the sound until he came to a small house. Another song started, and being so near, he could clearly understand the words, which were about following the Great King and walking in light. In that moment, King Roddol knew he must go inside. He felt quite compelled to do so. But he knew once he did, he would be as guilty as those inside of breaking Milant’s law. If he were ever discovered, his life could be demanded of him on the spot. He hesitated but a moment, and then he opened the door.” “And were those inside the house frightened?” I asked. “It must have been a great shock for them to see King Roddol there among them.” Elana smiled. “Not at all. We had been asking the Great King to send him. And the rest you may guess from the letters you’ve read.” Something outside had caught Prince Vestero’s attention. He stood and nimbly and quickly crossed the room to the window. “Darkness has fallen. We should return to the ship,” Prince Vestero said, seeming puzzled and slightly concerned. Chapter 18: A Shield “Do you know the way to the place I’ve described? Well enough to lead us without any lantern?” Prince Vestero asked Elana. “Yes, I think so. And there will be light from the fiducia trees. But we will have a much easier time if we take the lantern,” said Elana. “Much easier unless we are discovered,” said Prince Vestero. “What makes you think—” King Artemerio began. “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty, I do not think this darkness is natural. We have no clocks to guide us, but I think it is much too early for this level of darkness. And I think we should prepare ourselves for what we may find upon our return. The Royal Guards should have begun a search for us by now, given the darkness. Something is not as it should be,” said Prince Vestero. “No lantern, then, of course,” said King Artemerio. “Am I to join you on your ship now, or will I return to this house?” asked Elana. Prince Vestero looked at her kindly. “Whether you think of this island as a prison or as a refuge, the time has come for you to leave it behind, I believe. Do what you need to do to prepare for such a departure.” Elana nodded and picked up the stack of letters, which she had carefully folded and again bound together with the ribbon. “I can’t leave these where they might be found. I will only be a moment,” she said and left the room. When she returned, we left the small, hidden house. But once we were standing in the darkness, we were each surrounded by a faint glow—as Elana and her army had been in my dream. “It is an unnatural darkness,” said Queen Folasade. “Yes,” said King Artemerio. “And I wonder if there is any sense in our going without a lantern now. Who will not see us from miles away?” Prince Vestero relented regarding the lantern, and Elana quickly fetched one. But the darkness swallowed up its light, and it was useless to us. “A most unnatural darkness, indeed,” said Prince Vestero. We began our return to the ship. Though King Artemerio might have been right that others would be able to see us from a distance, we had only enough light to see a single step before us. *** The fiducia trees were ablaze with light and allowed us to see a great distance in every direction. “Stand behind the fiducia trees until we have determined what’s happening with the Luceat,” said Prince Vestero. “They and their light will shield us from unfriendly eyes.” The Luceat shone brilliantly exactly where we had left her, but she was no longer alone in the harbor. Another ship had been positioned between the Luceat and the open sea. For the moment, all was still. The rhythmic crashing of the waves against the shore was the only sound, and both ships seemed to be drifting peacefully on the water. “The ship nearest to us is ours,” said King Artemerio to Elana. “Do you recognize the other?” “It belongs to—” Elana began. But then a hail of flaming arrows burst forth from the far ship and rained down on the Luceat. Some overshot their target and landed in the water between us and the Luceat, sending up small plumes of smoke as the water put out the flames. “Dunley,” said Prince Vestero and Elana at the same moment. The five of us watched as the assault continued, one spray of flaming arrows after another. “The Luceat appears unharmed,” said King Artemerio with amazement. “How can it be that the ship does not burn?” “The wood of the fiducia trees acts as a shield against that weapon of Dunley,” said Elana. “It is why Ralo planted these trees as he did—to protect this island.” “King Ralo stopped here?” said Artemerio. “He built the house I live in,” said Elana. “There were others, but those houses were not as well hidden as his. Dunley found them and tore them down. As the story has been told, Ralo and the others very nearly decided to wait out the trouble on Windsal here. They hoped it might be settled quickly. They hoped they might return. But at some point not long after they built their homes, they decided to journey on. Look—see that rock at the base of the tree over there? It is a monument left from Ralo’s time.” “I must see it,” said Artemerio. “Not alone,” said Prince Vestero. “I will go with him,” I said. Artemerio and I moved stealthily from tree to tree until we reached the rock Elana had pointed out. By the light of the fiducia trees, its words were clear: The Great King leads us onward. Though we cannot see the way, we shall not fail to follow. ~Ralo, a royal son of Windsal Artemerio knelt down and touched the words with his fingertips. “He wrote of this in his journal, but I did not realize this was the island. If he had stayed...” Artemerio didn’t have to finish the sentence. Those few words were enough to express the idea of an unthinkably different history than the one we knew. He stood. “We should return.” As I led the way back, I looked toward the Luceat. No more flaming arrows flew, and the other ship appeared to be moving rapidly away. Then I looked toward where the others were waiting for us. I stopped. “Am I imagining things, or are there four people?” I said. “There are four,” said Artemerio, who had stopped beside me. We crept along more slowly, hoping to learn before we were too near whether the additional person was an enemy or friend. “Their postures do not reveal alarm,” Artemerio whispered. “And their nearness to one another suggests the fourth person is welcome.” We watched a moment longer—until Prince Vestero took off his cloak and gave it to the extra person. Then we hurried back. “Who is this?” said King Artemerio when we reached the others. “We left behind three. Now there are four. What has happened?” The mysterious person’s back was to us; all I could see was Prince Vestero’s cloak. “The cook left the Luceat to look for us,” said Prince Vestero. “The cook?” I said, astonished. The woman who had turned to face us looked nothing like the stooped-shouldered, grimy-faced cook from the ship—the woman whose gray hair was always pulled back in a severe bun and whose crooked teeth were the most pleasant part of her permanent snarl. No, the woman before me had dark, curly hair and charming, lively features. And the teeth that chattered together as she stood there, shivering, soaked through, and clutching Prince Vestero’s cloak tightly to her, were perfect. Her beauty was breathtaking, and I found I could neither look away nor speak. “King Artemerio, Prince Barto, I’d like you to meet Celisse...my sister,” said Prince Vestero. “She has, of course, been in disguise until now.” “Your…sister?” I said, astonished all the more. I had gone terribly wrong in all my efforts to imagine Prince Vestero’s sister. She was not a feminine version of him; there was a faint resemblance around the eyes, but she was unlike him in any other respect. I recalled Prince Vestero’s mention of her disapproval of my hair, and for reasons I cannot explain, I began to comb it all to one side with both hands, which was as much as I could remember of the style she preferred. Celisse curtsied deeply before the king. Through her chattering teeth, she said, “It is an honor to serve you, Your Majesty.” Then she turned to me. She glanced at my hair and seemed to be trying not to smile. “I do apologize that my cooking displeased you so, Prince Barto.” From the merry look in her eyes, I could tell she was teasing me. “All is forgiven,” I said. And it was. And I regretted that she knew of my disapproval. “I hope you can forgive—” “Not a word. Let us end the conversation while you are still racked with guilt and eager to overlook my many flaws.” Celisse turned to Prince Vestero. She was still shaking, and she drew the cloak more tightly around her. “The ship entered the harbor not long ago. Someone shot an arrow onto our deck with a message warning us that we had entered Windsalian territory and should leave—but not until we had surrendered to them any and all persons we had found on the island.” “Dunley must not have been on board,” said Queen Folasade. “He would have recognized our flag.” Prince Vestero nodded. “What happened then?” he said to Celisse. “Why did the other ship attack?” “Sutaniro,” said Celisse. “While Commander Toserto prepared a response, Sutaniro shot an arrow at the other ship with his own message. I saw the arrow fly and ran to Sutaniro immediately, but Sutaniro…” She paused. “Sutaniro vanished—disappeared—one second he was there, and the next he was not. I think we have our proof that he is what we suspected.” She gave Vestero a knowing look. “And within the hour, the other ship began its attack. I was able to slip away to search for you when the other ship began to disengage and withdraw. The only weapons the enemy ship used against us were the flaming arrows, which have had no effect on our ship whatsoever. I think the other ship was not prepared for battle. I think the crew’s only purpose must have been to find whoever they thought was on the island—until Sutaniro sent his message.” She glanced at Elana. “Whoever it is they are after, the message they sent to us made clear how desperate our attackers are to find the person.” “If they know I am here, King Roddol must have been captured,” said Elana. Her face grew pale. “Why did the other ship disengage and withdraw?” asked King Artemerio. “We damaged their ship with our cannons. And though they were unable to inflict any damage with their flaming arrows, we shot them back and burned their sails. But I would not be surprised if they intend to return or send others,” said Celisse. Prince Vestero turned to Elana. “How far away is your Windsal?” “Roddol used to make the entire journey, here and back, in only a few hours,” said Elana. “But that was without a large crew rowing for him, which the ship that attacked is likely to have.” “Dunley might not have been on board, but I have a feeling he will be hearing of our presence soon. And Sutaniro...he may betray us in any number of ways. Let’s find the rowboat. We should return to the Luceat,” said Prince Vestero. *** Once we were again aboard the Luceat, King Artemerio had Prince Vestero assemble the crew. The faces of the Royal Guards were unreadable; what effect the recent battle had had upon them was impossible to ascertain. When all were present on the deck, King Artemerio began to speak. “We are within a few hours of our destination: the first Windsal. Indeed, we have in our midst a future queen of that kingdom. She is a friend, an ally.” King Artemerio described for the crew how we found Elana and what we had learned about what was happening in the first Windsal. Then he said, “Despite the difficult circumstances that led to Elana’s exile on the island, she and the others like her have not become so disheartened by their difficulties that they have forgotten the larger context of their suffering. Instead, through their steadfastness, even in the face of persecution and oppression, they have testified to that larger context. They have testified to that unseen realm by daring to align their lives with it, by daring to allow invisible truths to govern their choices and actions. And now we have that same opportunity before us. “The words of the Great King’s promise are all we have to give us hope that this grand adventure will end well. And even then, we do not know what the promised victory will look like. Knowing what waits for us once we reach this Windsal, I refuse to order any of you to journey on. In this moment, I call on all of you to decide for yourselves whether you will journey on into the unknown or whether you will remain here, on this island, waiting for our return. There will be no penalties or punishment for your choice. But if you are to journey on, you must have the matter clearly settled in your own heart.” He paused and stared out into the crowd. The ship bobbed up and down as a stiff wind swept across the sea. But the Royal Guards stood firm. None moved. “Very well,” said King Artemerio. “The Great King leads us onward. Though we cannot see the way, we shall not fail to follow.” “Onward!” Prince Vestero shouted, one fist raised to the sky. “Onward!” the Royal Guards shouted in return. “To your posts, then! Onward we sail,” said King Artemerio. Chapter 19: The Port “Have you any thoughts on how we are to approach?” I asked. Six of us—King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, Prince Vestero, Elana, Celisse, and I—stood huddled around two maps, which were spread open on a table in Queen Folasade’s cabin. One map was the map King Artemerio had drawn of the islands; the other was a large sketch he had made of the small map in King Ralo’s journal. “I am forming an idea,” said Prince Vestero. “But I want to be sure I understand.” He looked at Elana and then pointed to a spot on the edge of the main island. “King Roddol’s palace is here.” He pointed to a spot on a barrier island directly across from the palace. “And this is where Dunley built Lady Justice’s court? On top of this mountain?” Elana nodded again. “Exactly. On Mount Umbra.” “But how could King Roddol not have known what was happening? The two are separated by only this narrow inlet,” said Celisse, moving Prince Vestero aside in her zeal and replacing his hand on the map with her own. “Is it a very high mountain? Is it part of a chain of mountains?” “No,” said Elana. “There is just the one mountain, which is really more like...a very impressive hill—neither so steep nor so high that travel to its top is difficult, but formidable and imposing enough to serve as a powerful symbol of Dunley’s dominance. It is Dunley’s mountain, given to him during the days of Milant so that Dunley could secure both the king’s palace and the coastline. Only his special guards are allowed on the island.” “Then we will have to contend with Dunley’s guards in making our approach,” said Prince Vestero. He nudged Celisse with his elbow and returned to the spot he had held before Celisse had pushed him aside. The two exchanged quick glances that conveyed the sense of a complete and often-repeated conversation: his annoyance, her apology, his forgiveness—and amusement he dared not openly express but could not quite hide. “Perhaps not.” Elana pointed at a spot along the coastline some distance from the palace. “There is a port here. When King Roddol helped me escape, we left from it. It is his own private port, but he has made it appear to be a den of smugglers and vagabonds. King Roddol’s own soldiers keep watch there in disguise—and pay bribes to Dunley’s men to protect the secrecy of their nonexistent trade.” “Perfect,” said Prince Vestero. “Well...almost,” said Elana. “King Roddol’s soldiers will not be welcoming toward a strange ship. They are under orders to fire one warning shot with a cannon and then to sink any unidentified vessel that does not turn away.” “There is no code word you could offer them? They would not recognize you and halt the attack?” asked Prince Vestero. “They won’t let us get close enough for that,” said Elana. “They depend on coded flags to identify ships that are allowed to dock, and, unfortunately, I am not familiar enough with the flags’ designs to piece one together for us.” Prince Vestero’s brow furrowed. “I have a plan,” said King Artemerio. “We shall take down all the sails and any other signs of life visible on the deck. We’ll make King Roddol’s men believe the ship is empty and drifting toward them on its own. Meanwhile, we’ll all be hiding in the ship’s secret compartments.” Prince Vestero’s eyes lit up, and he began nodding slowly. “And King Roddol’s men will likely come aboard to investigate or to navigate the ship into the port. Well done, Your Majesty. But will they come aboard, or will they sink the ship no matter what?” He looked at Elana. “We have legends of ships such as this one,” said Elana. “Ralo himself had such a ship made from the wood of the orange-flowered trees. They may sink us; I cannot say for sure. But they will be curious about this shining ship.” “Then it’s settled,” said King Artemerio. “We have our course. And if they sink us, we will swim ashore. We haven’t come all this way to fail.” “Indeed we have not,” said Prince Vestero. “I will give Commander Toserto his new instructions.” *** The port Elana had shown us on the map was not as easy to find as we had all hoped. Hours passed while we searched. Darkness masked the morning light and gave the new day a feeling of dreariness and despair. The likelihood that the ship that attacked us would reach the first Windsal before we did grew from a probability to a certainty. “The darkness is so much worse than I remembered.” Elana peered toward the shore as she stood with Prince Vestero and me on the deck. “We’ll find the port,” said Prince Vestero reassuringly. “And if we—” Something caught his attention, and he leaned far forward over the rail. “I see a light. Over there.” He pointed. “Very faint.” “Yes, I see it!” said Elana. She leaned forward like Prince Vestero had. “That is the place. I know it.” Prince Vestero nodded and looked toward where he had pointed out the light. “A few more strokes with the oars, I think. Then I’ll set the wheel and let the sea carry us—” “Home,” said Elana. She clutched at the rail and stared toward the shore. *** From my hiding place, I heard the sound of the warning shot and braced myself for the possibility of a cold swim. A long silence and an uncomfortable wait followed. But then I heard the soft, measured thumping of footsteps. “All clear!” someone shouted. Another voice echoed the message. “All cle— Wait! Who’s there?” I heard rushing footsteps and then a muffled conversation, which seemed to go on forever. If all was going according to plan, the conversation involved King Artemerio, Elana, and whoever had boarded the ship. As hard as I strained to identify the voices or to catch snatches of what was being said, I never succeeded and eventually had to resign myself to listening for a signal: either the ringing bell, which would mean all was well, or a cry of alarm. Whatever was happening was taking so long that I began to wonder if the signal had already been given. I pressed my ear to the wall of the cabinet where I was hiding and held my breath. And then the bell rang. I climbed out of my hiding place and hurried to the deck to search for Artemerio. The deck was bustling with activity. The Royal Guards had all come out of hiding and were preparing to dock the ship. A flag I’d never seen before was flying overhead, and I guessed it was the signal that the ship was to be granted safe passage into the port. King Artemerio stood speaking with Elana and a man I assumed was supposed to be a smuggler or vagabond. He had an unkempt appearance and unshaven face, but like the rest of us on the ship, he was surrounded by a soft glow. Artemerio stopped talking and looked toward me. Then he waved me over. “Prince Barto!” he shouted. I dodged a few crew members and a swinging rope and trotted over to him. “This is Captain Wimbel,” Artemerio said to me. “I was telling him about the battle with Dunley’s ship.” He turned back to Wimbel. “And then it just left.” Wimbel crossed his arms over his chest and then reached up and pinched his lips between two fingers. After a moment in that position, he shifted his weight and frowned. “Dunley has been searching for you, Lady Elana, with a desperate ferocity,” Wimbel said as he looked at her. He faced King Artemerio. “It is my guess that his men stumbled across your ship quite by accident. And that they left without much of a fight says to me that whatever message or information they rushed away to give Dunley was something valuable, indeed—so valuable that they felt Dunley’s pleasure upon hearing it would outweigh his anger upon learning they had not captured Lady Elana.” He reached up and pinched his lips again but released them long enough to say, “But your ship did not burn, did you say? Quite remarkable, that.” He gazed around the deck, as if to search for scars from the battle. “How did they know to look for me, Captain Wimbel?” said Elana. She searched Wimbel’s face. His eyes met hers for a moment, but then he looked away. “King Roddol is being held prisoner by Dunley.” Wimbel looked up at her quickly. “The king would never betray you, Lady Elana. No matter what Dunley might do to him.” A lengthy pause followed his emphatic words. “But if Dunley discovered any of the king’s hiding places...well…the king was very careful. But he could not bring himself to burn your letters, my Lady.” Elana reached over and grabbed the ship’s rail. Wimbel leaned toward her to steady her, and suddenly Prince Vestero appeared at her side. His approach had been so quiet that I hadn’t noticed him. “I shouldn’t have told you. Forgive me, my Lady,” said Wimbel as he cast a curious glance toward Prince Vestero. “I hope you will not blame the king for this trouble that has come to you.” “Blame the king?” said Elana. “He saved my life—at great risk to himself. And I could not burn his letters, either. I was just hoping the letters I kept would not cause him any harm if they too were discovered. The thought of it quite overwhelmed me.” She smiled bravely at Wimbel. “What a foolish pair we have been not to have taken your advice, Captain. But I do not regret knowing what you have told me.” “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero, “I think our next step should be to rescue King Roddol.” Wimbel squinted at Prince Vestero as if he were sizing him up but trying to look as if he were not. Prince Vestero turned to look at him. “Unless, sir, that is what you and your men have planned and you think we might be in the way.” A surprisingly awkward moment of silence followed. “Captain Wimbel, this is Prince Vestero,” said King Artemerio as he looked back and forth between the two men. Wimbel had seemed strangely disturbed by Prince Vestero’s comment, and neither had averted his gaze from the other since it had been spoken. I began to wonder if King Roddol had guards like our Royal Guards and if Wimbel might be one of them. “Prince Vestero is entirely trustworthy, Captain Wimbel. I assure you,” said Elana. “And I think it very likely our new friends will be able to help the king.” At that, Wimbel glanced at Elana, and when he returned his eyes to Prince Vestero’s face, his expression had softened. “Can’t be too careful these days,” said Wimbel. “Your suggestion would be a good one, if it were not impossible. If anything happens to King Roddol, Windsal will surely fall. But I and my men and you and yours can do little to help him now. We have no hope, sir. The king is to be taken before Lady Justice in two days. The end is upon us, and all that is left for us to do is to face it well.” “Two whole days?” said Prince Vestero. “Anything can happen in that amount of time.” A flicker of hope appeared in Wimbel’s eyes, and the look on his face was the sort of look a man wears when he hears something said that he desperately wants to believe is true. But the look passed. Wimbel smiled faintly. “What more could possibly be lost? I will help you however I can, though I expect you will discover the odds against you cannot be overcome.” King Artemerio reached into one of the pockets of his cloak and pulled out a piece of fruit, the kind that grew on the fiducia trees. Handing it to Wimbel, he said, “Have a bite, sir. And let us tell you about a few of the odds that have been overcome so far.” Chapter 20: Darkness Not long after we reached the port, Elana and I stood together on the deck watching Wimbel take quick steps down the dock. He stopped when he reached a very tall man. They had a heated conversation, during which the tall man kept glancing toward the Luceat and looking very displeased. But at last the two began walking toward the ship. Both men moved with purposeful strides, and whatever conversation had started down below continued as they walked. “Who is that man with Wimbel?” I asked Elana. “Commander Lane,” she answered. By the time the two men reached the deck, Elana and I had positioned ourselves to intercept them. Commander Lane’s face brightened when he saw Elana, and he bowed to her. “Lady Elana, I am not sure at all that you should be here, but it is a pleasure to see you.” His pleased look faded momentarily as he turned to Wimbel and dismissed him with a cold nod. Wimbel bowed to Elana, saluted Lane, and then rushed off down the ship’s ramp. “Commander Lane, I suppose Wimbel has told you—” Elana began. “He has told me all kinds of nonsensical things,” said Lane angrily. But the anger quickly turned to regret. “Forgive me, Lady Elana. I should not have interrupted.” He glanced at me. “Wimbel, in his wild ramblings, told me that these new…friends of yours think they may be able to help King Roddol. Is that correct?” “Yes, Commander,” said Elana. “Then for your sake, my Lady, I will hear them out.” He glanced at me again. “This way,” I said, and I led Commander Lane and Lady Elana to the cabin where King Artemerio, Queen Folasade, and Prince Vestero were waiting for us. *** “We cannot leave the port,” said Commander Lane to King Artemerio. “Captain Wimbel was wrong to lead you to believe otherwise, if he did so.” “I understand the position you are in,” said King Artemerio. “You answer to King Roddol, of course. His orders must be obeyed. But may we impose upon you, then, to guard this ship for us?” “So you mean to travel on foot to the king’s palace?” Lane glanced at Elana. “Has Lady Elana not told you how far away it is? And there is no hiding this—this—light we all carry. The darkness has made it impossible. And with all the members of your crew...” Lane shook his head. “Can’t be done. You will be discovered. I—” “Let me interrupt you and set your mind at ease, Commander Lane,” said Artemerio. “We will not travel by foot. We will sail as near to the palace as we are able to sail.” “Sail?” said Lane as if it were a ridiculous suggestion. “If the ship that attacked yours has already arrived, everyone will be watching for your ship. Absolutely everyone. And it is not a ship that is easily missed. But you said you wanted us to guard your ship. How do you expect us to guard…no…I have already told you we cannot leave the port.” “That’s why I was hoping to borrow a ship,” said King Artemerio. “If everyone is looking for the Luceat, they will not notice when we arrive in a different vessel. Do you know where we might find one? Something small is probably best. We will not be taking our entire crew.” Lane’s eyebrows rose at King Artemerio’s words, but his flash of curiosity was followed by a skeptical scowl. “I will have the men ready a vessel, and we will do our best to guard the Luceat for you. Is that all you need?” “Yes,” said Artemerio. “Then if you will excuse me…” Lane gripped the arms of his chair, clearly intending to rise. “Actually, Commander, I have a question for you,” said Prince Vestero. The Commander nodded his permission for Prince Vestero to continue. “I understand King Roddol is to be taken before Lady Justice on Mount Umbra,” said Prince Vestero. “Correct,” said Lane. “All of Windsal has been ordered to attend…including vagabonds and smugglers—and all visitors. I can sketch a rough picture of the court for you, if that’s what you are going to ask. But we have no detailed information regarding the many labyrinthine hallways it is rumored to contain. I would advise you to attempt your rescue before the king is taken to the mountain. Good day. I’ll send Wimbel with word of your ship and with the sketch.” He stood, as if he were convinced he had accurately anticipated and answered Prince Vestero’s question. “Thank you,” said Prince Vestero. “But I still have my question.” “Go ahead, then. Ask it,” said Lane, sounding impatient. He remained standing. “What can you tell us about the mountain on which Dunley’s court sits?” said Prince Vestero. “What specifically do you want to know? Many things can be said about mountains,” said Commander Lane. “But, again, I advise that your rescue attempt occur before the king reaches that small island. Once he has been taken to the mountain...” He paused, but his expression suggested he was about to continue with another short speech that answered questions that hadn’t been asked. “Is it the sort of mountain that might easily be moved?” said Prince Vestero, not waiting for whatever was to follow the commander’s pause. Lane glanced questioningly at Elana, but she too looked surprised at Prince Vestero’s words. She looked at King Artemerio. Artemerio glanced at me and then, turning his attention to Commander Lane, laughed insincerely. “You’ll have to forgive our friend. He spent a good amount of time disguised as a jester, and I don’t think he has recovered.” “If I may be so bold, Your Majesty,” said Prince Vestero, “according to the song of old, some mountain will move. Of course, there are many other mountains in the world. Perhaps there are many other mountains in this Windsal. But this mountain is the only one that seems relevant to our situation. And I imagine there are a good number of people who would like for it to be moved—and flung far off into the heart of the sea, for that matter, taking Dunley’s evil court with it.” “Oh, yes. The song,” said King Artemerio, his expression suddenly thoughtful. He looked at Prince Vestero. “Even given that poetic descriptions may still be precise, do you really think a mountain is going to—” “I do,” said Prince Vestero. “It must,” said Elana, whose surprise had faded after Vestero mentioned the song. “Then how about it, Commander Lane?” said King Artemerio. “Is it the sort of mountain that might easily be moved?” Lane’s face displayed his bewilderment, and he glanced at each of us before settling his gaze upon Elana. “You are...serious?” he said to her. Elana nodded. “Quite.” Lane sat down and was silent for a very long time. “I hardly know how to answer such a question,” he finally said. “But it seems to me that it would be no easier or harder to move this mountain than any other.” “Then there are no plans already underway to bring it down?” said King Artemerio. “No secret army of valiant men with shovels? No giant rope encircling it and harnessed to a thousand ships? Nothing like that?” “We tend to look upon our mountains as...permanent, sir,” said Lane. “Immovable. Unchangeable. They outlast generations…kingdoms…ages. We are not foolish enough to—” He cut himself off. “We have never considered moving any of our mountains. We have no plans underway at all like the ones you have suggested.” He paused. “Captain Wimbel mentioned some of your…adventures. I confess I don’t know what to make of them. But you speak so lightly of moving mountains and saving kings that I think you do not understand the desperate situation you now find. I won’t say that what you hope to do can’t be done, but I will say that the odds of you saving the king are the same as the odds of you moving that mountain.” “Commander Lane, let me assure you that we do understand the challenges facing us,” said King Artemerio. “And let me assure you that the stories we told Captain Wimbel are all entirely true.” “Yes…well…show me your moving mountain, sir, and then I will believe every one of your fantastical stories. But as I said, I will see you receive the help you need—for the sake of King Roddol and Lady Elana.” Commander Lane stood, bowed stiffly, and left. *** The air was dank and, for the most part, motionless. Now and then, a strong gust of wind would fill the sails of our small ship and propel us forward. But once the gusts passed, the sails hung lifelessly—perfectly still. That we were so few in number—only Artemerio, Folasade, Vestero, Elana, Celisse, and I were on the ship—made the sea seem eerily quiet. At no point did the unnatural darkness dissipate, and it gave both time and distance a surreal and disorienting feeling. “Strange weather here,” said Artemerio about halfway through the journey. “Strange everything here,” I said, in no mood for carrying on a conversation of any greater length. Besides providing us with a ship, Commander Lane had also provided us with clothing. Though I was grateful to be wearing garments that would not immediately mark me as being from someplace other than this Windsal, I regretted that I had had to trade my warm cloak for the inferior one that did almost nothing to block out the uncomfortable chill. We drifted along for an immeasurable amount of time before we caught sight of other boats and ships and began to prepare for whatever might face us at the dock, which was swarming with ships and people and which was directly before us. *** While the rest of us stood waiting, Prince Vestero spoke to one of the dock workers who had helped tie down our ship. The man’s expression fluctuated between curiosity and impatience, and he seemed to be offering Vestero one-word answers to whatever questions Vestero asked—until Vestero handed him a small bag of gold coins, which Wimbel had provided for us for just such a moment. At that, the man pocketed the bag and began to speak at great length about something. Vestero seemed to be listening carefully to whatever the man was saying. “Watch him,” said Celisse softly. “He keeps looking over his shoulders. Whatever he is telling Prince Vestero is likely true and likely dangerous for him to be sharing.” Prince Vestero saluted, as Wimbel had shown him to do, and the dock worker saluted back. As Vestero walked toward us, the man stared after him for a moment. Then he looked over each shoulder and scurried off toward another ship that had just arrived. “It is as we thought. Everyone along this section of the coast has been ordered to report any sightings of the shining ship. And a large reward has been promised to anyone who captures its passengers,” said Prince Vestero. “And King Roddol? The people of the light?” said Elana. “Did he have any news?” Prince Vestero turned to Elana. “Lady Justice has been summoned to the palace. King Roddol’s trial will be held there. Dunley is in a rush for it to take place because of the sighting of the Luceat. Only the people of the light will be taken to the new court on the mountain, and their trial will begin as planned.” “Should we try to disguise ourselves, then?” said Celisse. “With this light we carry, I would think we are almost certain to be caught.” “It is not carrying light that is forbidden, although such a law is certain to come,” said Elana. “It is speaking or—or singing of, or writing of, or mentioning in any way the Great King.” “As Commander Lane said, the light is impossible to hide...although, now that I think about it, Commander Lane’s understanding of what is and is not possible seems to be rather poorly developed,” said Prince Vestero. He paused and seemed to be considering the idea. “No. No, I don’t think we should attempt it. This light is meant to be seen, I think. But Lady Elana must certainly keep her face hidden with the hood of her cape. According to our new friend, she has been mentioned in connection with the shining ship.” Vestero glanced toward Elana. Her hood moved as if she were nodding. Vestero glanced around. “We should get going. We have a great deal to accomplish. And sadly, our new friend does not seem like the trustworthy type.” He led us forward, away from the dock. Chapter 21: The General We had not gone very far before I noticed we were surrounded on all sides by armed, uniformed men—soldiers of some sort. They kept their distance but matched our pace. Only when we were away from the crowded dock area did they draw closer. And then one of them approached us. “Stop,” said the soldier in a commanding voice. He was the only soldier who sat atop a horse. “I am General Myhr, commander of tens of thousands and servant of Advisor Dunley.” He paused and looked us over with his beady eyes. “I have been told that you have an unusual curiosity about the shining ship.” “That was fast,” said Celisse under her breath, and I wondered if the dock worker had gone to find General Myhr before or after counting the gold he had been given. “Who would not be curious about such a thing?” said Prince Vestero. “Have you seen it?” General Myhr demanded, his beady eyes unblinking. “We have,” said King Artemerio firmly. “Then you must answer my questions and tell me all you can about what you have seen.” The general signaled to the other soldiers, and they circled around us menacingly. “And if we refuse?” said Prince Vestero. “I would advise you not to refuse,” said General Myhr. “But if we did, what would happen?” said King Artemerio. General Myhr’s beady eyes grew beadier still as he squinted and glared at King Artemerio. “You would fall into the hands of one less merciful than I,” he said. “A refusal would be a violation of the law. You would be taken to Lady Justice.” “We do not refuse—not entirely, anyway,” said King Artemerio. “But we will give our report only to the king—to King Roddol.” “It seems you have not heard the news,” said Myhr. “Windsal has no king. The former king, Roddol, is to appear before Lady Justice. So if you refuse to answer my questions, perhaps you will see him when I take you to her.” The way he said her left no doubt that he intended his statement as the severest of threats. “Does the law specify to whom reports of the shining ship must be given?” asked King Artemerio. “Advisor Dunley,” said General Myhr. “Then we are required to give such a report to Dunley?” said King Artemerio. “Of course not. You are to give the report to me,” said General Myhr. “Does the law say that I am to give the report to you?” said King Artemerio. “Well, no, but—” General Myhr began. “Then it is assumed that Dunley will receive a secondhand report?” said King Artemerio. “Well, yes, but—” General Myhr said. “But the law does not specify to whom the initial report must be given?” said King Artemerio. “Well, no, but—” General Myhr said. “Then we choose to give our report of the shining ship to King Roddol,” said King Artemerio. “We demand to be taken to King Roddol. And you may listen to what I tell him and give Dunley his secondhand report.” “Your argument is clever, and I am curious to understand what help you think a powerless king might be to you. But...” General Myhr sat blinking his beady eyes for a moment. “But I am not persuaded to do as you have asked. You will give your report to me.” “General Myhr,” said Elana. She lowered her hood and looked up at him. “Please?” General Myhr’s expression softened, and I could see his fondness for her. But that softened look was instantly followed by a look of regret, as if he dreaded saying what he was about to say. “Lady Elana. You...you must be taken to the dungeon, of course. And I suppose the same is now true of your friends.” General Myhr paused. “I can see that you are imprisoned near King Roddol.” He looked at King Artemerio. “But I will expect a full report from you there.” He nodded to one of the soldiers and turned his horse in the direction of the palace. *** Many steps led down into the dungeon. As I neared the bottom of the steps and my eyes adjusted to the dim light, I noticed a man shackled to one wall. Two soldiers guarded him. He had been sitting on the ground, but when he saw us, he stood. He stepped forward as far as his chains would allow. “Lady Elana,” he said. She ran toward him, but the soldiers guarding him stopped her before she reached him. “King Roddol,” she said. “You will treat her gently,” said General Myhr to the soldiers who held her. “They found the letters,” said Roddol, his face twisted with remorse. “I am...so...sorry.” He strained against the chains. “It is my fault they found you. I will never forgive myself for allowing you to be captured. I was foolish to take such a risk and keep what you had written.” The soldiers who guarded Roddol led Elana back toward us, but she did not look away from King Roddol as she walked. “They did not find me, King Roddol,” said Elana. “And I took the same risk. I—” One of the soldiers interrupted. “That’s enough,” he said to Elana. He shoved her roughly into the cell where the rest of us had been taken. “Gently,” said General Myhr, his hand on the hilt of his sword as he stared down the guard. “Yes, sir,” said the guard. He hurried out of reach of the general. “You,” said General Myhr. He pointed to King Artemerio. “Come forward. It’s time for your report.” One of General Myhr’s soldiers pulled King Artemerio out of the cell and closed the door. “The great restraint I’ve shown has been on account of the Lady. But I will not think twice about punishing you severely if you disappoint me,” General Myhr said. “You will not be disappointed,” said King Artemerio. He walked toward King Roddol. When the two kings were separated by only a few feet, the general said, “Stop there and begin.” I worried at first that I would not be able to hear the conversation that was to follow, but the cold stone walls echoed every word clearly. “King Roddol,” said King Artemerio, “I am here to give you a report of the shining ship that has been sighted off of your coast. But first...” And he launched into the telling of the tale of Ralo and Milant. “In ages far beyond our reach, In days beyond the days of old, Before the foot of man was set Upon the land we now behold, Another land, Windsal by name, Across the sea did shine and gleam— A noble nation, bright and fair, A kingdom favored by the King. A treasure far beyond compare, The people knew the Great King’s heart—” At the mention of the Great King, General Myhr shouted, “Are you mad? This is not a report of the shining ship. This sounds like a silly children’s rhyme! And a forbidden one at that, mentioning...” He paused. “Mentioning one who is not to be mentioned. You will pay for this with your life. I’ve heard enough. Take him back.” He looked at the guards and gestured with an angry wave toward the cell holding the rest of us. “It is a tale that must be told, General Myhr. Without it, the report of the shining ship would be incomplete. You will have a better idea of what exactly to tell Dunley if you hear it,” said King Artemerio. I wished I could see the general’s face during the long pause that followed; I imagined the worst. But then he said, “Very well. But I warn you not to trifle with me.” Artemerio began again with the tale and continued all the way to the end. Then he said, “I am King Artemerio, king of the second Windsal, the one founded by King Ralo and spoken of in this tale. Take heart, King Roddol. The Great King sent us here. The time has come for his promise to be fulfilled.” King Artemerio turned to face General Myhr. “I traveled here from my kingdom in the ship that so concerns you, sir. The shining ship is mine. And you should know that you are fighting on a side that will not win. But if you will believe the words of the tale and put your trust in the Great King, you will be delivered from Dunley’s hands, whatever happens to us all over the next few dark days.” I could not hear General Myhr’s reply. He pointed toward the cell that held us, and then he quickly left the dungeon. Soldiers came toward us and opened the door. With drawn swords, they began to herd us toward the steps. Roddol, freed from his shackles, and Artemerio followed along. I turned and whispered to Artemerio, “Where are they taking us?” “To Lady Justice. And Dunley,” he said. *** The soldiers took us into what I guessed was the throne room. I was surprised at how like and unlike our own throne room it was. Here and there were familiar touches that reminded me of the shared history of the two kingdoms. But there was no splendor about it. That the room was marked by stark extravagance, empty extravagance—extravagance untempered by virtue—was my first impression of it all. We were alone in the room with the soldiers for a short time, none of us speaking, until a side door opened and a sour-faced, gaudily clad woman entered, followed by General Myhr. I knew without an introduction who she was. As the woman took a seat on the larger of the two thrones, a dreadful chill filled the air. This Lady Justice seemed to be nothing like our own. Her attention seemed to focus on King Artemerio. She was so absorbed in her study of him that when the side door opened again, making a loud thumping sound as it was thrown open, she jumped. Dunley strode into the room with the same intensity that he’d used on the door, his features twisted with a fury the likes of which I had never seen. In an instant, he was at Lady Justice’s side, taking her hand and escorting her toward the door. Despite the fury in his features, his voice was calm as he said, “I am sorry you were troubled, Lady Justice. You are not needed here. Not yet.” As the two walked toward the door, I heard a strange clanking sound. I had noticed something like it when Lady Justice first entered the room; it had been soft and rhythmic then, coinciding with each step the lady took. But now it was louder and more erratic—or perhaps it matched the quick, chaotic steps she took as Dunley led her. Lady Justice took one last, long look at King Artemerio before Dunley whisked her through the door. And then I recognized the noise: it was the sound of chains. With Lady Justice gone, Dunley turned his attention to the general. “General Myhr!” Dunley thundered as he again strode toward the thrones. A red-faced General Myhr approached Dunley. He bowed. “Sir?” “Why have you brought these prisoners before Lady Justice?” said Dunley. “Forgive me, sir, but you said that—” Myhr began. “Silence!” Dunley roared. That General Myhr could withstand the look of pure hatred Dunley gave him and not cower in terror was a testimony to the general’s strength of nerve. “Return the prisoners to the dungeon and report to my chambers for further orders. You may guess that I am displeased.” Dunley glowered at him and left, with no words to us and hardly more than a glance in our direction. General Myhr stared after him, his eyes not leaving the door for several moments, as if he expected—or feared—Dunley might return. “General Myhr, sir, shall we return the prisoners to the dungeon?” said the soldier to my left. “We await your command.” “You are dismissed, Officer Gil,” said the general, still looking toward the door. “Return to your posts, all of you. I will see to the prisoners.” “But, sir,” said Officer Gil. That was enough to take General Myhr’s attention off of the door. He silenced the soldier with a look. Officer Gil saluted and turned sharply on one heel. The other officers repeated the move and formed two orderly lines. Officer Gil led them out of the room. When the soldiers were gone, General Myhr turned to King Artemerio. Softly he said, “I believe, sir, that you are who you have claimed to be and that all you told me was true. I will help you escape if you will take me with you.” “Then...lead us away,” said King Artemerio, sounding very much surprised. Chapter 22: The Mountain General Myhr walked behind the thrones and lifted the corner of a large rug, which was attached to the top of a trap door. “There is a ladder. Hurry down. We may be interrupted at any moment.” King Artemerio hesitated. He looked at King Roddol. Roddol nodded. “It is an emergency escape for the king and queen—and the only way we can leave the palace without being seen. I will go first, if you like.” “And I must go last, I’m afraid,” said the general. “Unless you’d prefer for King Roddol to take that position. But we are the only ones who know how to latch the door to prevent anyone from realizing immediately where we’ve gone.” Elana grabbed a lantern and handed it to King Artemerio, and he began the climb down. One by one we all followed. The ladder led down to a long hallway. As soon as General Myhr had fastened the trap door’s latch and climbed down, he guided us through a series of secret passages and tunnels. “Where are you taking us?” asked King Roddol. “The stables? The private dock? Surely not the guards’ room...” “Yes, the guards’ room,” said the general. “At this time of day, it is the only one of our possible destinations that has a chance of being empty.” *** The guards’ room was a small room at the base of one of the towers near the front gate. As we had all been desperately hoping, it was empty. A number of spare cloaks, which looked like the sort that were to be worn in especially bad weather, were hung neatly along one wall. General Myhr had us put them on, along with the heavy boots that were lined up beneath them, while he grabbed a knapsack and filled it with food and various other items from neatly organized shelves of supplies. “If I may be so bold, sir,” said Prince Vestero, “you are too well known to go out undisguised.” “What do you suggest? We are unlikely to find much here in the way of disguises, even if we had the time to search for them...which we do not,” said the general. “Put on one of the spare cloaks. And here,” said Prince Vestero. From some inner pocket of his own cloak, he pulled out a long, red beard. “And...again...if I may be so bold...” He pulled out a brown beard and handed it to King Roddol. The general gave Prince Vestero an odd look but did all he had suggested. “Is this as far as you intend to take us?” asked King Artemerio. “Will we part ways once we leave the palace grounds?” “I intend to take you wherever you need to go, if you will allow me to stay