They came when Gul’dan called them, those who had willingly — nay, eagerly — sold their souls
to the darkness. Once they, like Gul’dan, had been deeply spiritual beings. Once, they had studied
the natural world and the orcs’ place in it; had learned from the beasts of forest and field, the
birds of the air, the fish of the rivers and oceans. And they had been a part of that cycle, no more,
no less.
No longer.
These former shamans, these new warlocks, had had the briefest taste of power and, like the
barest drop of honey on the tongue, found it sweet indeed. So their eagerness had been rewarded
with more power, and still more. Gul’dan himself had learned from his master Ner’zhul until
student had finally surpassed teacher. While it had been because of Ner’zhul that the Horde had
become the powerful, unstoppable tide of destruction it presently was, Ner’zhul had not had the
courage to go further. He had a soft spot for the inherent nobility of his people. Gul’dan had no
such weakness.
The Horde had slain all there was to slay in this world. They were lost with no outlet for their
bloodlust, and were turning on one another, clan attacking clan in a desperate attempt to assuage
the brutal longings that flamed in their hearts. It was Gul’dan who had found a fresh target upon
which to focus the Horde’s white-hot need to slaughter. Now they would soon venture into a new
world, filled with fresh, easy, unsuspecting prey. The bloodlust would rise to a fever pitch, and the
wild Horde needed a council to guide them. Gul’dan would lead that council.
He nodded to them as they entered, his small, fire-hazed eyes missing nothing. One by one they
came, called like servile beasts to their master. To him.
They sat around the table, the most feared, revered, and loathed among the entire orcish clans.
Some were hideous, having paid the price for their dark knowledge with more than just their
souls. Others were yet fair, their bodies whole and strong with smooth green skin stretched tight
across rippling muscles. Such had been their request in the dark bargain. All were ruthless,
cunning, and would stop at nothing to gain more power.
But none was as ruthless as Gul’dan.
“We few gathered here,” began Gul’dan in his raspy voice, “are the mightiest of our clans. We
know power. How to get it, how to use it, and how to get more. Others are beginning to speak out
against one or the other of us. This clan wishes to return to its roots; that clan is tired of killing
defenseless infants.” His thick green lips curled into a sneer of contempt. “This is what happens
when orcs go soft.”
“But, Great One,” one of the warlocks said, “we have slain all the Draenei. What is there left to
kill in this world?”
Gul’dan smiled, stretching his thick lips over large, sharp teeth. “Nothing,” he said. “But other
worlds await.”
He told them of the plan, taking pleasure in the lust for power that was kindled in their red eyes.
Yes, this would be good. This would be the most powerful organization of orcs that had ever
existed, and at the head of this organization would be none other than Gul’dan.
“And we will be the council that makes the Horde dance to our tune,” he said at last. “Each one
of us is a powerful voice. Yet such is the orcish pride that they must not know who is truly the
master here. Let each think that he swings his battle-ax because he wills it, not because we are
commanding it. We will stay a secret. We are the walkers in the shadows, the power that is all the
more potent for its invisibility. We are the Shadow Council, and none shall know of our strength.”
Yet, one day, and that day soon, some would know.

Even the beasts were cold on a night such as this, mused Durotan. Absently he reached out to his wolf
companion and scratched Sharptooth behind one of his white ears. The animal crooned appreciatively
and snuggled closer. Wolf and orc chief stared together at the silent fall of white snow, framed by the
rough oval that was the entrance to Durotan’s cave.
Once, Durotan, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan, had known the kiss of balmier climes. Had swung his ax
in the sunlight, narrowing small eyes against the gleam of sunshine on metal and against the spattering of
red human blood. Once, he had felt a kinship with all of his people, not just those of his clan. Side by side
they had stood, a green tide of death flooding over the hillsides to engulf the humans. They had feasted at
the fires together, laughed their deep, booming laughs, told the stories of blood and conquest while their
children drowsed by the dying embers, their little minds filled with images of slaughter.
But now the handful of orcs that comprised the Frostwolf clan shivered alone in their exile in the frigid
Alterac Mountains of this alien world. Their only friends here were the huge white wolves. They were so
different from the mammoth black wolves that Durotan’s people had once ridden, but a wolf was a wolf,
no matter the color of its fur, and determined patience combined with Drek’Thar’s powers had won the
beasts over to them. Now orc and wolf hunted together and kept one another warm during the
interminable, snowy nights.
A soft, snuffling sound from the heart of the cave caused Durotan to turn. His harsh face, lined and held
in perpetual tautness from years of worry and anger, softened at the noise. His little son, as yet unnamed
until the ordained Naming Day of this cycle, had cried out as he was being fed.
Leaving Sharptooth to continue watching the snowfall, Durotan rose and lumbered back to the cave’s
inner chamber. Draka had bared a breast for the child to suckle upon, and had just removed the infant
from his task. So that was why the child had whimpered. As Durotan watched, Draka extended a
forefinger. With a black nail honed to razor sharpness, she pricked deep into the nipple before returning
the infant’s small head to her breast. Not a flicker of pain crossed her beautiful, strong-jawed face. Now,
as the child fed, he would drink not only nourishing mother’s milk, but his mother’s blood as well. Such
was appropriate food for a budding young warrior, the son of Durotan, the future chieftain of the
Frostwolves.
His heart swelled with love for his mate, a warrior his equal in courage and cunning, and the lovely,
perfect son they had borne.
It was then that the knowledge of what he had to do sank over him, like a blanket settling over his
shoulders. He sat down and sighed deeply.
Draka glanced up at him, her brown eyes narrowing. She knew him all too well. He did not want to tell
her of his sudden decision, although he knew in his heart it was the right one. But he must.
“We have a child now,” Durotan said, his deep voice booming from his broad chest.
“Yes,” replied Draka, pride in her voice. “A fine, strong son, who will lead the Frostwolf clan after his
father dies nobly in battle. Many years from now,” she added.
“I have a responsibility for his future,” Durotan continued.
Draka’s attention was now on him fully. He thought her exquisitely beautiful at this moment, and tried to
brand the image of her in his mind. The firelight played against her green skin, casting her powerful
muscles into sharp relief and making her tusks gleam. She did not interrupt, merely waited for him to
continue.
“Had I not spoken against Gul’dan, our son would have more playmates with which to grow up,”
Durotan continued. “Had I not spoken against Gul’dan, we would have continued to be valued members
of the Horde.”
Draka hissed, opening her massive jaws and baring her fangs in displeasure at her mate. “You would not
have been the mate I joined with,” she boomed. The infant, startled, jerked his head away from the
nourishing breast to look up at his mother’s face. White milk and red blood dripped down his already
jutting chin. “Durotan of the Frostwolf clan would not sit by and meekly let our people be led to their
deaths like the sheep the humans tend. With what you had learned, you had to speak out, my mate. You
could have done no less and still be the chieftain you are.”
Durotan nodded at the truth of her words. “To know that Gul’dan had no love for our people, that it
was nothing more than a way for him to increase his power. . . .”
He fell silent, recalling the shock and horror — and rage — that had engulfed him when he had learned
of the Shadow Council and Gul’dan’s duplicity. He had tried to convince the others of the danger facing
them all. They had been used, like pawns, to destroy the Draenei, a race that Durotan was beginning to
think had not required extinction after all. And again, shuttled through the Dark Portal onto an
unsuspecting world — not the orcs’ decision, no, but that of the Shadow Council. All for Gul’dan, all for
Gul’dan’s personal power. How many orcs had fallen, fighting for something so empty?
He searched for the words to express his decision to his mate. “I spoke, and we were exiled. All who
followed me were. It is a great dishonor.”
“Only Gul’dan’s dishonor,” said Draka fiercely. The infant had gotten over his temporary fright and was
again nursing. “Your people are alive, and free, Durotan. It is a harsh place, but we have found the frost
wolves to be our companions. We have plenty of fresh meat, even in the depths of winter. We have kept
the old ways alive, as much as we can, and the stories around the fire are part of our children’s heritage.”
“They deserve more,” said Durotan. He gestured with a sharp-nailed finger at his suckling son. “He
deserves more. Our still-deluded brothers deserve more. And I will give it to them.”
He rose and straightened to his full imposing height. His huge shadow fell over the forms of his wife and
child. Her crestfallen expression told him that Draka knew what he was going to say before he spoke,
but the words needed utterance. It was what made them solid, real . . . made them an oath not to be
broken.
“There were some who heeded me, though they still doubted. I will return and find those few chieftains. I
will convince them of the truth of my story, and they will rally their people. We shall no longer be slaves
of Gul’dan, easily lost and not thought of when we die in battles that serve only him. This I swear, I,
Durotan, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan!”
He threw back his head, opened his toothy mouth almost impossibly wide, rolled his eyes back, and
uttered a loud, deep, furious cry. The baby began to squall and even Draka flinched. It was the Oath
Cry, and he knew that despite the deep snow that often deadened sound, everyone in his clan would
hear it this night. In moments, they would cluster around his cave, demanding to know the content of the
Oath Cry, and making cries of their own.
“You shall not go alone, my mate,” said Draka, her soft voice a sharp contrast to the ear-splitting sound
of Durotan’s Oath Cry. “We shall come with you.”
“I forbid it.”
And with a suddenness that startled even Durotan, who ought to have known better, Draka sprang to
her feet. The crying baby tumbled from her lap as she clenched her fists and raised them, shaking them
violently. A heartbeat later Durotan blinked as pain shot through him and blood dripped down his face.
She had bounded the length of the cave and slashed his cheek with her nails.
“I am Draka, daughter of Kelkar, son of Rhakish. No one forbids me to follow my mate, not even
Durotan himself! I come with you, I stand by you, I shall die if need be. Pagh!” She spat at him.
As he wiped the mixture of spittle and blood from his face, his heart swelled with love for this female. He
had been right to choose her as his mate, to be the mother of his sons. Was there ever a more fortunate
male in all of orc history? He did not think so.
Despite the fact that, if word reached Gul’dan, Orgrim Doomhammer and his clan would be exiled, the
great Warchief made Durotan and his family welcome in his field camp. The wolf, however, he eyed with
suspicion. The wolf eyed him back in the same manner. The rough tent that served Doomhammer for
shelter was emptied of lesser orcs, and Durotan, Draka, and their yet-unnamed child were ushered in.
The night was a bit cool to Doomhammer, and he watched with wry amusement as his honored guests
divested themselves of most of their clothing and muttered about the heat. Frostwolves, he mused, must
be unused to such “warm weather.”
Outside, his personal guards kept watch. With the flap that served as a door still open, Doomhammer
watched them huddle around the fire, extending enormous green hands to the dancing flames. The night
was dark, save for the small lights of the stars. Durotan had picked a good night for his clandestine visit.
It was unlikely that the small party of male, female, and child had been spotted and identified for who
they really were.
“I regret that I place you and your clan in jeopardy,” were the first words Durotan spoke.
Doomhammer waved the comment aside. “If Death is to come for us, it will find us behaving with
honor.” He invited them to sit and with his own hands handed his old friend the dripping haunch of a fresh
kill. It was still warm. Durotan nodded his acceptance, bit into the juicy flesh, and tore off a huge chunk.
Draka did likewise, and then extended her bloody fingers to her baby. The child eagerly sucked the
sweet liquid.
“A fine, strong boy,” said Doomhammer.
Durotan nodded. “He will be a fitting leader of my clan. But we did not come all this way for you to
admire my son.”
“You spoke with veiled words many years ago,” said Doomhammer.
“I wished to protect my clan, and I was not certain my suspicions were correct until Gul’dan imposed
the exile,” Durotan replied. “His swift punishment made it clear that what I knew was true. Listen, my old
friend, and then you must judge for yourself.”
In soft tones, so that the guards sitting at the fire a few yards away would not overhear them, Durotan
began to speak. He told Doomhammer everything he knew — the bargain with the demon lord, the
obscene nature of Gul’dan’s power, the betrayal of the clans through the Shadow Council, the eventual,
and dishonorable, end of the orcs, who would be thrown as bait to demonic forces. Doomhammer
listened, forcing his wide face to remain impassive. But within his broad chest his heart pounded like his
own famous warhammer upon human flesh.
Could this be true? It sounded like a tale spewed by a battle-addled half-wit. Demons, dark pacts . . .
and yet, this was Durotan who was speaking. Durotan, who was one of the wisest, fiercest, and noblest
of the chieftains. From any other mouth, these he would have judged to be lies or nonsense. But Durotan
had been exiled for his words, which lent them credence. And Doomhammer had trusted the other
chieftain with his life many times before now.
There was only one conclusion. What Durotan was telling him was true. When his old friend finished
speaking, Doomhammer reached for the meat and took another bite, chewing slowly while his racing
mind tried to make sense of all that had been said. Finally, he swallowed, and spoke.
“I believe you, old friend. And let me reassure you, I will not stand for Gul’dan’s plans for our people.
We will stand against the darkness with you.”
Obviously moved, Durotan extended his hand. Doomhammer gripped it tightly.
“You cannot stay overlong in this camp, though it would be an honor to have you do so,” Doomhammer
said as he rose. “One of my personal guards will escort you to a safe place. There is a stream nearby and
much game in the woods this time of year, so you shall not go hungry. I will do what I can on your behalf,
and when the time is right, you and I shall stand side by side as we slay the Great Betrayer Gul’dan
together.”
The guard said nothing as he led them out of the encampment several miles into the surrounding woods.
Sure enough, the clearing to which he took them was secluded and verdant. Durotan could hear the
trickling of the water. He turned to Draka.
“I knew my old friend could be trusted,” he said. “It will not be long before —”
And then Durotan froze. He had heard another noise over the splashing of the nearby stream. It was the
snap of a twig under a heavy foot. . . .
He screamed his battle cry and reached for his ax. Before he could even grasp the hilt the assassins were
upon him. Dimly, Durotan heard Draka’s shrill scream of rage, but could spare no instant to turn to her
aid. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw Sharptooth spring on one intruder, knocking him to the earth.
They had come silently, with none of the pride in the hunt that was so integral to orcish honor. These
were assassins, the lowest of the low, the worm beneath the foot. Except these worms were everywhere,
and though their mouths remained closed in that unnatural silence, their weapons spoke with a purposeful
tongue.
An ax bit deep into Durotan’s left thigh and he fell. Warm blood flowed down his leg as he twisted and
reached with his bare hands, trying desperately to throttle his would-be murderer. He stared up into a
face frighteningly devoid of good, honest orc rage, indeed of any emotion at all. His adversary lifted the
ax again. With every ounce of strength left to him, Durotan’s hands closed on the orc’s throat. Now the
worm did show emotion as he dropped the ax, trying to pry Durotan’s thick, powerful fingers from his
neck.
A brief, sharp howl, then silence. Sharptooth had fallen. Durotan did not need to look to see. He still
heard his mate grunting obscenities at the orc who, he knew, would slay her. And then a noise that sent
fear shivering through him split the air: his infant son’s cry of terror.
They shall not kill my son!The thought gave Durotan new strength and with a roar, despite the lifeblood
ebbing from the severed artery in his leg, he surged upward and managed to get his foe beneath his huge
bulk. Now the assassin squirmed in genuine terror. Durotan pressed hard with both hands and felt the
satisfying snap of neck beneath his palms.
“No!” The voice belonged to the treasonous guard, the orc who had betrayed them. It was high,
humanish with fear. “No, I’m one of you, they are the target —”
Durotan looked up in time to see a huge assassin swing a blade almost bigger than he was in a smooth,
precise arc. Doomhammer’s personal guard didn’t stand a chance. The sword sliced cleanly through the
traitor’s neck, and as the severed, bloody head flew past him, Durotan could still see the shock and
surprise on the dead guard’s face.
He turned to defend his mate, but he was too late. Durotan cried aloud in fury and raw grief as he saw
Draka’s still body, hacked almost to pieces, lying on the forest floor in a widening pool of blood. Her
killer loomed over her, and now turned his attention to Durotan.
In a fair battle, Durotan would have been a match for any three of them. Grievously wounded as he was,
with no weapon save his hands, he knew he was about to die. He did not try to defend himself. Instead,
out of deep instinct he reached for the small bundle that was his child.
And stared foolishly at the spurting fountain of blood that sprang from his shoulder. His reflexes were
slowing from lack of blood, and before he could even react, his left arm joined the right to lie, twitching,
on the ground. The worms would not even let him hold his son one more time.
The injured leg could bear him no longer. Durotan toppled forward. His face was inches away from that
of his son’s. His mighty warrior’s heart broke at the expression on the baby’s face, an expression of total
confusion and terror.
“Take . . . the child,” he rasped, amazed that he could even speak.
The assassin bent close, so that Durotan could see him. He spat in Durotan’s eye. For a moment,
Durotan feared he would impale the baby right in front of his father’s eyes.
“We will leave the child for the forest creatures,” snarled the assassin. “Perhaps you can watch as they
tear him to bits.”
And then they were gone, as silently as they had left. Durotan blinked, feeling dazed and disoriented as
the blood left his body in rivers. He tried again to move and could not. He could only stare with failing
eyesight at the image of his son, his small chest heaving with his screams, his tiny fists balled and waving
frantically.
Draka . . . my beloved . . . my little son . . . I am so sorry. I have brought us to this. . . .
The edges of his vision began to turn gray. The image of his child began to fade. The only comfort that
Durotan, chieftain of the Frostwolf clan, had as his life slowly ebbed from him was the knowledge that he
would die before having to witness the horrible spectacle of his son being eaten alive by ravenous forest
beasts.
“By the Light, what a noise!” Twenty-two-year-old Tammis Foxton wrinkled his nose at the noise that
was echoing through the forest. “Might as well turn back, Lieutenant. Anything that loud is certain to have
frightened any game worth pursuing.”
Lieutenant Aedelas Blackmoore threw his personal servant a lazy grin.
“Haven’t you learned anything I’ve tried to teach you, Tammis?” he drawled. “It’s as much about getting
away from that damned fortress as bringing back supper. Let whatever it is caterwaul all it likes.” He
reached for the saddlebag behind him. The bottle felt cool and smooth in his hand.
“Hunting cup, sir?” Tammis, despite Blackmoore’s comments, had been ideally trained. He extended a
small cup in the shape of a dragon’s head that had been hooked onto his saddle. Hunting cups were
specifically designed for such a purpose, having no base upon which to sit. Blackmoore debated, then
waved the offer away.
“One too many steps.” With his teeth he pulled out the cork, held it in one hand, and raised the bottle’s
mouth to his lips.
Ah, this stuff was sweet. It burned an easy trail down his throat and into his gut. Wiping his mouth,
Blackmoore recorked the bottle and put it back in the saddlebag. He deliberately ignored Tammis’s
look, quickly averted, of concern. What should a servant care how much his master drank?
Aedelas Blackmoore had risen swiftly through the ranks because of his almost incredible ability to slice a
swath through the ranks of orcs on the battlefield. His superiors thought this due to skill and courage.
Blackmoore could have told them that his courage was of the liquid variety, but he didn’t see much point
in it.
His reputation also didn’t hurt his chances with the ladies. Neither did his dashing good looks. Tall and
handsome, with black hair that fell to his shoulders, steel-blue eyes, and a small, neatly trimmed goatee,
he was the perfect heroic soldier. If some of the women left his bed a little sadder but wiser, and more
than occasionally with a bruise or two, it mattered nothing to him. There were always plenty more where
they came from.
The ear-splitting sound was starting to irritate him. “It’s not going away,” Blackmoore growled.
“It could be an injured creature, sir, incapable of crawling away,” said Tammis.
“Then let’s find it and put it out of our misery,” replied Blackmoore. He kicked Nightsong, a sleek
gelding as black as his name, with more force than was necessary and took off at a gallop in the direction
of the hellish noise.
Nightsong came to such an abrupt halt that Blackmoore, usually the finest of riders, nearly sailed over
the beast’s head. He swore and punched the animal in the neck, then fell silent as he saw what had
caused Nightsong to stop so quickly.
“Blessed Light,” said Tammis, riding up beside him on his small gray pony. “What a mess.”
Three orcs and a huge white wolf lay sprawled on the forest floor. Blackmoore assumed that they had
died recently. There was as yet no stink of decomposition, though the blood had congealed. Two males,
one female. Who cared what sex the wolf had been. Damned orcs. It would save humans like him a lot
of trouble if the brutes turned on themselves more often.
Something moved, and Blackmoore saw what it was that had been shrieking so violently. It was the
ugliest thing he had ever seen . . . an orc baby, wrapped in what no doubt passed for a swaddling cloth
among the creatures. Staring, he dismounted and went to it.
“Careful, sir!” yelped Tammis. “It might bite!”
“I’ve never seen a whelp before,” said Blackmoore. He nudged it with his boot toe. It rolled slightly out
of its blue and white cloth, screwed its hideous little green face up even more, and continued wailing.
Though he had already downed the contents of one bottle of mead and was well into the second,
Blackmoore’s mind was still sharp. Now, an idea began to form in his head. Ignoring Tammis’s unhappy
warnings, Blackmoore bent over and picked up the small monster, tucking the blue and white cloth
snugly about it. Almost immediately, it stopped crying. Blue-gray eyes locked with his.
“Interesting,” said Blackmoore. “Their infants have blue eyes when they are young, just as humans do.”
Soon enough those eyes would turn piggy and black, or red, and gaze upon all humans with murderous
hate.
Unless. . . .
For years, Blackmoore had worked twice as hard to be half as well regarded as other men of equal
birth and rank. He had labored under the stigma of his father’s treachery, and had done everything
possible to gain power and position. He was still skeptically regarded by many; “blood of a traitor” was
often muttered when those around him thought him unable to hear. But now, perhaps he might one day
not have to listen to those cutting comments any longer.
“Tammis,” he said thoughtfully, gazing intently into the incongruously soft blue of the baby orc’s eyes,
“did you know that you have the honor to serve a brilliant man?”
“Of course I did, sir,” Tammis replied, as was expected. “May I inquire as to why this is particularly true
at this moment?”
Blackmoore glanced up at the still-mounted servant, and grinned. “Because Lieutenant Aedelas
Blackmoore holds in his hands something that is going to make him famous, wealthy, and best of all,
powerful.”

Tammis Foxton was in a state of high agitation, due directly and inevitably to the fact that his master was
terribly displeased. When they had brought the orc whelp home Blackmoore had been much as he was
on the battlefield: alert, interested, focused.
The orcs were proving less and less of a challenge each day, and men used to the excitement of almost
daily battles were growing bored. The planned bouts were proving extremely popular, giving men an
outlet for their pent-up energies and providing a chance for a little money to change hands as well.
And this orc was going to be raised firmly under human control. With the speed and power of the orcs,
but the knowledge that Blackmoore would impart, he would be all but unconquerable in the planned
matches that were beginning to spring up.
Except the ugly little thing wouldn’t eat, and had grown pale and quiet over the last several days.
Nobody said the words, but everyone knew. The beast was dying.
That had enraged Blackmoore. Once, he had even seized the small monster and tried to shove finely
chopped meat down its throat. He succeeded only in nearly choking the orc, whom he had named
“Thrall,” and when Thrall had spat up the meat he had literally dropped the orc on the straw and strode,
cursing, from the stable in which the orc was temporarily housed.
Now Tammis walked around his master with the utmost discretion, choosing his words even more
carefully than usual. And yet, more often than not, he had left an encounter with Lieutenant Blackmoore
with a bottle — sometimes empty, sometimes not — flying behind him.
His wife Clannia, a fair-haired, apple-cheeked woman who served in the kitchens, now set a plate of
cold food in front of him on the wooden table and rubbed his tight neck as he sat down to eat.
Compared to Blackmoore, the beefy, loud cook who ran the kitchens was a veritable Paladin
“Any word?” Clannia asked hopefully. She awkwardly sat down beside him at the rough wooden table.
She had given birth a few weeks ago and still moved with hesitation. She and their eldest daughter,
Taretha, had eaten many hours ago. Unseen by either parent, the girl, who slept with her baby brother in
a small bed beside the hearth, had woken at her father’s entrance. Now she sat up, her yellow curls
covered by a sleeping cap, and watched and listened to the adult conversation.
“Aye, and all bad,” said Tammis heavily as he spooned congealing potato soup into his mouth. He
chewed, swallowed, and continued. “The orc is dying. It won’t take anything Blackmoore tries to feed
it.”
Clannia sighed and reached for her mending. The needle flashed back and forth, stitching together a new
dress for Taretha. “It’s only right,” she said softly. “Blackmoore had no business bringing something like
that into Durnholde. Bad enough we’ve got the mature ones screaming all day long. I can’t wait until the
internment camps are finished and they’re no longer Durnholde’s problem.” She shuddered.
Taretha watched, silent. Her eyes were wide. She had heard vague mutterings about a baby orc, but this
was the first chance she had had to hear her parents discussing it. Her young mind raced. Orcs were so
big and scary-looking, with their sharp teeth, green skin, and deep voices. She’d only caught the barest
glimpses of them, but she had heard all the stories. But a baby wouldn’t be big and scary. She glanced
over at the small figure of her brother. Even as she watched, Faralyn stirred, opened his rosebud mouth,
and announced that he was hungry with a shrill cry.
In a smooth motion, Clannia rose, put down her sewing, picked up her son, bared a breast, and set him
to nursing. “Taretha!” she scolded. “You should be asleep.”
“I was,” Taretha said, rising and running to her father. “I heard Da come in.”
Tammis smiled tiredly and permitted Taretha to climb in his lap. “She won’t go back to sleep until
Faralyn is done,” he told Clannia. “Let me hold her for a while. I so seldom get to see her, and she’s
growing like a weed.” He pinched her cheek gently and she giggled.
“If the orc dies, it will go badly with all of us here,” he continued.
Taretha frowned. The answer was obvious. “Da,” she said, “if it’s a baby, why are you trying to make it
eat meat?”
Both adults stared at her, stunned. “What do you mean, little one?” asked Tammis in a strained voice.
Taretha pointed to her nursing brother. “Babies drink milk, like Faralyn does. If this baby orc’s mother is
dead, it can’t drink its milk.”
Tammis continued to stare; then a slow smile spread across his weary face. “Out of the mouths of
babes,” he whispered, and then hugged his daughter to him so tightly that she began to squirm in protest.
“Tammis. . . .” Clannia’s voice was taut.
“My dearest,” he said. He held Taretha with one arm and reached across the table to his wife with the
other. “Tari’s right. For all their barbaric ways, the orcs do nurse their young, as we do. Our best guess
is that the orc infant is but a few months old. It’s no wonder it can’t yet eat meat. It doesn’t even have
any teeth yet.” He hesitated, but Clannia’s face grew pale, as if she knew what he was going to say.
“You can’t mean . . . you can’t ask me to. . . .”
“Think what it will mean to our family!” Tammis exclaimed. “I’ve served Blackmoore for ten years. I’ve
never seen him this excited about anything. If that orc survives because of us, we will lack for nothing!”
“I . . . Ican’t ,” stammered Clannia.
“Can’t what?” asked Taretha, but they both ignored her.
“Please,” begged Tammis. “It’s only for a little while.”
“They’re monsters, Tam!” cried Clannia. “Monsters, and you . . . you want me to. . . .” She covered her
face with one hand and began to sob. The baby continued to nurse, unperturbed.
“Da, why is Ma crying?” asked Taretha, anxious.
“I’m not crying,” said Clannia thickly. She wiped her wet face and forced a smile. “See, darling? All is
well.” She looked at Tammis, and swallowed hard. “Your Da just has something he needs me to do,
that’s all.”
When Blackmoore heard that his personal servant’s wife had agreed to wet-nurse the dying orc baby,
the Foxton family was deluged with gifts. Rich fabrics, the freshest fruits and choicest meats, fine
beeswax tapers — all began to appear regularly at the door of the small room that the family called their
home. Soon, that room was exchanged for another, and then for larger quarters still. Tammis Foxton was
given his own horse, a lovely bay he named Ladyfire. Clannia, now called Mistress Foxton, no longer
had to report to the kitchens, but spent all her time with her children and tending to the needs of what
Blackmoore called his “special project.” Taretha wore fine clothes and even had a tutor, a fussy, kind
man named Jaramin Skisson, sent to teach her to read and write, like a lady.
But she was never allowed to speak about the small creature that lived with them for the next full year,
who, when Faralyn died of a fever, became the only baby in the Foxton household. And when Thrall had
learned to eat a vile concoction of blood, cow’s milk, and porridge with his own small hands, three
armed guards came and wrested him away from Taretha’s arms. She cried and protested, and received a
harsh blow for her pleas.
Her father held her and shushed her, kissing her pale cheek where a red hand imprint was visible. She
quieted after a while, and, like the obedient child she wished to appear, agreed never to speak of Thrall
again except in the most casual of terms.
But she vowed she would never forget this strange creature that had been almost like a younger brother
to her.
Never.
“No, no. Like this.” Jaramin Skisson stepped beside his pupil. “Hold it thus, with your fingers here . . .
and here. Ah, that’s better. Now make this motion . . . like a snake.”
“What is a snake?” asked Thrall. He was only six years old, but already almost as big as his tutor. His
large, clumsy hands did not hold the delicate, thin stylus easily, and the clay tablet kept slipping out of his
grasp. But he was stubborn, and determined to master this letter that Jaramin called an “S.”
Jaramin blinked behind his large spectacles. “Oh, of course,” he said, more to himself than Thrall. “A
snake is a reptile with no feet. It looks like this letter.”
Thrall brightened with recognition. “Like a worm,” he said. He had often snacked on those small treats
that found their way into his cell.
“Yes, it does resemble a worm. Try it again, on your own this time.” Thrall stuck his tongue out to aid his
concentration. A shaky form appeared on the clay, but he knew it was recognizable as an “S.” Proud of
himself, he extended it to Jaramin.
“Very good, Thrall! I think it may be time we started teaching you numbers,” said the tutor.
“But first, it’s time to start learning how to fight, eh, Thrall?” Thrall looked up to see the lean form of his
master, Lieutenant Blackmoore, standing in the doorway. He stepped inside. Thrall heard the lock click
shut on the other side of the door. He had never tried to flee, but the guards always seemed to expect
him to.
At once Thrall prostrated himself as Blackmoore had taught him. A kindly pat on his head told him he
had permission to rise. He stumbled to his feet, suddenly feeling even bigger and clumsier than usual. He
looked down at Blackmoore’s boots, awaiting whatever it was his master had in store for him.
“How is he coming in his lessons?” Blackmoore asked Jaramin, as if Thrall weren’t present.
“Very well. I hadn’t realized orcs were quite so intelligent, but —”
“He is intelligent not because he is an orc,” Blackmoore interrupted, his voice sharp enough to make
Thrall flinch. “He is intelligent because humans taught him. Never forget that, Jaramin. And you.” The
boots turned in Thrall’s direction. “You aren’t to forget that either.”
Thrall shook his head violently.
“Look at me, Thrall.”
Thrall hesitated, then lifted his blue-eyed gaze. Blackmoore’s eyes bored into his own. “Do you know
what your name means?”
“No, sir.” His voice sounded so rough and deep, even in his own ears, next to the musical lilt of the
humans’ voices.
“It means ‘slave.’ It means that you belong to me.” Blackmoore stepped forward and prodded the orc’s
chest with a stiff forefinger. “It means thatI own you . Do you understand that?” For a moment, Thrall
was so shocked he didn’t reply. His name meantslave ? It sounded so pleasant when humans spoke it,
he thought it must be a good name, a worthy name.
Blackmoore’s gloved hand came up and slapped Thrall across the face. Although the lieutenant had
swung his hand with vigor, Thrall’s skin was so thick and tough that the orc barely felt it. And yet the
blow pained him deeply. His master had struck him! One large hand came up to touch the cheek, its
black fingernails clipped short.
“You answer when you’re spoken to,” snapped Blackmoore. “Do you understand what I just said?”
“Yes, Master Blackmoore,” replied Thrall, his deep voice barely a whisper.
“Excellent.” Blackmoore’s angry face relaxed into an approving smile. His teeth showed white against
the surrounding black hair of his goatee. That quickly, all was well again. Relief surged through Thrall. His
lips turned up in his best approximation of Blackmoore’s smile.
“Don’t do that, Thrall,” said Blackmoore. “It makes you look uglier than you already are.”
Abruptly, the smile vanished.
“Lieutenant,” said Jaramin softly, “he’s just trying to mimic your smile, that’s all.”
“Well, he shouldn’t. Humans smile. Orcs don’t. You said he was doing well in his lessons, yes? Can he
read and write, then?”
“He is reading at quite an advanced level. As for writing, he understands how, but those thick fingers are
having a difficult time with some of the lettering.”
“Excellent,” Blackmoore said again. “Then we have no more need of your services.”
Thrall inhaled swiftly and looked over at Jaramin. The older man appeared to be as surprised as he by
the statement.
“There’s much he doesn’t know yet, sir,” stammered Jaramin. “He knows little of numbers, of history, of
art —”
“He doesn’t need to master history, and I can teach him what he needs to know about numbers myself.
And what does a slave need to know of art, hmm? I fancy you think that would be a waste of time, eh,
Thrall?”
Thrall thought briefly of the one time Jaramin had brought in a small statue and told him how it was
carved, of how they had discussed how his swaddling cloth with its once-bright colors of blue and white
had been woven. That, Jaramin had said, was “art,” and Thrall had been eager to learn more about
making such beautiful things.
“As my master wishes, so does Thrall,” he said obediently, giving the lie to the feelings in his heart.
“That’s right. You don’t need to know those things, Thrall. You need to learn how to fight.” With
uncharacteristic affection, Blackmoore reached out a hand and placed it on Thrall’s enormous shoulder.
Thrall flinched, then stared at his master.
“I wanted you to learn reading and writing because it might one day give you an advantage over your
opponent. I’m going to see to it that you are skilled with every weapon I have ever seen. I’m going to
teach you about strategy, Thrall, and trickery. You are going to be famous in the gladiator ring.
Thousands will chant your name when you appear. How does that sound, eh?”
Thrall saw Jaramin turn and gather up his things. It pained him strangely to see the stylus and the clay
tablet disappear for the last time into Jaramin’s sack. With a quick, backward glance, Jaramin moved to
the door and knocked on it. It opened for him. He slipped out, and the door was closed and locked.
Blackmoore was waiting for Thrall’s response. Thrall was a fast learner, and did not wish to be struck
again for hesitating in his answer. Forcing himself to sound as if he believed it, he told his master, “That
sounds exciting. I am glad my master wishes me to follow this path.”
For the first time he could remember, Thrall the orc stepped out of his cell. He gazed in wonder as, with
two guards in front of him, two guards behind, and Blackmoore keeping pace, he went through several
winding stone corridors. They went up a set of stairs, then across, then down a winding stair that was so
small it seemed to press in on Thrall.
Ahead was a brightness that made Thrall blink. They were approaching that brightness, and the fear of
the unknown set in. When the guards ahead of him went through and into this area, Thrall froze. The
ground ahead was yellow and brown, not the familiar gray of stone. Black things that resembled the
guards lay on the ground, following their every movement.
“What are you doing?” snapped Blackmoore. “Come out. Others held here would give their right arms
to be able to walk out into the sunlight.”
Thrall knew the word. “Sunlight” was what came through in small slats in his cell. But there was so much
sunlight out there! And what of the strange black things? What were they?
Thrall pointed at the black human-shaped things on the ground. To his shame, all the guards started
laughing. One of them was soon wiping tears of mirth from his face. Blackmoore turned red.
“You idiot,” he said, “those are just — By the Light, have I gotten myself an orc who’s afraid of his own
shadow?” He gestured and one of the guards pricked Thrall’s back deeply with the point of a spear.
Although his naturally thick skin protected him, the prod stung and Thrall lurched forward.
His eyes burned, and he lifted his hands to cover them. And yet the sudden warmth of the . . . sunlight . .
. on his head and back felt good. Slowly he lowered his hands and blinked, letting his eyes become
accustomed to the light.
Something huge and green loomed in front of him.
Instinctively, he drew himself up to his full height and roared at it. More laughter from the guards, but this
time, Blackmoore nodded in approval at Thrall’s reaction.
“That’s a mock fighter,” he said. “It’s only made of burlap and stuffing and paint, Thrall. It’s a troll.”
Again embarrassment flamed through Thrall. Now that he looked more closely, he could tell it was no
living thing. Straw served the mock fighter for hair, and he could see where it was stitched together.
“Does a troll really look like that?” he asked.
Blackmoore chuckled. “Only vaguely,” said Blackmoore. “It wasn’t designed for realism, but for
practice. Watch.”
He extended a gloved arm and one of the guards handed him something. “This is a wooden sword,”
Blackmoore explained. “A sword is a weapon, and we use wood for practice. Once you’re sufficiently
trained with this, you’ll move on to the real thing.”
Blackmoore held the sword in both hands. He centered himself, then raced at the practice troll. He
managed to strike it three times, once in the head, once in the body, and once along the false arm that
held a cloth weapon, without breaking stride. Breathing only slightly heavily, he turned around and trotted
back. “Now you try,” he said.
Thrall held out his hand for the weapon. His thick fingers closed around it. It fit his palm much better than
the stylus had. It felt better, too, almost familiar. He adjusted the grip, trying to do what he had seen
Blackmoore do.
“Very good,” said Blackmoore. To one of the guards, he said, “Look at that, will you? He’s a natural.
As I knew he would be. Now, Thrall . . . attack!”
Thrall whirled. For the first time in his life, his body seemed willing to do what he asked of it. He lifted
the sword, and to his surprise, a roar burst forth from his throat. His legs began to pump almost of their
own accord, smoothly and swiftly carrying him toward the mock troll. He lifted the sword — oh, it was
so easy — and brought it down in a smooth arc across the troll’s body.
There was a terrible crack and the troll went sailing through the air. Suddenly afraid he had done
something terribly wrong, Thrall’s grace turned to clumsiness and he stumbled over his own feet. He hit
the earth hard and felt the wooden sword crack underneath him.
Thrall scrambled to his feet and prostrated himself, sure that some sort of terrible punishment was about
to ensue. He had broken the mock troll and destroyed the practice sword. He was so big, so clumsy . . .
!
Loud whoops filled the air. Other than Jaramin, the silent guards, and the occasional visit from
Blackmoore, Thrall had not had much interaction with humans. Certainly he had not learned to discern
the finer points in their wordless noises, but he had a strange suspicion that these were not sounds of
anger. Cautiously he looked up.
Blackmoore had an enormous smile on his face, as did the guards. One of them was bringing the palms
of his hands together to create a loud smacking sound. When he caught sight of Thrall, Blackmoore’s
smile widened even more.
“Did I not say he would surpass all expectations?” cried Blackmoore. “Well done, Thrall! Well done!”
Thrall blinked, uncertain. “I . . . that wasn’t wrong?” he asked. “The troll and the sword . . . I broke
them.”
“Damn right you did! First time ever swinging a sword and the troll sails across the courtyard!”
Blackmoore’s giddiness subsided slightly and he put his arm around the young orc in a friendly manner.
Thrall tensed, then relaxed.
“Suppose you were in the gladiator ring,” Blackmoore said. “Suppose that troll was real, that your
sword was real. And suppose the first time you charged, you struck him so hard that he fell that far.
Don’t you see that that’s a good thing, Thrall?”
The orc supposed he did. His large lips wanted to stretch over his teeth in a smile, but he resisted the
impulse. Blackmoore had never been so pleased with him, so kind to him, before, and he wished to do
nothing to disturb the moment.
Blackmoore squeezed Thrall’s shoulder, then returned to his men. “You!” he shouted to a guard. “Get
that troll back on the pike, and make sure it’s secure enough to withstand my Thrall’s mighty blows. You,
get me another practice sword. Hells, get me five of them. Thrall is liable to break them all!”
Out of the corner of his eye, Thrall saw movement. He turned to see a tall, slender man with curly hair
dressed in livery red, black, and gold that marked him as one of Blackmoore’s servants. With him was a
very small human being with bright yellow hair. It looked nothing like the guards that Thrall knew. He
wondered if this was a human child. It looked softer, and its garments were not the trousers and tunics
the other wore, but a long, flowing garment that brushed the dusty earth. Was this, then, a female child?
His eyes locked with the blue ones of the child. She did not seem frightened of his ugly appearance at all.
On the contrary, she met his gaze evenly, and as he watched, she smiled brightly and waved at him, as if
she was happy to see him.
How could such a thing be? Even as Thrall watched, trying to determine the proper response, the male
accompanying her clamped a hand to the little female’s shoulder and steered her away.
Wondering what had just happened, Thrall turned back to the cheering men, and closed his large, green
hand about another practice sword.

Aroutine was quickly established, one that Thrall would follow for the next several years. He would be
fed at dawn, his hands and feet clapped in manacles that permitted him to shuffle out to the courtyard of
Durnholde, and there he would train. At first, Blackmoore himself conducted the training, showing him
the basic mechanics and often praising him effusively. Sometimes, though, Blackmoore’s temper was
sharp and nothing Thrall could do would please him. At such times, the nobleman’s speech was slightly
slurred, his movements haphazard, and he would berate the orc for no reason that Thrall could discern.
Thrall came to simply accept the fact that he was unworthy. If Blackmoore berated him, it must be
because he deserved it; any praise was simply the lord’s own kindness.
After a few months, though, another man stepped in and Thrall ceased to see Blackmoore regularly. This
man, known to Thrall only as Sergeant, was huge by human standards. He stood well over six feet, with
a thick barrel chest covered with curly red hair. The hair on his head was bright red, its tousled mop
matched by the long beard. He wore a black scarf knotted around his throat and in one ear sported a
large earring. The first day he came to address Thrall and the other fighters who were being trained
alongside him, he had fixed each one with a hard stare and shouted out the challenge.
“See this?” He pointed with a stubby forefinger to the glistening hoop in his left ear. “I haven’t taken this
out in thirteen years. I’ve trained thousands of recruits just like you pups. And with each group I offer the
same challenge: Rip this earring from my ear and I’ll let you beat me to a pulp.” He grinned, showing
several missing teeth. “You don’t think it now, p’raps, but by the time I’m done with you, you’d sell your
own mother for the chance to take a swing at me. But if I’m ever so slow that I can’t fend off an attack
by any of you ladies, then I deserve to have my ear ripped off and be forced to swallow what’s left of my
teeth.”
He had been walking slowly down the line of men and now stopped abruptly in front of Thrall. “That
goes double for you, you overgrown goblin,” Sergeant snarled.
Thrall lowered his gaze, confused. He had been taught never, ever, to raise his hand against humans.
And yet it appeared as though he was to fight them. There was no way he would ever try to rip
Sergeant’s earring from his lobe.
A large hand slipped underneath Thrall’s chin and jerked it up. “You look at me when I talk to you, you
understand?”
Thrall nodded, now hopelessly confused. Blackmoore didn’t want him to meet his gaze. This man had
just ordered him to do exactly that. What was he to do?
Sergeant divided them into pairs. The number was uneven and Thrall stood alone. Sergeant marched
right up to him and tossed a wooden sword to him. Instinctively, Thrall caught it. Sergeant grunted in
approval.
“Good eye-hand coordination,” he said. Like all the other men, he carried a shield and was wearing
heavy, well-cushioned armor that would protect his body and head. Thrall had none. His skin was so
thick that he barely felt the blows as it was, and he was growing so quickly that any clothing or armor
fashioned for him would soon be far too small.
“Let’s see how you defend yourself, then!” And with no further warning, Sergeant charged Thrall.
For the briefest second, Thrall shrank from the attack. Then something inside him seemed to click into
place. He no longer moved from a place of fear and confusion, but a place of confidence. He stood up
straight, to his full height, and realized that he was growing so quickly that he was taller even than his
opponent. He lifted his left arm, which he knew would one day hold a shield heavier than a human, in
defense against the wooden sword, and brought his own practice weapon down in a smooth arc. If
Sergeant had not reacted with stunning speed, Thrall’s sword would have slammed into his helm. And
even with that protection, Thrall knew that the power behind his blow was such that Sergeant probably
would have been killed.
But Sergeant was swift, and his shield blocked Thrall’s likely fatal blow. Thrall grunted in surprise as
Sergeant landed a blow of his own against Thrall’s bare midsection. He stumbled, thrown briefly off
balance.
Sergeant took the opening and pressed, landing three swift blows that would have killed an unarmored
man. Thrall regained his footing and felt a strange, hot emotion surge through him. Suddenly, his world
narrowed to the figure before him. All his frustration and helplessness fled, replaced by a deadly focus:
Kill Sergeant.
He screamed aloud, the power of his own voice startling even him, then charged. He lifted his weapon
and struck, lifted and struck, raining blows upon the big man. Sergeant tried to retreat and his booted feet
slipped on a stone. He fell backward. Thrall cried out again, as a keen desire to smash Sergeant’s head
to a pulp swept through him like a white-hot tide. Sergeant managed to get the sword in front of him and
deflected most of the blows, but now Thrall had him pinned between his powerful legs. He tossed aside
his sword and reached out with his large hands. If he could just fasten them around Blackmoore’s neck
—
Appalled at the image that swam before his eyes, Thrall froze, his fingers inches away from Sergeant’s
throat. It was protected with a gorget, of course, but Thrall’s fingers were powerful. If he had managed
to clamp down —
And then several men were on him all at once, shouting at him and hauling him off the prone figure of the
fighting instructor. Now it was Thrall who was on his back, his mighty arms lifted to ward off the blows of
several swords. He heard a strange sound, aclang , and then saw something metallic catch the bright
sunlight.
“Hold!” screamed Sergeant, his voice as loud and commanding as if he had not just been inches away
from death. “Damn you, hold or I’ll cut your bloody arm off! Sheathe your sword this minute, Maridan!”
Thrall heard asnick . Then two strong arms seized his and he was hauled to his feet. He stared at
Sergeant.
To his utter surprise, Sergeant laughed out loud and clapped a hand on the orc’s shoulder. “Good job,
lad. That’s the closest I’ve ever come to having me earring snatched — and in the first match at that.
You’re a born warrior, but you forgot the goal, didn’t you?” He pointed to the gold hoop. “This was the
goal, not squeezing the life out of me.”
Thrall struggled to speak. “I am sorry, Sergeant. I don’t know what happened. You attacked, and then.
. . .” He was not about to tell of the brief image of Blackmoore he had had. It was bad enough that he
had lost his head.
“Some foes, you’re going to want to do what you just did,” said Sergeant, surprising him. “Good tactics
there. But some opponents, like all the humans you’ll face, you’re going to want to get ’em down and
then end it. Stop there. The bloodlust might save your hide in a real battle, but for gladiator fighting, you’ll
need to be more here —” he tapped the side of his head “— than here,” and he patted his gut. “I want
you to read some books on strategy. You read, don’t you?”
“A little,” Thrall managed.
“You need to learn the history of battle campaigns. These pups all know it,” and he waved at the other
young soldiers. “For a time, that will be their advantage.” He turned to glare at them. “But only for a time,
lads. This one’s got courage and strength, and he’s but a babe yet.”
The men shot Thrall hostile glances. Thrall felt a sudden warmth, a happiness he had never known. He
had nearly killed this man, but had not been reprimanded. Instead, he had been told he needed to learn,
to improve, to know when to go for the kill and when to show . . . what? What did one call it when one
spared an opponent?
“Sergeant,” he asked, wondering if he would be punished for even voicing the question, “sometimes . . .
you said sometimes you don’t kill. Why not?”
Sergeant regarded him evenly. “It’s called mercy, Thrall,” he said quietly. “And you’ll learn about that,
too.”
Mercy.Under his breath, Thrall turned the word over on his tongue. It was a sweet word.
“You let him do that to you?” Though Tammis was not supposed to be privy to this particular
conversation between his master and the man he had hired to train Thrall, Blackmoore’s shrill voice
carried. Pausing in his duty of cleaning the mud off of Blackmoore’s boots, Tammis strained to listen. He
did not think of this as eavesdropping. He thought of this as a vital way to protect his family’s welfare.
“It was a good martial move.” Sergeant Something-or-other replied, sounding not at all defensive. “I
treated it the way I would had it been any other man.”