Then came reports from the ships farthest out. Warps were opening in space, and through the warps
were coming hordes of Zerg. The lobster-brain-jellyfish, the queens, the mutalisks, and the strange flying
crabs were all erupting from space and descending on Antiga, summoned forth and trapped by its siren
call.
The dropship docked with the largerHyperion, and the entire crew evacuated the smaller ship. The
dropship itself was abandoned, jettisoned from the lock, and left to go spinning down toward the surface.
Its presence would only slow theHyperion from its escape, and there was no time to secure it.
Mengsk’s ship rose like a bubble among the panicked Confederates and descending Zerg. The Zerg
fought only when there was something in their way, and the Confederates did not disappoint, putting their
best ships in the path of the assault. There were several more flashes, but theHyperion showed the
explosions as only slightest flickers, each brief dimming representing the deaths of five hundred more
Confederate humans in a nuclear fireball.
Kerrigan was worn and white-faced. Mike was sure she could still hear the psionic call, even at this
altitude. It worked on some level that he could not be sure of, and pulled across the depths of space to
ring in the enemy. He helped her out of the landing bay.
Raynor came across them in a gangway. “Congratulations, you two,” he said warmly. “You really lit a
fire under the Zerg’s backsides. I don’t know what you said, Lieutenant, but it sure rought them running.”
Kerrigan’s head came up, her eyes lazing with fury, and even Raynor could see the rage and frustration
behind them. Then, as suddenly as it appeared, it was gone, expended, leaving only exhaustion in its
wake.
Raynor reached up to touch Kerrigan’s shoulder. His voice softened, and his forehead creased in
concern. “Lieutenant, are you all right?” He separated the words with slight pauses, Mike noted.
Kerrigan looked up again into Raynor’s eyes, and there was no anger there. Mike thought of the
feedback loop—fear reeding fear, concern breeding concern. “I’m fine,” she said, pushing a stray strand
of red hair out of her face. “It’s just been very tiring.”
Mike said, “Mengsk?”
“Up in his observation dome,” said Raynor. “I think he wants to watch the battle. I left him to it. Nothing
I really want to see.”
“I can report to him, if you want to rest,” Mike said to Kerrigan.
She paused for a moment, and almost physically wavered. “If you would, Michael,” she said. She was
still looking at Raynor.
“You look really beat,” said Raynor to the lieutenant, his concern so obvious that even Mike could read
it. “You want to grab a cuppa joe in the galley? Maybe talk?”
“Coffee would be nice,” said Kerrigan, and a small smile tugged at the corners of her mouth. “Talk too.
Yes. Talk would be good.”
Mike held up a hand and headed for the lift, leaving the pair in the hallway. As he hit the lift doors, he put
one thought at the top of his mind, where Kerrigan could easily find it.
Remember to let him finish his damned sentences,he thought, and then rose to find the architect of
Antiga Prime’s destruction.
Mengsk was alone on the observation deck, his hands behind his back, facing the main screen. The
chess set had been set up for a new game, and a fresh pack of cigarettes sat next to the ashtray. Two
brandy snifters and a still-corked bottle of cognac rested on the bar.
All the screens but the main one had been turned off, and the last screen showed a real-time display of
Antiga Prime, hovering at the center. Small yellow triangles represented Confederate forces, red triangles
the ever-multiplying Zerg. A few blue-white pips that Mike had never seen before were on the surface.
There were also a few circles planetside: rebel forces that had been unfortunate not to have escaped in
time. As Mike watched, they were subsumed in a wave of red triangles.
It was a similar story in orbit. More red triangles, each representing tens or hundreds of Zerg fliers, all
converging on Antiga Prime. The ships that bolted were untouched. Enough stood and fought to form
clustering points as the Zerg swarmed over them, ripping them apart in space.
Mike remembered the image of theNorad II going down. This was a hundred times worse.
“We’re pulling away at top speed,” Mengsk said reassuringly. “I have the ship’s computer compensating
to keep the scale the same.”
Mike crossed to the bar, pulled the cork, and poured himself an inch of cognac. He did not pour any for
Mengsk.
“We calculate that, based on the strength of the emissions, we are calling every possible Zerg from
twenty-five light-years out to us,” continued Mengsk. “Maybe more. Lieutenant Kerrigan is quite the
siren, luring these sailors to their doom.”
“It took a lot out of her,” Mike said, taking a long pull on his snifter.
“But not more than she could handle. I am glad you were there for her. She might not have made it,
otherwise.”
Mike felt his face flush, and for a moment thought it only the brandy. “You didn’t leave me much choice,
did you?”
“Not really.” Mengsk shrugged sheepishly and turned toward Mike. Behind him, the red triangles
multiplied. There was almost nothing left of the Confederate forces on the ground. “But I’m still glad you
were there for her.”
Mike snorted and took another drink. Mengsk poured himself one. Blue-white triangles were appearing
now at the edge of the screen. The Protoss had arrived in force.
Mengsk looked at the screen and said, “Interesting report while you were gone.” Mike said nothing, and
Mengsk continued, “Protoss ground forces pitched in to engage the Zerg we encountered. Their leader’s
name is Tassadar. He calls himself the High Templar and Executor of the Protoss Fleet. His flagship’s
name is theGantrithor.”
“Maybe they were impressed with your work and decided to lend a hand. You must have a good press
agent.”
Mengsk gave Mike a withering look. “Come now, Michael. I expect better from you. Work out what I
just said.”
Mike was silent for a moment, then said, “Ground forces?”
Mengsk brightened. “Exactly. Individual warriors in very ductile power suits. Strange bug-like vehicles.
Spell-casters that I can only assume are psionicists of some type. Tougher than the Zerg, man for man,
though the Zerg have it all over them in raw numbers. Very intriguing, watching them battle. You might
want to review the tapes later.”
“Hang on,” said Mike.
Mengsk’s smile roadened. “I’ll wait. You’ll get it. I believe in you.”
“If the Protoss have ground forces . . .”
“Quite good ones, I think I just said.”
“That means they’ve fought the Zerg on the ground before. And more important, they’ve won those
battles.”
“Or why maintain a ground force in the first place? Yes! Take it to the last step.”
Mike’s eyes opened wide. “Which means the Zerg can be destroyed without blowing up the planet
they’re on!”
“Full marks!” Mengsk took a sip from his snifter. “It may be a difficult task, and I think that the Protoss
are overmatched in this case, but yes, the Zerg can be beaten on the ground.” He chuckled. “I had to
explain it to Raynor three times, you know.”
“But,” said Mike. “But then all we’ve done is to just set the Protoss up to blow up Antiga Prime!”
“And a large piece of the Zerg forces with it. It should rock them back on their heels for a while. Long
enough to let us get the upper hand against the Confederacy.”
“They’ll blow up Antiga Prime, and with it any surviving humans!”
“No humans would survive that many Zerg. We will do whatever it takes to save the greater humanity,”
Mengsk said solemnly.
“Even if we have to kill all the humans in order to do it,” Mike snapped. Mengsk said nothing, and Mike
just let the silence expand to fill the dome. On the main screen, Antiga was nearly covered with red
triangles, and a perimeter of blue triangles was in orbit around it. There were no yellow triangles left.
After a moment, Mengsk said, “I know what you’re thinking.”
Mike set his glass down. “You’re a telepath, too, now?”
“I’m a politician, as you’re wont to tell me. And that means that I’m sensitive to other people. Their
needs, their desires, their motivations.”
“So what am I thinking?” Mike suddenly felt like a bug under a microscope.
“You’re asking yourself if I would sacrifice you for the good of all humanity. The answer is yes, in a
heartbeat and without remorse, but I really don’t want to. Good help is, as they say, hard to find. And
you’re very good, at more than just being a reporter.”
Mike shook his head. “How do you do it?”
“Do it?” Mengsk canted his head.
“Find everybody’s button and press it. You play people like they were pianos. Kerrigan would leap into
a hydralisk’s mouth for you, Raynor will jump through hoops for you, hell, you’ve even gotten that old
pin-headed gorilla Duke eating out of your hand. Doesn’t that bother you?”
“No. It’s a gift. I find that others tend to be scattered in their thinking. I try to provide a strong center for
them. Raynor is in many ways consumed by anger for the Confederates: I am but a means by which he
can vent that anger. Duke looks for nothing more than political cover to let him settle old scores and
create new atrocities: I provide that. Sarah? Well, Lieutenant Kerrigan has always sought approval,
despite her own gifts. I provide that as well.”
Mike thought of Sarah Kerrigan, down in the galley, talking with Jim Raynor over coffee. He asked,
“And me?”
Mengsk gave a great smile and shook his head. “You want to save souls, dear boy. You want to make a
difference. Whether you’re covering some traffic tie-up or rooting out some alderman’s corruption,
you’re trying to make things better. It’s practically in your genetic code. And you believe in it.That
makes you very valuable. It makes you an incredible resource. You keep Raynor from being too
impulsive, Kerrigan from being too inhuman. They both respect you, you know. You wrote off General
Duke as hopeless, I think, soon after you met him, but I do believe you still hold out hope for me. That’s
why you’ve hung around, in hopes that I will find my own redemption.”
Mike frowned. “And what keeps me from leaving now, knowing that this hope for your salvation is
probably misplaced?”
“Ah,” said Mengsk, watching the screen. The Protoss encirclement was almost complete. “Part of it is
your concern for others. But I can be honest with you, now, because the Confederacy, through its
puppet the UNN, has betrayed you. It has used your face and words against you. Now you’ve got your
own personal reason to fight them. Your own reason to commit. They have made itpersonal. You can go
on your own . . .” Mengsk let his voice trail off..
“But where would I go,” Mike said in a flat tone. A statement, not a question.
“Exactly. You’re in for the long haul. Until victory or defeat. Ah, it begins. Will you watch with me?”
Mike looked at the screen, at the ring of blue-white triangles surrounding the doomed world. Already
spearheads of red were rising from the surface, but they were repelled as the Protoss built up their
weapons charge to burn the world, to sterilize it to the deepest tunnels.
“I’ll pass,” said Mike, his mouth like ashes. He turned and walked toward the lift, not turning back to
watch.
Mengsk did not seem to notice Mike’s departure. He stood, snifter in hand, and watched as the Protoss
rained poisonous flame onto Antiga Prime.

The use of the psi emitter on Antiga Prime was a watershedevent, a Rubicon, a point of no
return. It was like the firstappearance of ghosts in the Confederacy ranks, or the indiscriminate
use of the Apocalypse bombs that leveled KorhalIV. It changedeverything.
It also changed nothing. For the average citizen caught between the rebels and the Confederates,
and the Confederatescaught between the Zerg and the Protoss, the war was still asdeadly as ever.
More planets would vaporize under the Protoss’sweapons, and more humans would be swallowed
by the Zerghives. Yet after the swarming of Antiga Prime, there was renewed hope among the
rebels. Now, at least, we had a weapon.
And like the damn-fool humans we were, we could notresist using it.

TEN DAYS LATER, THEY WERE ON TARSONIS ITSELF, blockbusting through the densest of
the downtown districts.
The city had taken the assault hard. The western precincts were still in flames caused by a battlecruiser
that had gone down in their midst, and a fountain of hot dust, laden with phosphoric heavy metals,
plumed southward in the strong wind. The upper windows of most of the major buildings were shattered,
and in some cases entire facades had slid from the metal skeletons beneath, leaving hills of roken glass at
the titanic tower’s feet.
The elegant spires of Tarsonis were nothing more than jagged, twisted remains, their fractured edges
scratching the bleeding sky. The atmosphere itself was torn by the shrieks and booms of battling craft,
and streaked with the smoke of downed fighters.
Most of the streets were jammed with the amorphous, burned wreckage of ground cars. Their shining
paint jobs had been baked by fire and heat to a uniform gray, and the once-tinted windows were
shattered, jagged holes. Initially Mike looked into the vehicles to see if he could identify those within, but
after the first hour he just ignored the blackened corpses, with their burned-stick limbs and withered,
screaming faces.
The only things left alive on the streets were the warriors, striving hard to kill each other.
The wreck-jammed side streets kept Raynor’s unit to the main boulevards, wide streets once dominated
by park-like traffic islands in the center. The trees there were toppled and burned now, and what statuary
to famous Confederates remained had been amputated to mere nubs.
Raynor’s unit was pinned down near one of the tri-level fountains along the central plaza. A discarded,
bent brass plaque identified it as a memorial placed there by the Daughters of the Guild Wars Veterans.
The fountain itself was now no more than a mound of damp debris, the only hint of its previous
incarnation a stone cannon jutting from the shattered stone. Mike found himself wishing the cannon were
real.
Across the plaza, past a hastily erected barricade of dead cars, an Arclite siege tank had planted itself
firmly between two buildings. It sat square in their path, fully deployed, its side pontoons firmly set in the
asphalt. The shock cannon sent listering rounds overhead, and its twin 80’s raked the debris of the
fountain. The siege tank had become a rallying point for the Confederate Security Forces, most of them
the remains of the Delta and Omega Squadrons. Now the recombined units, safe under the heavy fire of
the Arclite, laid down continual suppression fire on Raynor’s position.
Behind the stone cannon, Mike kept his head down and desperately slammed the side of his comm unit.
It burbled frustratingly at him.
“I havegot to think about a major career change,” he muttered, then ducked instinctively as another
round of fire thundered through the city’s stone canyons.
Raynor slid down the debris pile toward Mike, pushing a small avalanche ahead of his heavy boots.
“Any luck?” he asked.
Mike shook his head. “It’s probably a general jammer unit they have in operation, as opposed to an
EMP pulse that would knock out the unit. That means the radio is still working, I just can’t punch through
the interference. Something with more power could.”
“Just freaking great. We’re chewed up as it is. We can’t go back, and we can’t get past the tank. We
need to call for an evac, but it’s not going to happen if we can’t get in touch with theHyperion.”
“You boys need a hand?” Sarah Kerrigan warped into being near them. She was dressed in her
environmental suit and carried the bulky canister rifle on her back. There were dark red stains on her
pants cuffs, as if she had been wading through a river of blood.
Her eyes were bright and very, very alert.
“It’s good to see you, Lieutenant,” said Raynor. “We were just bemoaning our fate.”
“I was in the neighborhood and heard gunfire,” said Kerrigan. “What’s the sitch?”
“Arclite, hull down, between the buildings,” said Raynor, “supported by a full squad of marines.”
“That all? I thought you were having trouble.”
“Anything you can do to help would be appreciated, ma’am,” Raynor said, grinning.
“Piece of cake,” said Kerrigan, reaching up over her shoulder and pulling the canister rifle like a sword
from its sheath. “Lay down some suppression for me while I sneak up on them, will you?”
“Left or right flank?” asked Raynor.
“Left, I think,” said Kerrigan, and smiled again. The smile just accented the wildness in her eyes. “That’s
your left, Jimmy.”
“You got it, Sarah,” said Raynor.
Kerrigan touched a device at her belt. Her cloaking device activated and she faded from view as Raynor
bellowed orders at the remainder of the squad. The gauss rifles coughed as they laid down their own
devastating layer of spikes in response to the Confederate fire. Their sudden assault silenced the marines,
but the Arclite’s shock cannon continued to boom heavy shots over the rebels’ heads.
“So you think she can do it, ‘Jimmy’?” Mike asked.
James Raynor flushed and shrugged beneath his armor. “Probably. But it won’t mean a damn unless we
can flag a lift out of this dump.”
A curtain of dueling impaler spikes flew between the two camps, and Mike wondered how Kerrigan
could dance across such a battlefield. One stray shot could take out her cloak, and she would bleed
under the gauss rifle’s spikes like any other soldier.
Then the far flank of the Confederate flank started to collapse, accompanied by the high-pitched whine
of the canister rifle. One after another the Confederate Marines twitched and fell under an unseen sniper.
The flank was vulnerable, as marines started firing randomly at their suspected assailant.
There was a flicker, and Sarah Kerrigan appeared, briefly, atop the barricade of wrecked cars. She
flickered out again, and the air around her was filled with spikes.
Raynor bellowed for a charge, and the remnants of the squad rose from their hiding places and ran
across the plaza, their heavy boots shattering the faux granite of the walkways.
The siege tank’s protective screen of Confederate marines was thrown into disarray, though the Arclite
they were protecting continued to hammer the rebels’ position. The 80-millimeter cannons quickly found
the range of the charging rebels, while the main shock cannon brought itself around smartly, firing heavy
120-millimeter shells as it did.
Kerrigan appeared again, this time on the main deck of the siege tank, right beneath the cannon. She
shoved the barrel of her canister rifle into the turret ring, then somersaulted away as the Confederate rifle
fire closed in on her.
Mike imagined he could hear the rising charge of the canister rifle set to overload, and shouted out a
warning. Raynor and his men needed no warning, and they dropped in place.
A red flare lossomed at the base of the tank’s turret, and the blast scattered the remaining Confederates.
The lesser guns were silenced, but the large shock cannon continued its traverse, firing round after round
as it swung around, its programming jammed.
The shock cannon took a bite out of the corner of one of the two flanking buildings, and the ground
rumbled beneath them. The cannon kept going, its barrel now glowing a dull red as it tried to swivel
around, but was trapped by the structure. It continued to fire, and the great structure shook from the
continued assault. The top of the tank popped open, and the crew within tried to scramble out, like
clowns spilling from an overstuffed car in a circus act.
They never made it. There was a tremor that ripped through the entire plaza, and the pummeled building
collapsed on the tank at its feet, tons of steel and masonry falling in on itself, raising a hot cloud of dust.
Only in the quake of the building’s collapse did the Arclite finally stop firing.
Raynor picked himself up off the shattered pavement, along with the remains of the squad. Mike pulled
himself up as well and shouted, “Kerrigan? Lieutenant?” His voice sounded small and lost in the wake of
the explosion.
Kerrigan wafted up alongside them, gray as the ghost she was supposed to be. Mike realized it was dust
adhering to the cloaking field itself, forming a shell surrounding the telepath. She hit another control on her
belt and turned tangible again. The lines of wear and exhaustion were now tight around her face, but her
eyes were still bright. The cloak took something out of her, but she didn’t want to admit it.
“Target neutralized, Captain,” said Kerrigan. “But I’m afraid we can’t go that way now.”
“It doesn’t matter,” said Raynor. “The Confederates have to be regrouping by now. They should be
mounting a counteroffensive soon enough. We just can’t hold this area. What we need is a way to punch
through the jammer.”
“Jim,” said Mike. “Three blocks west of here is the UNN broadcast building. Its circuits have been
shielded, and it has generators in the basement. They may still have enough juice to overcome the
interference.”
Raynor nodded. “It might just be wreckage now, but it’s worth a shot.” He motioned the patrol forward.
Kerrigan fell in line alongside Mike.
“So you were just in the neighborhood,” Mike said to the telepath. “You justhappened to be around?”
“I go where Arcturus Mengsk thinks I am needed most,” said Sarah Kerrigan, barely hiding her
amusement at Mike’s thoughts.
“And what’s our fabled leader up tothis time?” Mike asked. “Jim’s right. I’m getting fragmentary reports
of reinforcements rolling in from the suburbs. Walkers, tanks, and bikes. It’s going to get real hot here
real soon. Has he got a plan for this?”
“He’s told me he has.”
The Universe News Network Building had fared pretty badly but was still intact. The windows along the
east side were nothing more than empty holes, and one of the great letters had fallen hundreds of feet to
impale itself in the twisted wreckage of the concrete beneath.
Raynor looked up at the building. “I hope the equipment you’re thinking of isn’t in the penthouse.”
“Upper levels are for management,” said Mike. “The worker bees toil on the fourth floor. And the
broadcast booth and generators are in the basement.”
Though his tone was glib, his heart sank. This had been his base of operations for years, his home away
from home. He had grabbed a dog and soda where the huge “N” now rested, arguing planetary politics
and local ordinances with the copywriters and stringers. There had been a pretzel stand next to the honor
boxes. Now there were just twisted reinforcement bars jutting out of the concrete, and no sign of
survivors.
The patrol moved inside. Mike didn’t expect any inhabitants, but the ghostly stillness covered the lobby
like a shroud. Even on weekends there was a continual hubbub here. Now there were only scattered
paper and asbestos dust shaken loose from the ceiling tiles.
It was quiet, save for the crunch of their own boots. Mike glanced up the broad stairs to the mezzanine
and arcade levels (quicker than the elevators even when the lifts were running), and thought about finding
his old desk. Wondered if his stuff was still there.
He wondered if there was anything there he really needed.
Raynor caught him looking up. “I thought you said the equipment was downstairs.”
“Yeah, just dealing with my own ghosts,” said Mike, a grim tenor in his voice. He led the squad through
the debris, downward, into the building’s primary basement.
Whatever else Mike thought of management, they were green-tag former military, and that meant they
thought in terms of triple redundancy. The main power had been cut, but the broadcast studio was
packing its own batteries, and if need be, old gasoline generators for power. The link to the tower was
still solid, despite all the fighting, and UNN kept underground lines to various outposts through the
globe-girdling metropolis. Many of these had been cut, and their red telltales winked evilly on the primary
board.
Even the air conditioning was still working, and their visors frosted at the sudden temperature change.
Raynor looked around uncomfortably. It was too easy for a stray shot from the outside chaos to bring
the building down on top of them, to make this their tomb. To Mike he said, “This going to take long?”
Mike shook his head as he ran leads from the field comm unit into the main board. “Just need to boost
the signal. Piece of cake. Here we go.” He flipped a toggle and said, “Raynor’s Rangers to Mother Ship.
Do you read? Rangers to Mother Ship.Hyperion, you there?”
The speakers crackled and spat, and a balding female face appeared on the miniscreen. “Mother Ship.
Crap, Liberty, you almost blew out my eardrums. What are you broadcasting on?” The voice was
vaguely familiar.
“Old UNN surplus. Power of the press,” said Mike. “We’re at the Network offices. Unit’s pretty shot
up, and the uglies are regrouping. Need an evac.”
“Working,” said the voice on the other end, and Mike placed it. The tech from the bridge of theNorad
II. One of Duke’s people. “There’s a park four locks south of you. Can you pull back that far?”
Mike looked at Raynor and Kerrigan. Both nodded. “Affirmative,” he said. “See you there, thirty
minutes ETA.”
“Roger that,” said the tech. “Hold on. Patching you through to headquarters.”
Mike’s brow furrowed at the delay, then Mengsk’s graying face materialized on the screen. “Michael,”
he said, his voice grim, and Mike noticed lines of concern at the corners of his eyes. “Are Kerrigan and
Raynor there?”
“Still with you,” said Raynor. “The lieutenant’s here as well.”
“Excellent, report when you get back.” Something beeped to the terrorist’s right and he reached over.
General Duke appeared on another screen.
“This is Duke.” He looked more than ever like a foul-tempered gorilla. “The emitters are secured and
on-line. Returning to the command ship.”
“Emitters?” Mike asked. “Psi emitters?”
Kerrigan leaned on the console over Mike’s shoulder, her face close to the screen. “Who authorized the
use of psi emitters?”
Mengsk’s face grew stony. “I did, Lieutenant.”
“You going to bring the Zerg here? Siccing them on the Confederates on Antiga was bad enough. This is
insane!”
Raynor broke in as well. “She’s right, man. Think this through.”
Mengsk let out an angry exhalation. “I have thought it through, believe me.” He paused and watched the
three of them through the network feed cameras. On another screen, General Duke looked like the cat
that swallowed the canary. “You all have your orders. Carry them out.”
Then the screen went dead.
“He’s lost it,” said Raynor. “He’s gone over the edge.”
Kerrigan shook her head. “No. He has to have a plan.”
Raynor said firmly, “Yeah, he has a plan. He plans to let the Protoss and the Zerg burn up the
Confederacy one planet at a time, and take over what’s left.”
Kerrigan shook her head again. “He’s always had a way to take care of things. He’s not afraid to
sacrifice, but he’s no fool.”
“He’s not afraid to sacrifice,” said Raynor grimly. “Confederates. Zerg. Protoss. When is it going to be
our turn?”
“I’ll talk to him when we get back,” said Kerrigan.
Mike sat there, staring at the now-dead screen. “He’s a politician,” he said. “He weighs every decision
on how far it advances him on his personal path to power. Never forget that.”
Raynor opened his mouth to say something, but there was the sound of rifle fire above.
“Visitors,” said Kerrigan.
“We’ve been rumbled,” said Raynor. “Probably they caught some of the signal we pushed out. Let’s
go.”
“Right. One more thing,” said Mike, pushing himself away from the console and heading deeper into the
basement.
“Liberty?” said Raynor. “What the hell?”
“He’s after something else,” said Kerrigan. “I’ll go after him. You take care of the visitors. I read only a
handful of marines. You can handle it. Watch out, one’s a firebat.” And she was gone as well.
She tracked Mike to another staircase, this one spiraling into the dimly lit darkness below. Pumping her
canister rifle, she carefully climbed down after him.
Mike was in front of a steel door, bashing at the padlock with the butt of his gun.
“We should go,” said Kerrigan.
“In a moment. This is Handy Anderson’s secret stash. His secrets. I hadn’t thought about it until just
now. No one was usually allowed down here. It’s supposed to be the records backup, the records
morgue, but it’s also where Anderson kept his dirt on everybody in the city.”
“It’s data you can use,” said Kerrigan calmly, picking up Mike’s surface thoughts. “You can look
through it and see if there were any warnings, anything that was kept hidden, about the Zerg and the
Protoss. Stuff that might have made a difference, if only people had known about it.”
“Hindsight is twenty-twenty,” said Mike.
“Stand aside,” said the ghost. The canister rifle whined under a charge, and she fired a bolt into the lock.
Fragments of metal flew in all directions.
The cache, no bigger than a broom closet, was lined with thin shelves. There were boxes of disks on all
the shelves.
“We can’t take it all,” said Kerrigan.
“Take as much as you can.” Mike opened his own pack and pulled out supplies and spare ammo,
replacing them with the disks. “If Mengsk is really going to kill this planet, I want some of our reports to
survive. And maybe we can figure out what really happened here.”
Kerrigan opened her own pack and started shoving disks in as well. They would still have to leave the
bulk of it behind.
“Don’t sweat the earlier stuff,” said Mike.
“You think Mengsk is really serious about the psi emitters?” Kerrigan asked, getting Mike’s answer as
soon as she asked.
Mike spoke anyway. “Like I said, he’s a politician. If he can force the Confederates to back down with
a threat of the emitters, he’ll do it. If he doesn’t, well, Tarsonis is one more casualty in his war. He can
justify it. Someone on Tarsonis gave the order to kill his homeworld.”
“But this is the heart of the human worlds. The biggest and the brightest. The center of humanity.”
“This is Mengsk. With the psi emitters, he’s bigger than worlds.”
“I can’t believe he’d do this. I’ve read his thoughts, like yours and Jim’s. He wouldn’t do this.”
“You said yourself that when you’re with him, he believes in every word he says, deep in his heart.”
“Yeah.”
“Then, next time you’re with him, look deeper. There. That’s as much as we can take. What’s the story
topside?”
Kerrigan said nothing, and Mike wondered if she was thinking about his question or his earlier
suggestion. Finally she said, “They’re fine. More Confederates on the way. Let’s go.”
Mike pulled up his pack and started out of the room. “Think about what I said, okay?”
“Thinking,” said Kerrigan with a grim smile, “is the one thing a telepathcan’t avoid.”

Everyone hates surprises. In the final days of Tarsonis, surprises were the nature of the
campaign. Units appearedwhere none had been reported, secret transmissions threadedbetween
allies, battle plans were activated that we had noidea were in place. We found out how many
moves out thoseplans had been laid. In a word, we had been foxed.
But even those in charge got their own surprises. As anyoperation gets larger and larger, more
pieces slip between thefingers, more pieces are ignored, until things start happeningthat you have
no idea were about to occur. That’s what happened to Mengsk at the end, when suddenly some of
his loyalsoldiers had second thoughts and the chess pieces weren’tmoving around the board the
way he wanted them to.
And that’s probably why he kicked the board over.Heckuvan end-game strategy, but it works.
Supposedly if you are in control of everything, you hatesurprises. But I’ll tell you, when you are
not in control, youhate them even more.

THE DROPSHIP MET THEM IN ATKIN’S SQUARE. AS the remains of Raynor’s team boarded, a
group of techs in lightweight armor disembarked. With them was one of Duke’s ghosts, the telepath’s
face hidden behind an opaque visor.
“This ain’t no place for soft targets,” said Raynor. “You boys don’t even have decent armor.”
“Yeah, but we got orders,” snarled the captain in charge, and they pushed through Raynor’s men and
out into the city, heading in the direction from which the rangers had come.
Mike supposed that Mengsk had figured out there were things to loot from the UNN building. He
suddenly felt very good about the backpack full of stolen secrets he had brought with him. Something he
could use as leverage with the rebel leader.
Then he looked at Kerrigan. Kerrigan was looking at Duke’s ghost. The blood had drained from her
face.
“What’s wrong?” Mike asked.
Kerrigan just shook her head and said, “We’d better get back to the command ship.”
As soon as they returned to theHyperion, Raynor was summoned into General Duke’s wardroom to
discuss strategy, “at his soonest convenience,” as the message said. Muttering a string of obscenities, the
former marshal lumbered forward, not even shucking his battle armor. Mike popped his own visor and
seals and climbed out of the suit. Kerrigan, stripping her lighter armor with practiced ease, was already
heading for the exit.
“Hang on,” said the reporter. “TheUber -Mengsk wanted both of us to report in when we got back. I’ll
go with you.”
Kerrigan said, “Let me talk to Arcturus on my own. He’ll be more forthcoming with me.” She strode
down the halls of theHyperion toward the lift to his observation post.
Mike considered going after Kerrigan, but she was right. The rebel leader and the ghost had a history,
and Mengsk would be more willing to open up to her.
And maybe, Mike thought, she’d be able to pull something useful out the terrorist’s mind. Like what he
was thinking in planting more psi emitters.
Mike looked around. Most of the rest of the unit had stripped and were heading for the showers.
Raynor himself would be with the general in the wardroom. Not that the general would be the best
company right now, but talking to him beat cooling his heels until Mengsk rang him up.
And he didn’t want to be caught stuck in the shower if Kerrigan needed him.
As Mike moved through the ship, he thought about the tech he had spoken with over the comm unit.
Now that he noticed, most of the crew on theHyperion were strangers: members of the Alpha Squadron
as opposed to Mengsk’s original rebels from before Antiga Prime. One by one, those original
revolutionaries had fallen by the wayside or been promoted to other ships. Part of a plan by Mengsk to
spread his agents among all the ships of his fleet, or part of a plan by Mengsk to move the old guard
aside in favor of professional soldiers?
Whichever it was, Mike was sure that it was part of a plan by Mengsk.
Mike was almost to the wardroom when the door exploded, and two men in combat armor tumbled out.
It was Raynor and Duke, locked in each other’s arms. The former lawman had already ripped off the
shoulder plate of the general’s suit and spiderwebbed the man’s visor with a steel-shod fist. Duke was no
slouch, however, and there were several new dents in Raynor’s already-rumpled chest plate.
“Jim!” shouted Mike. Despite himself, Raynor turned toward the reporter.
General Duke did not miss the opportunity, slamming both fists into the side of Raynor’s helmet. The
former marshal staggered back a step, but did not fall.
Now free of his opponent’s neosteel embrace, Duke went for his side arm, a nasty needle-gun that
could penetrate bulkheads. Raynor recovered as the general brought the weapon up and grabbed the
older man by the wrist. Then, the servos in both sets of armor squealing, Raynor slammed Duke’s arm
against the bulkhead.
Once. Twice. On the third time something cracked in Duke’s gauntlet and the general screamed. He
dropped the gun and sank to the deck. The needler went skittering across the floor. Mike knelt down,
grabbed it, and rose, clamping it to his own belt for safekeeping.
Only then did Mike become aware that they were not alone in the hallway. Ahead and behind them
were armed marines, their weapons leveled on Raynor and himself.
“Y’all just signed your own death warrant, boy!” Duke snarled. There was blood at the corner of his
mouth, and he cradled his pistol hand. More than metal had been shattered by Raynor’s blows.
“You just signed the death warrant of your home planet, General!” Mike snapped. To the marines he
said, “He just set off the emitters. He called the Zerg here! Dammit! He and Mengsk didn’t even give the
Confederates a chance to surrender! The Zerg are coming here, and this bastard is the one who rolled
out the welcome mat!”
Some of the marines lowered their weapons. They seemed suddenly to be having second thoughts about
the revolution, or were suddenly worried that the Zerg were going to show up on their doorstep. Others
kept a flinty-eyed, neutral glare, and their weapons remained aimed at Raynor’s chest.
Mike figured the ones who were hesitating were the ones who weren’t neurally resocialized. The others
were waiting for the kill order.
“I’ll have you court-martialed!” said the general. Mike let out a thin breath. Duke was threatening, not
ordering Raynor’s death. He was concerned that Mengsk might not approve.
“You want my rank, you can have it,” Raynor said hotly. “And I’m not in your chain of command. I
answer to Mengsk, same as you. You can’t do squat without Mengsk’s say-so.”
“And whose orders do you think I was following when I activated the emitters, boy?” said Duke, smiling
despite his pain.
“You set off a dozen emitters on Tarsonis!” said Raynor. “The populace will be swarmed!”
“We set them off in strong Confederate locations,” said Duke, “and evacuated most of our regular
troops. Hell, boy, didn’t you realize that we were planting one more when we pickedyou up?”
Mike suddenly thought of the ghost and the tech crew, and the way Kerrigan had reacted. Of course
Mengsk wouldn’t care about information. He was after control of the entire realm of human space.
Raynor spat. “You son of a . . .” He took two steps toward the general.
General Duke, in his armored battle suit, held up his good arm. Not to attack, but to ward off a blow.
The general was afraid, an old man quailing in a neosteel shell.
Raynor paused for a moment, then spat again. He wheeled and headed for the lift to the observation
dome.
None of the marines in the hall stopped him. Some didn’t have the guts to open fire on one of their own.
Some didn’t have the orders. And some didn’t know which man was the true criminal.
Mike followed Raynor. Behind them General Duke bellowed for the soldiers to get back to their
stations.
Mike laid a hand on Raynor’s shoulder, and the big man turned. For a moment Mike was afraid that
Raynor was going to take a swing at him, but the fire in the man’s eyes was replaced with deep, bitter
sadness.
“They didn’t even give them a chance,” he said. “They could have used it as a threat, but they just set
them off. No warning, nothing. While we were en route back to the ship. They set them off.”
“So what are you going to do?” Mike asked.
“I’m going to have it out with Mengsk himself,” said Raynor. “He’s got to be made to see reason.”
“You’re not going up there. Right now Duke is probably on the blower with him, calling for your hide.
You’ve got about ten minutes before he convinces some of his followers to arrest you. With or without
Mengsk’s permission.”
“Yeah,” Raynor said bitterly. “And the way I feel right now, I’d probably take a shot at Mengsk as
well.”
“Well, there’s that. And Mengskwill have you killed if you do that.”
“So your prescription is, Doctor Liberty?” said Raynor.
“Go find some allies. The rest of your unit from planetside. Any of the old colonial militia from the Sara
system, if any of them are left on board. Go there and stay there until I call for you. And here.” He
passed the pack to him. “Hold onto these. There’s juicy gossip on those disks.”
“Where are you going?” Raynor asked.
“I’mgoing up to the observation deck. I need to talk to the great man himself. I’ll try not to hit him.”
Raynor nodded and stomped off, the bag of secrets looking small and insignificant in his heavy hand.
Mike took a deep breath, closed his eyes, and repeated the mantra.
“I amnot going to hit him,” he said softly. “I amnot going to hit him.”
The doors to the lift opened, and Kerrigan stalked out. Her face was a roiling storm cloud of anger and
doubt.
Mike jumped back as if she had been General Duke swinging an armored fist.
“Lieutenant,” he said. “Sarah, what’s wrong?”
“I spoke with Arcturus,” said Kerrigan, and for the first time that Mike could remember, she stammered,
unsure of how to phrase her next words. “He . . . he explained himself. And his explanation was full of
examples and buzzwords and quotes and omelets and breaking eggs and freedom and duty and
everything else. And he had me believing, Mike. I really wanted to believe that he had information we
didn’t, like there were Zerg queens in the heart of Tarsonis itself, calling the shots through puppet rulers,
sacrificing the populace, and eating babies in the streets.”
She took a deep breath. “But as I listened, I watched the map of Tarsonis on the planet behind him.”
Mike said, “I know the screen. It’s his favorite toy.”
Kerrigan gave a derisive snort. “As I watched, that screen turned red. All of it, red from the Zerg
arriving.” She looked at Mike, looking for confirmation in his eyes.
“There were no Zerg on Tarsonis until he set off the psi emitters,” she said in a small voice. “None at all.
It wasn’t like the Sara planets, or even Antiga Prime, where there were some already there and we had
already lost the world.There was nothing there to threaten us but other humans.”
She took a deep breath and closed her eyes. “And now the Zerg are coming from everywhere. They’re
on the planet. Arcturus didn’t recall any of the units currently in combat. He didn’t even bother to get the
teams that placed the psi emitters off-planet. He left them there. ‘Sacrifices must be made,’ he said, and
he said it in that calm, pleased voice as if he were ordering coffee.”
Mike thought of the team that landed at Atkin’s Square, and hoped that Kerrigan was too upset to pick
up his suppositions. Instead he said, “All right. He told you this. And then what happened?”
“And then word came up from the bridge about a fight between Jim and Duke.” Kerrigan’s face was a
storm cloud again. “And he dismissed me. Just told me I had to go, just like that. And I . . . I lost my
temper with him.”
“There’s been a lot of that going around. And for good reason.”
“Mike, there was no rationale for him to do this. I thought it was a bluff, or that Tarsonis was already
infected, or that there was a master plan. It was just that Arcturus has a hammer, and when you have a
hammer, every problem seems to be a nail.”
Mike remembered Mengsk making the same quote earlier. It seemed like half a lifetime ago.
“It’s okay,” Mike said, reaching up to hold her by the shoulders. She did not turn away.
“And Mike”—her voice was a whisper—”when I got mad at him, Ilooked. I mean I reallylooked into
him.”
Michael waited for her to continue, but she just shook her head. When she spoke, it was in a low hiss.
She spat, “Thatbastard.”
Mike said, “Look, I sent Jim down to his quarters and told him to keep his friends around him. I think
you qualify.”
“Lieutenant,” he said. “Sarah, what’s wrong?”
“I spoke with Arcturus,” said Kerrigan, and for the first time that Mike could remember, she stammered,
unsure of how to phrase her next words. “He . . . he explained himself. And his explanation was full of
examples and buzzwords and quotes and omelets and breaking eggs and freedom and duty and
everything else. And he had me believing, Mike. I really wanted to believe that he had information we
didn’t, like there were Zerg queens in the heart of Tarsonis itself, calling the shots through puppet rulers,
sacrificing the populace, and eating babies in the streets.”
She took a deep breath. “But as I listened, I watched the map of Tarsonis on the planet behind him.”
Mike said, “I know the screen. It’s his favorite toy.”
Kerrigan gave a derisive snort. “As I watched, that screen turned red. All of it, red from the Zerg
arriving.” She looked at Mike, looking for confirmation in his eyes.
“There were no Zerg on Tarsonis until he set off the psi emitters,” she said in a small voice. “None at all.
It wasn’t like the Sara planets, or even Antiga Prime, where there were some already there and we had
already lost the world.There was nothing there to threaten us but other humans.”
She took a deep breath and closed her eyes. “And now the Zerg are coming from everywhere. They’re
on the planet. Arcturus didn’t recall any of the units currently in combat. He didn’t even bother to get the
teams that placed the psi emitters off-planet. He left them there. ‘Sacrifices must be made,’ he said, and
he said it in that calm, pleased voice as if he were ordering coffee.”
Mike thought of the team that landed at Atkin’s Square, and hoped that Kerrigan was too upset to pick
up his suppositions. Instead he said, “All right. He told you this. And then what happened?”
“And then word came up from the bridge about a fight between Jim and Duke.” Kerrigan’s face was a
storm cloud again. “And he dismissed me. Just told me I had to go, just like that. And I . . . I lost my
temper with him.”
“There’s been a lot of that going around. And for good reason.”
“Mike, there was no rationale for him to do this. I thought it was a bluff, or that Tarsonis was already
infected, or that there was a master plan. It was just that Arcturus has a hammer, and when you have a
hammer, every problem seems to be a nail.”
Mike remembered Mengsk making the same quote earlier. It seemed like half a lifetime ago.
“It’s okay,” Mike said, reaching up to hold her by the shoulders. She did not turn away.
“And Mike”—her voice was a whisper—”when I got mad at him, Ilooked. I mean I reallylooked into
him.”
Michael waited for her to continue, but she just shook her head. When she spoke, it was in a low hiss.
She spat, “Thatbastard.”
Mike said, “Look, I sent Jim down to his quarters and told him to keep his friends around him. I think
you qualify.”
on this world? Isthat the alien menace you mean?”
Mengsk tilted his head and pursed his brows, as if disappointed in Mike’s response. Behind him, the
screen continued to throb and glow, and now blue-white triangles were moving in from the edge of the
screen.
What Mengsk said was, “I didn’t anticipate Sarah coming up here. And I didn’t expect Raynor to pick a
fight with a general. That was foolish. And inconvenient. I’m going to have to smooth over some harsh
feelings there.”
“Harsh feelings? They nearly killed each other just now.”
Mengsk shook his head again, and Mike realized that the man was minimizing the problems, just as he
was minimizing the situation on Tarsonis. Minimizing them to the point where they could be ignored,
glossed over, forgotten.
His own reality-warping field,thought Mike.
“General Duke is,” the rebel leader said, “at heart a coward. I provide him with the spine he needs to go
forward. James, on the other hand, is all courage and honor looking for a place to explode. A loaded gun
looking for targets. I’ve given him direction. I’ve given him targets. Both men are very useful at what they
do, and once we’ve taken Tarsonis, all this will wash out. Neither man can really survive without me, and
to stay viable, they’ll realize they will have to follow my directives.”
“Are they just chess pieces to you?” Mike asked.
“Not chess pieces. Tools. Talented, useful tools. And yes. Raynor, Duke, the Zerg, the Protoss. Yes,
even you and dear Lieutenant Kerrigan are all tools to achieve a greater good, a better future. Yes, things
look dark right now, and I’ll admit my culpability. But think of this: if things are terrible now, think how
good we’ll look when we take over, eh?”
“Don’t look now,” Mike said, looking past Mengsk, up at the screen, “but I think some more of your
tools are attacking your other tools.”
“Eh?” Mengsk spun in place and looked at the board. Already the first blue-white triangles, the symbols
of the Protoss, were making planetfall. The red Zerg triangles were dispersing in their wake in ripples. It
was as though the Protoss were stones thrown into a crimson pond.
“This is bad,” Mengsk said softly. “Very bad. I did not expect them to arrive so quickly. This is very bad
indeed.”
“Oh my God. Youreally didn’t expect this,” Mike said, blinking in surprise. Then the nervousness in his
stomach turned to chill fear, and he added, “Why doesn’t that make me feel any better?”

Let’s not kid ourselves, we got our heads handed to us by theZerg and the Protoss. Yes, they were
like nothing we had everseen before. Yes, their biology was different. Yes, their technology, or
what we would call their technology was moreadvanced than ours in dozens of areas. And of
course, theywere belligerent and aggressive in the extreme, they knewandwhere we were,they had
the advantage of surprise.
But (and this is a rather large but) we humans are aboutthe most ornery cusses in the galaxy. We
had been fightingamong ourselves for as long as we’ve been in the sector, andwe had honed our
own battle technologies to the point wherewe were their equal in many ways. We had the
advantagesof interior lines of supply (that’s military for “surrounded”)and native terrain (that’s
military for “we’re fighting themin our living rooms”). We could have taken them if we hadgotten
our act together.
So what happened? The very thing that made us goodwarriors—the fact that we had fought
among ourselves—also made us horrible at banding together in our hour of crisis. We could not
unite under one banner or even form acoalition. In fact, every time there was a chance for that,
onefaction or another did something to enhance the advancement of their own political agenda
over the other factions.Often at the expense of the rest of humanity. I can’t imaginethe
hive-minded Zerg or the glowing Protoss falling prey tosuch basic human drives as greed and
power and raw pig-headedness.
Of course, those are all basic human drives, and that’swhy nonhumans were cleaning our clocks.

“YOU REALLY DIDN’T KNOW, DID YOU?” MIKE asked. “You didn’t know the Protoss would
get here? How could you not know?”
“Impudent pup,” said Mengsk, stalking to his console and scanning a dozen screens at once. “Ofcourse
I knew the Protoss would get here. They follow the Zerg around like housewives chasing flies with a
rolled-up newspaper, looking for them to alight so they can swat them. I just didn’t expect them to get
here sosoon.”
Despite himself, Mike smiled. Anything that disturbed the great Arcturus Mengsk was enough to make
him happy. And, upon consideration, if the Protoss had been in contact with Mengsk, they probably saw
him for the two-faced politico he was, and they were just hanging out in warp space waiting for him to do
something like this.
Mengsk cycled through a number of screens, then cursed under his breath. Finally he opened a toggle
and said, “Duke!”
The battered face of the general appeared on the screen. “Sir, have you considered my request
regarding Captain Raynor?”
“Spare me your petty bickering,” Mengsk snapped. “Get the local commanders on-line. The Protoss are
here.”
“Yes, sir, we know,” Duke said proudly. “But they’re avoiding our forces, concentrating primarily on the
Zerg hives.” He paused and blinked, completely unaware that this might be a bad thing.
“If the Protoss forces engage the Zerg,” Mengsk said, enunciating each word, “then the Zerg are fighting
them instead of the Confederates. If the Protoss engage the Zerg, the Confederates may escape. The
Old Families may get away, and with them the heart of Confederate power!”
Duke blinked again, then his face fell. “We need to stop the Protoss, then. I can send them a
transmission telling those glowing buzzards to back off.”
Mengsk ignored him and hit some other toggles. “Send Lieutenant Kerrigan with a strike force to engage
the Protoss advance party. Captain Raynor and General Duke will stay behind with the command ship.”
Raynor’s angry face, as red as the surface of Tarsonis, popped up on another screen. “First you sell out
every person on this world to the Zerg, and now you’re asking us to go up against the Protoss? Youare
losing it.And you’re going to send Kerrigan down there with no backup?”
Mengsk’s face had already changed from surprised agitation to calm reassurance. The reality bubble
was disrupted, but not broken. Mike wondered how much more would be needed to ring down the
entire facade the man projected. And what would happen once the mask dropped? Was there any
center at all to the man to be revealed?
Mike realized he could stay, poking and arguing, and maybe even getting an angry response out of the
terrorist. Mengsk was starting to look as though he might be at the end of his tether, but he was right
about one thing: Michael Liberty had given up trying to save Arcturus Mengsk’s soul.
And there were other, more deserving recipients of his aid.
Mike started for the lift. Behind him, Mengsk was saying calmly, “I have absolute confidence in
Kerrigan’s ability to hold off the Protoss.”
The lift doors closed as Raynor’s voice said, “This is bullsh—” And then Mike was dropping down to
where, he hoped, Raynor had gathered some allies.
And despite himself, he hoped that Kerrigan had changed her mind and would be there as well.
There were about two dozen men in Raynor’s barracks. Some were already strapped into their battle
armor. Others were hastily suiting up. Raynor was at the comm unit.
Kerrigan was not there in body. Instead her voice, tinny over the wrist-mounted receiver, bounced
upward through the room.
“But you don’t owe him this!” said Raynor. “Hell, I’ve saved your butt plenty of—”
Kerrigan interrupted him. “Jimmy, drop the knight-in-shining-armor routine. It suits you sometimes. Just
not . . .”
She paused for a moment, as if reconsidering her words. “. . . not now,” she said. She sounded tired and
worn. Almost defeated. “I don’t need to berescued. I know what I’m doing. Once we’ve dealt with the
Protoss, we can do something about the Zerg.”
She took a deep breath. “Arcturus will come around,” she said, but she sounded to Mike as though she
didn’t hold out much hope. “I know he will.”