That was his word for it, that rare, perfect day that warms the soul with a golden glow of joy. There was
peace in a golden day.
Some days were gray, hung with leaden clouds and rain punctuated by brilliant flashes of burning white
and rolling thunder. Other days were a vibrant cold blue arching over the frost-encrusted domes and
sheds of the settlement. Some days were even red—the evening sky painted by the dust in the spring
winds before the crops had gotten their own hold on the soil. Some days even extended into the night
with a velvety cobalt blanket across the sky.
He liked those autumn nights when he could leave his world behind by staring up into that rich darkness.
God had put pinpricks in the dome of the night, he imagined, so that His light could shine through. As a
child he had searched the stars, hoping to see through to the other side and catch some glimpse of this
Creator. He had never stopped looking, even though he had reached his nineteenth birthday and had
thought himself too mature for such things.
Each day held different colors for him. He had experienced them in all their hues. Each held a memory
and a place in his heart. Yet none in his experience could compare to a golden day. It was the color of
the wheat fields that rolled like waves across the low hills stretching out from his father’s homestead.
Golden was the warmth of the sun on his face. Golden was the glow he felt within him.
Golden was the color of her hair and the sound of her voice.
“You’re dreaming again, Ardo,” she whispered playfully. “Come back to me. You are much too far
away!”
He opened his eyes. She was golden.
“Melani, I’m right here.” Ardo smiled.
“No, you aren’t.” She pouted—a formidable weapon in getting her way. “You’re off dreaming again and
you’ve left me behind.”
He rolled onto his side, propping his head up on one elbow so that he could get a better look at her. She
was just a year younger than he. Her family had arrived back when Ardo was nine years old, another
group in a long line of religious refugees that fell from the sky to join with other Saints in Helaman
Township.
Refugee survivors had been gathering from nearly all the planets of the Confederacy back
then—reluctantpioneers of the stars. Many devout religious groups had been among the first to be
outlawed by the United Powers League on Earth back in ’31. It was not a new story to Saints and
Martyrs. Throughout humanity’s history, those who did not understand the faithful had driven them from
place to place and home to home. That they should be driven from planet to planet, then star to star, was
beginning to sound painfully repetitious in their Heritage classes. Now, exiles once more, families of the
faithful were scattered among the ill-fated transports of the ATLAS project, and when that mission ended
in such cataclysmic failure, those families who survived searched desperately for their brothers and
sisters. When communication was finally established between worlds, the Patriarchs chose an outlying
region on a world they called Bountiful for their new home. Soon, Orbital Dropships were landing at the
Zarahemla Starport daily. The newly arrived families would then make their way to the outlying
settlements as best they could. Arthur and Keti Bradlaw, with their wide-eyed daughter, were one of five
families that arrived that day. Ardo had joined his father as the entire township came out to welcome the
new families and get them settled.
Ardo could not remember much about Melani then, although he had been vaguely aware of the stick of a
girl who seemed awkward, lonely, and shy. He first took real notice of her when her fourteenth year
brought some rather remarkable changes. The “stickgirl” seemed to burst into his awareness like a
butterfly unfolding from its chrysalis. Her features held a natural beauty—body painting and makeup were
frowned upon by the Patriarchs of the township—and it had been Ardo’s great good fortune to have
been the first to approach her. His heart and soul fell into her large, luminescent blue eyes.
The nimbus of her long, shining hair played softly in the warm breeze drifting over the wheat fields. The
wind carried the distant hum of the mill and the faint scent of the bread at the bakery.
Golden.
“I may be off dreaming, but I’ll never leave you behind,” he said to her, smiling. The wheat rustled about
the blanket where they lay. “Tell me where you want to go. I’ll take you there!”
“Right now?” Her laugh was sunshine. “In your dreams?”
“Sure!” Ardo pulled himself up to kneel on the heavy blanket he had spread out for them. “Anywhere in
the stars!”
“I can’t go anywhere.” She smiled. “I have a test in Sister Johnson’s Hydroponics class this afternoon!
Besides,” she said more earnestly. “Why would I want to go anywhere else at all? Everything I want is
right here.”
Golden. Who could ever leave on such a golden day?
“Then let’s not go anywhere,” he said eagerly. “Let’s stay here . . . and get married.”
“Married?” She looked at him, half bemused and half questioning. “I told you, I have Hydroponics class
this afternoon.”
“No, I mean it.” Ardo had been working himself up for this for some time. “I’ve graduated, and things
are working out really well on Dad’s agraplots. He said he was thinking of giving me forty acres at the far
end of the homestead. It’s the sweetest place, right up near the base of the canyon. There’s a spot there
next to the river where . . . where . . . Melani?”
The girl with the golden hair did not hear him. She sat up, her blue eyes squinting toward the township.
“The siren, Ardo!”
Then he heard it, too. The distant wail, rising and falling across the fields.
Ardo shook his head. “They always sound it at noon . . .”
“But itisn’tnoon, Ardo.”
The sun was eclipsed in that instant. Ardo leaped up, wheeling around toward the darkened sky. His
mouth fell open as the lengthening shadow surged across the yellowed fields of wheat. Ardo’s eyes went
wide with the rush of fear. Adrenaline roared into his veins.
Enormous plumes of smoke trailed behind fireballs roaring directly toward him from the western end of
the broad valley. Ardo quickly reached down and pulled Melani to her feet. His mind raced. They had to
run, find shelter . . . But where could they go? Melani screamed, and he realized that there was nowhere
to go and noplace safe to hide.
The fireballs seemed so close that both of them ducked. The flames arched over them, the thunderous
sound of their fury quickly drowning the distant warning siren. The shadow of their wake covered the
entire valley. Five enormous columns crossed overhead, their fingers reaching over Ardo and Melani
toward the clustered buildings of Helaman Township. Then the fireballs wheeled as one, lifted over the
township, and descended in roiling flames into Segard Yohansen’s instantly ruined fields, about a mile
past the center of Helaman.
Ardo shook—whether from fear or excitement he could not tell—but at least his stupor had ended. He
clasped Melani’s arm and began pulling at her. “Come on! We’ve got to get into the town before they
shut the gates! Come on!”
She needed no further urging.
They ran.
He could not remember how they got into town.
The golden day had turned a muddy brown fading to gray from the smoke that still coated the sky
overhead. It was an oppressive color, slate and cold. It seemed so out of place here.
“We’ve got to find my Uncle Dez,” he heard himself say. “He has a shop in the compound! Come on!
Come on!”
Ardo and Melani struggled to move through the center of the township, now crowded with refugees.
Helaman originally had been nothing but an outpostin the far reaches of Bountiful. Its town center was the
original fortress compound with the defensive wall encompassing the main buildings. Since then, the town
had grown well beyond those central walls. Now more than ten thousand people called Helaman their
home—and nearly all of them had poured into the safety of the old fortress compound.
He could just see the sign “Dez Hardwarez” across the packed central square.
The rattle of automatic weapons clattered suddenly from the perimeter wall. Two dull explosive thuds
resounded, followed by even more chattering machine guns.
A cry arose from the crowd in the square. Ardo felt more than heard the fear in the seething mob.
Shouts rang out, some strident and others calming. The smoke overhead cast an oppressive veil over the
surging mob.
“Please, Ardo!” Melani said, “I . . . Where do we go? What do we do?”
Ardo glanced around. He could taste the panic in the air.
“We just need to get across the square,” he choked out, then, seeing the look in her eyes. “We’ve done
it hundreds of times.”
“But, Ardo—”
“It isn’t any farther than it was before. Just a little more crowded, that’s all.” Ardo looked at the tears
welling up in those beautiful blue eyes. He squeezed her hand tightly. “Don’t worry. I’ll be right here with
you.”
Somehow, they were halfway across the square when it came.
A sheet of flame erupted beyond the fortress’s outer wall. Its crimson light flashed against the blanket of
smoke that hung oppressively over the town. The blood-red hue electrified the panicked crowd in the
square. Screams, shouts, and cries all tumbled into a cacophony of sound, but several disembodied
voices penetrated Ardo’s thoughts clearly.
“Where are the Confederacy forces? Where are the Marines?”
“Don’t argue with me! Get the children! Stay together!”
“It can’t be the Zerg! They couldn’t have penetrated so far into the Confederacy . . .”
Zerg? Ardo had heard rumors about them. Nightmares, so he thought, to scare children or keep
outsiders from settling in the Outer Colonies. He could not remember all the whispered tales, but the
nightmare was here now, and very real.
Another voice penetrated his thoughts. He turned toward her.
“Ardo, I’m frightened!” Melani’s eyes were wide and liquid. “What is it? What’s going on?”
Ardo opened his mouth. He could not answer her question. No words came out. There were so many
words he wanted to say to her in that moment—so many words that he would regret never having said
for uncounted years to come. But no words came out.
A light flared. He felt the heat on his back. He turned, holding Melani behind him.
The eastern wall had been breached. The old rampart was being pulled down from the other side,
dismantled before Ardo’s eyes. It seemed as though a dark wave was breaking against the breach, an
undulating silhouette. Then details lodged in his mind: a gleaming purple carapace, red-streaked ivory
claws sliding from a colonist’s limp body, the arching, snakelike bodies writhing across the broken stone.
It was unthinkable. . . . The nightmare had come to Bountiful.
The shoulder-to-shoulder crowd in the square roared their deep fear and turned to run from the breach.
There was nowhere to go. Zerg Hydralisks had already crested the opposite wall, cascading into the
street like black drops from a greasy spill. Within moments, hideous cobralike hoods had unfolded above
their razor-sharp talons. They arched their tails upward. Armored spikes exploded from their serrated
shoulder sockets and darted with deadly effect into the western edge of the crowd.
Those facing the new threat suddenly tried to reverse direction, crushing back into the surging crowd
behind them.
Ardo heard Melani gasp behind him. “I can’t . . . I can’t breathe . . .”
The mob was crushing them. Ardo looked desperately around him, trying to find a way out.
Movement overhead caught his eye. A bloated,bulbous form like a disembodied brain drifted over the
colony wall. Tendrils hung like viscera beneath it, quivering with activity. It was reaching down for the
center of the crowd. Ardo had heard tales in which the Zerg had captured colonists and taken them alive
to a fate that could only be worse than death.
Tears flooded Ardo’s eyes. There was nowhere to go and nothing left to do.
Suddenly the Zerg Overlord drifting above the colony shuddered and slid sideways. Several explosions
erupted from the side of the hideous beast. The Overlord exploded in an enormous fireball. The Zerg
Hydralisks entering the compound suddenly hesitated.
A wing of five Confederacy Wraith fighters ripped through the smoke overhead, the scream of their
engines nearly drowning out the cries of the terrified crowd below. Twenty-five-millimeter burst lasers
pulsed repeatedly as the Wraiths wheeled through the air, the bolts slamming against targets on the far
side of the crumbling fortress wall.
One of the Wraiths wavered suddenly, then exploded under a hail of ground fire from the outraged Zerg.
The Zerg who had entered the compound were pressing their attack, killing some and dragging others
off without apparent distinction. They had corralled the humans; now all they had to do was harvest them
from the edges of the crowd inward.
A second flight of Wraiths tore through the smoke-blackenedsky. Then a single Confederacy Dropship
ripped through the air, spinning in a rapid breaking maneuver and descending toward the square. The
downblast from the engines created an instant hurricane on the ground. Trees bent over nearly double. It
was impossible to hear anything over the roar of the engines. People all about Ardo tumbled to the
ground, shielding themselves from the gale.
Ardo blinked through the dust. The Dropship continued to hover but managed somehow to lower its
transport ramp into the square. He could see the silhouetted figure of a Confederacy Marine beckoning
to them.
Everyone else in the square saw the Marine also. Mindlessly they charged the ramp. A human tide pulled
Ardo along.
He lost Melani’s hand.
“Melani!” he screamed. He tried to fight against the crushing press of the panicked crowd. His words
were lost in the roar of the Dropship’s engines. “Melani!”
He saw her behind him. The Zerg were pressing their attack with anger now. The Dropship was
depriving them of their prize. Ardo was appalled at how quickly the large crowd had been
sundered—harvested like blood-red wheat in the field. The Zerg were already nearly at Melani’s side.
Ardo clawed and fought. He screamed.
Three Hydralisks grasped Melani at once, dragging her back from the edge of the crowd.
“Please, Ardo!” she wept. “Don’t leave me alone!”
The mindless mob pushed him farther into the ship.
Zerg claws suddenly rang against the sides of the Dropship. The pilot had played out all the time his luck
would afford. The ship responded instantly to his command, lurching upward away from the Zerg and
bearing Ardo away from his home, his life, and his love.
“Don’t leave me alone!”Those were her last words to him, pounding through his mind and soul, louder
and louder, threatening to burst his skull . . .
Ardo’s world went black. It would stay black for a very long time.
“ALL RIGHT, YOU RAW MEAT! HANG ON TO YOUR asses! We’re takin’ the long fall!”
Private Ardo Melnikov did not bother to glance at the sergeant as he barked at them. The man was a
tic—temporarily in command—for this drop. Odds were that Ardo would never see the man once they
were down. It was best to just stay out of the man’s way until Ardo’s new platoon was sorted out for the
mission. He could barely hear the tic above the screaming engines of the Dropship and the thunder of
their hot descent buffeting the hull. There was just something about the sergeant that seemed to require a
full voice and an angry eye. In any event, it really did not matter to Ardo—the sergeant was just
baby-sitting them down to the surface. Once he got there, Ardo knew there would be someone who
would make his life miserable on a more permanent basis.
Ardo shrugged his shoulders, trying to lift his backaway from the wall pad. The interior of the Dropship
was normally a hot box, but most especially during the plunge down through the atmosphere. This
particular Dropship was at least two cooling units shy of keeping everyone comfortable. Now a growing
patch of sweat was sticking his shoulder blades to the nonporous cushion. Sweat beaded up on his face
and occasionally dropped down the front of his fatigues. The restraining bar prevented him from finding
any relief from the pooling discomfort gathering at various junction points of his uniform.
Worse yet, the Dropship was fully loaded—packed shoulder to shoulder and bulkhead to bulkhead.
The heat was not nearly so oppressive as the growing smell that was overwhelming the air scrubbers.
There was nothing for him to look at except the same slack and blank faces of the other Marine recruits
strapped against the bulkhead across from him. There was nothing for him to listen to except the
sergeant’s occasional growl and the uniform roar of the hull behind him. There was nothing for him to do
but wait it out with his own thoughts . . . and that was the last thing he wanted.
They haunted him, those thoughts lurking at the back of his mind. It seemed to him sometimes that the
ghosts pursued him from inside his own head. Closing his eyes never banished those specters. No sound
could drown them out for long. Those ghosts were all painfully bright and beautiful, terrible and crushing.
They would wait quietly, patiently at theedge of his conscious thought, kept at bay by his will alone.
Sometimes he would be arrogant enough to think he had them mastered and banished once and for all.
Then some smell of ripening grass or plowed earth would waft past him on a breeze, or a glint of the
color of light honey, or a distant whispered laugh, or some indefinable quality of his surroundings, and the
demons would rush back, overwhelming him.
He would have bled tears just at the thought of them if he could.
All he wanted was to fight. He needed to fight. It was the only thing that really kept the demons at bay.
He could concentrate on the mission and its objectives . . . or at least those minor objectives that his
commander deemed necessary for him to know. Grand strategy was not his purview. It was none of his
business. His job was to do whatever he was told to do and with as little thought as necessary. That
suited him just fine.
The howling of the Dropship was tapering off. The vehicle had finally spent its energy against the
atmosphere of whatever world they were plunging toward. The engines were doing their best now to
make the ship imitate the grace of a bird in flight. Ardo chuckled to himself at the thought. The
Quantradyne APOD-33 was the Confederacy’s proof to the stars that anything with a big enough engine
would fly—no matter how badly. Of course, he had made many training jumps before. Each was
completely unremarkableand he really did not care to recall them in any detail.
Why reflect on something so painful as time to be still and think?
Better to concentrate on something else . . . anything else. Ardo began scanning the faces of the Marines
around him. It was an exercise in self-preservation. It was always a good idea to know the Marines
around you. You never knew when your life might depend on one of them . . . or be threatened by one.
The woman sitting across from him seemed to be a good example of one kind or the other—it was just
that Ardo was not all that sure of which. She had close-cropped blond hair that stood in neat bristles
from a well-shaped scalp. Her face was drawn tight, with angular cheekbones that sharply framed two
shining, steel-tinged eyes. They stared unfocused at some distant point past Ardo’s shoulder, unblinking
yet shuttered windows into any soul she might possess.Those eyes could freeze a river solid in
midsummer,he thought. He was left to his own imagination as to what the rest of her looked like. The
powered combat suit she wore effectively hid any physical distinction she might otherwise have
displayed, but it did tell him one thing: her suit markings were that of an officer.
That meant danger to a private no matter how you cut it. Avoidance of an officer is the first thing a
private learns—especially in casual conversation. Thelast private he could remember being too familiar
with his squad leader ended up with a hole where his head had been.
The female officer had not said a word since they boarded the Dropship. She was perfectly welcome to
let her silence continue as far as Ardo was concerned.Speak when spoken to,he thought.Otherwise, do
not go looking for trouble.
At leastshewas comfortable, Ardo thought. Her suit was self-cooling, and he could see the power
umbilical plugged into the Dropship’s power bus. Ardo suspected that her chill went well beyond the
physical. Someday he, too, would learn the intricate skills necessary to wear the CMC-300—maybe
even the new 400 model. That day was a long way off, of course. Still, it would be a lot better to wear in
combat than a few layers of ablative cloth and one’s standard-issue underwear. If he could just manage
to live long enough to get a combat suit of his own, his prospects would improve considerably.
Well, hopefully they would at least give him some training in a weapon. He had not even had the chance
to do that yet.
The rest of the compartment was filled with grunts just like himself. Each of them wore the
standard-issue detached look of a Confederacy Security Marine. Each of them dripped Confederacy
sweat through their Confederacy fatigues, as was their duty.
Ardo’s eye fell for a time, however, on one particularly large private. The man was enormous—Ardo
remembered the prep crew had some trouble getting his harness to lock closed—and he would not stop
his incessant yammering for a moment. Ardo could not imagine where they had found a uniform that
would fit him. He was dark complexioned, and Ardo vaguely recalled the ancient United Powers League
back on Earth had once qualified the man as “South Seas Islander.” He had broad, angular features and
full lips. His hair was a long mane that flowed back from his forehead and down his neck in natural black
waves. The giant was gung-ho certifiable—one of those all-for-the-wall, eat-their-hearts-for-breakfast
psychotics who was the first person you would want to come and pull you out of the fire and the last
person you would want to follow into one.
“Get this junkwad on the ground!” The giant laughed beneath his bright eyes. “I’ve got some death to
deal out! Want to roast me some Zerg on a spit! Maybe eat their brains straight off!”
The islander threw his head back and laughed too loudly once more. He slapped his massive hands
down on the thighs of the two Marines sitting next to him. They both winced so hard from the impact that
tears pooled in their eyes.
“We’ll eat them for dinner, eh? Big Zerg feast! Ha! Just put this flying trashyard on the ground before I
open it myself!”
The pilot in the sealed cockpit forward of the drop-bay could not possibly have heard the request but
seemed willing just the same to accommodate it. Theship pivoted noticeably—Ardo knew this was a
standard clearing maneuver just before landing—and the engines whined a little differently. A final bump,
and the engines suddenly spindled down.
The lieutenant in front of Ardo wasted no time unplugging herself from the Dropship power, managing to
get herself free before the restraining bar had lifted completely out of the way. A deft move with her free
hand brought her duffel bag down from the overhead racks. She was already moving toward the ramp as
it began lowering at the back of the ship. She even beat the islander, who seemed to be in his own hurry
to get into whatever fight he could either find or manufacture.
Ardo took his time, tugging at his fatigues to pull them free of each of the places sweat had stuck them to
his body. He could smell the change in the atmosphere already blowing in through the open ramp. An
achingly dry breeze swept the musty dampness out of the compartment like a furnace. He pulled his own
duffel bag from the racks and followed the others as they straggled out the back of the Dropship.
“Get your asses out here, ladies,” the sergeant snarled. “We haven’t got all day!”
The air was oven-hot and dry—drier than Ardo ever remembered breathing. A stiff breeze carried the
furnace heat around him. His sweat evaporated almost at once as he stepped onto the tarmac of the
spaceport.
Ardo glanced grimly around.
He had stepped into hell.
The world was a rusting red, colored by the sand that seemed to add its own tint to every building and
vehicle regardless of its original color. The effect was all the more enhanced by the flaming dawn just
breaking over the starport.
Or what was left of the starport. Nearly half of the seven launch control towers originally scattered
around the sprawling installation were on fire. Two of them were crested only with broken rubble.
Columns of smoke from various other fires could be seen rising from buildings of the starport itself. More
telling, larger columns could be seen rising from the central city district of the colony several miles
beyond.
It was then that Ardo heard the sound—an all too familiar sound. Drifting toward him on the breeze, he
heard the cries, the anguish, the panic.
He turned sharply. On the opposite side of the field, just short of the embarkation pads, he could see the
cordon of Marines surrounding the Confederacy section of the starport and the panicked mob beyond.
No!
The memories flooded over him. He stood in the colony square once more. The sounds of it filled his
mind. Their cries . . .hercries . . .
“Don’t leave me alone!” she wept.
Someone shoved Ardo hard from behind. His training took over, and he tumbled deftly before rising
quickly to his feet, his hands prepared to defend and attack.
“Quit stalling, you maggot-wipe,” the drop sergeant snapped. “What are you waiting for—an official
welcome? Get over to the barracks for training. You’re needed on the double!”
Ardo dreaded the barracks more than any other thing in his life. There was something about them that
repulsed him, that shook him to his very soul whenever he just heard the word. Ardo was slightly dazed,
but he knew better even as he said, “No, Sergeant, I can’t . . .”
The sergeant simply knocked him down again.
“Welcome to Mar Sara, Marine! Now move!”
He moved. Gathering up his kit, Ardo joined the rest of the group from his Dropship as they made their
way toward the barracks at the edge of the tarmac. He had the distinct impression of swimming against
the current: everyone else on the base was moving out toward the pads. “Looks like we’re the cleanup
crew,” Ardo muttered to himself, trying not to think about the inevitability of what was coming next. He
kept his eyes to the ground, refusing to look at the box-like mobile barracks unit even as he was walking
up into its interior. He looked up only when he was inside, standing with the others in rough rows in the
cramped deployment room at the top of the access ramp.
The tic was still there with them, mothering them with his unique touch every step of the way. “You
know the drill, boys and girls. Drop your gear and strip . . . then right back here, people!”
Ardo felt a wave of nausea wash over him. There was nothing he hated more than the barracks and
there was nothing in the barracks he hated more than what they were about to force on him. He told
himself that it was all part of the job, but it did not make the fact of it any less revolting to him.
Ardo herded into the adjoining barracks room—like cattle into a slaughter chute, he thought,
shuddering—and found an empty bunk. Whoever had called this place home ahead of him had
apparently left in a hurry. Odd bits of trash remained strewn about the bedding and the floor. Ardo
thought that the tic outside probably would not have approved of such sloppy behavior. With a sigh, the
young Marine began peeling off his sweat-stained shirt. He tried not to notice the others around him as
they undressed. There were both men and women present—the Confederacy Marines were perfectly
willing to allow both sexes to die for their missions—but Ardo was always deeply ashamed of being
naked in front of men, let alone women. Young and inexperienced, he found it achingly upsetting every
time he was so casually required to strip, and more than once he had been the source of considerable
amusement to the other Marines.
Ardo shivered as he stepped back into the deployment room. The dry heat was rapidly cooling the
sweat still on his back. He felt physically sick. He knew what was coming next.
He tried to distract himself by glancing at the othersaround the room. He would barely admit to himself
that his motives in doing so were more than a little tainted with puerile curiosity. The majority of those
present were men, he noted—in fact, an unusually high number. He had even briefly wondered what that
lieutenant would look like once taken out of her battle armor. Ardo was somewhat surprised to note that
she was not among them. Was she somehow exempt from this indignity?
Two large guards with stunners were standing next to the tic. Between them, a single hatchway led into
the darkened room beyond. Ardo closed his eyes, trying to calm down. The tic was reading from a hand
display.
“. . . Alley . . . Bounous . . .”
Ardo could not think for the pounding in his head.
“. . . Mellish . . . Melnikov . . .”
Ardo took several steps forward at the sound of his name and then froze. His feet refused to move any
closer to the terrifying, darkened doorway. His eyes locked on the passage beyond. Rows of man-size
tubes, each filled with a blue-green liquid, lined each side of the passageway.
“Melnikov, what the hell . . . ?”
They would pack him in one of those tubes and as soon as they did the nightmare would begin.
“Melnikov!”
It was like a coffin . . . a nightmare in a coffin.
He could not move. The two guards had seen it many times before. They stepped forward casuallyand,
as roughly as possible, helped Ardo into the darkness.
He was falling and there was no end. He did not know how he had gotten here. Was he here at all or
was he somewhere else . . . someone else? He struggled to concentrate on the images and memories that
were drifting past his mind, but he could not find a way to grasp them. He would reach for them,
desperate to examine them, but they would fall apart like bubbles of air under water as he tried to hold
them.
Bubbles of air.
He could breathe the water. The long clear tube was filled with the breathable water. He had tried to be
brave, really he had, but in the end he had panicked and screamed and disgraced himself. They did not
care, for they had seen it a thousand thousand times before. Their rough hands clamped the headpiece
firmly on him and pushed him down into the tube and spun shut the seals. “We’ll have to make an
adjustment in this one,” he heard one of them say. He held his breath as long as he could . . .
As long as he could . . . what?
What was he thinking? Why was he thinking?
Hair the color of wheat fields dancing in the summer sun. There was a golden day . . .
His hands slammed against the sides of the clear tube as his last gasp escaped his lungs. The implants
charged suddenly in the headpiece and his mind exploded into a million shards.
Shards tumbled around him. Bubbles of shards.
Combat suit school. How could he have forgotten? His instructor was an old Marine named Carlyle.
They spent weeks there perfecting his technique—or was it months? The combat suit was like an old
friend. He seemed to have lived with one all his life . . .
The combat suit. Where was that? When was that? During the seminary class? There was Brother
Gabittas teaching about the fall of the ancients and the sin of pride. Peace comes from within, a joyful
knowledge of the pure voice of God speaking to each man. “Thou shalt not kill,” he says, but he raises an
AGR-14 gauss rifle in the front of the class.
“Here, Ardo,” the brother says, walking to where the boy sat near the back of the classroom. He hands
the 8-millimeter automatic weapon to the young boy who has not been paying attention. “Do unto
others,” he says as the boy takes the weapon.
The boy drifts away in the bubble but the weapon remains, smooth and seductive. Magnetic acceleration
of the projectile to supersonic speeds with enormous kinetic punch utilizing a variety of jacketless slugs
from depleted uranium to steel-tipped infantry rounds. Another old friend from long ago, the rifle turns
itself inside out, explodes, and then reassembles into the face of his father.
“You’ll always be my son,” the old man says, with a single tear coursing down his cheek. The family
agra-farm stretches beyond him in the sunset. “No matterwhere you go or what you do . . . you’ll always
be my son.”
Am I? Will I?
Ardo was feeling better now. He had been disoriented when he first came out of the resocialization
tanks, but he was clear-headed now.
He always felt better wearing his combat suit. It was an older CMC-300 model, but he didn’t mind. He
had been using a 300 for years now, and it fit him just fine.
Ardo stood packed shoulder to shoulder with other Marines. There were some Firebats as well as
regulars in the Ready Room. In the little space he had, he checked the power connection between his
gauss rifle and the combat suit. He loved that rifle; it was his weapon of choice. He had been firing a
gauss rifle for nearly as many years as he had been working with the combat suit.
Ardo looked up. The “go” lamp over the exit hatch had just turned from red to green. A roar went up
from the Marines as the door slid open in an instant.
He hated to leave, though.
He sure loved the barracks.
CHAPTER 3
OUT COUNTRY
ARDO WAS ONE OF A TIDE OF MARINES POURING uniformly from the barracks and into a
world of chaos.
A company of Marines in power armor had formed a perimeter around the Confederacy section of the
starport, cordoning off the military units. Beyond them, Ardo could see as he quick-marched across the
tarmac, literally thousands of colonists pressed against the Marine line. Men, women, and children—a
screaming mass of humanity—struggled desperately for a way off the planet.
Beyond them, the civilian side of the starport was in anarchy. All down the flight line, perhaps as many as
a hundred orbital spacecraft were either clawing their way up from the surface or hovering in anticipation
of launch. At least twice that number moved listlessly beyond the outer markers, the daylight glinting off
their polished hulls. There was a sense of desperation in their movements. Control seemed to havebeen
abandoned. Ships attempted to take off and land at will. Several transports hovered near the terminal
building, searching for a place to put down, but the panicked mob would not, or could not, move out of
the way. The still-burning wreckage of at least half a dozen ships lay strewn about the port complex.
Those pilots still flying apparently paid them little heed. Like moths to a flame, they were drawn by the
exorbitant ransoms they could charge anyone who managed to board. Fearful for the safety of
themselves and their ships, they wanted to get in and out as quickly as possible.
If everyone is trying so hard to getoutof here, why did the Confederacy work so hard to get mein
here?Ardo wondered. The terribly uncomfortable, gnawing cold below his stomach reasserted itself.I
don’t know these people. I don’t even really know what world I’m on! What am I doing here?
He knew his assigned transport—yet another Dropship—and found himself dashing toward it with two
squads of Marines. Each individual knew where he or she was supposed to report. So it was that their
squad formed up almost as if by some magnetic magic. Ardo found himself jogging behind that female
lieutenant he had seen the day before. Next to him was the huge, dark islander in perhaps the largest
powered armor suit Ardo had ever seen. He recognized it as a CMC-660 Heavy Combat Suit, complete
with plasma generator tanks on the back. So the large islander was a Firebat, Ardo thought: one of those
plasma flame-throwing units that were occasionally as dangerous to their operators as they were to the
enemy. Several others followed as well, including a single technician in a set of light fatigues. Where was
hegoing, Ardo thought. On vacation?
The roar of the Orbitals constantly lifting from the surrounding pads did not deter the enthusiasm of the
Dropship pilot, nor did it entirely drown out his shrill words.
“Step right up, boys and girls, young and old!” he screeched, punching out the words in
carnival-huckster style. “Come see the greatest show in the universe! See the local colonists run for their
lives! See the government collapse before your very eyes! Witness feats of panic never before attempted
by civilized man! Right this way!”
Ardo made his way toward the Dropship. The crackle of automatic gauss fire ripped through the air near
the Marine cordon. Ardo winced, trying not to think of what it meant.
“Cutter!” the lieutenant barked when they arrived at the ramp leading into the ship.
“Ma’am!” the hulking islander piped up.
“Get these drip-dry recruits loaded in five minutes.” Her command voice carried even over the din of the
riot that was taking place all around them. “We’ve got a job to do. I’ll sort them out once we get on
station.”
“Yes, ma’am! You heard the lady! Make a line!”
The small group fell in. Cutter begin making hisway down the line, making sure everyone had their gear
set for transport.
The pilot leaned against the landing strut of the Dropship, and grinned.
“Okay, ladies!” Cutter was enjoying himself. “Take your places inside. Let’s go!”
Ardo pulled up his kit and moved forward, suspiciously eyeing the nose art painted on the side of the
ship.“Valkyrie Vixen?”
“That’s right, friend,” the pilot answered smugly. “They say once you’ve had a Valkyrie, you’ll never
ride another! You’ve come to the right place . . . or the wrong place, if you take my drift.” The slim pilot
had the most outrageous hair that Ardo had ever seen. Brilliant blue spikes radiated away from his head
in sharp cones, the areas between them shaved bald with precision care. His gaunt frame seemed to
radiate all arms and legs, a scarecrow in a flight suit with a mischievous smile that seemed to wind
halfway around his head. “Tegis Marz is the name. I’m the Angel of Death for you boys out on the
periphery. Happy to serve you. You need anything—including a proper butt-saving—and I’m the man to
call.”
“It’s a death trap, and I’m not getting on it.”
Tegis turned toward the voice coming from just down the line behind Ardo. It was the technician. Ardo
could not remember seeing him on the transport down to the surface; the guy must have been here longer
than that.
“I can’t even look at it!” said the man in fatigues.He had a slender build but was smooth-faced and
sported his hair close-cropped. The guy was so clean he probably squeaked when he walked. “This
piece of abandoned trash isn’t even up to beingcalledabandoned trash!”
Tegis stood away from the landing strut and growled menacingly. “You piece of dog puke! This ship is a
thing of beauty! There’s not another one like her in the entire fleet!”
“That’s because therestof the fleet is at least insomestate of reasonable repair!”
“You take that back, Marcus!”
“In your dreams, Tegis!”
“You’re getting on this ship right now!”
“Not if it was the last ship off this rock! I’d stand a better chance flapping my arms off a cliff than in that
hurtling death trap. When you gonna grow up and get yourself arealship?”
With an outraged cry, Tegis lunged at the technician. They tumbled to the ground, rolling as each
pounded the other. Red dust kicked into the air around them as they fought; a blur of arms and legs. A
pair of alley cats would have been hard-pressed to put up a more vicious fight.
Ardo stood there, dumbfounded. It was almost laughable.
Cutter waded into the fight and pulled the two combatants apart. “Mister Jans, I believe the lieutenant
told you to get your gear on board. I thinknowwould be a good time to do it.”
The red-faced technician continued to claw the air in the direction of the Dropship pilot. Cutter gave him
a strong shake that should have loosened the man’s teeth.
“Wouldn’t it?” Cutter reiterated.
Marcus Jans quit struggling. “Yes. I believe it would.”
Cutter turned toward Tegis Marz. The tips of the pilot’s hair spikes were still quivering with rage. “And
don’t you have a ship to fly?”
“Yeah,” Tegis replied, still seething. “And a damn fine ship, too!”
“Then, respectfully,sir, maybe you had better go fly it,” Cutter’s smile was so full of teeth that it looked
like he might eat the next person who disagreed with him. “I’ve got a reason to be here and I don’t want
anyone between me and where I’m going. And right now, you are standingin my way . . . sir.”
Tegis went slack. “I . . . I’ll just get thisfine piece of machineoff the ground for you, then.”
“You do that, sir. Thank you, sir,” Cutter said, pushing each of them apart as he let them go. Staggering
slightly, each of the former combatants found a great deal of interest in the ground at his feet as they
moved off to take care of business elsewhere.
Ardo let out his breath in a sigh.
“What about you, soldier,” Cutter said, turning his dark eyes toward Ardo for the first time. “You gonna
get in my way?”
“No, sir,” Ardo replied, regretting that he had notmanaged to avoid the large islander’s attention longer.
“I’m definitely staying out of your way, sir.”
The big man grinned again. There was something both devilishly playful and at the same time dangerous
in that smile. “No, friend, I’m not a ‘sir.’ ” The gloved hand he extended was enormous. “PFC Fetu
Koura-Abi, but everyone just calls me Cutter.”
“PFC Ardo Melnikov,” he responded, grateful that the active feedback in his glove managed to dampen
what might have otherwise been a crippling handshake. “Pleased to know you.”
“You’re lying,” Cutter grinned malevolently.
“Almost,” Ardo replied.
The big man threw his head back and laughed heartily. “Fair enough! Grab your kit. I want to get out to
where I can burn something! Did you enjoy the show?”
Ardo picked up his kit and began making his way up the Dropship’s ramp. “What? Oh, you mean the
pilot and that tech?”
“Sure!” Cutter replied, carrying his own duffel bag easily over his shoulder with one hand. “It’s always
fun to watch brothers go at it. The best times I had were with my own brothers . . .”
Ardo turned. “You mean . . . those two are . . .”
“It’s obvious.” Cutter smiled, giving Ardo a playful shove back into the jump harness that nearly
knocked the wind out of him. “You can’t hide the blood between brothers.”
Suddenly Cutter shuddered. Ardo could see somedark thought pass over the big man’s face. With a
sudden cry, Cutter reached out and grabbed the sealing ring for Ardo’s helmet, pulling the man’s face
near his own. “That’s why I’m here, Melnikov. My own brothers are out there on this ball of red dust
working the waterfarms in the Out Country. I will find them, Melnikov, or I will avenge them with hell’s
own fire! You understand me, Melnikov? You going to get in my way, Melnikov?”
Ardo calmly returned Cutter’s twitching stare.
Eye for an eye, Ardo thought. Then,Love them that hate you.
“Ardo,” he replied quietly. “You can call me Ardo, if you like.”
Cutter’s cheek muscles twitched. “What?”
“My name is Ardo. I hope you’ll let me call you Cutter, because I don’t think I caught your full name the
first time.”
Cutter relaxed his grip. A smile played on his lips. “Sure, Ardo. I like you. You can call me Cutter,
friend. So, I guess youarebehind me, eh?”
As far behind you as possible,Ardo thought, but aloud he said, “All the way, Cutter.”
The hydraulics suddenly whined. The aft ramp was closing quickly. Cutter loosed his grip, regained his
huge Cheshire Cat grin, and stepped back against the opposite wall. He was just struggling into his own
drop harness when the lieutenant stepped back into their personnel bay.
“All right, listen up,” she said in a solid alto voice.“I am Lieutenant L. Z. Breanne. I’m your commanding
officer for this mission.”
“Ooh! How about that, boys, we got a mission!”
Lieutenant Breanne continued, her voice level and authoritative: “We don’t have a lot of time, people.
I’ve given our drop coordinates to the pilot and we should be on station at the LZ in about thirty minutes.
“Fifteen days ago, outland colonist stations began going silent. Initial investigations resulted in lost recon
squads. A subsequent reconnaissance-in-force ten days ago confirmed that this planet has been infested
with what we now call the Zerg . . .”
“Zergs, boys!” Alley smiled.
“Pardon, ma’am, but what’s a Zerg?” Mellish sniffed.
“A new species of alien life-form. We don’t know too much about them at this point . . .”
“Bring on the barbecue!” Cutter chattered.
Breanne ignored them for the time being. “Given the planetwide saturation of these Zerg—whatever they
are—the Confederacy has determined to withdraw its assets from Mar Sara—”
“Hey, the Confederacy is hauling its ‘assets’ out!” Marcus snorted.
Laughter rolled around the cabin.
“Stow it, Jans, or I’ll put you in a bag myself.” Lieutenant Breanne meant it, and there was not a person
in the compartment who thought otherwise. “Our mission is threefold: first, hold the forward bunker
position at three-nine-two-seven in support ofthe Confederacy evacuation; second, recon enemy activity
forward of that position, and, finally, pick up a little bauble that command lost along the way. That’s all.”
“Uh, Lieutenant,” Cutter asked. “What kind of . . . bauble?”
“You’ll know when I see it, Cutter,” Breanne said. “On board you’ll find a scanner plug-in for your
armor. It has been precalibrated to acquire the target. I don’t know what the target is, and you don’t
really care. But if wedofind it, it’s our ticket off this rock. I’ll give you more once we’ve got the position
secure. That’s all.”
Lieutenant Breanne turned and took her place in her own jump harness. Once again, Ardo found himself
opposite the woman, now his commander.
“Begging your pardon, Lieutenant,” Ardo asked. The engines of the Dropship were spinning up.
“What is it, soldier?” Breanne looked at him with those steel-cold eyes.
“You said we were here to cover the evac of the Confederacy personnel and equipment?”
“Yes, that’s part of the mission,” she replied over the increasing noise.
“What about the colonists?” Ardo called out over the roar. “Are we here to cover the evacuation of the
colonists, too?”
If Breanne had a response, she did not bother to give it. Perhaps the engine noise was now just too
great. Perhaps she simply had no answer to give him.
Ardo settled back once more into the jump harness and dreaded the next thirty minutes. He closed his
eyes for a moment and could see in his mind the ruins of Mar Sara’s starport receding below. Through
the roar shaking the hull he could have sworn he heard the cries of the thousands below him desperate to
escape.
He thought he saw Melani’s face among them.
CHAPTER 4
LITTLEFIELD
ARDO FLEW OVER A WORLD OF RUST. THE SHEER faces of the distant mountains were rust.
The crags that cut into the earth were rust. Even the outskirts of the settlement city were coated with a
layer of rust. Only days ago, those buildings were occupied, and the fine dust that blew across the arid
world was diligently kept at bay. Now the world itself was taking no time in reclaiming the surface as its
own.
All of this, Ardo experienced vicariously through his combat suit. He was plugged into the Dropship’s
main power bus, which also transmitted to him a continuous stream of data that Ardo could configure in
any way that he liked. He had switched the sensor system over to external, and instantly the ship had
vanished around him. He soared above the landscape alone, the internal display system automatically
masking out the Dropship around him and everyone inside it. He was a bird sailing the hot plasma fire
that trailed behind him.
The outskirts of the central city fell quickly behind. Below was a wasteland, cratered and scarred black
from the battles that had preceded him here. The scattered carnage of desperate struggles dotted the
shattered land. The occasional hulks of Vulture hover-cycles and hundreds of civilian transports formed
twisted, black-metal flower petals here and there.
Ardo sailed through the sky above it all and wondered at it. Where were the siege tanks, the mobile
artillery, the Goliath assault walkers? Everything he could see below him was strictly light armaments and
local militia trash.
More important, where were they deploying if the battle below had already been lost? Ardo looked
ahead. His flight was slowing as he descended toward an outpost bunker complex and the landing zone
just inside its perimeter.
“Get your head out, Marine,” the sharp voice of Lieutenant Breanne sounded through his com-system.
“It’s time to disembark.”
The Dropship materialized around him almost at once as his attention shifted. The lieutenant was staring
coolly into his faceplate.
“Yes, ma’am,” Ardo responded sharply. “Ready, ma’am!”
Lieutenant Breanne gave no more acknowledgment than a moment’s look into Ardo’s eyes and then
turned to address the squad. Her voice cut across the whine of the engines. “We’re here for a reason,
boysand girls! Let’s get the job done and get out. Is that clear?”
“Ma’am! Yes, ma’am!” they all barked as one.
“You have ten minutes from touchdown to find your bunk and stow your gear. You will then report to
me outside the command bunker for immediate deployment.” Lieutenant Breanne extended two fingers
together as she indicated the Marines around her. “Cutter, Wabowski, both of you will prep Firebat
cat-five. The rest of you prep for recon-in-force, cat-three configuration.”
Ardo ran through the category-3 checklist in a moment: power armor, Impaler gauss rifle with infantry
loads, no field pack . . . fast on their feet and ready for anything. It also meant they would not be going
too far from the encampment. Sounded like a pleasant afternoon after all.
Lieutenant Breanne paused a moment as she looked down the bay, filled with the members of her
squad. Ardo wondered what the lieutenant was thinking.
“Be a minute late, you won’t be breathing after two. Clear?”
“Ma’am! Yes, ma’am!”
The Dropship lurched suddenly, landing hard. The lieutenant snatched a handhold instantly, then snapped
shut her suit visor.
She had cleared the lowering exit ramp before it even touched the ground.
***
Ardo tried to move through the barracks hatch, but he felt so confused. He couldn’t seem to concentrate
very well on even simple tasks. His duffel bag got caught somewhere on the other side of the frame as he
tried to enter the barracks. His face flushed red from the tittering laughter that rolled around the double
rows of bunks. It spurred him to try harder, but his anger and embarrassment just managed somehow to
keep him from turning the bag the right way. His mind seemed caught in some kind of a terrible
loop—understanding what he was doing wrong but somehow not being able to correct it.
“Easy, soldier,” said an older Marine from his top bunk. “Let me give you a hand with that.”
“Don’t trouble yourself, mister,” Ardo grumbled. Some part of him was sure the old man just meant to
embarrass him further.
The older Marine snorted, then rolled out of his bunk. “Look, kid, it’s no trouble at all. Sometimes you
just gotta let things slack off a little and they work themselves out. You’re just trying too hard.”
The Marine gently rested his hand on Ardo’s arm.
Ardo snatched back his arm angrily. The power armor protected his elbow as it slammed against the
metal wall and left a rather sizable dent, but the shock of it numbed his arm. The duffel bag fell with a
jumbled clank to the floor.
The older Marine shook his head and smiled. Ardo could barely see the man through his own dizzying
pain and embarrassment. He had iron-gray hair inlong, unkempt strands, and the faint grizzle of a beard.
Piercing dark eyes looked out of a scarred and twisted face. Ardo guessed that the man was in his late
thirties, although the ravages of his face made that only a guess. That twisted face continued to smile at
Ardo, however, putting his two hands up in front of him, palms out, in a sign of surrender. Then, slowly,
the man reached through the hatchway, drew the bag into the compartment, and set it down in front of
Ardo.
“Easy, brother,” he said. “Looks like you’re fresh out of the resoc tank. They can scramble your head
up pretty good for a while.”
Ardo merely nodded sullenly. The electric feeling was subsiding in his elbow.
“Jon Littlefield,” the Marine said as he extended his large, callused hand. “Glad to meet you, brother.”
Ardo blinked. Something in the back of his mind screamed at him from a distance, but he could not
understand what it was saying. The thought of being called “brother” somehow made him dizzy.
The memories bounded and rebounded within his mind in a bewildering cascade.
“Brother Melnikov!” His youth leader smiled brilliantly in the dawning light . . .
His father’s voice: “All are brothers in God’s eyes, son. Brothers do not kill brothers . . .”
“Brother?” Ardo blinked as he spoke, trying to steady himself.
“Sure.” Jon sniffed. “We’re all brothers here—brothers in arms, brothers in combat. Face it, recruit, all
we’ve got out here is each other.”
Melani’s receding face, twisted in horror as the Zerg dragged her bleeding to the grass of the
square.
“Yes . . . of course,” Ardo said, his eyes looking down at the deck. “We’re all we’ve got.”
Jon Littlefield deftly picked up the bag and tossed it onto the bunk beneath his own. “Don’t you worry,
son. I’ve been ‘on the quick’ for most of my life as a Marine. Stick with me, boy, and you’ll do all right.
We’ll straighten out your head and you’ll be feeling better in no time.”
Ardo stared blankly at Jon Littlefield. If Littlefield was in his early thirties, then the man was old . . . older
than any Marine he remembered seeing. He had seen older men before, of course, back on Bountiful.
The Patriarchs of the colony were all gray-haired elders. He remembered that they all seemed so wise. It
had been comforting at the time to have leaders who had survived so long. They had wisdom of their
own instead of borrowed from someone else. Now that he thought about it, Littlefield was about the
oldest man he had seen among the Marines who was anything less than a colonel.
“Old at thirty” was not on any of the recruiting posters.
What do I care?Ardo thought.I didn’t join up for the retirement plan. I owe the Zerg for what they
did, and if I get my payback before they take me, all the better.
Cutter deftly squeezed his enormous framethrough the hatch. His bulk nearly filled the space between
Ardo and Littlefield.
“Well, Sergeant Littlefield!” Cutter’s sarcasm and disdain were evident in his tone as he looked down on
the older Marine. “Wasn’t thatCaptainLittlefield when we last served together,sir?”
Ardo was shocked for a moment that a private would be so disrespectful of an officer, even a
noncommissioned one.
Jon apparently chose to simply ignore the obvious insult as he smiled back his response. “It’s nice to see
you in my squad, Private. You’d all better get on the quick now. Lieutenant Breanne has a bee up her
butt and won’t stop until she’s spilled a little blood on one side or the other. You’ve got the config, so
let’s get prepped and get out!”
CHAPTER 5
MISSION ELAPSED
TIME
THE WIND WHIPPED ACROSS THE CRAGGY, DESOLATE landscape. Ardo could almost feel
the grains of sand digging into the joints of his Powered Combat Suit. There was no help for it. The
squad was at attention. If he even contemplated making a move, Ardo felt sure that Lieutenant Breanne
would make it his last.
Even though the combat suit carefully controlled his body temperature to keep it at its peak performance,
he felt a rivulet of sweat start to make its way between his shoulder blades toward the hollow of his back.
Maybe Sergeant Littlefield was right. Maybe something was still scrambled in his head after his resoc
back at the starport. He was having a little trouble concentrating, and there was a sense of foreboding
that seemed to hover just at the edge of his conscious thoughts. His father had often called such notions
the “promptings of the Spirit,” that still, small voice that came to men to give them divine direction. “Heed
thatvoice,” his father had said, “and it will never lead you wrong.”
Where was that warning Spirit when the Zerg had torn his parents apart limb by limb?
A sharp, blinding pain shot through the back of his right eye. Ardo winced as a wave of nausea
followed. The image of spraying his breakfast hash across his battlesuit visor flitted across his mind.
Littlefield said it would pass,Ardo thought as he struggled to regain his mental balance.Just hang on
for a moment and it will be all right.
He tried, instead, to concentrate on Lieutenant Breanne. She stood before them, the polarized field of
her bubble helmet deliberately turned down so that everyone could see her face clearly as she spoke.
Everyone in the squad faced rigidly forward. No one wanted to risk catching her eye as she strode
before them.
“With everyone pulling out, they’re sending us in, my beauties,” her voice sounded before them, only
slightly distorted by the helmet she wore. Aural directional enhancers in the suits made both transmitted
and external sounds seem to come from the direction of their source. “The entire Confederacy force is
jumping off the surface of this rock.”
But what of the colonists? Ardo thought.Is the Confederacy leaving them as well?
“Before we join our brothers in abandoning this dustball of a planet, we’ve got a job to do.”
“Burning to burn ’em, ma’am!” Cutter interrupted enthusiastically in a crisp, military voice.
Breanne smiled like a wolf in response. “You’ll have plenty to roast with that toy of yours before we’re
finished, Mister Koura-Abi. I would suggest, however, that we get the present job done first and get off
this rock while we still have a way out.”
“Ma’am! Yes, ma’am!” Cutter sounded a little disappointed.
“Your new home—if any of you are wondering—is Bunker Complex 3847. A week ago it was an
outpost settlement. Folks used to call it Scenic, God knows why. It’s all ours now. Enjoy it while you can
’cause I don’t intend to stay here one moment more than we have to for this mission.
“There’s an old pumping settlement in the bottom of an impact crater just northeast of here. It’s a
collection of scrap called Oasis about three clicks out on a radial of thirty-five degrees from the
command transmitter. Set your navigational transceivers to those coordinates. Captain Marz here”—the
pilot stood squinting in the blowing dust, managing to wave his hand slightly in reluctant
identification—“will be flying cover and directing us below.”
“Flying cover?” It was Sejak, the young kid. “In a Dropship?”
“TheVixenhas been fitted with a special receiver, Mister Sejak, to help us locate this thing we are
looking for. Do you have a problem with this, mister?”
The tone in her voice should have frosted over Sejak’s faceplate from the inside. “No, ma’am!”
“We find this thing, we pull out and bring it with us. Clean and quick. Corporal Smith-puun will lead First
Squad on Vultures with Bowers, Fu, Peaches, and Windom. Littlefield?”
“Yes, ma’am!” The old Marine’s voice sounded loud in Ardo’s helmet. Littlefield was standing right next
to him.
“You take Second Squad—that will be Alley, Bernelli, Melnikov, and Xiang. Cutter and Ekart will give
you heavy support in the Firebats.”
Ardo took in the names of his squad as best he could. Bernelli, Xiang, and Ekart were unfamiliar to him.
Cutter was still a very dangerous mystery. If they needed a squad leader, though, Littlefield gave him a
little more hope than he might have had otherwise.
“Ma’am! Yes, ma’am!” Littlefield barked back enthusiastically.
Breanne barely took notice. “Jensen, you’re boss of Third Squad. That’s Collin, Mellish, Esson, and
M’butu. Wabowski gives you Firebat support.”
“Yes, ma’am,” Jensen replied without much enthusiasm. Ardo hoped the man fought better than he
talked. He looked as though he were about to fall asleep where he stood.
“The Dropship will fly high cover and sensor support until we’ve got the prize. Then we dust off and get
off this rock. Any questions?” When Breanne said it, it was a dare, not an invitation.
Ardo could not help himself. He stepped forward and saluted as he spoke. “Ma’am! Yes, ma’am!”
“Yes, Mister . . . Melkof, isn’t it?”