THROUGHOUT THE COURSE OF EVERY PERSON’S
life, a large-scale catastrophe is certain to occur. At some
point, fate will hand each of us the ultimate test: a
tragedy so profound and so inescapable that it will forever
alter the remaining course of the life affected. This
event will have one of two outcomes. The man or
woman confronted with the catastrophe may be defeated
in the test, and live the remainder of their life as a
shadow of the person they once were. Or a person might
transform and become strengthened by their experience,
transcending all self-imposed limitations and flourishing
in a way they had never deemed possible.
Arcturus Mengsk was one such man. He had overcome
a tragic event in his life, and now it had changed
him, forever molded him into a being of single-minded
purpose and unshakable determination. Lesser men
would have been broken by the tragedy. Lesser men
would have just given up. But lesser men did not take
their place in the proud annals of Terran history.
During his formative years, young Arcturus would
often awake from dreams in which he had seen himself
as a figure of importance, a preeminent leader of men.
Mostly, Arcturus would dismiss the dreams as whims of
an overactive imagination. In the waking world,
Arcturus did not see himself as the leader-type at all. He
didn’t care about the affairs of others; he didn’t care
about the Confederacy. All he cared about was serving
his time in the Confederate military and how much
money he might be able to earn as a fringe-world
prospector when that time was done. He had certainly
done his duty, and, lack of desire to lead notwithstanding,
had ascended to the rank of colonel before the climate
changed; before he realized he was not fighting for
what he believed in, and of course, before the tragedy.
Now, in the wake of the tragedy, things had changed.
Arcturus’s self-perception had changed; the man he
once saw himself as seemed no more than a distant relative.
Now Arcturus was on his way to becoming the
man he was in his dreams.
For the most part, up until now, it had all been about
preparation: keeping in constant communication with
his colleagues in the underground network on Korhal
(although they had become so vocal and overt as of late
that the term “underground” no longer applied);
recruiting like-minded, eager civilians for training; and
observing the actions of the Confederacy here among
the relative safety of the Umojan Protectorate.
Preparation was well and good, and Arcturus prided
himself on planning ahead. But he believed that the

time had now come for action. Blowing up supply route
bridges on key planets, hacking into Confederate mainframes
and staging mine-worker revolts was all well and
good, but the time had come to strengthen his numbers
and to set out on his quest in earnest. The time had come
to raise hell.
And so General Mengsk now stood looking into the
determined eyes of the roughly twenty or so Umojan
men before him. They were an able-bodied lot, though
not as many as he had hoped for, and he was fairly certain
that none of the men had ever seen combat. Still,
they were capable, and they were willing to fight for
what they believed in, and that’s where the seeds of
rebellion truly began to germinate.
The general greeted each man’s eyes in turn. Once he
was confident that he held their attention, he spoke.
“You men are gathered here today because you share
common beliefs and a common desire. Among the
beliefs you share is the tenet that no man or body of government
should have authority to treat you unjustly;
the desire you share is the pursuit of independence.
Make no mistake men—these are the ideals that wars
are made of. The least of the troubles that lie ahead for
all of you is a life of forced seclusion, of being branded as
seditionist by the very government that would impose
her unfair laws upon you. The worst of what you may
face—of what we all face—is death. Pollock and I and
the rest of our fighters are, as you know, already considered
turncoats by the Confederacy. . . .”
Arcturus motioned to a man standing at parade-rest to
his left. Pollock Rimes was a man who looked the part of
a battle veteran—his bald head and face were covered
with scars, and the upper left hemisphere of his skull
bore a slight indentation the size of a large man’s fist. His
left ear was mostly missing and the bridge of his nose
formed a backward S. Pollock’s eyes stared ahead
blankly as Arcturus continued. “It is important that all of
you go into this knowing that there exists a very real
possibility that you may not live to see it through.”
As Arcturus allowed his words to sink in, his eyes fell
on a man outside the room, visible through one of the
large windows. The man, of Asian descent, wearing the
clothes of a low-level prospector, seemed to be quite
intrigued by what was going on inside. When the man
looked up and saw Arcturus staring at him, he held the
gaze for a second before looking away. He seemed to be
wrestling with some kind of decision. Just then Arcturus
heard the sound of one of the men clearing his throat.
He turned to see a somewhat crazed-looking older man
standing near the front of the group whose face bore a
web of wrinkles and whose white tonsured hair circled
his bald dome like wispy clouds hovering around a particularly
worn mountain peak. “My mother, may she
rest easy, used to say that there wan’t nothing worth living
fer that wan’t worth dyin’ fer.”
Arcturus allowed himself a half-smile. “I see. And
what might your name be, civilian?”
“I’m Forest Keel, and I seen my share o’ friction in the
seven cycles I served in the Guild Wars.”
“I’m sure you did. And I’m sure you made your superiors
proud.” Old Forest beamed a smile devoid of a few
teeth as Arcturus’s eyes once again scanned the nearby
window, where the prospector was still standing, nervously
undetermined. Arcturus turned his attention
back to the group. “Well men, the time has—”
Just then Arcturus was interrupted by the sound of an
entryway opening. Looking to the far side of the room,
the general saw Ailin Pasteur—one of the Protectorate’s
ambassadors—stick his head in. The usually unflappable
man looked pale and distressed.
“I’m sorry to interrupt, General, but there is a situation
that requires your immediate attention.”

The Spy Deck was an area where mining foremen
watched image-enhanced holograms of planets within
the system that might be fertile grounds for prospecting.
For the enlistment of its current purpose, the Spy Deck
could not have been more aptly named. Not long ago,
Ailin Pasteur had served under the command of
Arcturus’s father, Angus. Angus had saved the man’s life
on one occasion and Ailin had repaid the favor by being
one of the voting members of the Ruling Council that
appointed Arcturus the rank of general, and leader of
the revolution. The Council also allowed Mengsk to use
the Protectorate as a base of operations, and to use the
Spy Deck as a somewhat archaic means of surveillance.
The imaging program contained detailed charts of all the
planets within the known systems. It was also capable of
charting the progress of freight ships carrying their valuable
cargo through the trade routes in real-time—a
primitive kind of “radar” system to be sure, but more
than adequate for Arcturus’s needs. It was here on the
Spy Deck that the Ruling Council of the Umojan
Proctectorate stood, their haggard faces revealing collective
concern.
Ailin turned to Arcturus and spoke in a halting voice:
“We received an anonymous transmission suggesting
that we keep on eye on this sector.”
Arcturus looked at the sector currently being displayed.
He recognized the planet at the display’s center
immediately. “Korhal,” he said, to no one in particular.
The superintendent nodded slightly. Arcturus noticed
that the man was sweating heavily. “Yes.”
Several smaller objects that looked like orbiting satellites
of some kind surrounded the image of the planet.
Arcturus had an idea, even before the superintendent
spoke, of what the objects really were.
“Battlecruisers,” Ailin confirmed. “We make out twenty
of them. We’ve been monitoring the military channels
and have overheard nothing that might explain this.”
“Nothing they’re willing to admit, anyway,” offered
Mengsk. “But you can bet your bottom credit that the
Confederates are the source of your anonymous tip. And
if those ships are orbiting Korhal on Confederate orders,
they mean to start trouble. Send an intelligence report to
Achton immediately.”

In Korhal’s capital city of Styrling, Colonel Achton
Feld—the elected leader of the rebel forces in the
absence of General Mengsk—was busy shouting orders,
standing atop a guardwalk at the city’s perimeter, the
myriad antiair missile turrets that served as outer
defenses forming a jagged outline on the horizon behind
him. At one time, this fortress in the center of the city
had been a Confederate post. That was before the revolution.
Now it served as the rebel headquarters on
Korhal.
The rebels had of course known about the presence of
Confederate ships in their orbit, but their limited surveilstarcraft
lance systems had been unable to uncover what the
recent intelligence transmission confirmed: that the
orbiting ships numbered twenty—quite a number, especially
with the capacity of each ship to hold hundreds of
marines, dropships, siege tanks, even armored Goliaths.
And those were just the ground forces. They were sure
to be bombarded from the air first. But none of that mattered
now. The rebels had spent almost a full cycle beefing
up their antiair defenses and had recruited enough
of the planet’s population to form an army that was
more than just sizable—it was huge.
The confrontation with the Confederate forces was
inevitable. And even now, in the midst of all the fear and
the panic and the anticipation, Achton was glad. He was
glad that the waiting was over and that the battle was
about to begin. The Korhalians were about to send a
message to the Confederates: that they were the citizens
of a free planet, and that they would fight to ensure that
freedom. Let them come, thought the Colonel, let them
bring their armored walkers and their cloaked fighters, but just
let them come.
Colonel Achton smiled and waited for the first dropships
to appear.

The holo-image now showed several tiny objects, no
more than minuscule dots. They came from the ships in
swarms, like locusts, leaving the battlecruisers and
snaking their way toward Korhal’s atmosphere.
“Dropships?” Ailin responded to the unasked question
on everyone’s mind. Mengsk shook his head. “No. Too
small. They look more like . . . no, no that couldn’t be,
just could not—“ Mensgk continued shaking his head,
refusing to believe, because he knew that if he believed,
that just might make it all the more real.
He watched with the others as the scores of tiny, luminescent
dots began descending into Korhal’s dense
atmosphere.

Achton waited, looking out at the array of defenses
beyond Styrling’s walls. A lieutenant raced up onto the
guardwalk, out of breath. He had the harried look of a
man who suddenly wished he were somewhere else.
“Sir, we’re tracking hundreds of incoming objects that
have locked onto several positions across this side of the
planet. I’m not sure, but I think we got a report from the
Underside that they’re tracking objects as well.”
“Hundreds, you say?” The colonel’s calm veneer was
slipping, and the naked fear began to become apparent
on his face.
“Yes, sir. Too small for us to identify just yet, but
they’re coming fast.”
Just then the colonel heard a low hum, barely
detectable, like the whine of a small insect. Then he
looked to the horizon and saw a swarm of small objects
descending, trailing tails of smoke from behind, and he
knew. “Not fair . . .” he whispered.
But the lieutenant did not hear him. The hum/whine
had become almost deafening now. As the lieutenant
looked up and saw more of the objects descending on
them from directly above, he began to scream.

On the Spy Deck, a palpable silence pervaded as pools
of brilliant light began spreading across the surface of the
already luminescent image of Korhal. They continued
from multiple locations until the majority of the planet
was engulfed in that brilliance and no one in the room
could question what they had just seen.
“By the fathers, it’s gone . . . Korhal’s gone. Everybody.
Millions of people . . .” Ailin seemed on the verge
of fainting.
Arcturus felt his stomach tighten and was aware of
nothing but that image in front of him, the image of
Korhal burning. After a short time, the pools of light
began to fade, and the holo-image of Korhal became a
darker, featureless facsimile of its former self.
In the midst of his shock and denial, Arcturus managed
to speak three words: “Gather the men.”
The case of Korhal was, like many others throughout
history, an example of a government attempting to suppress
upheaval among its populace through tyrannical
means and thereby only strengthening the determination
of its dissenters. Inside the ready room where
twenty men had stood just moments before, a throng of
over fifty now crowded, exchanging angry and violent
discourse over the loss of Korhal and the impudence of
the Confederacy.
A hatchway slid open at the head of the room and
Arcturus entered, looking like a lion that has stalked its
prey into a corner and is savoring the moment just
before the kill.
“You all know what has just transpired. For those of
you who want the specifics—and I think you all deserve
to know—twenty battlecruisers just launched about a
thousand Apocalypse-class missiles from Korhal IV’s
orbit. The missiles impacted on the planet’s surface and
35 million people will never again see the light of day.
You need no stirring speeches; you need no coercion or
coaxing. You all know the difference between right and
wrong. Now the time has come to fight for the values
you hold dear and to challenge those who would strip
you of your individual freedoms. Are you with me?”
Fifty fists raised into the air simultaneously as the mob
responded with a deafening roar. Mengsk waited for the
din to subside before continuing. “As of this day, I
declare that you are all no longer civilians. You are now
soldiers. And we are now at war.” Mengsk prepared to
go on, then stopped as a hatchway at the side of the
room opened, and the Asian prospector he had spotted
outside earlier now stepped in. The crowd was silent.
Mengsk’s eyes traveled to the newcomer.
“I want to join,” he said.
Mengsk approached the smaller man and stood before
him, an intimidating presence.
“I saw you before. You seemed hesitant.”
The Asian man nodded. “I wasn’t sure yet. But I am
now.”
Somewhere among the crowd a mocking comment
was made. A man near the general muttered “Fringesquib”
under his breath. The general silenced the man
with a glance, then turned back to the Asian. “Indecision
on the battlefield costs lives, boy.”
The smaller man held the general’s gaze. “Sir, all I’m
asking is that you give me a chance.”
“Will you follow orders without question?”
“I will.”
Mengsk searched the other man’s eyes for a moment,
then finally nodded. “What’s your name?”
“Somo. Somo Hung.”
“Welcome aboard,” said the general before he walked
back to his spot next to Pollock and surveyed the men.
“As I said, from now on . . . you are soldiers. And you
will bear that mantle proudly. And as for the name of
our little army, the name that shall be the bane of the
Confederacy’s existence, I think it only appropriate that
we call ourselves the Sons of Korhal!”
Once more the room erupted, this time with spirited
cries of “Mengsk! Mengsk! Mengsk!”

Ailin stood next to the general, looking out into the
docking bay where a battered, barely recognizable craft
hung suspended. Workers pored over the behemoth
busily, their torches spraying out sparks of light as final
fittings and adjustments were made.
“She’s not exactly pristine, but she’ll serve her purpose,”
Ailin offered, nodding his head toward the craft
outside.
“That she will, my friend.” Arcturus was visibly
pleased with the progress.
The battlecruiser was the casualty of a navigational
systems error, much like the snafu that landed four
supercarriers, carrying convicted criminals onto a few
inhabitable worlds (including Umoja) into the deepest
reaches of space just a few millennia ago. Those criminals
were the forefathers of the Terrans, a blanket term
that applied to all the generations of humans who followed
and spread, inhabiting world after world and
marching on in the way only humanity can.
The battlecruiser now in the docking bay had crashed
onto a fiery planet not far from the Protectorate, but well
out of range of the Confederacy’s hailing frequencies.
Ailin and Mengsk went to the crash site immediately
and stripped the craft of its tracking beacon. In the cargo
bay they found several SCVs as well as a fully operational
siege tank, and in the launching bay they found
two CF/A-17G Wraith fighters, as well as four dropships.
The Protectorate shepherded the cruiser into one of its
many docking bays. The Confederacy was obviously
angered by the loss of one of their ships, but without
proof of the Protectorate’s subversion, was unwilling to
start another war. The crew was pronounced dead, and
offered better pay and shorter hours to remain among
the Protectorate and remain silent (a proposition no one
balked at), and not too long after that the displaced
ship’s captain became Arcturus’s most trusted soldier,
Pollock Rimes.
It seemed like so much time had passed since then,
though it was only a cycle. The craft had remained,
being upgraded and modified slowly and methodically,
until it became what Arcturus now saw before him, a
battlecruiser he could call his own.
Ailin interrupted the general’s thoughts briefly. “What
would you like to call her?” he asked.
Mengsk thought for a long moment.
“Hyperion,” he said at last. “I’ll call her the Hyperion.”
Just then Pollock approached the two men. “The soldiers
request an update of status, General.”
Arcturus turned his bright eyes to Pollock. “Tell them
we set out at next interval.”
Pollock’s lip lifted slightly, the closest thing to a smile
Arcturus had ever seen cross the man’s face.
“Yes, sir.”
SARAH KERRIGAN WAS HAVING A NIGHTMARE. IN
this nightmare, she spent seemingly endless intervals
trapped in dark rooms, bound, with the feeling of
unseen eyes watching her. From the darkness she would
hear a noise, a moist smacking sound accompanied with
slithering, the sound of a giant slug methodically
traversing the tile floor. The sound could not be pinpointed.
It seemed to come from all around her. Then
she would feel something wet, something alive, crawling
up her leg and then . . . the nightmare would start all
over again.
Sarah awoke to find that she was living the nightmare.
She was in a small, dimly lit room with no visible
doors, her hands and feet bound with metal shackles, in
a seated position. At the far end of the room she could
barely make out a closed container with a hazard label
affixed to it and beyond that, a large, dark pane of glass
reflected her image back to her. Sarah knew that she was
being watched from behind that glass. She was also
vaguely aware of a sound from somewhere outside the
room, the constant sound of rushing wind.
Her mind felt almost disconnected, her body sluggish
and numb. She knew that she had been drugged,
although she could not remember how she came to be in
this place, or even what her name was. She began to
fight the drug’s effects. As she did so, she heard the
sound of a door opening. As she watched, a small arm
extended from an aperture above and behind the container.
The arm slid into a ring on the container’s top and
lifted. There was a slight gushing sound of trapped air
escaping. The arm then retracted back into the aperture
and disappeared. A small door slid shut and the room
was sealed once again.
There was a noise from the container then, as of a
pocket of air escaping a vat of molasses.
As Sarah watched, a purplish, viscous blob rose to the
top of the container and began spilling over its sides. It
moved down the outside of the container in a way that
seemed wholly unnatural, as if not being moved by
gravity but rather as if the substance was moving itself,
crawling onto the floor and spreading outward. Sarah
watched it creep up the wall behind the container and
across the floor, endlessly proliferating. On the wall, as
the substance reached and finally touched the glass,
there was a quick hissing sound, like a drop of liquid
touching an extremely hot surface. The substance began
moving around the glass, framing it as it continued to
cover the surrounding surface.
The creeping mass made its way inexorably across the
floor. Sarah wanted to scream, but resisted. She kept
telling herself that this was just all part of the nightmare
and soon she would wake up at her . . . home? Sarah
couldn’t remember having a home, or even a life prior to
being in this room, and that made the nightmare more
real than ever.
As the material made its way to the lights on the ceiling,
it moved across, and the already dim room grew
even darker. The glob was translucent. The diffused,
softened light silhouetted a host of veins and arteries
inside the mass, pulsing with some form of life.
Sarah had begun to shiver as the substance made its
way to within inches of her feet. She shook her head,
willing with all her might for the substance to halt its
progress, and much to her amazement and relief, it did.
The material continued to slide across the walls and
ceiling, now closing in the wall behind her, but it had
stopped at her feet and simply sat there now, as if waiting
Straining to turn her head, Sarah could see that the
wall behind her was now fully covered. The creeping
fungus was crawling up the sides of the metal chair she
was bound to, and once again Sarah willed for the
movement to cease, and once more, the effort was
greeted with success.
Virtually the entire room was now covered, save for
Sarah herself and the window across from her. A voice
came from the room then, a masculine voice, muffled,
being transmitted through some speakers somewhere
that were, like everything else in the room, smothered
in the mass.
“I want you to call the substance onto your arm, without
speaking. Do it now.”
Sarah certainly did not want to do any such thing, but
that was simply not an option. Her inability to refuse the
order was more than just a conditioned response; it was
somehow hard-wired into her mind that she could
never, under any circumstances, refuse a direct order . . .
unless that order is issued by an enemy of the Confederacy, her
brain reminded her. She didn’t know where that information
had come from, or what exactly the Confederacy
was. Neither did she know that the voice she heard
was not that of an enemy of the Confederacy. But her
drugged brain was in no condition to work out such reasoning,
and so, Sarah complied and willed for the substance
to touch her arm.
It moved fast. Faster than its previous behavior indicated
it was capable of moving. It wrapped around
Sarah’s arm and she could feel it, probing at her skin
hungrily. . . .
She screamed then, and willed it to back away. It complied,
and Sarah could see that she had willed it with
such force that it pulled back as one, all around her.
Sarah felt a pricking in the back of her neck, and her
vision began to fade as more drugs were administered to
her system. Before long, Sarah Kerrigan drifted back to
sleep and returned to her troubled dreams.
* * *
Inside the observation room, Doctor Flanx was busily
notating the results of the experiment.
“I’ve never seen it move like that before,” offered his
assistant. “The way it reacted to her was amazing.
Nothing like the interaction with the other telepaths.”
He was still looking out through the window at the
slumped figure of Sarah in the chair. The alien substance
had begun to close in on her once again.
The doctor did not look up from the screen as he
typed: Patient appears to have innate ability to interact with
subject matter. “Yep. Looks like the brass was right for
once. Let’s start the evacuation process.”
The assistant nodded and pressed a button on the console
before him. In the other room, beneath the mass,
several red lights along the floor and walls suddenly illuminated.
There was an audible hissing sound, and the
substance began to retreat from the heat sources, being
ushered back toward the safety of the container. No
matter how many times the process was repeated, the
assistant still marveled at the fact that the proliferating
substance could spread from just a few tiny spores. The
doctor pressed a button. A moment later a disc ejected
from the console. He handed the disc to the assistant. “I
want this sent underground for Lockston immediately,
to be transmitted to Tarsonis.”
The assistant nodded, then motioned toward the other
room. “What’s next for her?”
The doctor sighed. “We’ll move her up to the next
stage, see how she interacts with the larvae. Until then
keep her drugged.”
The assistant nodded, watching as the final remains of
the Creep, as the scientists had come to call it, disappeared
back into the container.

The Hyperion was moving steadily through Protected
Space, on the Umojan side.
Inside the cargo bay, Forest Keel was learning how to
operate a siege tank. The old man sat inside the metal
behemoth, the control panel lights bathing his smiling
face in an array of primary colors. One of Mengsk’s officers,
Sela Brock, sat in the vehicle’s rear, educating
Forest on the tank’s finer points in her sultry, almost
hypnotic voice.
“The Arclite siege tank is a dual purpose vehicle,” she
explained. “Once a forward unit has reached an optimal
position for insertion—” Forest chuckled somewhat at
this comment; Sela either did not notice or chose to
ignore the infraction and continued “—the tank can be
transformed into siege mode, where it will provide cover
artillery fire with the 120mm shock cannon.”
Forest rubbed the palms of his hands together in eager
anticipation. “You just show me which button to push,
little lady.”
Sela sighed and moved forward to show Forest how to
transform the tank.

In the mess hall, Somo Hung sat alone. He had become
used to isolation, having grown up in the outer limits of
what was called the Fringe Worlds, a belt at the farthest
reaches of the galaxy’s inhabitable planets.
Fringe Worlders for the most part were considered to
be ignorant, expendable sources of cheap labor. The
Fringes offered the hardest work for the cheapest pay,
though the work was steady. Those who settled the
outer ring kept mostly to themselves. Some of the Fringe
workers had begun reviving forgotten religions, and
some had created new religions that enjoyed a following
that sometimes bordered on the fanatical.
Somo’s parents had never been caught up in the new
religions or the old, and though they had sacrificed education
for stability, they had never wished the same fate
on their only son. And so they saved their credits, and
when Somo reached his eighteenth cycle, they paid for
him to be transported to Umoja, a bustling mecca of
opportunity.
And there he stayed. He taught himself to read, and
began collecting Digi-tomes on everything from philosophy
and poetry to the recorded histories of several of the
key planets. Two cycles later an outbreak of cholera
ended a score of lives on his home planet, including that
of his mother and father. But still Somo pressed on, in
their memory, bearing the burden of their loss in silence
and striving to become the man they would have wished
him to be.
Just now Somo was reading his favorite Digi-tome,
the History of the Guild Wars. He was aware of the whisperings
from the nearby tables. At one table in particular,
a group of warp-rats sat staring. Warp-rats were the
engineers who maintained the warp drives that were
standard on all space-faring craft.
Somo tried to ignore the large, bald engineers whose
intent gazes were growing more and more persistent by
the moment. It wasn’t long before the largest of the men
shouted: “Who you tryin’ to impress, Fringe-squib? We
all know you can’t read.” The other men at the table
snickered. Somo looked up and offered a brief smile
He smiled, revealing a field of crooked teeth. “Now double-
time it to the cargo bay. It’s time to begin your
instruction on the proper use and maintenance of your
CMC 400 powered combat suit.”
Somo nodded, looked back at the remains of the Digitome,
and left.
“Thank you, sir,” offered the engineer. Pollock turned
to the large man, facing him at eye level. “Return to your
seat, warp-rat.” The man emitted a small laugh to indicate
that he knew the lieutenant was joking. The lieutenant’s
steady gaze indicated that he was not. The
warp-rat returned to his seat.

The next few intervals passed without incident. The
forty-six new recruits in General Mengsk’s army were all
trained in the use of marine-issue combat suits, gauss
rifles, and basic military protocol. The men, who had
clearly signed on for action, soon began to grow restless
and wondered when they would strike a blow to the
Confederacy.
The mess hall became more of a gambling hall, where
credits were won and lost and then won again (Somo
was never invited to these games, nor did he wish to
attend). Forest Keel became well versed in the operation
of the siege tank, although he had no idea when that
knowledge would prove useful. Mengsk, during this
period, was nowhere to be seen, and as a result, his leg-
end grew. Whisperings and rumors abounded that
Mengsk was a recluse, that he spent his time in meditation,
or that he simply didn’t care (at one point a rumor
began that the general had been stricken with a debilitating
disease and didn’t have much time left among the
living).
Finally, mercifully, much to the delight of the new
recruits (and the relief of the alarmists), the general
called for a briefing.
The briefing was held in the main cargo bay, where an
expansive area had been cleared, and a holo-projection
system had been set up. The forty-six new recruits as
well as roughly thirty of Mengsk’s original troops waited
nervously for the arrival of their fearless leader. Sela
Brock stood impassively near the projection system.
Before long, a metallic droning sound was heard as the
cargo bay lift arrived. Sela called attention. The lift doors
opened, and Pollock Rimes stepped out, followed by
Arcturus Mengsk.
The general walked to a spot near the projector and
nodded to Sela as Pollock stepped up and assumed a
position to Mengsk’s right. The lights in the bay were
dimmed, and the holo-projector came to life, emitting a
glowing image of a small rotating planet.
“Rest easy,” Pollock ordered. The men went from
attention to a resting position and waited in silence for
Arcturus to begin speaking.
“Men,” he began, “Umojan intelligence sources have
recently provided us with the necessary information to
deal our first substantial blow to a key target in the
Confederate empire.” There was a murmur of excitement.
“At ease,” Pollock barked. The murmuring ceased
and Mengsk continued: “Our target is on the planet
Vyctor 5 in the Koprulu system.” Mengsk motioned
toward the image. “As some of you may know, Vyctor 5
is renowned for a particular feature on its desert surface:
a weather anomaly unlike any other previously
recorded in the known systems.” Mengsk turned to the
glowing planet, and nodded once again to Sela. “Bring
us closer.”
The edges of the planet began to fade out as the program
zoomed in on the desert surface and now the
assembly was treated to a first-person view, skimming
along the planet’s relatively flat surface until a massively
tall, rotating windstorm appeared on the horizon.
“It is known as the Fujita Pinnacle—a complex mass of
conflicting pressure systems and staggering updrafts that
have created what is, in simple terms, a stationary,
volatile vortex of immense size and unlimited life. It is
four leagues wide and over twenty high. To give you a
rough idea, its diameter is that of two battlecruisers
placed end-to-end, and its height is twice that of the
tallest superstructure on Tarsonis.”
There was silence among the men as Mengsk stood in
front of the swirling column of light. “Long ago, before the
Guild Wars, a research center was built in the eye of the
tempest, to study it.” The perspective of the holo-image
changed once more, moving through the cyclone winds
of the anomaly, into its center, where a sprawling complex
of structures were seen to rest on the sandy floor.
“That facility has since been taken over by the
Confederacy and, we have just learned, is being used by
them for some highly secretive experiments. We have
arranged for a falsified message to be sent to a detachment
of marines at the Fujita facility, informing them of
a change in their rotation. They are expecting to be
replaced at the end of this cycle, so they have already
alerted sector patrol to be on the lookout for a carrier—
our carrier. I believe the marines will be excited enough
about the transfer that they will not question its authenticity
and we should have little trouble getting to the
planet. That, however, is only the first step. The marines
will be expecting their replacements to come to them via
underground transit. . . .”
One of the men near the front, a Private Saunders
from Umoja blurted out: “I’ve been to Vyctor 5. The
transit’s terminal has more guards than the Council
headquarters on Tarsonis!” Some of the more experienced
members of Mengsk’s militia, who had already
learned not to interrupt the general during his briefings,
threw the man derisive stares but remained silent.
Mengsk acknowledged the man briefly with a flat
gaze, and then returned to the image. “The facility is
supplied via underground transit systems that run from
the closest city, Lockston, fifty leagues away. To attack
the city, as our friend so aptly pointed out, would be too
risky. To try and break into the underground tunnels
from the desert would be too difficult and time consuming.
So . . . we will breach the facility’s defenses from
above, with a squadron of four dropships led by a Wraith
fighter. Two of the dropships will carry armed forces,
while the other two will bring back any civilians we run
across, or any Confederates who wish to surrender.”
New recruits, Somo thought.
“One aspect of the anomaly that works in our favor is
that it blocks virtually all ground-based surveillance,
scanning and transmissions. They won’t even know
we’re there until we’re on top of them.”
The image moved outside the column once more,
then up. Once at the top the angle tilted down and the
view was from above the windstorm, looking down its
winding tunnel at the structures below. “The facility’s
defenses, due to its already formidable location, are minimal.
There are four missile turrets around the facility’s
perimeter to discourage an attack from above.” The perspective
moved forward, down the wind tunnel, leveling
out at the bottom and circling to provide a view of
the four turrets.
“The turrets must be taken out before the airdrop can
take place. Like I said, although they are expecting our
carrier, they are expecting it at Lockston, not the facility.
Those turrets will be live, and will fire on anything that
comes down the funnel. The only way to get past them
is to sabotage them from the ground.”
Another private, a dark-skinned man named Tibbs
asked, “How do we get to the turrets without going
through that storm?”
Mengsk waited patiently for a moment before answering.
“We don’t. That’s where Sergeant Keel comes in.
He’s going to take four soldiers with him, and he’s going
to drive a siege tank right through the Pinnacle’s outer
barrier and into the belly of the beast.”
There was a stunned silence among the assembly, and
many eyes turned to Forest. He simply beamed a smile
back, although he had no idea how he was going to get
through the tempest, and until now, hadn’t even known
he was a sergeant.
Another private managed to stammer out, “But with
the force of those winds . . . that’s impossible.”
Mengsk sighed. It was obvious that Pollock would
have to have a discussion with the “newbies” about
briefing protocol. In the meantime, he told Sela to bring
the lights back up and proceeded to explain exactly how
Forest Keel and four of his companions were going to
achieve the impossible.
ARCTURUS HAD TO EXPLAIN THE CONCEPT TO
Forest three times, and Forest still didn’t really understand
it, but it went something like this: the problem was
that once the tank reached the hurricane winds of the
Pinnacle, it would be swept up into the air and hurled
across the wastes like some child’s toy if it was not somehow
“rooted” to the ground. The solution lay in the fact
that, long ago, even before the landing of the forefathers
on the inhabitable planets, mankind’s technology had
advanced to a point where it could simulate and control
gravity. The same technology that was used on battlecruisers
to create artificial gravity was used to a smaller
degree in combat suits and in siege tanks, to allow for
their use on orbiting platforms—although most platforms
had their own version of the gravity technology,
to have a platform’s power supplies fail and subse-
quently allow a tank to float out into space simply would
not do. Therefore, tanks, marine combat suits, Goliath
walkers, and Vulture cycles all had accelerator technology
in place.
So the siege tank that Forest Keel now piloted across
the arid wastes of Vyctor 5 carried modified accelerators
that would, with the press of a button, increase the
downward G-forces of the tank to six times normal; the
inside of the tank, much like a pressurized cabin, would
remain unaffected.
This particular technique had never been tested in
field conditions before to anyone’s knowledge, and
Somo and the others were not exactly thrilled to be the
pioneers of its inception, but, as Mengsk had explained,
their options were limited and time was a factor.
Intercepted Confederate transmissions indicated that
in just under an interval a Mammoth-class carrier—a real
Confederate carrier—was due to arrive on the planet. It
would proceed to Lockston, but to get to Lockston it
would pass through the outer orbit where the Hyperion
now waited. The Confederate carrier was certain to be
escorted by several fighters, and perhaps even a battlecruiser,
and so it was imperative that Mengsk’s operatives
slip in and out as quickly as possible.
Entering Confederate space had been fairly easy.
Umojan operatives were masters at pilfering both military
and commercial passage codes. The Sector Patrol for
Vyctor 5 was expecting the Hyperion, and remarked that
they must be the cause of the cancellation of the massive
tour ship that had been scheduled to visit the Pinnacle
until just a few intervals ago. Mengsk, of course, had
known of the cancellation and its purpose: the canceled
tour coincided with the legitimate carrier’s arrival. The
Confederacy didn’t like civilians snooping around when
they were going about their shady business.
The tank had been dropped several leagues away from
the Pinnacle, just beyond the restricted area warning
markers, and just inside the elevated Lookout Plateau
where the people of Lockston and other visitors could
rent telescopic sights to view the anomaly. On ground
level the Pinnacle was not yet visible past the rolling
dunes. Old Forest wondered if civilians at the lookout
had noticed the dropship, or if they noticed the tank as it
now rolled toward its destination, then figured that most
people who paid to view the Pinnacle would not bother
with inspecting the trackless desert surrounding it, and
even if they did see the tank they probably wouldn’t
care; or if they did care, by the time they finally got
around to reporting it and the squadrons at Lockston
acted, it would be too late. Forest then decided that he
was thinking too much and decided to concentrate on
the situation at hand.
On the interior vidscreen, Forest watched the horizon
through his combat suit face shield. Just now the tank
had begun to encounter several small cresting hills, and
the journey soon began to simulate the effects of being
on a vessel at sea. As the small dunes grew larger, Somo
suddenly felt that he might be sick. He closed his eyes
and concentrated, then glanced around at the others.
They didn’t seem to be faring much better, except for
Pollock of course, who simply returned Somo’s glance
with a cold stare. Somo’s condition was not helped by
the fact that the tank was incredibly hot, despite the
cooling unit inside the suit. And to add to the discomfort,
the space inside the tank was cramped and claustrophobic.
Somo wasn’t sure exactly how many
personnel the tank was made to accommodate, but he
was fairly sure it wasn’t five. At least not five fully
suited.
The dunes continued to grow in size, and at each crest
and downward descent, Somo felt more sure that he
would vomit, until, mercifully, the tank would level out.
Then before long, it would begin another upward climb.
After several of these, Forest finally stopped on the crest
of a particularly large dune.
“I’ll be a swampbat’s uncle,” the old man said. There
was a touch of awe in his voice that made Somo and the
others crowd forward to share a look at the forward vidscreen.
Only Pollock remained seated.
What they saw looked like a solid towering pillar of
sand rising up and up and finally disappearing into the
open sky. It was possible to note a certain amount of
movement in the funnel, but from here it looked as if
the winds were moving in slow motion, like a video
recording being played at half speed. There was an
immense cloud of dust at the Pinnacle’s base that roiled
and shifted like a nest of angry hornets.
“Enough gawking. Let’s move,” Pollock ordered.
Somo and the others sat back down. There was a tickling
sensation in Somo’s stomach that he was not used
to. He took several deep breaths and told himself to
remain calm. Everything’s going to be just fine, he thought.
No problem. There was a lurch as Forest engaged the forward
drive and the tank began descending the large
dune.

Sela stood on the bridge of the Hyperion looking over
General Mengsk’s shoulder at a spy screen that displayed
a large red dot, and not too far below it, a small green
dot. She was wearing her flight suit and had her piloting
helmet tucked under one arm. The green dot on the
screen stopped briefly, and then began to move again,
toward the red.
Mensgk sat with his chin resting on his closed fists,
watching intently.
“All right, lieutenant,” he said finally. “Prepare to
drop.”
Sarah Kerrigan was reliving the nightmare. This time
it was just a little different: a glowing red line cleanly
bisected the dark room, keeping the purplish substance
at bay on the other side. Wherever the shifting mass
would touch the heat source, it would retract instantly.
As before, Sarah was bound, facing a dark window. She
was still groggy from the latest dose of drugs, and had
grown emaciated and sickly.
Below the window across from her and to one side,
Kerrigan noted an opening. She had not noticed it upon
waking, and now that she looked closer she could see
that the mass extended into the depths of the aperture.
She heard a sound coming from the hole then, a sticky,
wet noise; almost a sucking noise, like someone trying to
free a foot that has been stuck in mud.
The sound was becoming louder, more insistent, and it
became obvious that whatever was making the noise
would soon be in the room with her.
Sarah still believed that there was a chance she was
dreaming, and that before the thing in the hole entered
the room, she would wake up.
Then the creature emerged.

They were past the rippling dunes now. The area just
outside the tempest was in fact so perfectly level that it
almost seemed unnatural. All of the loose sand in the
area had long since been swept into the storm and what
remained was hard-packed ground, layered with spiderweb
cracks. The wind was intense, and Somo could hear
it buffeting against the tank’s armor even through his
combat suit helmet.
“We’re within two leagues,” Forest informed the others.
The tickling sensation in Somo’s stomach was gone.
Mostly what Somo felt now was a kind of detached disbelief;
disbelief that he was playing at being a soldier,
disbelief that he had come so far on his own, and disbelief
that he was about to enter a raging tempest in the
name of the rebellion.
As these thoughts traveled through his mind, he felt
the tank begin to slow, heard the sound of the engine
ramping up, working harder to push through the wind,
and wondered if the vehicle was powerful enough to
even get them to the storm’s outer barrier.
“We’re under one league,” Forest croaked. The wind
was making it increasingly difficult to hear, and when
Pollock spoke, he had raised his voice to be heard over it.
Pollock looked to Forest, who was waiting for the
order, and nodded. “All right, time to get heavy.”
Forest activated the gravity accelerator and the tank
began to crawl, moving at an agonizingly slow pace.
Seemingly an eternity later, tiny flecks of sand could
be heard pelting the tank’s outer armor, and Somo realized
as he looked over at the monitor that they had
reached the sandstorm at the tempest’s base.
For a long time, no one spoke. They sat there listening;
to the wind punishing the tank’s outer shell; to the
impact sounds of the gritty sand like a constant rainfall;
and to the now high-pitched, persistent drone of the
overworked engine.
After another infinite stretch of time, Forest’s voice
was heard once again. “We’re just now at the outer
perimeter. Engine’s in the red. I don’t know how much
more it’s gonna take.”
Pollock shot Forest a withering glance. “I didn’t know
you were an authority on siege tank engines. Continue
ahead full.” Pollock’s voice was breaking up, even in the
interior suit mikes. Somo knew that pretty soon, when
they were inside the funnel, their transmitters would
not work at all.
“Aaallrighty,” muttered Forest as he turned back to
panel. “Here goes the farm.” The tank then lumbered
through the outer barrier and into the Fujita Pinnacle.
* * *
Arcturus Mengsk sat watching a timer on his console.
He then thumbed a button on his lapel and spoke into a
collar mike. “They should be in now, lieutenant. Proceed
with insertion.”
“Roger that, sir,” returned Sela’s sultry voice.
Arcturus leaned back and closed his eyes. This is where
it truly begins, he thought. They would soon learn what-
ever secret the Confederacy was hiding, and, most
importantly, they would embark upon the road to
revenge. And then, maybe at long last, there would be
atonement for his life’s catastrophe.

The creature appeared to be some kind of insect. It had
a segmented, multilegged body that trailed a mucouslike
substance behind it. It crawled forward on its tiny
legs, shimmying like a snake, its tail section creating the
sticking/sucking noises that Sarah had previously heard.
It moved to the edge of the purple mass, and then
stopped as two small antennae on its head probed the
empty air. The creature wriggled to a position just in
front of Sarah, maneuvering to face her. It rose up onto
its hind section until it had reached a height that was on
Kerrigan’s eye level. Its tiny legs moved back and forth
as the creature inclined its head slightly.
Sarah stared into the creature’s multifaceted eyes.
There was a mutual, unspoken recognition that
Kerrigan did not understand. She wasn’t sure but it
seemed as if the creature was waiting . . . the way a foot
soldier would wait to be given an order.

Inside the observation room, Doctor Flanx was
stunned. He began typing feverishly. The assistant was
watching the scene in the opposite room with an open
mouth.
“Well, I’d say it’s clear that there is some kind of communication
taking place,” he offered. The doctor nodded,
then looked back into the room. The larva was
waiting there, sitting in front of the patient like a pet
begging for food. It was truly amazing.
“Now what?” asked the assistant.
The doctor shrugged. “I don’t really know. . . .” It was
clear that telepaths, and especially this patient in particular,
had an effect on the alien species. But could she
control it? “We’ll see if she can give it orders,” the doctor
finally replied.

Forest, Somo, and the others were inside the vortex
making their way slowly toward the inner wall. The
vehicle had tilted slightly as the side facing the wind was
lifted, and at some point something (hopefully
nonessential) had been ripped from the tank’s top and
was carried away into the maelstrom. The sound in the
funnel was a constant, almost deafening roar. Somo was
quite sure that had he not been wearing the helmet he
would be forced to plug his ears.
The progress seemed almost nonexistent to those
inside, but they were, at least, moving forward. The
engine had now developed a disconcerting rattling noise
from somewhere deep inside, but Pollock and the others
knew that they were close to making it into the storm’s
eye.
Somo had glanced at the monitor in front of Forest on
several occasions, but the view never really changed. All
the monitor showed was a blur of sand. But now, as
Somo watched, he actually believed he could make out
the first structures of the Fujita facility.
It was like coming upon a landmass in the midst of a
dense fog. The facility and its outlying constructions
were just dark masses glimpsed through the sandy wall,
but, as Somo watched, they became clearer and clearer
until finally, he could make out more details such as
antennae and dishes. The roar of the funnel moved then,
working its way back as the tank emerged into the
storm’s center. Then, the noise was simply gone,
replaced by what sounded like nothing more than a
strong wind.
As the tank rolled to a stop Pollock gave the hand signal
to move out.
Somo was the first one out of the tank. He vaulted to
the ground, stumbled a few feet, and hit the visor button
for his helmet. (They had been informed during the
briefing that Vyctor 5’s air was breathable. The suits
were to protect against human enemies, not the atmosphere.)
He felt heat in his throat, and then his stomach
tightened and he doubled over, vomiting his last two
meals. He wiped at his mouth, then looked up, and
froze.
Behind the facility the Pinnacle was a counterclock
wise rotating wall of sand. Somo could hear the furious
winds now, but it was muted somehow, not nearly the
same as on the outside. Somo turned slightly, following
the blur of the inner wall until he saw where the tank
had come through. Then he looked up, and became
instantly dizzy, and thought he might puke again. It was
like being inside a living, raging tower.
Pollock grabbed Somo by the arm and spun him
around. “You’d better wake your dimwitted ass up!” he
yelled. “Pick up your weapon and start firing at that turret!”
The plan was to take out all of the four antiair missile
turrets. The closest one was just a few strides in front of
the tank. The foot soldiers would take care of that one,
but it would take some time. The other three, however,
could be taken out in one shot each with the shock cannon.
Luckily, the siege tank’s targeting computer keyed
in on heat sources, and therefore was not affected by the
Pinnacle’s dampening effects. Forest’s fingers danced
across the control panel nimbly. He felt a shifting underneath
him as the tank’s support legs extended. The
entire vehicle then rose up slightly, and a moment later
a light flashed indicating that the tank was now in siege
mode. Well, color me giddy! Forest thought as he put on
his ear protection and targeted the first turret.

A voice, the same voice that had told Sarah to invite
the mess onto her arm in a previous nightmare now told
her to order the maggot-thing to move back across the
room. This order Sarah had no problem complying with,
since the proximity of the creature repulsed her. She was
in the midst of sending the thought when her concentration
was interrupted by what sounded like . . . gunfire.
The gunfire was followed by a blast that caused the
ground to shake. Somewhere an alarm was sounding.
Sarah wondered what was happening, then realized as
she looked to the far side of the room that the creature
had complied. Somehow, the thing understood her.
Even in the midst of her delirium Sarah knew that this
was significant, that some kind of unexplainable connection
had been established.
There was more gunfire then, and an explosion. Sarah
felt a stabbing at the base of her neck, and heat, and then
nothing as the world faded away.

Doctor Flanx had just told Sarah to command the
insect away when the gunfire began outside. Shortly following
the gunfire, a perimeter alarm sounded. The
assistant had turned white as snow and looked at the
doctor in a detached, lost kind of way.
“I think we’re being attacked,” he managed. The doctor
looked back into the room where the subject was
being held. He saw that the creature had obeyed the subject’s
command. Not now, he thought. We can’t be under
attack now. There was a ground-shaking explosion then.
The doctor pressed a console button and the patient in
the other room was knocked out. The assistant was
standing frozen, staring dumbly at the wall where the
sounds were coming from.
“What do we do? What the hell do we do?” he stammered,
and then looked to the doctor.
“Stay calm. We’re just going to wait here. Remember,
we have an entire marine detachment to protect us.”
“Yeah . . . yeah. That’s right.” The assistant smiled and
wiped sweat from his forehead. “We’re gonna be just
fine.”

The support legs were designed to absorb the recoil of
the cannon, but the force of it was intense nonetheless.
The entire tank had jarred dramatically when the shock
cannon fired, and Forest, who had not strapped in to his
seat, was in the process of picking himself up from the
floor. He returned to his seat somewhat dazed, harnessed
himself in, and prepared to continue firing.

The Wraith CF/A-17G fighter had led its entourage of
four dropships through Vyctor 5’s atmosphere and was
now hovering far above the Fujita Pinnacle. Sela sat in
the pilot’s seat, and canted the craft so that she could
look down at the spectacle through her canopy window.
It was breathtaking, and even this high up she could feel
the turbulence it created. She looked down at her computer
readout, which was set to key in on heat signatures.
There were four red dots representing the missile
turrets, and one of them now blinked out. Sela smiled.
Then, another of the dots faded. Two to go, Sela thought,
and then returned her eyes to the beauty of the Pinnacle
as she waited for the last two turrets to be destroyed.

Gunnery Sergeant Mitch Tanner had almost cried
when he received the Vyctor 5 duty assignment. The last
thing he wanted to do was baby-sit the science geeks
while they did whatever top-secret crap they were supposed
to do. He knew the experiments involved some
kind of newly discovered, buglike aliens, but beyond
that, he really didn’t care. The aliens didn’t carry guns,
and hadn’t seemed to want to put up a fight yet, so
they were about as exciting as pulling fire-watch duty in
the frozen wastes of Saluset. And the geeks weren’t
much better; they didn’t drink, and they didn’t gamble,
so what good were they? The Pinnacle was neat to look
at . . . for a while. The novelty wore off after the first
planetary month. Mitch had cleaned his weapon and
combat suit so many times he could do it in his sleep. He
knew that the men were just as bored as he was, but
they had made the best of it, and now they had finally
gotten the good news that replacements were coming,
and Mitch and his Gamma Squadron could go back to