learning of the suffering ofothers. Like when you hear that a rival newsman suddenlywas caught
cursing in front of a live mike, or that a particularly corrupt alderman just stepped in front of a
garbagetruck. It’s elation accompanied by that twinge of guilt forfeeling so good, and the quiet,
fervent prayer that somethingthat bad never happens to you.
With the Protoss and Zerg biting deep into Confederateterritory, we hadschadenfreudein buckets.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
OTHER MEN AND WOMEN WENT TO WAR. MIKE returned to Mengsk’s base and monitored
the flow of communications. There was the blind panic he had come to expect during warfare—units
suddenly cut off and demanding, then pleading for, reinforcements, then relief and finally rescue. Other
messages from units that suddenly evaporated in a haze of radiation. And still other messages, these from
civilians, asking for help from anyone, on any side.
And then there were the anomalous reports, the ones of monsters suddenly appearing in the countryside,
ascribed to the Confederates, or the rebels, or to invasions from beyond. These reports were growing
more numerous by the hour, and they convinced Mike that Kerrigan was right: the Zerg were on Antiga.
He wanted to hit the console when that realization sank in. Zerg presence was as good as a cancer
diagnosis, and much more fatal. Until they figured out how to defeat them, the Zerg would eat this world
alive. Or the Protoss—fatal chemotherapy—would sterilize it to keep the Zerg from spreading.
“But it doesn’t work that way, does it?” said Mike to the comm unit. “A few cells always seem to
escape, and the cancer keeps growing.”
The fury he felt in his belly lasted only a moment, then was replaced with amazement as the next message
rattled through his earpiece.
“This is General Duke, calling from the Alpha SquadronNorad II!flagshipWe’ve crash-landed and
are being hithard by the Zerg! Request immediate backup from anyonereceiving this signal!
Repeat, this is a priority one distresscall. This is General Duke . . .”
The distress call went into a loop, and Michael listened to it three more times before checking the other
channels.
There were a couple calls asking for confirmation, and a plethora of other responses, describing attacks
by the Zerg and Antigan rebels, and in one case, an assault by other Confederate forces. And there were
now reports of Protoss ships in-system, fighting something themselves, probably Zerg similar to the ones
that brought down theNorad II, out in the outer rim of ice worlds. There were even some reports of
Protoss ground forces appearing. There was a lot of noise, but nothing that resembled an honest, solid
offer of help.
He’s cooked,thought Michael.Old Duke’s goose isfinally cooked.
Raynor stormed in about ten minutes later. “Mike, you’re with me. Suit up.”
“What’s up?” Mike asked, reaching for his combat armor.
“You didn’t hear the news in here?” Raynor looked as though lightning bolts would spring from his brow
at any moment.
“The normal panic and despair,” said Mike, waving at the board. “Oh, yeah. I heard Duke finally got
promoted to general. Should we send a fruit basket?”
“Funny, newshound. Mengsk wants us to go in and rescue him. He thinks Duke would make a good
ally.”
Mike blinked at the captain. “I’m hearing things, right?”
“That’s what I said,” Raynor said, holding out Mike’s helmet.
“He’s crazy!”
“It’s been noted,” Raynor said grimly.
“And Mengsk wantsme to go? It’s news I can cover from here.”
“Iwant you to come along. That bastard locked me and my boys up. I’m going to want someone there
who he’s willing to talk to.”
“Did I mention that the last time I talked to him he had me forcibly ejected from his bridge?” said Mike,
taking the helmet.
“It’s come up, but at least I’m sure you’re not going to shoot him right away.”
Mike locked down the helmet and followed Raynor out of the comm area. “I suddenly have a craving
for a cigarette.”
“Maybe you can bum one off Duke.”
Only when they were on the road did Mike think to ask, “Does Kerrigan know about this?”
“Uh-huh.”
“And she thinks it’s a good idea?”
“Actually,” said the former lawman, “she’s the one who called Mengsk crazy.”
“So you two agreed on something. I’m amazed.”
“Yeah,” said Raynor. Then there was a pause. “Yeah, I guess we did.”
Arcturus Mengsk was starting to rally troops now to his banner, and when Raynor and Mike arrived on
the surface, the assault to rescue the downed battle-cruiser was already under way.
The units that barreled across the flats now included Antigan rebels, Sons of Korhal, and Confederate
stragglers that had discarded their loyalties and kept their weapons. Raynor rode at the left flank of a
flight of Vulture hover-cycles, while overhead a squadron of A-17 Wraith fighters tore through the sky.
Huge Goliaths left great splayed footprints in the soft mud, and they soon overtook a unit of Arclite siege
tanks, churning across the bottomlands, their support frames pulled up for movement.
The combined forces met resistance almost immediately. Zerglings and hydralisks spattered on all sides
of them, like bugs on a windshield. The air was filled with both the organic cannons (now known to Mike
and the rest of human space as mutalisks) and creatures that looked like jellyfish rains with lobster claws;
they drifted over the alien forces like storm-clouds in the desert.
There was a cluster of marines off to Mike’s right, swarming up the sides of what looked like a giant
upright zergling, a titanic creature with front claws like huge, hooked sabers. On the horizon, something
that looked like a cross between a flying squid and a giant starfish fled from the assault of the Wraith
fighters.
They plowed through the Zerg forces, routing some, eliminating others. A group of zerglings erupted
from the ground and took out a full unit of marines before the Vultures arrived and laid down a blanket of
withering fire.
The Zerg fell back, returned in greater numbers, then fell back again. Mike felt he was fighting the sea.
The waves were being beaten back, but he was sure that it was an illusion. The tide was coming in, and it
would return in greater force.
In his gut Mike knew that Antiga Prime was damned, as damned as Chau Sara and Mar Sara had been.
These things were burrowing through the heart of the world, and either they would be successful or the
Protoss would burn them from space.
The Zerg line stiffened for a moment, then broke again, and the humans were through, heading for the
uplands where theNorad II went down.
With one glance at the starship, Mike could see that the old behemoth would never fly again. Its rear
engine pods had been twisted at a forty-five degree angle to the rest of the structure, and the lower
landing struts, if they had even been deployed, had been mired totally in the mud. The ship’s forward
bridge hung precariously over the edge of the mesa, with a view of the devastation beneath it.
Mike and Raynor gunned their engines for an open hatchway and drove their Vultures on board. They
sealed the hatch behind them manually, while outside another wave of mutalisks popped up over the
horizon.
“Which way?” asked Raynor, pulling off his helmet.
“Come on,” said Mike, tearing off toward the bridge. He moved through the tight spaces of theNorad II
effortlessly, despite his combat armor. He had noticed that Mengsk provided larger hallways on his ship
than the Confederacy managed.
It was as if Duke had never left the bridge. The silverbacked gorilla was still hunched over his station in
his armored hide. The only change was the number of screens around him that showed nothing but static,
and a cascade of fiber-optic cables draped along one bulkhead. He turned to the newcomers and
scowled.
“You’re about the last folks I expected to show up,” he growled.
“Yeah, we love you, too, General,” said Mike, pushing his way to the ship’s comm unit. He punched in
the communication code for Mengsk’s base.
“What’s all this about?” Duke barked.
“A word from our sponsor,” said Mike. “It feels like years since I last said that. Anyone got a cig?”
On the screen, the static-scarred form of Arcturus Mengsk formed. Mengsk, thought Mike, safe in his
secret redoubt while the rest of us did the fighting and bleeding.
Mike didn’t think it possible, but Duke’s scowl deepened. “What’s your angle, Mengsk?” he asked.
“Our angle?” Raynor snarled. “I’ll give you anangle, you slimy Confederate piece of . . .”
“Easy, Jim,” said Mike.
“In case you haven’t noticed,” said Mengsk, “the Confederacy is falling apart, Duke. Its colonies are in
open revolt. The Zerg are rampaging unchecked. What would have happened here today if we hadn’t
shown up?”
“Your point?” Duke kept a stone face.
Mike checked the other screens. Another Wraith attack had dispersed the mutalisks, but the flying
starfish looked to be made of tougher stuff.
“I’m giving you a choice,” Mengsk said smoothly. “You can go back to the Confederacy and lose, or
you can join us and help save our entire race from being overrun by the Zerg.”
“You expect me to answer that?”
“I don’t think it’s a difficult decision.” A small smile appeared beneath Mengsk’s gray-spattered
mustache.
“I’m ageneral, for God’s sake,” Duke exploded.
“Oh yeah,” said Mike. “Congratulations. Shall we put it on your tombstone?”
“Michael, please,” said Mengsk. “Duke, you’re a general without an army. I’m offering you a position
on my staff, in my cabinet, not just some backwater post where they shelved you before the war.”
“I don’t know . . .” said Duke, and Mike saw the warrior waver for a moment. Mengsk had him. Poor
Duke, he had been hooked. He just didn’t know it yet.
“Don’t test my patience, Edmund,” said Mengsk. Somewhere beyond the bulkheads, something
exploded near the ship. Almost as if it had been planned to punctuate Mengsk’s comment.
Duke held the moment for a decorous beat, then said, “All right, Mengsk. You’ve got a deal.”
“You’ve made the right choice . . .General Duke,” said Mengsk. “Captain Raynor?”
“Yes, sir?” Raynor was scowling now.
“Escort the general’s supporters and equipment to a safe location.” As Mengsk spoke, Duke enabled
the ship’s self-destruct. In twenty minutes they would be klicks away, and theNorad II would be a
thermonuclear fireball.
“I hope it takes a lot of Zergs with it,” said Mike, as the bridge started to clear very, very fast.
Later, Mike was back at Mengsk’s communications center. With the explosion of theNorad II, there
had been a lull in the fighting. Confederate troops, including the neurally resocialized ones, had switched
sides easily with official permission, and now the only enemies to deal with were inhuman.
The downside was that there was no shortage of these.
Mike wrapped up a report on theNorad II rescue and shot it into the net. He leaned back and ran a
hand through his hair. It felt thinner than before.
A pack of cigarettes, slightly crushed, dropped onto the console, followed by a foil container of
matches. Raynor said, “One of the crew of theNorad says you’re even now.”
“Excellent,” said Mike, drawing out a coffin nail.
“Sending another report to nowhere?”
“I thought Kerrigan was the mind reader. But yeah. Old habits die hard, though I have the fantasy that
someone finds these reports years later and appreciates all the sacrifice of men and women against these
things. And all the stupidity as well.”
Raynor settled down into a chair across from him as Mike lit up. “Unlikely. Like Mengsk says, the
victors write the histories. Losing memoirs are deleted like yesterday’s data.”
Mike took a deep draw and coughed, making a face. “What did they marinate these in, cat urine?”
Raynor raised his hands. “Best I could find, under the circumstances. Story of our lives.”
“You betcha,” said Mike. “Speaking of theuber- Mengsk, how did your talk with Arcturus go?”
“I told him that Duke was a snake.” Raynor sighed. “And he said . . .”
“That he wasour snake, right?”
Raynor shook his head in disbelief. “I believe in Mengsk’s cause, that the Confederacy has to go, and he
did get me out of stir, but, man. Some of the deals he’s making. Some of the things he’s asking us to do. .
.”
“Don’t go following causes,” said Mike, taking a painful puff. “They’ll just break your heart. When
idealism meets reality, it’s rarely reality that backs down. I’ve seen more good government types turn into
political hacks than I’ve seen zerglings. And I’ve seen a lot of zerglings.”
There was a silence between the two men. In the background the muted comm units spoke of mutalisks
and Wraiths, of Goliaths and hydralisks, and the starfish things, which they were calling Zerg queens. And
death. They spoke incessantly of death.
“I tell you I was married once?” Raynor volunteered.
The chasm of personal interaction yawned wide and deep at Mike’s feet. “It hasn’t come up,” he said
calmly, hoping that he was not expected to share back.
“Married. Had a kid. He was ‘gifted,’ they said.”
“I heard the quotation marks around that. Gifted like in ghost material? Psionic powers? Telepathic?”
“Uh-huh. Sent him off to a special school. Government scholarship. A few months later, we got a letter.
There had been an ‘incident’ at the school.”
Mike had heard of such letters. They were unfortunately as common as grass when dealing with
telepaths. Another of the Confederacy’s dirty little secrets, rarely broadcast. “I’m sorry,” Mike said,
because that was all he could say.
“Yeah. Liddy never recovered. She just sort of wasted away, that winter she went down with the flu.
And afterwards, I threw myself into my work. Found out I liked working alone.”
“It’s an easy trap to fall into, hiding in your work,” said Mike, looking at thetransmit light of his
commlink, which meant his report was being sent out into the void.
“Anyway, I wanted you to know,” said Raynor. “You may have thought I was being hard on Kerrigan
for being a telepath. Maybe I was. But I have my reasons.”
“She’s got her own problems, you know. Like everybody else, and like no one you’ve ever met. You
might want to cut her a little slack.”
“It’s kind of hard, when she knows what you’re really thinking.”
“Kerrigan seems to be a good soldier,” said Mike, the image of her as a death-dealing dervish rising
unbidden to his mind. “She may be wound a little tight, that’s all.”
“I think she’s dangerous,” said Raynor. “Dangerous to the troops around her. Dangerous to Mengsk.
And dangerous to herself.”
Mike shrugged, unsure how much he could comfortably reveal to the ex-marshal. He settled at last for
“She’s had a tough life.”
“And we’ve had it easy so far?”
“All the more reason to keep an eye on her. Watch her back. Whether she knows it or not, though she
probably will. We all need guardian angels.”
The conversation shifted after that to questions of what worlds were in rebellion and what effect Duke’s
defection would have on other military leaders. Finally Raynor took his leave and abandoned Mike to the
soft urgency of the communications room.
Mike looked at the half-empty pack of cigarettes. The taste of the first one was still pungent in his
mouth.
“Hell,” he said, reaching for the pack and the matches. “I guess, around here, you can learn to tolerate
just aboutanything. ”

I played chess with Arcturus Mengsk. I lost regularly, by theway. Someday I’ll probably be
dragged before some high justice and told that this was a crime against the state, but I willhave
no defense. Other than losing more times than I won.More often than not, Mengsk would dangle
some bait infront of me in a game, and I would snap at it, only to discover too late that I had been
distracted from the trap he wassetting.
The entire human campaign against the Zerg was similar, consisting of a series of defeats, each
one more gallingthan the last because each time we ignored what was reallygoing on. Our first
warning that the Zerg were planetsidecame usually too late, when the creep appeared at our
doorsteps or the Protoss warped in with the thunder-godships.
We thought we could escape it. Some of us, includingMengsk himself, thought we could control it.
But we were allpawns in a greater game.
No, not pawns. Dominos. Each falling in turn, planetafter planet, person after person, until we
reached the biggestdomino of them all, the one called Tarsonis.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
“THE COMPARISON HAS BEEN MADE BETWEEN war and chess,” said Arcturus Mengsk,
forking his knight to threaten both Mike’s queen and his bishop.
“You’re very good at both,” said Mike, moving his queen to take Mengsk’s rook.
“Actually, I find the comparison to be false,” said the terrorist, moving his knight to take the bishop.
“Checkmate, by the way.”
Mike blinked at the board. Mengsk’s strategy was obvious now, in the same way that it had been totally
opaque mere seconds before. The reporter mentally kicked himself and reached for his brandy snifter. In
the background, the lost tunes of ancient Miller and Goodman warbled out of the comm unit. The ashtray
to one side of the board was filled with butts, all of them Mike’s. They smelled faintly of cat urine.
They were on board theHyperion, resting in a hidden hanger on Antiga Prime. Duke was off
reorganizing the rebel troops into something that was more Confederate in nature. Raynor was off trying
to keep Duke from making a complete mess of things. Mike had no idea where Kerrigan was, but that
was normal for Kerrigan.
“Chess is not like war?” Mike asked.
“Once, perhaps, it was,” said Mengsk. “On Old Earth, back in the mists of time. Two equal opponents,
with equal forces, on a level playing field.”
“And that’s not the case. Not anymore.”
“Hardly,” said the terrorist, warming to his own discussion. “First, the opponents are hardly ever truly
even. The Confederacy of Man had Apocalypse-class missiles and my homeworld did not; the
Confederacy played that card until Korhal IV was a blackened glass sphere hanging in space. Hardly
even. Similarly, our little rebellion seemed at first to be undermanned and underfunded, but with each new
revolt the Confederacy loses more of its will to fight. It is ancient and rotten, and all it needs is a good
push to cave it in. You don’t see that in chess.
“Second,” Mengsk continued, “is the idea of equal forces. I mentioned the missiles, so effective in my
father’s time, yet mere pinpricks in the light of the forces being wielded today. Forces continue to
evolve—nukes, telepaths, now Zerg being raised by the Confederacy.”
“War is supposed to increase development,” said Mike.
“Yes, but most people use the guns and armor analogy: one side gets a better gun, the other side gets
better armor, which inspires a still better gun, and so on. The truth is that a better gun inspires a chemical
counterweapon, which then inspires a telepathic strike, which then brings about an artificial intelligence
guiding the weapon. The pressure of war does bring about growth, but it is never the neat, linear growth
that you learn about in the classroom.”
“Or read about in the papers.”
Mengsk smiled. “Third is the idea of a level playing field. The chessboard is limited to an eight-by-eight
grid. There is nothing beyond this little universe. No ninth rank. No green pieces that suddenly sweep
onto the board to attack both black and white. No pawns that suddenly become bishops.”
“A pawn can become a queen,” Mike noted.
“But only by advancing through all the spaces of its row, under fire the entire time. It doesn’t suddenly
blossom into a queen by its own volition. No, chess is nothing like war, which is one of the reasons I play
it. It’s so much simpler than real life.”
Not for the first or last time, Mike thought about Mengsk’s almost supernatural ability to warp reality
around himself. “You think that the Confederacy is going to be able to come up with a weapon against
these latest attacks? Against the Protoss and the Zerg?”
“Unlikely, though they are pulling out all the stops. Doing what they do best right now: propaganda and
silencing those who speak out. Those are their best weapons, and they have never hesitated to use them
before. But they’re just throwing spitwads at a bull elephant that’s bearing down on them. Hang on, I’ve
got something here I wanted to show you.” Mengsk pressed numerous buttons on a remote control. He
stared at it, as if trying to remember a secret code.
“I thought you once said that the Confederacy was breeding the Zerg. Doesn’t that make the Zerg their
weapons?” Mike asked.
“Originally I thought so as well.” Mengsk pressed a few more buttons, then paused. “And though I may
be incorrect in the assumption, as far asour propaganda is concerned, that’s our story, and we’re
sticking with it. Nothing undermines faith in the government faster than realizing that they’ve been
developing deadly alien menaces in their spare time.”
“But the truth really is?” Mike prompted.
“The truth is as malleable as ever.” Mengsk grinned. “Yes, the Confederacy has been studying the Zerg
for years, and the ones in the Sara system were deliberately brought there by Confederate agents. Yes,
they were a big weapons test. But no, they didn’t create the Zerg. No, they had a much worse plan in
mind. It was on those disks that you and Raynor brought back from the Jacobs Installation. Here we go.
You’ll appreciate this.”
He hit a button, and the screen sprang to scratchy life. When the distortion had cleared, Mike could see
a string of low buttes and mesas beneath an orange-brown sky. The scene could have been anywhere on
Antiga Prime. The familiar UNN logo perched along one side, and multiplanetary stock prices crawled
across the bottom of the screen.
Then a frighteningly familiar voice spoke over the panorama. “This is Michael Liberty, reporting from
Antiga Prime.”
Mike blinked. That was his voice, part of his last transmission out. But he had never sent this particular
footage. Had they pulled it from a file somewhere?
The camera continued to pan, then settled on the speaker. He was dressed in a neat duster (much neater
than the one that currently hung in Mike’s locker), his blond hair pulled back to cover a bald spot, his
features hard-chiseled and experienced, his eyes deep and soulful.
It was Michael Liberty, but not Mike. This Michael Liberty looked almost like an idealized version of
Mike himself.
The figure on the screen continued, “This reporter has just escaped captivity at the hands of the infamous
terrorist Arcturus Mengsk. I was captured on Mar Sara by the rebels shortly before the reptilian Protoss
destroyed the planet, and have only made it to safety now.”
“That’s not me,” said Mike.
“I know,” said Mengsk. “And the Protoss aren’t reptiles, as far as we know. But keep watching.”
“During my captivity I learned that Mengsk and the Sons of Korhal are in control of powerful
mind-control drugs, which they have been using freely on the populace,” continued the flat-screen Mike
Liberty. “Hundreds have died as a result of indiscriminate spraying, which can only be described as
chemical attacks against innocent citizens. Others have been warped into strange mutagenic shapes as a
result of side effects of these drugs.”
Mengsk made a rude noise, but the figure on the screen continued, “Mengsk sent a saboteur aboard the
Norad II and exposed the crew to a virulent toxin. The result was the recent crash of that ship. Agents of
the Sons of Korhal captured those affected by the mind-control drugs, and left the rest to die at the
hands of their Zerg allies.”
“Zerg allies? Who’s writing that crap?” Mike snapped at the screen.
“Itis much of muchness,” Mengsk said calmly. “Laying it on a bit thick and all.”
“I believe that General Edmund Duke, scion of the Duke Family of Tarsonis, has fallen prey to these
mind-control devices, and now has been reduced to a mentally reprogrammed zombie in the service of
the terrorists. In this way Mengsk and his inhuman allies hope to confuse the brave warriors of the
Confederacy and cause them to lose faith in their leaders.”
“Brave warriors of the . . . I used that line in a filler piece I did on theNorad II!” said Mike. “And the bit
about ‘virulent toxins.’ That rings another bell.”
“Groundwater pollution outside a middle school,” said Mengsk. “One of your better early pieces, if I
remember right.”
“Only by eternal vigilance can we root out such terrorists as Mengsk and his mind-controlled minions,”
said the figure on the screen. “As I speak a massive Confederate blockade is surrounding Antiga Prime,
and the terrorist should be destroyed within a few days. This is Michael Daniel Liberty for UNN.”
Mengsk hit another button. Michael Daniel Liberty froze into silence on the screen.
“Did you see that!?” Mike shouted, jumping up from his seat. “That wasn’t me!”
“I hope not,” Mengsk said with a calm grin. “You seem like such a rational and truthful reporter, most of
the time.”
“What did they do?”
“You’ve never been edited before?” Mengsk raised an eyebrow.
“Of course!” Mike snapped, then added quickly, “I mean for time, or if the facts couldn’t be confirmed,
or the legal department had a problem, or a sponsor raised a stink. I mean, I’ve had things cut before,
and sometimes they’ve slid in images that took the tone of the story in a different direction. But this is a . .
. a . . .”
“Lie?”
“Fabrication,” Mike said, frowning.
“Indeed. Clipped together from bits of previous reporting, using another actor as a stand-in, a shuffling
of pixels. Mind you, it’s easy enough on a flat screen—damned impossible with a true hologram. That’s
why I prefer the latter, you know. This is just enough to fool someone just catching the news, to remind
them that you’re alive and well and fighting the good fight for UNN and the Confederacy.”
“But my reports . . .” Mike sputtered.
“Grist that they took apart and reassembled as they saw fit.”
Mike slouched back into his chair. “I’m going tokill Anderson.”
“Your Anderson may already be dead, I’m afraid,” said the terrorist. “If he’s as devoted a reporter as
you.”
Mike snorted.
“Or,” Mengsk reconsidered, “he may be acquiescing to the current power structure, though he knows
it’s a horrible idea. Maybe that’s why the ‘toxic poisons’ line is in there—a bit of internal sabotage, a
desperate cry for help. I mean, it doesn’t make a whole lot of sense: Why would mind-control drugs be
poisons? Of course, it did let them lift an entire sentence verbatim.”
“Yeah, that’s a shortcut Handy Anderson would take.”
“I just wanted you to know that your own network has turned its back on you. I didn’t want you to find
out at a bad time. Like on the battlefield, for example.” Mengsk refilled Mike’s snifter.
“But why this?”
“Propaganda is a weapon that the Confederacy wields best, and wields heaviest. It is their hammer. And
when all you have is a hammer, then everything looks like a nail.”
“You’d think they’d have better weapons than a reporter to throw at you,” Mike muttered. He shook
his head at the screen. “What happened to all their Zerg research, the material we got out of that
installation?”
“Ah.” Mengsk hit another series of buttons. “The Jacobs disk. I’m glad you remembered that—it shows
that my mind-control drugs have not had a complete effect on you. Don’t look at me that way, it was
meant as a joke.”
“I’m a little sensitive about that right now. It’ll pass.”
“I expected weapons data—something to keep them ahead of the technological curve. Instead I found
something much more interesting. Here we go. You know about ghosts, of course.”
Mike thought of Kerrigan, the merciless fighter who felt the death of each of her victims. “Telepathic
warriors. A specialty of the Confederates, and an example of your technological curve.”
“An interesting example, if I may digress. The original inhabitants of the colony ships were Earth people,
but the long voyage apparently put a twist in their genetic code, enough to ring out more psionic abilities
than were common in the original Terran populace. An interesting happenstance.”
“I think we’ve both gotten to the point where we don’t believe in happenstance.” Mike took a pull on his
brandy.
Mengsk gave a good-natured shrug. “By design or accident, the humans of what would become the
Confederacy tended toward psychic abilities. Again, through design or accident, we found this out and
created the ghosts—superior assassins with mind-reading powers. It’s a horrible process—only a few
children make it out of the process in any usable state. And, until recently, the Confederate’s control over
them seemed unbreakable.”
“Lieutenant Sarah Kerrigan. How did you break their control over her?”
“That’s a case where one side gets better armor, and the other side gets a bigger gun,” Mengsk said
with a smile. “Suffice it to say that the control over her was broken, and broken in such a way that she
was left amazingly intact and generally useful.”
“And grateful.”
“And grateful,” Mengsk admitted. “And she has appeared often enough that the Confederates are in a
tizzy about it.”
“Which suits you just fine,” said Mike. “But you were busy digressing?”
“Yes. Now we get to the Jacobs disk. It turns out that our pestilent friends the Zerg are attuned to
psychic emanations. Apparently the wavelengths that the ghosts function on are similar to those that the
higher-level Zerg use to control the lesser ones. So they can zero in on them at close range.”
“How close?” Mike asked, thinking suddenly of Kerrigan’s activities in the Sara and Antiga systems.
“For a normal telepath, very, very close. Tens of yards at best. By that time a hydralisk can smell them
anyway. But that’s part of the technology the Confederates have used in their tower defenses and other
anti-ghost detectors.”
“Guns and armor. Can the ghosts read Zerg minds like they do humans’?”
“It’s much more painful. And yes, the Confederates tried. They came away with the idea that the Zerg
are an ultimate evolutionary success stories: everything is either genetic material for their creations or meat
to be fed to their children. They operate off a hierarchy of hive minds, each greater than the ones below
it, growing up to near-planetary consciousnesses.”
“Sounds appealing.” Mike took another long sip of his brandy. It burned the back of his throat and
reminded him he was human.
“Nasty. The Protoss are as bad,” said Mengsk. “Mind you, this is all from the Zerg viewpoint that’s
recorded on the disks, but the Protoss are the ultimate genetic purists. They see themselves as the judges
of the universe, eradicating any life that gets out of hand and does not meet their standard of perfection.”
“Genetic Survivors versus Genetic Xenophobes. A match made in hell.”
“Very much so. So the Confederates discover the Zerg and discover the telepathic attraction. They want
more Zerg available.”
“More? Why in the name of God would they want more?”
“The nonlinear nature of war, son. They were looking for a weapon with all the advantages of nukes and
none of the downside, like radiation or bad press. The Zergs were perfect—they were ugly-buggy aliens
that the Confederates could unleash on anyone, and then come in afterwards and eliminate. A pocket
plague of monsters.”
“You said you thought they were breeding them.”
“And I was wrong about that,” Mengsk said smoothly, “Breeding them is much more complex than just
capturing a bunch of zerglings and putting them in the same cage. So they needed to lure more into their
traps, and that’s where the telepaths came in.”
“But the telepaths have limited range.”
“Yes,” Mengsk agreed. “So they worked on improving that range. What you pulled out of the Jacobs
Installation was the plans for a Transplanar Psionic Waveform Emitter. Nice name, and fairly
self-descriptive. With it they could boost the power of a telepath and make it an interplanetary beacon
for the Zerg, drawing them in like moths to a lantern.”
Mike was silent for a moment, then said, “The Sara system.”
“Exactly. That’s what I mean when I say they were using those planets as a testing ground for their
weapons. They brought the Zerg to Sara, and the Protoss came after them. But they brought more than
just a couple zerglings—they brought the whole Zerg ecosystem and power structure into play, which
theydidn’t expect. And now the Zerg are moving from system to system at will, directed by their own
intelligence, intent on either transforming humanity or consuming it.”
“So you know how to defeat them?” Mike asked.
“Other than blasting each and every one of them into its and burning their nests, no.” Mengsk leaned
forward. “But I do know how to send them in the directions I want them to go.”
“How does that help?” Mike shook his head. Had the brandy made him suddenly stupid?
Mengsk leaned back. “There was one piece of truth in that news report your doppelgänger delivered.
There is a serious lockade forming around Antiga. The Confederates are hoping to keep us penned up
until either the Zerg or the Protoss destroy us.”
“And we’re just sitting here?”
“No. I’m already doing something. We built an emitter, based on the plans you liberated. We’re going to
take it into the heart of Confederate territory and set it off. Every Zerg from as far away as ten light-years
is going to come here. They’re going to fall among the blockaders like falcons on doves. The crash of the
Norad II will be a simple fender bender in comparison.”
“But the emitter will only amplify. You need a telepath to . . .” The final circuit closed in Mike’s brain.
“Kerrigan. You’re going to use Kerrigan to bring in the Zerg.”
“Very good.”
“You can’t do that!” Mike objected. “You want her to break into a Confederate camp? They’ll have
detectors. She’ll never make it!”
“I have a high degree of confidence in the lieutenant.”
”You can’t do that!” Mike repeated.
“You have your tense wrong. I gave the orders for the operation before we sat down for our first game.
The good lieutenant should be picking up the emitter in the shops below right about now. If you hurry,
you can catch up with her.”
Mike cursed and launched himself from his seat.
“And wish her luck from me!” Mengsk shouted at Mike’s back as the reporter bolted out of the terrorist
leader’s quarters. Then Mengsk leaned back, lifted his own brandy snifter, and offered a silent toast to
the frozen figure of the false Michael Liberty on the screen.

Aliens were pressing in on human space, and the humansreacted by turning on one another. I can
only imagine whatthe Zerg and the Protoss thought as they landed on planetsthat consisted of
nothing but rebels and Confederates whaling the tar out of each other. They probably thought it
wasthe normal behavior pattern for our race. And I suppose theywould be right.
Mengsk’s successes, spread in part by bootleg copies of myown reports, sparked dozens of
brushfire wars. Every crankwith a gripe took up arms against the ancient Confederateregime.
The Confederacy in turn reacted as it always had toarmed dissent—with harsher and harsher
oppression thatin turn spawned other revolts.
And through it all, the Zerg were infiltrating moreplanets, and the Protoss were turning them to
dead lumps.The humans didn’t have so many worlds that they couldafford to lose them at this
clip. If the two sides had beenthinking, they would have joined forces to fight the truemenace.
I think everybody was so busy planning and fighting thatno one really had time tothink.
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
“KERRIGAN!” MIKE SHOUTED IN THE LANDING Bay. The lieutenant was just putting on her
helmet. He had no time for armor, but he did grab his duster.
“Liberty,” she said grimly. Mike saw a large device mounted to the side of her Vulture bike. “I’m just
heading out.”
“Ride shotgun?”
“Look, normally I’d . . .” she began, then looked at Mike with her deep jade-green eyes. The hairs on
the back of Mike’s neck stood up, and he knew that she knew.
Her too-wide lips twitched for a moment. Then she shook her head and said, “It’s your funeral. I’ll need
someone to lug the gear anyway. Come on.”
The pair roared out of the hangar, making for the rendezvous point.
Antiga Prime had suffered under the relentless assault. The sky was darker now from the smoke of
continuous pyres, and the great loated figure of the world’s gas giant primary hung like a sorrowful god
behind a shroud of mourning. In the distance there was the thunder of Arclite artillery, though who was
firing, and who they were firing at, was unknown.
They passed abandoned bunkers, cracked open like eggshells, surrounded by the partially buried
detritus of war: broken weapons and shattered men. The thunder grew louder, and Liberty realized they
were heading into the heart of the storm.
“We’ve got siege tanks and Goliaths,” Kerrigan said over the comm link, “trying to punch a hole in their
lines. We slip through and into Confederate territory. Regret coming now?”
“Maybe a little.” Mike knew that the ghost knew his answer even before he spoke.
“So Mengsk gave you the whole song and dance,” she continued. Mike frowned, concerned that the
telepath was rummaging through his thoughts so easily. “Got you to come along.”
“Check my mental replay again, Lieutenant,” said Mike. “Mengsk never asked me to go.”
“He didn’t have to. He knows the buttons to press on people. Probably he felt that if he ordered you to
come help, you’d probably just dump him then and there.”
“He’s probably right.”
“He usually is. That’s why it’s probably a good idea you’re along.”
Up ahead, a pile of boulders vaporized in a massive explosion. Kerrigan brought the cycle up short.
“That shouldn’t happen,” she said. “Our siege tanks know we’re coming this way. Did Duke screw up
his artillery spotting on purpose, or . . .”
Mike heard the whistling of another set of incoming rounds. “It’s their tanks!” he shouted. “They’ve
broken throughour lines!”
Kerrigan gunned the engine the moment he said it, tearing the Vulture at a sharp angle to its original
course of travel. The road ahead vanished in a crescendo of flying earth and rock as another round
tracked closer. The shattered earth was too much for the limited grav units, and the entire bike shook.
“It’s a bit—” Mike began.
“Sorry for the rough ride,” Kerrigan snapped over the comm link. “Just hang on!”
Next time let me finish my sentence,thought Mike, and felt Kerrigan shrug on the bike.
The Confederates must have had a spotter. The missile fire tracked them mercilessly, staying about a
hundred yards behind them. Kerrigan took them into a ravine that had long since lost anything that looked
like water.
“Let’s see them follow in here,” she said.
Mike heard the high-pitched whine of metal slicing through air, “Wraiths!” he yelled into the comm link.
The fighter spacecraft came in low and hard, lasting both sides of the ravine with their 25-millimeter
burst-lasers. The scrub was incinerated at a touch, and the fighters pulled up, unable to see their prey
through the smoke they had generated.
“They’re herding us,” Kerrigan’s voice crackled over the comm link. “But to where?”
The ground beneath the hover-cycle suddenly changed in texture, from red clays and brownish slates to
a mottled clumping of gray-black moss.
“Creep!” said Mike, as soon as he had recognized it. “They’re herding us into Zerg territory!”
Kerrigan cursed and threw on the brakes, but the creep beneath the grav-fields provided no traction for
the bike’s transducer coils. The thin bike started to fishtail, then skewed horribly to one side, plowing up
a thick crust of the creep like foam on a wave.
Mike shouted, and Kerrigan yelled something. The reporter clutched the container of the psi emitter, half
hoping that it would provide some protection. He was sure that if anyone could get them through this, it
would be the ghost lieutenant.
Then the ground opened up beneath them, and they both tumbled into the darkness.
Sometime later, Mike heard Kerrigan’s voice, as if from a distance, “Liberty?”
“Urg,” was the best Mike could reply.Hell, she canread my mind, let her read this.
“Is the psi emitter all right?” she asked.
“Oh yeah. I cushioned its fall with my body.”
He opened his eyes and discovered he was lying in soft, recently churned earth. That must have been
what broke their fall as they pitched down the rabbit hole.
He looked up. There was a jagged hole in the ceiling, probably where they tore through the creep
matting. Already the thick webbing was reknitting across the opening.
Mike spat out some blood. He had bitten the inside of his mouth in the fall. The rest of his body seemed
battered but generally unharmed. His duster was caked with soft earth. He would feel the bruises
tomorrow.
If I’m lucky,he thought.
“If we’re both lucky,” said Kerrigan. She was already on her feet, sweeping the area with a
wrist-mounted light. She had slung her canister rifle over her shoulder.
Mike stood up, and found himself wobbling but unhurt. “Y’all right?” he managed.
“Not bad,” said the ghost. “I landed on my pride, which is, I’m afraid, a lost cause. Had to shoot it, put
it out of its misery. We’re patsies. Fools. Mooks. Rubes.”
“No one expected the Confederates—” Mike began.
“To use the terrain and situation to their advantage? Exactly. Which is why we’re patsies. They came out
to meet our attack, and then flushed us into the one place we don’t want to be.”
“You know, this would be easier if you—”
“Let you finish your sentences. Sorry. Nervous habit right now. You’re practically broadcasting your
fear, and that’s irritatingme.”
Like anybody wouldn’t be afraid in this situation,Mike thought, walking over to the remains of the
Vulture bike.
“The bike is shot,” Kerrigan said, without looking, and of course she was right. The frame was bent in
three places, so that the long, lean vehicle had been turned into a twisted corkscrew. Something
important had been punctured and was leaking into the ground. The bike, in spite of all its metal and
shaped ceramic, had taken the fall worse than he had.
“This way,” said Kerrigan, pointing sharply one way along the corridor.
“Any clue why?”
“No, but something large and foul-thinking is in the other direction. You get to carry the emitter.”
Mike hoisted the emitter in its container and followed. He thought about the lieutenant’s mood. After a
few minutes Kerrigan said, “It’s a feedback loop.”
“Stopdoing that.”
“But it is. Your fear is sent to me, and I’m in turn taking it out on you. Which increasesyour anger.” She
paused for a moment. “Something’s real strange here. Wrong. I can handle this kind of thing normally.
Most of the time.”
Mike thought of the Zerg’s supposed connection with telepaths, then wished he hadn’t.
Kerrigan’s too-wide lips twisted in a grim smile. “Yeah, I know. Raynor already gave me grief about it
at the briefing with Arcturus, thank you very much. It does explain the Confederacy’s interest in
telepaths. And also there have been a lot of MIAs among the Confederate telepaths. Even outside the
ghost units, I hear things.”
“Think the Zerg are collecting their own telepath subjects?” Mike asked, then realized that Kerrigan had
let him finish his sentence.
“Uh-huh. Hang on, something’s up ahead.” She pulled out her side arm and edged forward, her other
hand, the one with the wristlight, pointing ahead.
The something was hanging across the passageway like a great spider. Her light flashed against it, and it
shrank away from the beam. It was a great eye, human in appearance, its pupil contracting under the
harshness of the wristlight’s beam.
Mike felt a wave of revulsion and nausea sweep over him. Apparently Kerrigan felt it as well, and her
emotions were compounded through Mike’s mind. She let out a loud curse and fired a short burst into
the twitching orb.
The eye-thing let out a screech that sounded like glass and blew apart, the muscular strands of its web
peeling back toward the wall like broken rubber bands.
“What was—?” Mike began.
“Observer? Sentry?” Kerrigan guessed, and for the first time Mike caught a bit of fear in the unshakable
Sarah Kerrigan’s voice. Feedback loop, he reminded himself. He willed himself to calm down.
Otherwise they would get themselves killed.
“What does it feel like?” he asked, as they edged past the shredded meat of the eye-thing. Mike noticed
that there was creep along the floors and walls of the passage.
“What?” said Kerrigan, distracted by the ichor.
“You said it felt strange down here. Strange?”
Kerrigan was silent for a moment, and Mike felt she was trying to regain her emotional strength. “It’s
tough to describe to a hard-shell, sorry, a nontelepath. It’s like you’re in a hotel hallway and there’s a
party in one of the rooms. As you pass it, you hear that there’s a party, but it’s not yours. You don’t
make out anything distinct, but there’s a babble of voices. That’s what it feels like.”
“Maybe psionic power on a different channel?” Mike suggested.
“Maybe, but it’s larger. Like standing on a street outside a theater where there’s a concert. You hear
something organized, but all you make out is blather. It’s maddening.” She paused for a moment. “Oh my
God. Mike, come here.”
The passage opened out to the right, into a larger cavern, before continuing upward. Mike could feel
fresher air on his face from the passage across the way. They must be near the surface.
The larger cavern was filled with creep. Vague pouches hung from the walls, and things that might have
been organs dotted the grayish fungus. Along the wall was a scattering of centipede-like creatures moving
among a field of toadstools.
“Maggots,” said Mike. “I saw them at Anthem Base, on Mar Sara.” He shot an image of the bar there
to Kerrigan, and noticed her shudder. “Is this a garbage dump for the Zerg? What are they eating?”
“They’re not eating. They’re nursemaids. They’re tending the eggs.”
What Mike had first thought of as toadstools were really eggs, green with reddish speckles, that sat on
stands of piled creep. The eggs pulsed with their own heartbeats. As Mike watched, the skeletal face of
a hydralisk appeared beneath the murky surface of the nearest egg, like a drowned creature in a tidal
pool. The egg quivered a little, as if the beast within knew of their presence.
The maggots were busy building up piles of the creep. Then one climbed the pile, curled in on itself, and
wove a thick spider-silk cocoon around itself. The cocoon hardened, and the maggot became an egg.
“Crap,” said Mike, suddenly realizing what the maggots were.
“Larvae. They’re the basic building units of the Zerg. Larvae to eggs to monsters. That’s why the
Confederates never got anywhere breeding the suckers, despite what Mengsk said. The zerglings and
hydraliskscan’t breed—they all come from the same genetic stock, served up to order from some higher
power.”
Mike nodded, and the hydralisk face in the egg turned toward him. The egg started to vibrate violently
as the beast within tried to force itself out.
“Head toward the fresh air,” said Kerrigan, unslinging her canister rifle. “I’ll be along in a moment.”
Grunting under the load of the emitter, Mike continued up the corridor. When he heard the whirring
noise of the canister rifle’s feed and the sliding ratchet of its pump action, he started running. Behind him
now was the hammering chatter of the rifle’s sharp-tipped bullets strafing the egg chamber. Then there
was silence.
The air grew fresher, and he saw natural light up ahead. Mike’s legs felt like lead weights, but he forced
them forward. Ten more yards, then five, then two. Then up to the surface, into the early evening air, and
. . .
Face-to-face with his reflection in the mirrored surface of a Confederate marine’s combat visor. Despite
himself, Mike yelped and almost fell backward. A sentry from the Confederate forces was posted at the
entrance.
The sentry lumbered a step toward the reporter, and Mike realized that something was wrong with the
man. His knees were bent oddly, and his arms seemed to belong to separate entities. One hand raised a
gauss rifle uncertainly, while the other touched something at the base of its armor.
The mirrored visor slid back to reveal a face from hell. Half of it had been eaten away to the
yellow-stained skull, which oozed a thick grayish creep from a useless eyehole. The other half, the
greenish shade of rot, was studded with rock-like extrusions that broke the skin like short daggers.
It was a sentry, but not for the Confederates. It had once been human, but not now. It had once been
sane, but not now. Now it only lived to protect the nest. It brought up its gauss rifle and let out a cry as if
coins were caught in its throat. The creature’s good eye seemed to weep blood.
Mike heard the whine of the canister rifle behind him and threw himself to the ground, twisting to cushion
the emitter as he toppled. An instant later the air where he had been was filled with live rounds. A few of
the rounds shredded the edge of his coat.
The transformed Confederate sentry was transfixed by the rifle fire, but only for a moment. Then its
gauss rifle slowly spilled from its hand and it fell backward, its armor in tatters. What lay beneath the
armor was no longer human, but it reacted to the canister shot in the same fashion.
Kerrigan ran up and tugged hard on Mike’s collar. “Are you okay?”
Spots danced in front of Mike’s eyes, but he refused to succumb to the bitter bile rising in his throat.
“Whatwas that?”
“The Zerg are master biologists. That’s probably what they want to do with humanity. Turn it into
another experiment. Another servant race.”
Mike took a deep breath, looking at the lacerated, rotting meat, and said, “It doesn’t look like a
successful experiment.”
Kerrigan gave an exhausted shrug. “Maybe if they had better material to work with. You volunteering?
I’m sure they need a reporter.” She managed a tight, chiding grin, and despite himself, Mike let out a
chuckle.
Breaking the feedback loop,he thought. Foxhole jokes. Gallows humor in the face of the obscenity of
war.
If Kerrigan read those thoughts, she did not let on. “Feel like running for a while?” she asked.
“How far?”
“As far as we can.”
“You start, I’ll follow,” said Mike, hoisting the emitter in front of him.
They were lucky. They were on the edge of the creep. Yet even from their vantage point Mike could see
a line of towers in the direction opposite their line of travel. They looked like great, misshapen flowers
from some giant’s garden, and the cannon-like mutalisks danced among them. There were other flying
monsters as well, including the starfish squids, the lobster-jellyfishes, and the great flying crabs.
“They’re winning,” said Mike. “The Zerg. They’re getting more powerful every damned planet they take
over.”
“Try not to think about it.” Kerrigan touched her wrist. “I just sent out a short pulse-message. If
Arcturus is listening, at least he’ll know we’re still alive.”
Travel was easy now, for even as the sun set there was strong reflected light from the gas giant above.
To their left there were more flashes along the horizon, and the sound of distant thunder.
“You say you heard about other ghosts going MIA. You hear from them?” Mike asked.
Kerrigan’s lips made a firm line, and she shook her head. “Most telepaths avoid one another. I don’t
even talk to the ones in Duke’s command. It’s bad enough being around the continual chatter of normal
people. Being with another telepath is a hundred times worse. People can’t control their thoughts, at least
not very well. Ghosts read other ghosts very well, and form their own feedback loops. Most need psionic
dampers to keep them sane. That’s like the neural resocialization, but much, much worse.”
“But you don’t have any psionic dampers.”
“I still have some, but most of them are gone. Arcturus . . .” She paused for a moment, then said, “You
don’t like him, you know.”
“Never would have guessed. But you think the world of him.”
“He . . .” She paused again. “He broke me out, I guess that’s the best way to put it. He rescued me,
freed me, roke me of the dampers and the guards and the horror. I owe him my life. More important, I
owe him my soul.”
As if in response to her comment, the comm link beeped. Mike scanned the horizon for movement.
Nothing. Kerrigan popped open a small screen, and Mike could envision Mengsk’s smiling face there.
“Good to know you’re alive,” said the rebel leader. “Your position puts you a klick south of where you
need to be. No bogeys between you and the Confederate camp. We’re drawing off their reserves.”
“We were delayed,” said Kerrigan. “The Zerg. There are a lot of them already here.”
“And there will be more when you set off our little surprise. They’ll keep our Confederate friends busy
while we escape.”
A frown crossed Kerrigan’s features. “They’ll be wiped out, Arcturus.” Static crossed the line.
“Arcturus? Do you read? The Zerg don’t take prisoners.”
“Kerrigan!” said Mengsk, and Mike could imagine the stern-father look on the terrorist’s face. “We
didn’t invent the emitters, but if we don’t use them, we will all die, lockaded by the Confederates. And if
we die, all hope of humanity dies with us.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Remember how much I trust you. And say hello to Mr. Liberty for me, eh?”
Kerrigan closed the screen and turned north. Mike picked up the emitter and followed.
Mike was silent for a while, then said, “I think they’re afraid.”
“Who? The people in charge of the ghosts?”
“Yeah. They don’t want you to be able to communicate your experiences to other telepaths. Conspire
against them. That’s why the psionic dampers and the training.”
Kerrigan shrugged. “That’s likely. I think it’s also to keep their investments in one piece. The casualty
rate is incredibly high among the ghosts.”
“I thought you’d be lionized, after all that investment. Like Wraith pilots or destroyer captains.”
Kerrigan let out a horrible laugh. “Lionized? God, even the child molesters they put in the marines get
better treatment than we do. The criminals in the marines are just medicated and indoctrinated to follow
their leaders. We’re given the living nightmare of pushing against our restraints constantly, knowing that if
we break them, we’ll spin out into insanity because we can’t keep others’ minds out of our own.”
“Easy, Lieutenant. I didn’t mean—”
“Of course you didn’t mean anything,” Kerrigan said hotly. “That’s what drives us crazy. Your words
mean one thing, but your mind’s broadcasting something completely different. Raynor’s all gung-ho, but I
can feel his unease, his disgust. And I know he’s watching, even when my back’s turned. It’s knowing
what’s on the tip of everyone’s mind without being able to respond.”
“I’m sorry.”
“I know,” said Kerrigan, softening a little. “That’s one of the things Ido like about you, Michael Liberty.
You’re all surface. Don’t take that the wrong way. You think of something, and you say it. Your only
defense is when you’re asking questions, playing the hard-nosed reporter. It makes you easier to tolerate
than most humans.”
She paused for a moment as they crested a hill. In the distance rose the ruined towers of the
Confederates’ outer perimeter. There was no fire from the towers; Mengsk’s troops had drawn them off.
“You know what the final exam is to get into ghost training?” she asked suddenly. Mike shook his head,
knowing better than to interrupt.
“They have a guard with a gun,” she said, and her eyes seemed to mist over. She herself was elsewhere.
“The guard takes the gun and presses it against your forehead, or the forehead of someone you care
about. You have to kill the guard before he pulls the trigger.” Her eyes refocused, and she looked at
Mike hard. “I was twelve at the time.”
Mike blanched, and despite himself, thought of Raynor’s son. The “gifted” child who had experienced an
“incident.”
Kerrigan reacted as if Mike had slapped her. She sank to one knee and gripped her forehead with her
hand. After a while she said, “Christ.”
Mike said quickly, “I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to tell you, it just slipped out.”
“Christ,” she repeated. “I should have guessed. I just didn’t know.”
Mike shook his head. “You’re a telepath. How can you not know?”
Kerrigan looked up, and there were tears at the corners of her eyes. “Telepaths don’t dig down into
your thoughts, at least if they want to stay sane. We hear all the surface chatter, all the stuff that’s on the
top. What you’re thinking about. Errant thoughts. Whether that woman has a nice set of legs. All the
stupid crap. Not the stuff they keep buried. Not the important crap.” She was silent for a moment, then
asked, “He say when it happened?”
Mike shook his head and turned away, partly to keep an eye out for Confederate patrols, partly to give
the lieutenant a chance to pull herself together.
She probably knew that, but when Mike turned back she was on her feet and her eyes were dry. “Let’s
plant this thing. Base of one of those towers should do it.”
They reached the shell of the gun emplacement without difficulty, and Mike surrendered the burden he
had been lugging for the past few kilometers. With deft, practiced hands, Kerrigan began setting up the
psi emitter that she had never handled before. Mike realized that she must have gotten the instructions in
a burst of telepathy when she picked up the device.
It was a lash-up, and it took a few minutes for the lieutenant to uncoil all the packing material and check
all the leads. Then she pulled out what looked like a starfish-shaped headset and placed in on her head.
A crown of delicate copper filigree was lost among her red tresses.
“The transplanar psionic waveform emitter,” explained Kerrigan, “is like the sound box of a violin. It will
capture, amplify, and then propagate the psychic beacon that is fed into it. That’s why we’re here—it
needs a ghost to activate it.”
She flipped a few switches, pressed a toggle, and then took off the headset. Her face looked strained.
“Okay. Let’s go.”
“That’s it?”
“You wanted an airhorn and bright light? A chime from above? Or a big clock with a countdown?
Sorry.” Kerrigan’s face was ashen now, and Mike suddenly realized that, even though he couldn’t feel it,
Kerrigan could, and it was getting “louder” all the time.
“Right,” Kerrigan said. “Let’s go.”
Mike and Kerrigan headed along the line of abandoned tower emplacements, each one a shattered
monument to the battle of Antiga Prime. She had to pause, wincing from the unheard noise. It was as if
she could hear nails on a chalkboard, a grating sound that Mike was deaf to.
They made it to the fourth tower, where the pain seemed to ease. By the sixth tower she was almost
normal again. She popped open the small screen on her wrist. “Psi emitter in place,” she said.
Mengsk’s unseen face said, “Excellent, Sarah, I knew you could do it. We’ve got to get you out before
every Zerg on Antiga gets there. Dropship en route.”
“I know,” Kerrigan said, breathing hard. Her lips formed a thin line, then she said, “Promise me . . .
Promise me we’ll never do anything like this again.”
“Sarah.” Mike could imagine Mengsk shaking his head over the line. “We will do whatever it takes to
save humanity. Our responsibility is too great to do any less.”
And he was gone again, the great wise leader on the far side of the electronic channel, directing the war
from the safety of his brandy and chess games.
“Why do you trust him?” Mike asked. The thought had crossed his mind and he said it. “Why do you
follow him?”
Sarah managed a weary smile. “He saved my soul.”
“And you’ve been killing for him ever since. Don’t the scales ever balance? Aren’t you due your own
freedom?”
“It’s . . . complex. Mengsk is a lot like you. Okay, I’m sorry, he’s actually the complete opposite.
You’re all surface, like a sheet of newsprint. He’s all depth. He tells you what he thinks, and he’s so
convinced of it, down to the core of his being, that the effect is very much the same. He inspires me to
believe.”
“He’s a politician. If you look deep enough, you’ll find that out. There’s a bottom to that swamp of his
soul.”
“And will that change anything? Do I want to look?”
“Sometimes looking isn’t a bad thing. If you looked a little harder, then maybe Raynor wouldn’t seem
like such a jackass.”
Kerrigan opened her mouth to say something, then stopped and nodded. “Yeah, you’re probably right.
At least with Raynor. I guess I owe that much to the jackass.”
“Our responsibility is too great to do any less,” quoted Mike.
Kerrigan let out a laugh, a short giggle. It was unexpected and unplanned and very human.
Mike let out a long breath and wondered which would arrive first, the Zerg from the nearby colony or
Mengsk’s promised dropship.

Through the lens of history, war seems to function with afrightening punctuality, like a
murderous music box. Battlesare no more than clockwork mechanisms of death, a dramaof
destruction with each act flowing naturally into the next,until one side or the other is vanquished.
In retrospect, thefall of the Confederacy seems like a logical slide that, oncebegun, leaves no
question as to its conclusion.
For those of us trapped in the middle of the war, therewas nothing but raw panic broken by
periods of totalexhaustion. No one, not even those who supposedly did theplanning, had any clear
idea of the forces we were dealingwith, until it was too late to change.
Clockwork? Perhaps. But I prefer to think of it as a timer on abomb we were feverishly
disarming, hoping we could finishbefore the damned thing exploded in our collective faces.

THE DROPSHIP WOULD REJOIN THEHYPERION IN low Antigan orbit. Mengsk had left the
surface as soon as the emitter was activated, but he didn’t want to try to run the Confederate blockade
above without gathering all his wandering, barefoot children home. At least that’s how it seemed to Mike.
As they rose from the surface, Mike watched the screens. All the ship’s cameras were directed toward
the surface. The emitter was already having an effect on the Zergs below. They were boiling out of their
nests like angry ants, moving randomly, even attacking each other in psionic-inspired madness. But soon
they started descending on the tower where Mike and Kerrigan had left the emitter. A hurricane of living
creatures circled the beacon like moths around a flame.
As the ship rose higher, its sensors picked up other nests, other reactions as the ever-sounding chord
that came from Kerrigan’s mind echoed and reverberated, growing stronger by the second. There were
radioed cries from Confederate ground troops as they were overwhelmed, and the night side of Antiga
Prime was now dotted with small explosions. The rebels had more warning, but those who were too
slow to get off the ground were swallowed in the waves of zerglings and hydralisks.
The dropship continued to rise, and Mike could see the curve of the horizon. There was a right flash
along it, and a few seconds later the electromagnetic pulse swept over the ship. The screens went
momentarily lank before countermeasures kicked in. One of the greatBehemoth -class cruisers, sister
ship to theNorad II, had gone down beneath the growing assault.
Above them the Confederate blockade was already disintegrating. Available ships with landing capability
were being rerouted, while others were trying to strafe the now ever-present Zerg.
There was a triad of glowing triangles that streaked near them, and Mike blinked as they left hot patterns
on his retinas. The Protoss were already present—not in force, but still in the atmosphere.
