UNFERTH TAUNTS BEOWULF.


{Unferth, a thane of Hrothgar, is jealous of Beowulf, and undertakes to
twit him.}

          Unferth spoke up, Ecglaf his son,
          Who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,
          Opened the jousting (the journey[1] of Beowulf,
          Sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to Unferth
        5 And greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never
          That any man else on earth should attain to,
          Gain under heaven, more glory than he):

{Did you take part in a swimming-match with Breca?}

          "Art thou that Beowulf with Breca did struggle,
          On the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,
       10 Where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,

{'Twas mere folly that actuated you both to risk your lives on the ocean.}

          From vainest vaunting adventured your bodies
          In care of the waters? And no one was able
          Nor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade you
          Your difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming,
       15 Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover,
          The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them,
          Glided the ocean; angry the waves were,
          With the weltering of winter. In the water's possession,
          Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee,
       20 In strength excelled thee. Then early at morning
          On the Heathoremes' shore the holm-currents tossed him,
          Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,
          Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings,
          The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,
[20]   25 Had borough and jewels. The pledge that he made thee

{Breca outdid you entirely.}

          The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
          Then I ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,

{Much more will Grendel outdo you, if you vie with him in prowess.}

          Though ever triumphant in onset of battle,
          A grim grappling, if Grendel thou darest
       30 For the space of a night near-by to wait for!"

{Beowulf retaliates.}

          Beowulf answered, offspring of Ecgtheow:
          "My good friend Unferth, sure freely and wildly,

{O friend Unferth, you are fuddled with beer, and cannot talk coherently.}

          Thou fuddled with beer of Breca hast spoken,
          Hast told of his journey! A fact I allege it,
       35 That greater strength in the waters I had then,
          Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.
          We made agreement as the merest of striplings
          Promised each other (both of us then were

{We simply kept an engagement made in early life.}

          Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure
       40 Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.
          While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbarded
          Boldly we brandished, our bodies expected
          To shield from the sharks. He sure was unable

{He _could_ not excel me, and I _would_ not excel him.}

          To swim on the waters further than I could,
       45 More swift on the waves, nor _would_ I from him go.
          Then we two companions stayed in the ocean

{After five days the currents separated us.}

          Five nights together, till the currents did part us,
          The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest,
          And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled
       50 Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.
          The mere fishes' mood was mightily ruffled:
          And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet,
          Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me;
          My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded,

{A horrible sea-beast attacked me, but I slew him.}

       55 Lay on my bosom. To the bottom then dragged me,
          A hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,
          Grim in his grapple: 'twas granted me, nathless,
          To pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,
          My obedient blade; battle offcarried
       60 The mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.

    [1] It has been plausibly suggested that 'sieth' (in 501 and in 353)
    means 'arrival.' If so, translate the bracket: _(the arrival of
    Beowulf, the brave seafarer, was a source of great chagrin to Unferth,
    etc.)_.

[21]




X.

BEOWULF SILENCES UNFERTH.--GLEE IS HIGH.


          "So ill-meaning enemies often did cause me
          Sorrow the sorest. I served them, in quittance,

{My dear sword always served me faithfully.}

          With my dear-loved sword, as in sooth it was fitting;
          They missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,
        5 Ill-doers evil, of eating my body,
          Of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;
          But wounded with edges early at morning
          They were stretched a-high on the strand of the ocean,

{I put a stop to the outrages of the sea-monsters.}

          Put to sleep with the sword, that sea-going travelers
       10 No longer thereafter were hindered from sailing
          The foam-dashing currents. Came a light from the east,
          God's beautiful beacon; the billows subsided,
          That well I could see the nesses projecting,

{Fortune helps the brave earl.}

          The blustering crags. Weird often saveth
       15 The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!
          But me did it fortune[1] to fell with my weapon
          Nine of the nickers. Of night-struggle harder
          'Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely,
          Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;
       20 Yet I 'scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,

{After that escape I drifted to Finland.}

          Weary from travel. Then the waters bare me
          To the land of the Finns, the flood with the current,

{I have never heard of your doing any such bold deeds.}

          The weltering waves. Not a word hath been told me
          Of deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth,
       25 And of sword-terror none; never hath Breca
          At the play of the battle, nor either of you two,
          Feat so fearless performed with weapons
          Glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .
[22]      . . . . . . . . . . . . I utter no boasting;

{You are a slayer of brothers, and will suffer damnation, wise as you may
be.}

       30 Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,
          Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get
          Direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.
          I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf,
          Never had Grendel such numberless horrors,
       35 The direful demon, done to thy liegelord,
          Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,

{Had your acts been as brave as your words, Grendel had not ravaged your
land so long.}

          Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.
          He hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,
          The edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,
       40 Of the Victory-Scyldings, need little dismay him:
          Oaths he exacteth, not any he spares

{The monster is not afraid of the Danes,}

          Of the folk of the Danemen, but fighteth with pleasure,
          Killeth and feasteth, no contest expecteth

{but he will soon learn to dread the Geats.}

          From Spear-Danish people. But the prowess and valor
       45 Of the earls of the Geatmen early shall venture
          To give him a grapple. He shall go who is able
          Bravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morning

{On the second day, any warrior may go unmolested to the mead-banquet.}

          Which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,
          O'er children of men shines from the southward!"
       50 Then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure

{Hrothgar's spirits are revived.}

          Was blithesome and joyous, the Bright-Danish ruler
          Expected assistance; the people's protector

{The old king trusts Beowulf. The heroes are joyful.}

          Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.
          There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,
       55 The words were winsome. Wealhtheow advanced then,

{Queen Wealhtheow plays the hostess.}

          Consort of Hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,
          Gold-decked saluted the men in the building,
          And the freeborn woman the beaker presented

{She offers the cup to her husband first.}

          To the lord of the kingdom, first of the East-Danes,
       60 Bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,
          Lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted
          Of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.
          The Helmingish lady then graciously circled
          'Mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:

[23]

{She gives presents to the heroes.}

       65 Treasure-cups tendered, till time was afforded
          That the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen

{Then she offers the cup to Beowulf, thanking God that aid has come.}

          Might bear to Beowulf the bumper o'errunning;
          She greeted the Geat-prince, God she did thank,
          Most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,
       70 That in any of earlmen she ever should look for
          Solace in sorrow. He accepted the beaker,
          Battle-bold warrior, at Wealhtheow's giving,

{Beowulf states to the queen the object of his visit.}

          Then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,
          Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:
       75 "I purposed in spirit when I mounted the ocean,

{I determined to do or die.}

          When I boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,
          I would work to the fullest the will of your people
          Or in foe's-clutches fastened fall in the battle.
          Deeds I shall do of daring and prowess,
       80 Or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall."
          These words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,
          The boast of the Geatman; with gold trappings broidered
          Went the freeborn folk-queen her fond-lord to sit by.

{Glee is high.}

          Then again as of yore was heard in the building
       85 Courtly discussion, conquerors' shouting,
          Heroes were happy, till Healfdene's son would
          Go to his slumber to seek for refreshing;
          For the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew he
          A fight was determined,[2] since the light of the sun they
       90 No longer could see, and lowering darkness
          O'er all had descended, and dark under heaven
          Shadowy shapes came shying around them.

{Hrothgar retires, leaving Beowulf in charge of the hall.}

          The liegemen all rose then. One saluted the other,
          Hrothgar Beowulf, in rhythmical measures,
       95 Wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall giving
          To his care and keeping, quoth he departing:
[24]      "Not to any one else have I ever entrusted,
          But thee and thee only, the hall of the Danemen,
          Since high I could heave my hand and my buckler.
      100 Take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;
          Be mindful of honor, exhibiting prowess,
          Watch 'gainst the foeman! Thou shalt want no enjoyments,
          Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!"

    [1] The repetition of 'hwaeethere' (574 and 578) is regarded by some
    scholars as a defect. B. suggests 'swa Þaer' for the first: _So there
    it befell me, etc._ Another suggestion is to change the second
    'hwaeethere' into 'swa Þaer': _So there I escaped with my life, etc._

    [2] Kl. suggests a period after 'determined.' This would give the
    passage as follows: _Since they no longer could see the light of the
    sun, and lowering darkness was down over all, dire under the heavens
    shadowy beings came going around them_.




XI.

ALL SLEEP SAVE ONE.


{Hrothgar retires.}

          Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,
          Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building;
          The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for,
          The queen for a bedmate. To keep away Grendel

{God has provided a watch for the hall.}

        5 The Glory of Kings had given a hall-watch,
          As men heard recounted: for the king of the Danemen
          He did special service, gave the giant a watcher:
          And the prince of the Geatmen implicitly trusted

{Beowulf is self-confident}

          His warlike strength and the Wielder's protection.

{He prepares for rest.}

       10 His armor of iron off him he did then,
          His helmet from his head, to his henchman committed
          His chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,
          And bade him bide with his battle-equipments.
          The good one then uttered words of defiance,
       15 Beowulf Geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:

{Beowulf boasts of his ability to cope with Grendel.}

          "I hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,
          In warlike achievements, than Grendel does himself;
          Hence I seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,
          Of life to bereave him, though well I am able.

{We will fight with nature's weapons only.}

       20 No battle-skill[1] has he, that blows he should strike me,
          To shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty
[25]      In strife and destruction; but struggling by night we
          Shall do without edges, dare he to look for
          Weaponless warfare, and wise-mooded Father
       25 The glory apportion, God ever-holy,

{God may decide who shall conquer}

          On which hand soever to him seemeth proper."
          Then the brave-mooded hero bent to his slumber,
          The pillow received the cheek of the noble;

{The Geatish warriors lie down.}

          And many a martial mere-thane attending
       30 Sank to his slumber. Seemed it unlikely

{They thought it very unlikely that they should ever see their homes
again.}

          That ever thereafter any should hope to
          Be happy at home, hero-friends visit
          Or the lordly troop-castle where he lived from his childhood;
          They had heard how slaughter had snatched from the wine-hall,
       35 Had recently ravished, of the race of the Scyldings

{But God raised up a deliverer.}

          Too many by far. But the Lord to them granted
          The weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroes
          Aid and comfort, that every opponent
          By one man's war-might they worsted and vanquished,

{God rules the world.}

       40 By the might of himself; the truth is established
          That God Almighty hath governed for ages
          Kindreds and nations. A night very lurid

{Grendel comes to Heorot.}

          The trav'ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.
          The warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,

{Only one warrior is awake.}

       45 One only excepted. 'Mid earthmen 'twas 'stablished,
          Th' implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them
          To the land of shadows, if the Lord were unwilling;
          But serving as warder, in terror to foemen,
          He angrily bided the issue of battle.[2]

    [1] Gr. understood 'godra' as meaning 'advantages in battle.' This
    rendering H.-So. rejects. The latter takes the passage as meaning that
    Grendel, though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.

    [2] B. in his masterly articles on Beowulf (P. and B. XII.) rejects
    the division usually made at this point, 'Þa.' (711), usually rendered
    'then,' he translates 'when,' and connects its clause with the
    foregoing sentence. These changes he makes to reduce the number of
    'com's' as principal verbs. (Cf. 703, 711, 721.) With all deference to
    this acute scholar, I must say that it seems to me that the poet is
    exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event on
    which the whole subsequent action turns. First, he (Grendel) came _in
    the wan night_; second, he came _from the moor_; third, he came _to
    the hall_. Time, place from which, place to which, are all given.

[26]




XII.

GRENDEL AND BEOWULF.


{Grendel comes from the fens.}

          'Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then
          Grendel going, God's anger bare he.
          The monster intended some one of earthmen
          In the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:

{He goes towards the joyous building.}

        5 He went under welkin where well he knew of
          The wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,
          Gold-hall of earthmen. Not the earliest occasion

{This was not his first visit there.}

          He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought:
          Ne'er found he in life-days later nor earlier
       10 Hardier hero, hall-thanes[1] more sturdy!
          Then came to the building the warrior marching,

{His horrid fingers tear the door open.}

          Bereft of his joyance. The door quickly opened
          On fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it;
          The fell one had flung then--his fury so bitter--
       15 Open the entrance. Early thereafter
          The foeman trod the shining hall-pavement,

{He strides furiously into the hall.}

          Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmered
          A lustre unlovely likest to fire.
          He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,
       20 A circle of kinsmen sleeping together,

{He exults over his supposed prey.}

          A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,
          He minded to sunder from each of the thanemen
          The life from his body, horrible demon,
          Ere morning came, since fate had allowed him

{Fate has decreed that he shall devour no more heroes. Beowulf suffers
from suspense.}

       25 The prospect of plenty. Providence willed not
          To permit him any more of men under heaven
          To eat in the night-time. Higelac's kinsman
          Great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature
[27]      In unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.
       30 No thought had the monster of deferring the matter,

{Grendel immediately seizes a sleeping warrior, and devours him.}

          But on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold of
          A soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,
          Bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,
          Swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man's
       35 Feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.
          Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior

{Beowulf and Grendel grapple.}

          Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,
          Forward the foeman foined with his hand;
          Caught he quickly the cunning deviser,
       40 On his elbow he rested. This early discovered
          The master of malice, that in middle-earth's regions,
          'Neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greater

{The monster is amazed at Beowulf's strength.}

          In any man else had he ever encountered:
          Fearful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,
       45 Not off could betake him; death he was pondering,

{He is anxious to flee.}

          Would fly to his covert, seek the devils' assembly:
          His calling no more was the same he had followed
          Long in his lifetime. The liege-kinsman worthy

{Beowulf recalls his boast of the evening, and determines to fulfil it.}

          Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening,
       50 Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.
          His fingers crackled; the giant was outward,
          The earl stepped farther. The famous one minded
          To flee away farther, if he found an occasion,
          And off and away, avoiding delay,
       55 To fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of
          The strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.

{'Twas a luckless day for Grendel.}

          'Twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,
          Harrying harmer to Heorot wandered:

{The hall groans.}

          The palace re-echoed; to all of the Danemen,
       60 Dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,
          Earlmen, was terror. Angry they both were,
          Archwarders raging.[2] Rattled the building;
[28]      'Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then
          The bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,
       65 Excellent earth-hall; but within and without it
          Was fastened so firmly in fetters of iron,
          By the art of the armorer. Off from the sill there
          Bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,
          Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.
       70 The Scylding wise men weened ne'er before
          That by might and main-strength a man under heaven
          Might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,
          Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire
          In smoke should consume it. The sound mounted upward

{Grendel's cries terrify the Danes.}

       75 Novel enough; on the North Danes fastened
          A terror of anguish, on all of the men there
          Who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,
          The song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,
          Heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow
       80 Hell-bound bewailing. He held him too firmly
          Who was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.

    [1] B. and t.B. emend so as to make lines 9 and 10 read: _Never in his
    life, earlier or later, had he, the hell-thane, found a braver
    hero_.--They argue that Beowulf's companions had done nothing to merit
    such encomiums as the usual readings allow them.

    [2] For 'reethe ren-weardas' (771), t.B. suggests 'reethe, renhearde.'
    Translate: _They were both angry, raging and mighty_.




XIII.

GRENDEL IS VANQUISHED.


{Beowulf has no idea of letting Grendel live.}

          For no cause whatever would the earlmen's defender
          Leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,
          He deemed his existence utterly useless
          To men under heaven. Many a noble
        5 Of Beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,
          Would guard the life of his lord and protector,
          The far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;
          While waging the warfare, this wist they but little,
          Brave battle-thanes, while his body intending

{No weapon would harm Grendel; he bore a charmed life.}

       10 To slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:
          That the relentless foeman nor finest of weapons
          Of all on the earth, nor any of war-bills
[29]      Was willing to injure; but weapons of victory
          Swords and suchlike he had sworn to dispense with.
       15 His death at that time must prove to be wretched,
          And the far-away spirit widely should journey
          Into enemies' power. This plainly he saw then
          Who with mirth[1] of mood malice no little
          Had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen
       20 (To God he was hostile), that his body would fail him,
          But Higelac's hardy henchman and kinsman
          Held him by the hand; hateful to other

{Grendel is sorely wounded.}

          Was each one if living. A body-wound suffered
          The direful demon, damage incurable

{His body bursts.}

       25 Was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,
          His body did burst. To Beowulf was given
          Glory in battle; Grendel from thenceward
          Must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,
          Sick unto death, his dwelling must look for
       30 Unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully

{The monster flees away to hide in the moors.}

          The end of his earthly existence was nearing,
          His life-days' limits. At last for the Danemen,
          When the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.
          The comer-from-far-land had cleansed then of evil,
       35 Wise and valiant, the war-hall of Hrothgar,
          Saved it from violence. He joyed in the night-work,
          In repute for prowess; the prince of the Geatmen
          For the East-Danish people his boast had accomplished,
          Bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,
       40 The craft-begot evil they erstwhile had suffered
          And were forced to endure from crushing oppression,
          Their manifold misery. 'Twas a manifest token,

{Beowulf suspends Grendel's hand and arm in Heorot.}

          When the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,
          The arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw
       45 Of Grendel together) 'neath great-stretching hall-roof.

    [1] It has been proposed to translate 'myrethe' by _with sorrow_; but
    there seems no authority for such a rendering. To the present
    translator, the phrase 'modes myrethe' seems a mere padding for
    _gladly_; i.e., _he who gladly harassed mankind_.

[30]




XIV.

REJOICING OF THE DANES.


{At early dawn, warriors from far and near come together to hear of the
night's adventures.}

          In the mist of the morning many a warrior
          Stood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me:
          Folk-princes fared then from far and from near
          Through long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder,
        5 The footprints of the foeman. Few of the warriors

{Few warriors lamented Grendel's destruction.}

          Who gazed on the foot-tracks of the inglorious creature
          His parting from life pained very deeply,
          How, weary in spirit, off from those regions
          In combats conquered he carried his traces,
       10 Fated and flying, to the flood of the nickers.

{Grendel's blood dyes the waters.}

          There in bloody billows bubbled the currents,
          The angry eddy was everywhere mingled
          And seething with gore, welling with sword-blood;[1]
          He death-doomed had hid him, when reaved of his joyance
       15 He laid down his life in the lair he had fled to,
          His heathenish spirit, where hell did receive him.
          Thence the friends from of old backward turned them,
          And many a younker from merry adventure,
          Striding their stallions, stout from the seaward,
       20 Heroes on horses. There were heard very often

{Beowulf is the hero of the hour.}

          Beowulf's praises; many often asserted
          That neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters,

{He is regarded as a probable successor to Hrothgar.}

          O'er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better
          'Mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern,
       25 'Neath the arch of the ether. Not any, however,
          'Gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words uttered

{But no word is uttered to derogate from the old king}

          Of Hrothgar the gracious (a good king he).
          Oft the famed ones permitted their fallow-skinned horses
[31]      To run in rivalry, racing and chasing,
       30 Where the fieldways appeared to them fair and inviting,
          Known for their excellence; oft a thane of the folk-lord,[2]

{The gleeman sings the deeds of heroes.}

          [3]A man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,
          Who ancient traditions treasured in memory,
          New word-groups found properly bound:
       35 The bard after 'gan then Beowulf's venture

{He sings in alliterative measures of Beowulf's prowess.}

          Wisely to tell of, and words that were clever
          To utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,
          Everything told he that he heard as to Sigmund's

{Also of Sigemund, who has slain a great fire-dragon.}

          Mighty achievements, many things hidden,
       40 The strife of the Waelsing, the wide-going ventures
          The children of men knew of but little,
          The feud and the fury, but Fitela with him,
          When suchlike matters he minded to speak of,
          Uncle to nephew, as in every contention
       45 Each to other was ever devoted:
          A numerous host of the race of the scathers
          They had slain with the sword-edge. To Sigmund accrued then
          No little of glory, when his life-days were over,
          Since he sturdy in struggle had destroyed the great dragon,
       50 The hoard-treasure's keeper; 'neath the hoar-grayish stone he,
          The son of the atheling, unaided adventured
          The perilous project; not present was Fitela,
          Yet the fortune befell him of forcing his weapon
          Through the marvellous dragon, that it stood in the wall,
       55 Well-honored weapon; the worm was slaughtered.
          The great one had gained then by his glorious achievement
          To reap from the ring-hoard richest enjoyment,
[32]      As best it did please him: his vessel he loaded,
          Shining ornaments on the ship's bosom carried,
       60 Kinsman of Waels: the drake in heat melted.

{Sigemund was widely famed.}

          He was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,
          Mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,
          War-troopers' shelter: hence waxed he in honor.[4]

{Heremod, an unfortunate Danish king, is introduced by way of contrast.}

          Afterward Heremod's hero-strength failed him,
       65 His vigor and valor. 'Mid venomous haters
          To the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,
          Offdriven early. Agony-billows

{Unlike Sigemund and Beowulf, Heremod was a burden to his people.}

          Oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,
          To all the athelings, an ever-great burden;
       70 And the daring one's journey in days of yore
          Many wise men were wont to deplore,
          Such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,
          That the son of their ruler should rise into power,
          Holding the headship held by his fathers,
       75 Should govern the people, the gold-hoard and borough,
          The kingdom of heroes, the realm of the Scyldings.

{Beowulf is an honor to his race.}

          He to all men became then far more beloved,
          Higelac's kinsman, to kindreds and races,
          To his friends much dearer; him malice assaulted.--

{The story is resumed.}

       80 Oft running and racing on roadsters they measured
          The dun-colored highways. Then the light of the morning
          Was hurried and hastened. Went henchmen in numbers
          To the beautiful building, bold ones in spirit,
          To look at the wonder; the liegelord himself then
       85 From his wife-bower wending, warden of treasures,
          Glorious trod with troopers unnumbered,
          Famed for his virtues, and with him the queen-wife
          Measured the mead-ways, with maidens attending.

    [1] S. emends, suggesting 'deop' for 'deog,' and removing semicolon
    after 'weol.' The two half-lines 'welling ... hid him' would then
    read: _The bloody deep welled with sword-gore_. B. accepts 'deop' for
    'deog,' but reads 'deaeth-faeges': _The deep boiled with the sword-gore
    of the death-doomed one_.

    [2] Another and quite different rendering of this passage is as
    follows: _Oft a liegeman of the king, a fame-covered man mindful of
    songs, who very many ancient traditions remembered (he found other
    word-groups accurately bound together) began afterward to tell of
    Beowulf's adventure, skilfully to narrate it, etc_.

    [3] Might 'guma gilp-hladen' mean 'a man laden with boasts of the
    deeds of others'?

    [4] t.B. accepts B.'s 'he þaes aron þah' as given by H.-So., but puts a
    comma after 'þah,' and takes 'siethethan' as introducing a dependent
    clause: _He throve in honor since Heremod's strength ... had
    decreased_.

[33]




XV.

HROTHGAR'S GRATITUDE.


          Hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,
          He stood by the pillar,[1] saw the steep-rising hall-roof
          Gleaming with gold-gems, and Grendel his hand there):

{Hrothgar gives thanks for the overthrow of the monster.}

          "For the sight we behold now, thanks to the Wielder
        5 Early be offered! Much evil I bided,
          Snaring from Grendel:[2] God can e'er 'complish
          Wonder on wonder, Wielder of Glory!

{I had given up all hope, when this brave liegeman came to our aid.}

          But lately I reckoned ne'er under heaven
          Comfort to gain me for any of sorrows,
       10 While the handsomest of houses horrid with bloodstain
          Gory uptowered; grief had offfrightened[3]
          Each of the wise ones who weened not that ever
          The folk-troop's defences 'gainst foes they should strengthen,
          'Gainst sprites and monsters. Through the might of the Wielder
       15 A doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplished
          Which erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdom

{If his mother yet liveth, well may she thank God for this son.}

          Failed to perform. May affirm very truly
          What woman soever in all of the nations
          Gave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth,
       20 That the long-ruling Lord was lavish to herward
          In the birth of the bairn. Now, Beowulf dear,

{Hereafter, Beowulf, thou shalt be my son.}

          Most excellent hero, I'll love thee in spirit
          As bairn of my body; bear well henceforward
          The relationship new. No lack shall befall thee
       25 Of earth-joys any I ever can give thee.
          Full often for lesser service I've given
[34]      Hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious,

{Thou hast won immortal distinction.}

          To a weaker in war-strife. By works of distinction
          Thou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish
       30 Forever and ever. The All-Ruler quite thee
          With good from His hand as He hitherto did thee!"

{Beowulf replies: I was most happy to render thee this service.}

          Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow's offspring:
          "That labor of glory most gladly achieved we,
          The combat accomplished, unquailing we ventured
       35 The enemy's grapple; I would grant it much rather
          Thou wert able to look at the creature in person,
          Faint unto falling, the foe in his trappings!
          On murder-bed quickly I minded to bind him,
          With firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple
       40 Low he should lie in life-and-death struggle
          'Less his body escape; I was wholly unable,

{I could not keep the monster from escaping, as God did not will that I
should.}

          Since God did not will it, to keep him from going,
          Not held him that firmly, hated opposer;
          Too swift was the foeman. Yet safety regarding
       45 He suffered his hand behind him to linger,
          His arm and shoulder, to act as watcher;

{He left his hand and arm behind.}

          No shadow of solace the woe-begone creature
          Found him there nathless: the hated destroyer
          Liveth no longer, lashed for his evils,
       50 But sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath him
          Close in its clutches, keepeth him writhing
          In baleful bonds: there banished for evil
          The man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,

{God will give him his deserts.}

          How the God of glory shall give him his earnings."
       55 Then the soldier kept silent, son of old Ecglaf,

{Unferth has nothing more to say, for Beowulf's actions speak louder than
words.}

          From boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,
          Since the princes beheld there the hand that depended
          'Neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,
          Each one before him, the enemy's fingers;
       60 Each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,
          The heathen one's hand-spur, the hero-in-battle's
          Claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,

[35]

{No sword will harm the monster.}

          That not any excellent edges of brave ones
          Was willing to touch him, the terrible creature's
       65 Battle-hand bloody to bear away from him.

    [1] B. and t.B. read 'staþole,' and translate _stood on the floor_.

    [2] For 'snaring from Grendel,' 'sorrows at Grendel's hands' has been
    suggested. This gives a parallel to 'laethes.' 'Grynna' may well be gen.
    pl. of 'gyrn,' by a scribal slip.

    [3] The H.-So punctuation has been followed; but B. has been followed
    in understanding 'gehwylcne' as object of 'wid-scofen (haefde).' Gr.
    construes 'wea' as nom abs.




XVI.

HROTHGAR LAVISHES GIFTS UPON HIS DELIVERER.


{Heorot is adorned with hands.}

          Then straight was ordered that Heorot inside[1]
          With hands be embellished: a host of them gathered,
          Of men and women, who the wassailing-building
          The guest-hall begeared. Gold-flashing sparkled
        5 Webs on the walls then, of wonders a many
          To each of the heroes that look on such objects.

{The hall is defaced, however.}

          The beautiful building was broken to pieces
          Which all within with irons was fastened,
          Its hinges torn off: only the roof was
       10 Whole and uninjured when the horrible creature
          Outlawed for evil off had betaken him,
          Hopeless of living. 'Tis hard to avoid it

{[A vague passage of five verses.]}

          (Whoever will do it!); but he doubtless must come to[2]
          The place awaiting, as Wyrd hath appointed,
       15 Soul-bearers, earth-dwellers, earls under heaven,
          Where bound on its bed his body shall slumber

{Hrothgar goes to the banquet.}

          When feasting is finished. Full was the time then
          That the son of Healfdene went to the building;
[36]      The excellent atheling would eat of the banquet.
       20 Ne'er heard I that people with hero-band larger
          Bare them better tow'rds their bracelet-bestower.
          The laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then
          (Their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful,
          Many a cupful quaffing complaisantly),
       25 Doughty of spirit in the high-tow'ring palace,

{Hrothgar's nephew, Hrothulf, is present.}

          Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot then inside
          Was filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treachery
          The Folk-Scyldings now nowise did practise.

{Hrothgar lavishes gifts upon Beowulf.}

          Then the offspring of Healfdene offered to Beowulf
       30 A golden standard, as reward for the victory,


 A banner embossed, burnie and helmet;
          Many men saw then a song-famous weapon
          Borne 'fore the hero. Beowulf drank of
          The cup in the building; that treasure-bestowing
       35 He needed not blush for in battle-men's presence.

{Four handsomer gifts were never presented.}

          Ne'er heard I that many men on the ale-bench
          In friendlier fashion to their fellows presented
          Four bright jewels with gold-work embellished.
          'Round the roof of the helmet a head-guarder outside
       40 Braided with wires, with bosses was furnished,
          That swords-for-the-battle fight-hardened might fail
          Boldly to harm him, when the hero proceeded

{Hrothgar commands that eight finely caparisoned steeds be brought to
Beowulf.}

          Forth against foemen. The defender of earls then
          Commanded that eight steeds with bridles
       45 Gold-plated, gleaming, be guided to hallward,
          Inside the building; on one of them stood then
          An art-broidered saddle embellished with jewels;
          'Twas the sovereign's seat, when the son of King Healfdene
          Was pleased to take part in the play of the edges;
       50 The famous one's valor ne'er failed at the front when
          Slain ones were bowing. And to Beowulf granted
          The prince of the Ingwins, power over both,
          O'er war-steeds and weapons; bade him well to enjoy them.
          In so manly a manner the mighty-famed chieftain,
[37]   55 Hoard-ward of heroes, with horses and jewels
          War-storms requited, that none e'er condemneth
          Who willeth to tell truth with full justice.

    [1] Kl. suggests 'hroden' for 'haten,' and renders: _Then quickly was
    Heorot adorned within, with hands bedecked_.--B. suggests 'gefraetwon'
    instead of 'gefraetwod,' and renders: _Then was it commanded to adorn
    Heorot within quickly with hands_.--The former has the advantage of
    affording a parallel to 'gefraetwod': both have the disadvantage of
    altering the text.

    [2] The passage 1005-1009 seems to be hopeless. One difficult point is
    to find a subject for 'gesacan.' Some say 'he'; others supply 'each,'
    _i.e., every soul-bearer ... must gain the inevitable place_. The
    genitives in this case are partitive.--If 'he' be subj., the genitives
    are dependent on 'gearwe' (= prepared).--The 'he' itself is disputed,
    some referring it to Grendel; but B. takes it as involved in the
    parenthesis.




XVII.

BANQUET (_continued_).--THE SCOP'S SONG OF FINN AND HNAEF.


{Each of Beowulf's companions receives a costly gift.}

          And the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroes
          Who the ways of the waters went with Beowulf,
          A costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,
          Offered an heirloom, and ordered that that man

{The warrior killed by Grendel is to be paid for in gold.}

        5 With gold should be paid for, whom Grendel had erstwhile
          Wickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had done
          Had far-seeing God and the mood of the hero
          The fate not averted: the Father then governed
          All of the earth-dwellers, as He ever is doing;
       10 Hence insight for all men is everywhere fittest,
          Forethought of spirit! much he shall suffer
          Of lief and of loathsome who long in this present
          Useth the world in this woful existence.
          There was music and merriment mingling together

{Hrothgar's scop recalls events in the reign of his lord's father.}

       15 Touching Healfdene's leader; the joy-wood was fingered,
          Measures recited, when the singer of Hrothgar
          On mead-bench should mention the merry hall-joyance
          Of the kinsmen of Finn, when onset surprised them:

{Hnaef, the Danish general, is treacherously attacked while staying at
Finn's castle.}

          "The Half-Danish hero, Hnaef of the Scyldings,
       20 On the field of the Frisians was fated to perish.
          Sure Hildeburg needed not mention approving
          The faith of the Jutemen: though blameless entirely,

{Queen Hildeburg is not only wife of Finn, but a kinswoman of the murdered
Hnaef.}

          When shields were shivered she was shorn of her darlings,
          Of bairns and brothers: they bent to their fate
       25 With war-spear wounded; woe was that woman.
          Not causeless lamented the daughter of Hoce
          The decree of the Wielder when morning-light came and
          She was able 'neath heaven to behold the destruction
[38]      Of brothers and bairns, where the brightest of earth-joys

{Finn's force is almost exterminated.}

       30 She had hitherto had: all the henchmen of Finn
          War had offtaken, save a handful remaining,
          That he nowise was able to offer resistance[1]

{Hengest succeeds Hnaef as Danish general.}

          To the onset of Hengest in the parley of battle,
          Nor the wretched remnant to rescue in war from
       35 The earl of the atheling; but they offered conditions,

{Compact between the Frisians and the Danes.}

          Another great building to fully make ready,
          A hall and a high-seat, that half they might rule with
          The sons of the Jutemen, and that Folcwalda's son would
          Day after day the Danemen honor
       40 When gifts were giving, and grant of his ring-store
          To Hengest's earl-troop ever so freely,
          Of his gold-plated jewels, as he encouraged the Frisians

{Equality of gifts agreed on.}

          On the bench of the beer-hall. On both sides they swore then
          A fast-binding compact; Finn unto Hengest
       45 With no thought of revoking vowed then most solemnly
          The woe-begone remnant well to take charge of,
          His Witan advising; the agreement should no one
          By words or works weaken and shatter,
          By artifice ever injure its value,
       50 Though reaved of their ruler their ring-giver's slayer
          They followed as vassals, Fate so requiring:

{No one shall refer to old grudges.}

          Then if one of the Frisians the quarrel should speak of
          In tones that were taunting, terrible edges
          Should cut in requital. Accomplished the oath was,
       55 And treasure of gold from the hoard was uplifted.

{Danish warriors are burned on a funeral-pyre.}

          The best of the Scylding braves was then fully
          Prepared for the pile; at the pyre was seen clearly
          The blood-gory burnie, the boar with his gilding,
          The iron-hard swine, athelings many
       60 Fatally wounded; no few had been slaughtered.
          Hildeburg bade then, at the burning of Hnaef,

[39]

{Queen Hildeburg has her son burnt along with Hnaef.}

          The bairn of her bosom to bear to the fire,
          That his body be burned and borne to the pyre.
          The woe-stricken woman wept on his shoulder,[2]
       65 In measures lamented; upmounted the hero.[3]
          The greatest of dead-fires curled to the welkin,
          On the hill's-front crackled; heads were a-melting,
          Wound-doors bursting, while the blood was a-coursing
          From body-bite fierce. The fire devoured them,
       70 Greediest of spirits, whom war had offcarried
          From both of the peoples; their bravest were fallen.

    [1] For 1084, R. suggests 'wiht Hengeste wieth gefeohtan.'--K. suggests
    'wieth Hengeste wiht gefeohtan.' Neither emendation would make any
    essential change in the translation.

    [2] The separation of adjective and noun by a phrase (cf. v. 1118)
    being very unusual, some scholars have put 'earme on eaxle' with the
    foregoing lines, inserting a semicolon after 'eaxle.' In this case 'on
    eaxe' (_i.e._, on the ashes, cinders) is sometimes read, and this
    affords a parallel to 'on bael.' Let us hope that a satisfactory
    rendering shall yet be reached without resorting to any tampering with
    the text, such as Lichtenheld proposed: 'earme ides on eaxle
    gnornode.'

    [3] For 'gueth-rinc,' 'gueth-rec,' _battle-smoke_, has been suggested.




XVIII.

THE FINN EPISODE (_continued_).--THE BANQUET CONTINUES.


{The survivors go to Friesland, the home of Finn.}

          "Then the warriors departed to go to their dwellings,
          Reaved of their friends, Friesland to visit,
          Their homes and high-city. Hengest continued

{Hengest remains there all winter, unable to get away.}

          Biding with Finn the blood-tainted winter,
        5 Wholly unsundered;[1] of fatherland thought he
          Though unable to drive the ring-stemmed vessel
[40]      O'er the ways of the waters; the wave-deeps were tossing,
          Fought with the wind; winter in ice-bonds
          Closed up the currents, till there came to the dwelling
       10 A year in its course, as yet it revolveth,
          If season propitious one alway regardeth,
          World-cheering weathers. Then winter was gone,
          Earth's bosom was lovely; the exile would get him,

{He devises schemes of vengeance.}

          The guest from the palace; on grewsomest vengeance
       15 He brooded more eager than on oversea journeys,
          Whe'r onset-of-anger he were able to 'complish,
          The bairns of the Jutemen therein to remember.
          Nowise refused he the duties of liegeman
          When Hun of the Frisians the battle-sword Lafing,
       20 Fairest of falchions, friendly did give him:
          Its edges were famous in folk-talk of Jutland.
          And savage sword-fury seized in its clutches
          Bold-mooded Finn where he bode in his palace,

{Guthlaf and Oslaf revenge Hnaef's slaughter.}

          When the grewsome grapple Guthlaf and Oslaf
       25 Had mournfully mentioned, the mere-journey over,
          For sorrows half-blamed him; the flickering spirit
          Could not bide in his bosom. Then the building was covered[2]

{Finn is slain.}

          With corpses of foemen, and Finn too was slaughtered,
          The king with his comrades, and the queen made a prisoner.

{The jewels of Finn, and his queen are carried away by the Danes.}

       30 The troops of the Scyldings bore to their vessels
          All that the land-king had in his palace,
          Such trinkets and treasures they took as, on searching,
          At Finn's they could find. They ferried to Daneland
          The excellent woman on oversea journey,

{The lay is concluded, and the main story is resumed.}

       35 Led her to their land-folk." The lay was concluded,
          The gleeman's recital. Shouts again rose then,
          Bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered

{Skinkers carry round the beaker.}

          Wine from wonder-vats. Wealhtheo advanced then
          Going 'neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated

[41]

{Queen Wealhtheow greets Hrothgar, as he sits beside Hrothulf, his
nephew.}

       40 Uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,
          True each to the other. And Unferth the spokesman
          Sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings:
          Each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,
          Though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.
       45 Said the queen of the Scyldings: "My lord and protector,
          Treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;
          Joyance attend thee, gold-friend of heroes,

{Be generous to the Geats.}

          And greet thou the Geatmen with gracious responses!
          So ought one to do. Be kind to the Geatmen,
       50 In gifts not niggardly; anear and afar now
          Peace thou enjoyest. Report hath informed me
          Thou'lt have for a bairn the battle-brave hero.
          Now is Heorot cleansed, ring-palace gleaming;

{Have as much joy as possible in thy hall, once more purified.}

          Give while thou mayest many rewards,
       55 And bequeath to thy kinsmen kingdom and people,
          On wending thy way to the Wielder's splendor.
          I know good Hrothulf, that the noble young troopers

{I know that Hrothulf will prove faithful if he survive thee.}

          He'll care for and honor, lord of the Scyldings,
          If earth-joys thou endest earlier than he doth;
       60 I reckon that recompense he'll render with kindness
          Our offspring and issue, if that all he remember,
          What favors of yore, when he yet was an infant,
          We awarded to him for his worship and pleasure."
          Then she turned by the bench where her sons were carousing,
       65 Hrethric and Hrothmund, and the heroes' offspring,

{Beowulf is sitting by the two royal sons.}

          The war-youth together; there the good one was sitting
          'Twixt the brothers twain, Beowulf Geatman.

    [1] For 1130 (1) R. and Gr. suggest 'elne unflitme' as 1098 (1) reads.
    The latter verse is undisputed; and, for the former, 'elne' would be
    as possible as 'ealles,' and 'unflitme' is well supported. Accepting
    'elne unflitme' for both, I would suggest '_very peaceably_' for both
    places: (1) _Finn to Hengest very peaceably vowed with oaths_, etc.
    (2) _Hengest then still the slaughter-stained winter remained there
    with Finn very peaceably_. The two passages become thus correlatives,
    the second a sequel of the first. 'Elne,' in the sense of very
    (swiethe), needs no argument; and 'unflitme' (from 'flitan') can, it
    seems to me, be more plausibly rendered 'peaceful,' 'peaceable,' than
    'contestable,' or 'conquerable.'

    [2] Some scholars have proposed 'roden'; the line would then read:
    _Then the building was reddened, etc._, instead of 'covered.' The 'h'
    may have been carried over from the three alliterating 'h's.'




XIX.

BEOWULF RECEIVES FURTHER HONOR.


{More gifts are offered Beowulf.}

          A beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff it
          Graciously given, and gold that was twisted
          Pleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels,
[42]      Rings and corslet, of collars the greatest
        5 I've heard of 'neath heaven. Of heroes not any
          More splendid from jewels have I heard 'neath the welkin,

{A famous necklace is referred to, in comparison with the gems presented
to Beowulf.}

          Since Hama off bore the Brosingmen's necklace,
          The bracteates and jewels, from the bright-shining city,[1]
          Eormenric's cunning craftiness fled from,
       10 Chose gain everlasting. Geatish Higelac,
          Grandson of Swerting, last had this jewel
          When tramping 'neath banner the treasure he guarded,
          The field-spoil defended; Fate offcarried him
          When for deeds of daring he endured tribulation,
       15 Hate from the Frisians; the ornaments bare he
          O'er the cup of the currents, costly gem-treasures,
          Mighty folk-leader, he fell 'neath his target;
          The[2] corpse of the king then came into charge of
          The race of the Frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:
       20 Warmen less noble plundered the fallen,
          When the fight was finished; the folk of the Geatmen
          The field of the dead held in possession.
          The choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.
          Wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:

{Queen Wealhtheow magnifies Beowulf's achievements.}

       25 "This collar enjoy thou, Beowulf worthy,
          Young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,
          Gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,
          Show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen
          Mild with instruction! I'll mind thy requital.
       30 Thou hast brought it to pass that far and near
          Forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,
          Even so widely as ocean surroundeth
          The blustering bluffs. Be, while thou livest,
[43]      A wealth-blessed atheling. I wish thee most truly

{May gifts never fail thee.}

       35 Jewels and treasure. Be kind to my son, thou
          Living in joyance! Here each of the nobles
          Is true unto other, gentle in spirit,
          Loyal to leader. The liegemen are peaceful,
          The war-troops ready: well-drunken heroes,[3]
       40 Do as I bid ye." Then she went to the settle.
          There was choicest of banquets, wine drank the heroes:

{They little know of the sorrow in store for them.}

          Weird they knew not, destiny cruel,
          As to many an earlman early it happened,
          When evening had come and Hrothgar had parted
       45 Off to his manor, the mighty to slumber.
          Warriors unnumbered warded the building
          As erst they did often: the ale-settle bared they,
          'Twas covered all over with beds and pillows.

{A doomed thane is there with them.}

          Doomed unto death, down to his slumber
       50 Bowed then a beer-thane. Their battle-shields placed they,
          Bright-shining targets, up by their heads then;
          O'er the atheling on ale-bench 'twas easy to see there
          Battle-high helmet, burnie of ring-mail,

{They were always ready for battle.}

          And mighty war-spear. 'Twas the wont of that people
       55 To constantly keep them equipped for the battle,[4]
          At home or marching--in either condition--
          At seasons just such as necessity ordered
          As best for their ruler; that people was worthy.

    [1] C. suggests a semicolon after 'city,' with 'he' as supplied
    subject of 'fled' and 'chose.'

    [2] For 'feorh' S. suggests 'feoh': 'corpse' in the translation would
    then be changed to '_possessions_,' '_belongings_.' This is a better
    reading than one joining, in such intimate syntactical relations,
    things so unlike as 'corpse' and 'jewels.'

    [3] S. suggests '_wine-joyous heroes_,' '_warriors elated with wine_.'

    [4] I believe this translation brings out the meaning of the poet,
    without departing seriously from the H.-So. text. 'Oft' frequently
    means 'constantly,' 'continually,' not always 'often.'--Why 'an (on)
    wig gearwe' should be written 'anwig-gearwe' (= ready for single
    combat), I cannot see. 'Gearwe' occurs quite frequently with 'on'; cf.
    B. 1110 (_ready for the pyre_), El. 222 (_ready for the glad
    journey_). Moreover, what has the idea of single combat to do with B.
    1247 ff.? The poet is giving an inventory of the arms and armor which
    they lay aside on retiring, and he closes his narration by saying that
    they were _always prepared for battle both at home and on the march_.

[44]




XX.

THE MOTHER OF GRENDEL.


          They sank then to slumber. With sorrow one paid for
          His evening repose, as often betid them
          While Grendel was holding[1] the gold-bedecked palace,
          Ill-deeds performing, till his end overtook him,
        5 Death for his sins. 'Twas seen very clearly,

{Grendel's mother is known to be thirsting for revenge.}

          Known unto earth-folk, that still an avenger
          Outlived the loathed one, long since the sorrow
          Caused by the struggle; the mother of Grendel,
          Devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,
       10 Who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,

{[Grendel's progenitor, Cain, is again referred to.]}

          The cold-flowing currents, after Cain had become a
          Slayer-with-edges to his one only brother,
          The son of his sire; he set out then banished,
          Marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,
       15 Lived in the desert. Thence demons unnumbered

{The poet again magnifies Beowulf's valor.}

          Fate-sent awoke; one of them Grendel,
          Sword-cursed, hateful, who at Heorot met with
          A man that was watching, waiting the struggle,
          Where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;
       20 Nathless he minded the might of his body,
          The glorious gift God had allowed him,
          And folk-ruling Father's favor relied on,
          His help and His comfort: so he conquered the foeman,
          The hell-spirit humbled: he unhappy departed then,
       25 Reaved of his joyance, journeying to death-haunts,
          Foeman of man. His mother moreover

{Grendel's mother comes to avenge her son.}

          Eager and gloomy was anxious to go on
          Her mournful mission, mindful of vengeance
          For the death of her son. She came then to Heorot
[45]   30 Where the Armor-Dane earlmen all through the building
          Were lying in slumber. Soon there became then
          Return[2] to the nobles, when the mother of Grendel
          Entered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievous
          By even so much as the vigor of maidens,
       35 War-strength of women, by warrior is reckoned,
          When well-carved weapon, worked with the hammer,
          Blade very bloody, brave with its edges,
          Strikes down the boar-sign that stands on the helmet.
          Then the hard-edged weapon was heaved in the building,[3]
       40 The brand o'er the benches, broad-lindens many
          Hand-fast were lifted; for helmet he recked not,
          For armor-net broad, whom terror laid hold of.
          She went then hastily, outward would get her
          Her life for to save, when some one did spy her;

{She seizes a favorite liegemen of Hrothgar's.}

       45 Soon she had grappled one of the athelings
          Fast and firmly, when fenward she hied her;
          That one to Hrothgar was liefest of heroes
          In rank of retainer where waters encircle,
          A mighty shield-warrior, whom she murdered at slumber,
       50 A broadly-famed battle-knight. Beowulf was absent,

{Beowulf was asleep in another part of the palace.}

          But another apartment was erstwhile devoted
          To the glory-decked Geatman when gold was distributed.
          There was hubbub in Heorot. The hand that was famous
          She grasped in its gore;[4] grief was renewed then
[46]   55 In homes and houses: 'twas no happy arrangement
          In both of the quarters to barter and purchase
          With lives of their friends. Then the well-aged ruler,
          The gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit,
          When his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of,

{Beowulf is sent for.}

       60 His dearest one gone. Quick from a room was
          Beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.
          As day was dawning in the dusk of the morning,

{He comes at Hrothgar's summons.}

          Went then that earlman, champion noble,
          Came with comrades, where the clever one bided
       65 Whether God all gracious would grant him a respite
          After the woe he had suffered. The war-worthy hero
          With a troop of retainers trod then the pavement
          (The hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,

{Beowulf inquires how Hrothgar had enjoyed his night's rest.}

          The earl of the Ingwins;[5] asked if the night had
       70 Fully refreshed him, as fain he would have it.

    [1] Several eminent authorities either read or emend the MS. so as to
    make this verse read, _While Grendel was wasting the gold-bedecked
    palace_. So 20_15 below: _ravaged the desert_.

    [2] For 'sona' (1281), t.B. suggests 'sara,' limiting 'edhwyrft.' Read
    then: _Return of sorrows to the nobles, etc_. This emendation supplies
    the syntactical gap after 'edhwyrft.'

    [3] Some authorities follow Grein's lexicon in treating 'heard ecg' as
    an adj. limiting 'sweord': H.-So. renders it as a subst. (So v. 1491.)
    The sense of the translation would be the same.

    [4] B. suggests 'under hrof genam' (v. 1303). This emendation, as well
    as an emendation with (?) to v. 739, he offers, because 'under'
    baffles him in both passages. All we need is to take 'under' in its
    secondary meaning of 'in,' which, though not given by Grein, occurs in
    the literature. Cf. Chron. 876 (March's A.-S. Gram. Sec. 355) and Oro.
    Amaz. I. 10, where 'under' = _in the midst of_. Cf. modern Eng. 'in
    such circumstances,' which interchanges in good usage with 'under such
    circumstances.'

    [5] For 'neod-laethu' (1321) C. suggests 'nead-laethum,' and translates:
    _asked whether the night had been pleasant to him after
    crushing-hostility_.




XXI.

HROTHGAR'S ACCOUNT OF THE MONSTERS.


{Hrothgar laments the death of AEschere, his shoulder-companion.}

          Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the Scyldings:
          "Ask not of joyance! Grief is renewed to
          The folk of the Danemen. Dead is AEschere,
          Yrmenlaf's brother, older than he,
        5 My true-hearted counsellor, trusty adviser,
          Shoulder-companion, when fighting in battle
          Our heads we protected, when troopers were clashing,

{He was my ideal hero.}

          And heroes were dashing; such an earl should be ever,
          An erst-worthy atheling, as AEschere proved him.
       10 The flickering death-spirit became in Heorot
          His hand-to-hand murderer; I can not tell whither
          The cruel one turned in the carcass exulting,

[47]

{This horrible creature came to avenge Grendel's death.}

          By cramming discovered.[1] The quarrel she wreaked then,
          That last night igone Grendel thou killedst
       15 In grewsomest manner, with grim-holding clutches,
          Since too long he had lessened my liege-troop and wasted
          My folk-men so foully. He fell in the battle
          With forfeit of life, and another has followed,
          A mighty crime-worker, her kinsman avenging,
       20 And henceforth hath 'stablished her hatred unyielding,[2]
          As it well may appear to many a liegeman,
          Who mourneth in spirit the treasure-bestower,
          Her heavy heart-sorrow; the hand is now lifeless
          Which[3] availed you in every wish that you cherished.

{I have heard my vassals speak of these two uncanny monsters who lived in
the moors.}

       25 Land-people heard I, liegemen, this saying,
          Dwellers in halls, they had seen very often
          A pair of such mighty march-striding creatures,
          Far-dwelling spirits, holding the moorlands:
          One of them wore, as well they might notice,
       30 The image of woman, the other one wretched
          In guise of a man wandered in exile,
          Except he was huger than any of earthmen;
          Earth-dwelling people entitled him Grendel
          In days of yore: they know not their father,
       35 Whe'r ill-going spirits any were borne him

{The inhabit the most desolate and horrible places.}

          Ever before. They guard the wolf-coverts,
          Lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses,
          Fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains
          'Neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles,
       40 The stream under earth: not far is it henceward
          Measured by mile-lengths that the mere-water standeth,
          Which forests hang over, with frost-whiting covered,[4]
[48]      A firm-rooted forest, the floods overshadow.
          There ever at night one an ill-meaning portent
       45 A fire-flood may see; 'mong children of men
          None liveth so wise that wot of the bottom;
          Though harassed by hounds the heath-stepper seek for,

{Even the hounded deer will not seek refuge in these uncanny regions.}

          Fly to the forest, firm-antlered he-deer,
          Spurred from afar, his spirit he yieldeth,
       50 His life on the shore, ere in he will venture
          To cover his head. Uncanny the place is:
          Thence upward ascendeth the surging of waters,
          Wan to the welkin, when the wind is stirring
          The weathers unpleasing, till the air groweth gloomy,

{To thee only can I look for assistance.}

       55 And the heavens lower. Now is help to be gotten
          From thee and thee only! The abode thou know'st not,
          The dangerous place where thou'rt able to meet with
          The sin-laden hero: seek if thou darest!
          For the feud I will fully fee thee with money,
       60 With old-time treasure, as erstwhile I did thee,
          With well-twisted jewels, if away thou shalt get thee."

    [1] For 'gefraegnod' (1334), K. and t.B. suggest 'gefaegnod,' rendering
    '_rejoicing in her fill_.' This gives a parallel to 'aese wlanc'
    (1333).

    [2] The line 'And ... yielding,' B. renders: _And she has performed a
    deed of blood-vengeance whose effect is far-reaching_.

    [3] 'Se Þe' (1345) is an instance of masc. rel. with fem. antecedent.
    So v. 1888, where 'se Þe' refers to 'yldo.'

    [4] For 'hrimge' in the H.-So. edition, Gr. and others read 'hrinde'
    (=hrinende), and translate: _which rustling forests overhang_.




XXII.

BEOWULF SEEKS GRENDEL'S MOTHER.


          Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow's son:

{Beowulf exhorts the old king to arouse himself for action.}

          "Grieve not, O wise one! for each it is better,
          His friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;
          Each of us must the end-day abide of
        5 His earthly existence; who is able accomplish
          Glory ere death! To battle-thane noble
          Lifeless lying, 'tis at last most fitting.
          Arise, O king, quick let us hasten
          To look at the footprint of the kinsman of Grendel!
       10 I promise thee this now: to his place he'll escape not,
          To embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest,
          Nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders.
[49]      Practice thou now patient endurance
          Of each of thy sorrows, as I hope for thee soothly!"

{Hrothgar rouses himself. His horse is brought.}

       15 Then up sprang the old one, the All-Wielder thanked he,
          Ruler Almighty, that the man had outspoken.
          Then for Hrothgar a war-horse was decked with a bridle,
          Curly-maned courser. The clever folk-leader

{They start on the track of the female monster.}

          Stately proceeded: stepped then an earl-troop
       20 Of linden-wood bearers. Her footprints were seen then
          Widely in wood-paths, her way o'er the bottoms,
          Where she faraway fared o'er fen-country murky,
          Bore away breathless the best of retainers
          Who pondered with Hrothgar the welfare of country.
       25 The son of the athelings then went o'er the stony,
          Declivitous cliffs, the close-covered passes,
          Narrow passages, paths unfrequented,
          Nesses abrupt, nicker-haunts many;
          One of a few of wise-mooded heroes,
       30 He onward advanced to view the surroundings,
          Till he found unawares woods of the mountain
          O'er hoar-stones hanging, holt-wood unjoyful;
          The water stood under, welling and gory.
          'Twas irksome in spirit to all of the Danemen,
       35 Friends of the Scyldings, to many a liegeman

{The sight of AEschere's head causes them great sorrow.}

          Sad to be suffered, a sorrow unlittle
          To each of the earlmen, when to AEschere's head they
          Came on the cliff. The current was seething
          With blood and with gore (the troopers gazed on it).
       40 The horn anon sang the battle-song ready.
          The troop were all seated; they saw 'long the water then

{The water is filled with serpents and sea-dragons.}

          Many a serpent, mere-dragons wondrous
          Trying the waters, nickers a-lying
          On the cliffs of the nesses, which at noonday full often
       45 Go on the sea-deeps their sorrowful journey,
          Wild-beasts and wormkind; away then they hastened

{One of them is killed by Beowulf.}

          Hot-mooded, hateful, they heard the great clamor,
          The war-trumpet winding. One did the Geat-prince
[50]      Sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring,
       50 From his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missile

{The dead beast is a poor swimmer}

          Pierced to his vitals; he proved in the currents
          Less doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.
          Soon in the waters the wonderful swimmer
          Was straitened most sorely with sword-pointed boar-spears,
       55 Pressed in the battle and pulled to the cliff-edge;
          The liegemen then looked on the loath-fashioned stranger.

{Beowulf prepares for a struggle with the monster.}

          Beowulf donned then his battle-equipments,
          Cared little for life; inlaid and most ample,
          The hand-woven corslet which could cover his body,
       60 Must the wave-deeps explore, that war might be powerless
          To harm the great hero, and the hating one's grasp might
          Not peril his safety; his head was protected
          By the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,
          Trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,
       65 Encircled with jewels, as in seasons long past
          The weapon-smith worked it, wondrously made it,
          With swine-bodies fashioned it, that thenceforward no longer
          Brand might bite it, and battle-sword hurt it.
          And that was not least of helpers in prowess

{He has Unferth's sword in his hand.}

       70 That Hrothgar's spokesman had lent him when straitened;
          And the hilted hand-sword was Hrunting entitled,
          Old and most excellent 'mong all of the treasures;
          Its blade was of iron, blotted with poison,
          Hardened with gore; it failed not in battle
       75 Any hero under heaven in hand who it brandished,
          Who ventured to take the terrible journeys,
          The battle-field sought; not the earliest occasion
          That deeds of daring 'twas destined to 'complish.

{Unferth has little use for swords.}

          Ecglaf's kinsman minded not soothly,
       80 Exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken
          Drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to
          A sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture
          'Neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,
[51]      To fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,
       85 Repute for his strength. Not so with the other
          When he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.




XXIII.

BEOWULF'S FIGHT WITH GRENDEL'S MOTHER.


{Beowulf makes a parting speech to Hrothgar.}

          Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow's son:
          "Recall now, oh, famous kinsman of Healfdene,
          Prince very prudent, now to part I am ready,
          Gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,

{If I fail, act as a kind liegelord to my thanes,}

        5 Should I lay down my life in lending thee assistance,
          When my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve me
          In stead of a father; my faithful thanemen,
          My trusty retainers, protect thou and care for,
          Fall I in battle: and, Hrothgar beloved,

{and send Higelac the jewels thou hast given me}

       10 Send unto Higelac the high-valued jewels
          Thou to me hast allotted. The lord of the Geatmen
          May perceive from the gold, the Hrethling may see it

{I should like my king to know how generous a lord I found thee to be.}

          When he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found I
          Good over-measure, enjoyed him while able.
       15 And the ancient heirloom Unferth permit thou,
          The famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid[1]
          The hard-edged weapon; with Hrunting to aid me,
          I shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me."

{Beowulf is eager for the fray.}

          The atheling of Geatmen uttered these words and
       20 Heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder
          Was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed

{He is a whole day reaching the bottom of the sea.}

          The doughty-in-battle. Then a day's-length elapsed ere
          He was able to see the sea at its bottom.
          Early she found then who fifty of winters
       25 The course of the currents kept in her fury,
          Grisly and greedy, that the grim one's dominion

[52]

{Grendel's mother knows that some one has reached her domains.}

          Some one of men from above was exploring.
          Forth did she grab them, grappled the warrior
          With horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured
       30 His body unscathed: the burnie out-guarded,
          That she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor,
          The limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.
          The sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she,

{She grabs him, and bears him to her den.}

          The ring-prince homeward, that he after was powerless
       35 (He had daring to do it) to deal with his weapons,
          But many a mere-beast tormented him swimming,

{Sea-monsters bite and strike him.}

          Flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks did
          Break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.
          The earl then discovered he was down in some cavern
       40 Where no water whatever anywise harmed him,
          And the clutch of the current could come not anear him,
          Since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming
          Fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.
          The good one saw then the sea-bottom's monster,

{Beowulf attacks the mother of Grendel.}

       45 The mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset
          With weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted
          From striking, that war-blade struck on her head then
          A battle-song greedy. The stranger perceived then

{The sword will not bite.}

          The sword would not bite, her life would not injure,
       50 But the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:
          Erst had it often onsets encountered,
          Oft cloven the helmet, the fated one's armor:
          'Twas the first time that ever the excellent jewel
          Had failed of its fame. Firm-mooded after,
       55 Not heedless of valor, but mindful of glory,
          Was Higelac's kinsman; the hero-chief angry
          Cast then his carved-sword covered with jewels
          That it lay on the earth, hard and steel-pointed;

{The hero throws down all weapons, and again trusts to his hand-grip.}

          He hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.
       60 So any must act whenever he thinketh
          To gain him in battle glory unending,
          And is reckless of living. The lord of the War-Geats
[53]      (He shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder[2]
          The mother of Grendel; then mighty in struggle
       65 Swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,
          That she fell to the floor. With furious grapple

{Beowulf falls.}

          She gave him requital[3] early thereafter,
          And stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors
          Faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,

{The monster sits on him with drawn sword.}

       70 Foot-going champion. Then she sat on the hall-guest
          And wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing,
          For her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn.

{His armor saves his life.}

          His breast-armor woven bode on his shoulder;
          It guarded his life, the entrance defended
       75 'Gainst sword-point and edges. Ecgtheow's son there
          Had fatally journeyed, champion of Geatmen,
          In the arms of the ocean, had the armor not given,
          Close-woven corslet, comfort and succor,

{God arranged for his escape.}

          And had God most holy not awarded the victory,
       80 All-knowing Lord; easily did heaven's
          Ruler most righteous arrange it with justice;[4]
          Uprose he erect ready for battle.

    [1] Kl. emends 'wael-sweord.' The half-line would then read, '_the
    battle-sword splendid_.'--For 'heard-ecg' in next half-verse, see note
    to 20_39 above.

    [2] Sw., R., and t.B. suggest 'feaxe' for 'eaxle' (1538) and render:
    _Seized by the hair_.

    [3] If 'hand-lean' be accepted (as the MS. has it), the line will
    read: _She hand-reward gave him early thereafter_.

    [4] Sw. and S. change H.-So.'s semicolon (v. 1557) to a comma, and
    translate: _The Ruler of Heaven arranged it in justice easily, after
    he arose again_.




XXIV.

BEOWULF IS DOUBLE-CONQUEROR.


{Beowulf grasps a giant-sword,}

          Then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory,
          An ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty,
          Glory of warriors: of weapons 'twas choicest,
          Only 'twas larger than any man else was
[54]    5 Able to bear to the battle-encounter,
          The good and splendid work of the giants.
          He grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the Scyldings,
          Bold and battle-grim, brandished his ring-sword,
          Hopeless of living, hotly he smote her,
       10 That the fiend-woman's neck firmly it grappled,

{and fells the female monster.}

          Broke through her bone-joints, the bill fully pierced her
          Fate-cursed body, she fell to the ground then:
          The hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.
          The brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered,
       15 Just as from heaven gemlike shineth
          The torch of the firmament. He glanced 'long the building,
          And turned by the wall then, Higelac's vassal
          Raging and wrathful raised his battle-sword
          Strong by the handle. The edge was not useless
       20 To the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to
          Give Grendel requital for the many assaults he
          Had worked on the West-Danes not once, but often,
          When he slew in slumber the subjects of Hrothgar,
          Swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers
       25 Of the folk of the Danemen, and fully as many
          Carried away, a horrible prey.
          He gave him requital, grim-raging champion,

{Beowulf sees the body of Grendel, and cuts off his head.}

          When he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict
          Grendel lying, of life-joys bereaved,
       30 As the battle at Heorot erstwhile had scathed him;
          His body far bounded, a blow when he suffered,
          Death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy,
          And he cut off his head then. Early this noticed
          The clever carles who as comrades of Hrothgar

{The waters are gory.}

       35 Gazed on the sea-deeps, that the surging wave-currents
          Were mightily mingled, the mere-flood was gory:
          Of the good one the gray-haired together held converse,

{Beowulf is given up for dead.}

          The hoary of head, that they hoped not to see again
          The atheling ever, that exulting in victory
       40 He'd return there to visit the distinguished folk-ruler:
[55]      Then many concluded the mere-wolf had killed him.[1]
          The ninth hour came then. From the ness-edge departed
          The bold-mooded Scyldings; the gold-friend of heroes
          Homeward betook him. The strangers sat down then
       45 Soul-sick, sorrowful, the sea-waves regarding:
          They wished and yet weened not their well-loved friend-lord

{The giant-sword melts.}

          To see any more. The sword-blade began then,
          The blood having touched it, contracting and shriveling
          With battle-icicles; 'twas a wonderful marvel
       50 That it melted entirely, likest to ice when
          The Father unbindeth the bond of the frost and
          Unwindeth the wave-bands, He who wieldeth dominion
          Of times and of tides: a truth-firm Creator.
          Nor took he of jewels more in the dwelling,
       55 Lord of the Weders, though they lay all around him,
          Than the head and the handle handsome with jewels;
[56]      The brand early melted, burnt was the weapon:[2]
          So hot was the blood, the strange-spirit poisonous

{The hero swims back to the realms of day.}

          That in it did perish. He early swam off then
       60 Who had bided in combat the carnage of haters,
          Went up through the ocean; the eddies were cleansed,
          The spacious expanses, when the spirit from farland
          His life put aside and this short-lived existence.
          The seamen's defender came swimming to land then
       65 Doughty of spirit, rejoiced in his sea-gift,
          The bulky burden which he bore in his keeping.
          The excellent vassals advanced then to meet him,
          To God they were grateful, were glad in their chieftain,
          That to see him safe and sound was granted them.
       70 From the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnie
          Were speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid,
          The water 'neath welkin weltered with gore.
          Forth did they fare, then, their footsteps retracing,
          Merry and mirthful, measured the earth-way,
       75 The highway familiar: men very daring[3]
          Bare then the head from the sea-cliff, burdening
          Each of the earlmen, excellent-valiant.

{It takes four men to carry Grendel's head on a spear.}

          Four of them had to carry with labor
          The head of Grendel to the high towering gold-hall
       80 Upstuck on the spear, till fourteen most-valiant
          And battle-brave Geatmen came there going
          Straight to the palace: the prince of the people
          Measured the mead-ways, their mood-brave companion.
          The atheling of earlmen entered the building,
       85 Deed-valiant man, adorned with distinction,
          Doughty shield-warrior, to address King Hrothgar:
[57]      Then hung by the hair, the head of Grendel
          Was borne to the building, where beer-thanes were drinking,
          Loth before earlmen and eke 'fore the lady:
       90 The warriors beheld then a wonderful sight.

    [1] 'Þaes monige geweareth' (1599) and 'hafaeth þaes geworden' (2027).--In a
    paper published some years ago in one of the Johns Hopkins University
    circulars, I tried to throw upon these two long-doubtful passages some
    light derived from a study of like passages in Alfred's prose.--The
    impersonal verb 'geweorethan,' with an accus. of the person, and a
    þaet-clause is used several times with the meaning 'agree.' See Orosius
    (Sweet's ed.) 178_7; 204_34; 208_28; 210_15; 280_20. In the two
    Beowulf passages, the þaet-clause is anticipated by 'þaes,' which is
    clearly a gen. of the thing agreed on.

    The first passage (v. 1599 (b)-1600) I translate literally: _Then many
    agreed upon this (namely), that the sea-wolf had killed him_.

    The second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): _She is promised ...; to this
    the friend of the Scyldings has agreed, etc_. By emending 'is' instead
    of 'waes' (2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.

    In v. 1997 ff. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in B.'s great
    article on Beowulf, which appeared about the time I published my
    reading of 1599 and 2027. Translate 1997 then: _Wouldst let the
    South-Danes themselves decide about their struggle with Grendel_. Here
    'Sueth-Dene' is accus. of person, and 'guethe' is gen. of thing agreed on.

    With such collateral support as that afforded by B. (P. and B. XII.
    97), I have no hesitation in departing from H.-So., my usual guide.

    The idiom above treated runs through A.-S., Old Saxon, and other
    Teutonic languages, and should be noticed in the lexicons.

    [2] 'Broden-mael' is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened
    sword. Translate: _The damaskeened sword burned up_. Cf. 25_16 and
    note.

    [3] 'Cyning-balde' (1635) is the much-disputed reading of K. and Th.
    To render this, "_nobly bold_," "_excellently bold_," have been
    suggested. B. would read 'cyning-holde' (cf. 290), and render: _Men
    well-disposed towards the king carried the head, etc._ 'Cynebealde,'
    says t.B., endorsing Gr.




XXV.

BEOWULF BRINGS HIS TROPHIES.--HROTHGAR'S GRATITUDE.


{Beowulf relates his last exploit.}

          Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:
          "Lo! we blithely have brought thee, bairn of Healfdene,
          Prince of the Scyldings, these presents from ocean
          Which thine eye looketh on, for an emblem of glory.
        5 I came off alive from this, narrowly 'scaping:
          In war 'neath the water the work with great pains I
          Performed, and the fight had been finished quite nearly,
          Had God not defended me. I failed in the battle
          Aught to accomplish, aided by Hrunting,
       10 Though that weapon was worthy, but the Wielder of earth-folk

{God was fighting with me.}

          Gave me willingly to see on the wall a
          Heavy old hand-sword hanging in splendor
          (He guided most often the lorn and the friendless),
          That I swung as a weapon. The wards of the house then
       15 I killed in the conflict (when occasion was given me).
          Then the battle-sword burned, the brand that was lifted,[1]
          As the blood-current sprang, hottest of war-sweats;
          Seizing the hilt, from my foes I offbore it;
          I avenged as I ought to their acts of malignity,
       20 The murder of Danemen. I then make thee this promise,

{Heorot is freed from monsters.}

          Thou'lt be able in Heorot careless to slumber
          With thy throng of heroes and the thanes of thy people
          Every and each, of greater and lesser,
          And thou needest not fear for them from the selfsame direction
       25 As thou formerly fearedst, oh, folk-lord of Scyldings,
[58]     End-day for earlmen." To the age-hoary man then,

{The famous sword is presented to Hrothgar.}

          The gray-haired chieftain, the gold-fashioned sword-hilt,
          Old-work of giants, was thereupon given;
          Since the fall of the fiends, it fell to the keeping
       30 Of the wielder of Danemen, the wonder-smith's labor,
          And the bad-mooded being abandoned this world then,
          Opponent of God, victim of murder,
          And also his mother; it went to the keeping
          Of the best of the world-kings, where waters encircle,
       35 Who the scot divided in Scylding dominion.

{Hrothgar looks closely at the old sword.}

          Hrothgar discoursed, the hilt he regarded,
          The ancient heirloom where an old-time contention's
          Beginning was graven: the gurgling currents,
          The flood slew thereafter the race of the giants,
       40 They had proved themselves daring: that people was loth to

{It had belonged to a race hateful to God.}

          The Lord everlasting, through lash of the billows
          The Father gave them final requital.
          So in letters of rune on the clasp of the handle
          Gleaming and golden, 'twas graven exactly,
       45 Set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for,
          Finest of irons, who first it was wrought for,
          Wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.
          The wise one then said (silent they all were)

{Hrothgar praises Beowulf.}

          Son of old Healfdene: "He may say unrefuted
       50 Who performs 'mid the folk-men fairness and truth
          (The hoary old ruler remembers the past),
          That better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!
          Thy fame is extended through far-away countries,
          Good friend Beowulf, o'er all of the races,
       55 Thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength with
          Prudence of spirit. I'll prove myself grateful
          As before we agreed on; thou granted for long shalt
          Become a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades,

{Heremod's career is again contrasted with Beowulf's.}

          A help unto heroes. Heremod became not
       60 Such to the Scyldings, successors of Ecgwela;
          He grew not to please them, but grievous destruction,
[59]      And diresome death-woes to Danemen attracted;
          He slew in anger his table-companions,
          Trustworthy counsellors, till he turned off lonely
       65 From world-joys away, wide-famous ruler:
          Though high-ruling heaven in hero-strength raised him,
          In might exalted him, o'er men of all nations
          Made him supreme, yet a murderous spirit
          Grew in his bosom: he gave then no ring-gems

{A wretched failure of a king, to give no jewels to his retainers.}

       70 To the Danes after custom; endured he unjoyful
          Standing the straits from strife that was raging,
          Longsome folk-sorrow. Learn then from this,
          Lay hold of virtue! Though laden with winters,
          I have sung thee these measures. 'Tis a marvel to tell it,

{Hrothgar moralizes.}

       75 How all-ruling God from greatness of spirit
          Giveth wisdom to children of men,
          Manor and earlship: all things He ruleth.
          He often permitteth the mood-thought of man of
          The illustrious lineage to lean to possessions,
       80 Allows him earthly delights at his manor,
          A high-burg of heroes to hold in his keeping,
          Maketh portions of earth-folk hear him,
          And a wide-reaching kingdom so that, wisdom failing him,
          He himself is unable to reckon its boundaries;
       85 He liveth in luxury, little debars him,
          Nor sickness nor age, no treachery-sorrow
          Becloudeth his spirit, conflict nowhere,
          No sword-hate, appeareth, but all of the world doth
          Wend as he wisheth; the worse he knoweth not,
       90 Till arrant arrogance inward pervading,
          Waxeth and springeth, when the warder is sleeping,
          The guard of the soul: with sorrows encompassed,
          Too sound is his slumber, the slayer is near him,
          Who with bow and arrow aimeth in malice.

[60]

    [1] Or rather, perhaps, '_the inlaid, or damaskeened weapon_.' Cf.
    24_57 and note.




XXVI.

HROTHGAR MORALIZES.--REST AFTER LABOR.


{A wounded spirit.}

          "Then bruised in his bosom he with bitter-toothed missile
          Is hurt 'neath his helmet: from harmful pollution
          He is powerless to shield him by the wonderful mandates
          Of the loath-cursed spirit; what too long he hath holden
        5 Him seemeth too small, savage he hoardeth,
          Nor boastfully giveth gold-plated rings,[1]
          The fate of the future flouts and forgetteth
          Since God had erst given him greatness no little,
          Wielder of Glory. His end-day anear,
       10 It afterward happens that the bodily-dwelling
          Fleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins;
          Another lays hold who doleth the ornaments,
          The nobleman's jewels, nothing lamenting,
          Heedeth no terror. Oh, Beowulf dear,
       15 Best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee,
          And choose thee the better, counsels eternal;

{Be not over proud: life is fleeting, and its strength soon wasteth away.}

          Beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!
          But a little-while lasts thy life-vigor's fulness;
          'Twill after hap early, that illness or sword-edge
       20 Shall part thee from strength, or the grasp of the fire,
          Or the wave of the current, or clutch of the edges,
          Or flight of the war-spear, or age with its horrors,
          Or thine eyes' bright flashing shall fade into darkness:
          'Twill happen full early, excellent hero,

{Hrothgar gives an account of his reign.}

       25 That death shall subdue thee. So the Danes a half-century
          I held under heaven, helped them in struggles
          'Gainst many a race in middle-earth's regions,
          With ash-wood and edges, that enemies none
          On earth molested me. Lo! offsetting change, now,

[61]

{Sorrow after joy.}

       30 Came to my manor, grief after joyance,
          When Grendel became my constant visitor,
          Inveterate hater: I from that malice
          Continually travailed with trouble no little.
          Thanks be to God that I gained in my lifetime,
       35 To the Lord everlasting, to look on the gory
          Head with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!
          Go to the bench now, battle-adorned
          Joy in the feasting: of jewels in common
          We'll meet with many when morning appeareth."
       40 The Geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediately
          To go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.
          Then again as before were the famous-for-prowess,
          Hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted,
          Feasted anew. The night-veil fell then
       45 Dark o'er the warriors. The courtiers rose then;
          The gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers,
          The hoary old Scylding. Hankered the Geatman,

{Beowulf is fagged, and seeks rest.}

          The champion doughty, greatly, to rest him:
          An earlman early outward did lead him,
       50 Fagged from his faring, from far-country springing,
          Who for etiquette's sake all of a liegeman's
          Needs regarded, such as seamen at that time
          Were bounden to feel. The big-hearted rested;
          The building uptowered, spacious and gilded,
       55 The guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven
          Blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.
          Then the bright-shining sun o'er the bottoms came going;[2]
          The warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples
          Were ready to go again to their peoples,

{The Geats prepare to leave Dane-land.}

       60 The high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward
          Look for his vessel. The valiant one bade then,[3]

[62]

{Unferth asks Beowulf to accept his sword as a gift. Beowulf thanks him.}

          Offspring of Ecglaf, off to bear Hrunting,
          To take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;
          He him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted
       65 The war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then
          The blade of the brand: 'twas a brave-mooded hero.
          When the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,
          The atheling dear to the Danemen advanced then
          On to the dais, where the other was sitting,
       70 Grim-mooded hero, greeted King Hrothgar.

