“Why me?” muttered Mike as he headed for the john.
“Because, you idiot,” shouted Kerrigan from across the room, “you’re important to us. Now powder
your nose and get back here.”
When Mike returned she had finished the setup for the holographic rig. It had a full projection plate, but
could fit into a couple suitcases.
“It’s not, you know,” she said as he approached.
“Not an advantage to a reporter to read minds?” Mike was catching onto the odd shorthand of talking
to a telepath.
“No.” Kerrigan shook her head, “Most of what I get is off the surface, and even that is usually pretty
slimy. Animal needs and all that crap. And secrets. Damn it, my entire life has been filled with secrets. It
gets real old, real fast.”
“Sorry,” Mike said, suddenly realizing he didn’t know if he meant it or not.
“Yeah, you meant it. You just don’t know you meant it. And no, I don’t have any cigarettes. Here we
go.”
She stroked a switch and spoke softly into a microphone. The lower plate of the holographic transmitter
whirred softly, and a humanoid aura took form in the light. It seemed to be carved out of the light itself, a
massive man, broad-shouldered, in quasi-military uniform. His face resolved into bushy eyebrows, a
craggy nose, a huge mustache, and a prominent chin. His hair was lack with gray stripes, but still was
more black than gray.
Mike recognized him at once from dozens of wanted posters across the Confederacy.
“Mr. Liberty, I am so glad you could join us,” said the glowing figure. “I am Arcturus Mengsk, leader of
the Sons of Korhal. I would like to ask you to join us.”

DEALS
Arcturus Mengsk. There’s a name that is synonymous with terror, betrayal, and violence. A living
example of the ends justifying the means. The assassin of the Confederacy of Man. The heroof the
blasted world of Korhal IV. King of the universe. A savagebarbarian who never let anything or
anyone get in his way.
And yet, he is also charming, erudite, and intelligent.When you’re in his presence you feel that
he’s really listening to you, that your opinions matter, that you’re someoneimportant if you agree
with him.
It’s amazing. I have often wondered if men like Mengskdon’t carry around their own
reality-warping bubbles, and allwho fall in are suddenly transported to another dimensionwhere
the hellish things he says and does suddenly make sense.
At least, that’s the effect he always had on me.

THE GLOWING FIGURE PAUSED FOR A MOMENT, then said, “Is there something wrong with
our connection, Lieutenant?”
Kerrigan responded, “We read you loud and clear, sir.”
“Mr. Liberty, can you hear me?” Arcturus asked.
“I can hear you,” said Mike. “I just don’t know I can believe what I’m hearing. You’re the most hated
man in the Confederacy.”
Arcturus Mengsk chuckled and folded his hands over his broad, muscle-flat belly. “You honor me, but I
must reply that I am only the most hated man among the Confederacy’s elites. Those elites who make it
their mission to keep everyone else under their thumbs. Those who choose to think otherwise are cast
out. I have survived that casting out, and as such I am a danger to them.”
Mengsk’s words washed over Michael Liberty like warm honey. The man’s manner and voice
screamed “politician” at every turn. Here was a creature who would be at home in the Tarsonis City
Council, or among the confabs and social retreats of the Old Families of the Confederacy.
“I know a lot of reporters who would like to talk to you,” Mike said.
“You among them, I hope? I’ve been a fan of your work for many years. I must admit my surprise at
seeing your illustrious name attached to mere military reporting.”
Mike shrugged. “There were extenuating circumstances.”
“Of course,” said Mengsk, another smile appearing beneath his bushy salt-and-pepper mustache. “And
similarly, I fear my own vagabond lifestyle has prevented a suitable interview from being set up. The few
that have been managed were quickly spoiled by the Confederacy. I think you understand what I mean.”
Mike thought of Rourke, dying with Mike’s press tags, and of Raynor’s people, locked up in orbit, and
the refugees waiting for dropships that didn’t seem to be appearing. He nodded.
“I know my reputation precedes me, Michael.” Mengsk brought himself up short. “May I call you
Michael?”
“If you want to.”
Another half-concealed smile. “And I must tell you that this reputation is fully deserved. I am, by
Confederate lights, a terrorist, an agent of chaos against the old order. My father was Angus Mengsk,
who first led the people of Korhal IV in rebellion against the Confederacy.”
“And paid for it with the death of the planet.”
Arcturus Mengsk turned somber. “Yes, and I carry their ghosts with me every day of my life. They were
branded rebels and revolutionaries by the Confederates, but, as you well know, it is the victors who are
given the luxury of writing the histories.”
Mengsk paused for a moment, but Mike didn’t leap in, either to agree or disagree. At length Mengsk
said, “I make no apologies for the actions of the Sons of Korhal. There is blood on my hands for my
actions, but I have yet to reach the 35 million lives that the Confederacy claimed on Korhal IV.”
“Is that a target number?” Mike asked, looking for a chink in the politician’s armor.
He expected a flash of anger, or a quick rebuttal. Instead, Mengsk gave a brief chortle. “No. I cannot
hope to compete with the merciless bureaucracy of the Confederacy of Man. They wave the banners of
Old Earth, but no ancient government would have tolerated the inhumanity that the Confederacy
considers business as usual. And those who would raise the alarm are either silenced by violence or
shamed into complicity through comfort.”
“That would be us in the press,” stated Mike, thinking of Handy Anderson’s nosebleed office.
Arcturus Mengsk shrugged. “The shoe very well may fit, though I will not press the point. I know that
you, for one, are a rare individual who has not shrunk from always seeking the truth.”
“So, all this”—Mike waved at the equipment and Kerrigan—“is to set up an interview opportunity?”
Again the easy laugh. “There will be time for interviews later, but there are more pressing matters at the
moment. You know the refugee situation in the hinterlands?”
Mike nodded. “I’ve visited a few of them. They’ve emptied the cities, and the people are now waiting in
the wilderness for the Confederacy dropships to come for them.”
“And what would you say if I told you there would be no such ships coming?”
Mike blinked, suddenly aware that Kerrigan was looking at him. “I’d have a hard time believing that.
They may be delayed, but they wouldn’t abandon the populace here.”
“Its true, I’m afraid.” Mengsk sighed. Mike wished for some long-distance telepathy himself to dig
underneath the man’s well-mannered outer mantle. “None are en route. Indeed, Colonel Duke has been
very busy for the past few days uprooting the Confederate military structure here, preparing to retreat at
the first appearance of the Protoss, or the overwhelming success of the Zerg.”
“What doyou know about the Protoss and the Zerg?” Michael asked sharply.
“More than I want to admit,” Mengsk said with a grim smile. “Suffice it to say that they are ancient
races, and that they hate each other. And they have little or no use for the human race, either. In that way
they are very much like the Confederacy.”
“I’ve seen both the Zerg and the Protoss at work,” Mike said. “I have a hard time believing that they are
like anything human.”
“Even though the Confederacy plans to abandon the population of Mar Sara? To let the Zerg overrun
them from below, or the Protoss vaporize them from above? This system is nothing more than a giant
petri dish to the bureaucrats on Tarsonis, where they can watch these alien races duel and plan how to
save their own hides. Can you, as a man, stand aside and watch this happen?”
Mike thought of the deadly, radiant rainbows on the surface of Chau Sara. “You have a solution,” he
said, making the words a statement, not a question. “And this solution somehow involves me.”
“I am a man with great but not unlimited resources,” said Arcturus Mengsk, suddenly with the intensity
of a gathering storm. “I have my own ships en route to ferry as many people as I can out of the system.
Kerrigan has located the bulk of the camps and spread sufficient anti-Confederate ideas that we may be
welcomed as heroes. I have been in contact with the fragments of this planet’s government. But I need a
friendly face to reassure them that we do indeed come in peace.”
“And that’s where I come in.”
“That’s where you come in,” Mengsk repeated. “Your reputation precedes you as well.”
Mike thought about it, conscious of both the Protoss above and the Zergs below. “I won’t fashion
propaganda for you,” he said at last.
“I’m not asking you to do so,” said Mengsk, spreading his hands wide. Welcoming him.
“And I report what I see.”
“Which is more than the Confederacy allows you now, under their military strictures. I would expect no
less from a reporter of your caliber.”
Another pause. Mengsk ended it by saying, “If there’s anything I can do to help you further . . .”
Mike thought of Raynor’s men. “I have some . . . associates . . . in Confederate custody.”
Mengsk raised an eyebrow at Kerrigan. She said, “Local militia and law enforcement officers, sir. They
were captured and secured in a prison ship. I can find the location.”
“Hmmm. Ask no small favors, eh, Michael?” Mengsk scratched his chin, but even over the connection,
Mike knew the man had already made up his mind. “All right, but you have to help with it. But first . . .”
“I know,” Mike said with a shrug. “I have to write your bloody press release.”
“Exactly,” confirmed Mengsk, his eyes twinkling. “If we’re agreed, then I’ll let Lieutenant Kerrigan take
care of the details.”
And with that the light-wrapped figure evaporated.
Mike let out a deep breath. “You still reading my mind?” he asked at last.
“It’s hard not to,” Kerrigan said levelly.
“Then you know I don’t trust him.”
“I know,” answered Mengsk’s lieutenant. “But you trust that he’ll live up to his side of the bargain.
Come on, let’s get started.”
The prison shipMerrimack was an old relic, aLeviathan -class battlecruiser that had been stripped of
everything useful, save for life support, and even that was quirky and unreliable. Even its drive had been
disengaged once it had warped in, and it had been towed to its station high above Mar Sara’s northern
pole. Its holds were filled with unarmed men, prisoners who had been seized for various reasons and
who were considered too dangerous to leave on the surface. There were a lot of the homegrown
planetary militia up here, along with the marshals and not a few outspoken local leaders.
What the collection of prisoners, stashed away behind locked bulkheads, did not know was that they
were being overseen by a skeleton crew, a fraction of the normal staff of such a prison hulk. Most of the
important ranking officers had already been shuttled off, and of the major ships that had visited Mar Sara
in the past few days, only theNorad II still remained in orbit.
Captain Elias Tudbury, the remaining ranking officer on board theMerrimack, growled as he scanned
the docking ring monitors. The last shuttle was overdue by at least an hour, and if the radio scuttlebutt
was correct, the Protoss with their lightning weapons were due any time now.
And Captain Tudbury had not survived long enough to command a prison ship by exposing himself to
danger of any stripe. Now, as the shuttle edged its way toward the dock, he shifted uneasily from one
foot to the other. Beside him the comm officer was monitoring frequencies.
The sooner the shuttle arrived, Tudbury thought, the sooner he and his few stragglers could get away
from here, leaving the prisoners to their fate.
The speaker crackled over his head. “Prison Shu . . . port five-four . . . requ . . . sting clear . . . for
docking. Passphrase . . .” The rest was lost in static.
The comm officer tapped his headpiece and said, “Repeat transmission, five-four-six-seven. I say again,
repeat transmission.”
The speaker continued to crack and spark. “. . . ison shuttle . . . six-seven. Requesting clearance . . .
king. Pass . . .” More static.
“Come again, five-four-six-seven,” said the comm officer. Tudbury was practically exploding with
anxiety, but the comm officer’s voice was soft and mechanical. “Please repeat.”
“Interferen . . .” came the response. “We wi . . . pull off and tr . . . gain later.”
“No you don’t,” said Tudbury, reaching past his officer and flicking a switch. “Shuttle
five-four-six-seven, ya’ll are cleared for docking. Get your ass in here and get us off this tub!”
The hydraulics hissed as the two ships linked, while the communications officer pointed out the violation
of standard protocol.
“This is a nonstandard situation, son,” said Tudbury, already halfway to the dock, his duffel already
packed and swinging behind him. “Grab your gear and spread the word. We’re off this here wreck!”
The airlock slid open, and Captain Tudbury was looking down the barrel of a large-bore slugthrower.
At the operating end of the slugthrower was a lean man with a ponytail who looked like someone
Tudbury had seen on UNN.
“Boo,” said Michael Liberty.
It took a mere ten minutes to overpower the rest of the crew, most of whom were armed only with their
duffels and a great desire to leave, and another twenty to convince them to reengage the warp engines
and limp theMerrimack out of planetary range. Raynor and his men took the shuttle with Liberty.
“I’ll admit,” said former marshal Raynor, “that when I told you to do something, I didn’t expect this.”
Mike Liberty lushed. “Let’s just say I made a deal with the devil, and it worked out to our benefit.”
As if on cue, Mengsk’s broad face filled the shuttle’s viewscreen. “Congratulations, Michael. We must
report success as well with our endeavor. We have been welcomed with open arms by the people of
Mar Sara and even now our ships are evacuating the refugees. I have come to understand that even
Colonel Duke is unwilling to fire on ships filled with innocents, and the turn of events has vexed him
dearly.”
Raynor leaned toward the screen. “Mengsk? This is Jim Raynor. I just want to thank you for your help
in getting us off that hulk.”
“Ah, Marshal Raynor. Michael apparently thinks very highly of you and your men. I was wondering if
you would be willing to help me in a small matter.” Mengsk’s smile filled the screen.
“Now wait a minute, Mengsk,” said Mike. “We made a deal here, and we both did our part.”
“And that bargain is done, Michael,” continued the terrorist leader who had saved the population of a
planet. “But now I want to offer a similar arrangement to the former marshal and his men. Something that,
I hope, will be beneficial toall our peoples.”

ZERG AND PROTOSS
It would be easy to declare that Arcturus Mengsk was a master manipulator, which he was, or
that he regularly deceivedothers, which was true as well. But it would be a mistake todeny all
personal responsibility in falling into his web.
It seems now the height of folly ever to have dealt with theman, but think of the situation when
the Sara system died.You had the mindless beasts of the Zerg on one side, and theunholy fury of
the Protoss on the other. And in the middleyou had the criminal bureaucracy of the old
Confederacy ofMan, which was willing to write off the population of twoplanets in order to learn
more about its enemies.
With such a surplus of devils in the universe, what did itmatter if there was one more?
—THELIBERTYMANIFESTO
THE JACOBS INSTALLATION WAS BUILT INTO THE side of a mountain on the far side of Mar
Sara from its major cities. It wasn’t listed in any planetary archive that Michael Liberty had found, but
Mengsk knew about it.
Somewhere in the Jacobs Installation there was a computer with data in it. Mengsk said he didn’t know
what the data was, but he knew it was important. And he knew that he needed it. And he knew that
Raynor would go get it for him.
All of this made Mike wonder what else Mengsk knew. It also made the reporter think about other deep
craters on Chau Sara. Had there been similar locations on the other planet, unknown to most humans but
beacons to the Protoss? Had Mengsk known about these as well?
Liberty suddenly felt as though he were at the epicenter of a bomb site, and the countdown had already
begun.
The planet was already unraveling. He could see the devastation from the screens on the dropship that
brought Raynor and his combat troops in. Miles of former farmland was now overrun with the creep, a
pulsing living organism that covered the earth and sent tendrils deep into the rock beneath. Odd
constructs dotted the landscape like twisted mushrooms, and scorpion-like creatures pulled down and
consumed anything in their path. He could see packs of the skinned-dog zerglings, herded by the larger
snake-beast hydralisks. And once, on the horizon, there was a flight of things that looked like winged
organic cannons.
The creep had not reached the Jacobs Installation yet, but the strange Zerg towers were already on the
horizon. The front gates were open, and men were trying to flee the complex. The dropship came under
fire as it deployed Raynor and his troops. Even in the relative safety of a low-grade technician’s combat
suit, Liberty hung back.
I’m not doing this for Mengsk,he told himself.I’mdoing it for Raynor.
The guards were more interested in flight than fight, and Raynor’s troops scattered them easily. Michael
Liberty followed the hulking armored forms into the base itself.
The resistance stiffened as soon as they entered. Defensive guns were mounted in the wall, and popup
turrets erupted at every corner. Raynor lost two men before he got cautious.
“We need to find some control computer,” said Mike.
“Yeah,” Raynor agreed. “But I’m willing to bet it’s on thefar side of those guns.”
And with that he was out in the corridor, spraying spikes in a wide arc, hitting targets that had been
unseen a moment ago. Mike followed as close as he dared, his own gauss rifle at the ready, but by the
time he rounded the corner Raynor was standing in a smoking hallway. Charred emplacements scorched
the walls and floor.
Another hundred feet and another intersection. And another turret popping up from the floor like a
mechanical gopher, spraying the hallway.
Raynor and Liberty dodged into one doorway, three others of the squad into another. One man wasn’t
fast enough and was caught in the stream of bullets, his fall forward slowed by the continual impacts of
the spikes against his helmet and shattered chest plate.
“Okay, we need to take this one out,” said Raynor.
“Hold on,” said Mike. “I think I found something.”
It looked akin to a typical comm center, with zooming screens on either side and altogether too many
buttons. But the screens showed what looked like a diagram of the installation itself.
“It’s a map,” said Raynor.
“Full marks,” said Mike. “Better yet, it’s a map that we can use.”
Several areas already flashed red, marking where the assault team had already passed. Other regions
were flashing green pips, including the one outside the door. Probably active defenses.
“Right,” said Mike. “You know anything about computers?”
“Had to replace a memory board on my Vulture once,” said Raynor.
“Dandy.” Mike’s own experience consisted of repairing persnickety comm units in the field, but he
didn’t say anything. He scanned the various buttons and toggles. All were numbered, but there was no
master listing.
He hit a toggle, and one of the green lights went out. He hit another and another vanished. He started
flipping the toggles and mashing the buttons wildly. About fifteen seconds later the staccato in the hallway
stopped.
“Nice job,” said Raynor.
“Let’s see what the others do.” Mike grabbed a small dial and turned it. Somewhere deep in the
complex a Klaxon sounded, and there was a vibration under their feet.
“What the Sam Hill was that?” said Raynor.
“The sound of me pushing my luck too far,” said Mike.
“So why did you do that?”
“It seemed like the right thing to do at the time.”
Raynor let out a frustrated sigh, then said, “Can you get the data we’re looking for off this terminal?”
Mike shook his head, running a finger over the installation schematic. “Here,” he said. “There’s a
separate system, not linked up to the mainframe.”
“Think that’s it?”
“Has to be. The best way to protect information from hackers is to completely separate the machine that
it’s on. Basic computer security one-oh-one.”
“Then let’s go whack some varmints,” said Raynor, signaling to the survivors of the squad.
“Yeah,” Mike said with a laugh. “Let’s git them ‘varmints.’ ”
They stepped out, then dodged back immediately as another volley of spikes ricocheted down the
hallway.
“Liberty!” Raynor bellowed. “I thought you got all the gun emplacements!”
“Those aren’t emplacements, Jim,” Mike shouted back, squatting in the doorway. “Those are live
targets.”
Indeed, there was a pair of white-armored forms now at the crossroads, their combat armor similar to
Mike’s own save for color. They carried their own gauss rifles and were spraying the corridor.
Mike brought his own weapon up and leaned forward for a shot. A white-armored specter hovered in
his crosshairs.
And Mike found he could not shoot. His target was a man, a living human. He could not shoot.
The target in white armor harbored no such compunctions, and let loose a burst. The door frame
splintered under the assault as Liberty rolled back into the room.
“What happened?” Raynor shouted. “They in cover?”
“They . . .” Mike began, then shook his head. “I can’t shoot them.”
Raynor frowned. “You took out a Zerg with a shotgun. I saw you.”
“That was different. These are humans.”
Mike expected the admission to disgust the lawman, but instead Raynor merely nodded and said,
“That’s okay. Lots of folks have a problem with shooting other people. The good news is thatthey don’t
know you don’t want to shoot them. Fire a little over their heads. That will spook ‘em.”
He pushed Mike back toward the door. Across the hallway the other two marines were trading shots
with the white-armored forms.
Mike rolled out of the doorway, targeted the one on the right, raised his gauss rifle just a hair, and let off
a burst. The white form dropped into a crouch, while his companion brought his own weapon around and
dropped to one knee.
Despite himself, Mike smiled. Then the chest of the soldier he had fired above blossomed in a fountain of
blood. His companion brought his own weapon around, but too slowly. His head vaporized in a red mist
as visor and helmet shattered.
Mike looked up to see Raynor standing above him, leaning out of the doorway. He had taken the two
enemy troopers out with single shots.
Raynor looked down and said, “I understand if you have a problem shooting people. Fortunately, I
don’t. Now let’s go.”
The wall and floor guns were silent now, and the team was practically running through the halls. In his
lighter armor, Mike was in front.
He suddenly realized that this was not the smartest place to be.
Then he rounded the corner and sprawled over a zergling.
In one graceless swoop Mike skidded forward, tumbling over the top of the skinless beast. He could
feel the creature’s muscles pulse and shudder beneath him as he inadvertently vaulted over it. He landed
on his shoulder and felt pain ratchet through the right side of his body.
“Zerg!” Mike shouted. “Kill it!” He ignored the pain and twisted his rifle around, praying it hadn’t been
damaged in the fall.
“Crossfire!” Raynor bellowed. “We’ll hit each other!”
There was a silent moment in the hallway— Raynor’s troops on one side, Mike on the other, the Zerg in
the middle. This close, Mike could smell the creature’s fetid reath. Its very skin seemed to exude decay
and rot.
The zergling turned toward the squad, then toward the reporter, as if trying to determine which to attack
first. Finally some organic circuit closed in its twisted mind and it came to its decision.
It leapt at Liberty with a chittering cry, its claws extended.
Mike dove forward, underneath the leap, and raised his gauss rifle. He caught the creature in the belly,
spearing it and catching the beast’s own momentum. Beast and barrel rose in a slow arc above him.
At the top of the arc Mike pulled the trigger, and a volley of spikes splattered the zergling. Those that
passed through its body embedded in the metal ceiling of the hallway.
Mike sputtered as he was drenched in the beast’s ichor. Raynor ran up.
“What are Zerg doing here?” Raynor asked.
“Maybe they’re after what we’re after?” Mike suggested.
“Let’s find that information, now.” Raynor waved the remains of the team forward.
“Let’s find a shower,” Mike muttered, wiping the Zerg’s guts off his stained armor.
The complex had a few surprises left. The passage widened into a larger room. Three more zerglings
were within, brought down in rapid fire before they could react. Along one wall was a line of cages, all
open. They gave off the fetid smell of the zerglings.
“They were keeping them here,” said Raynor. “Pets? Studies?”
“And for how long?” Mike reached the isolated computer station and started hitting buttons. “Christ.
Look at this.”
“The information?”
“That, and more. Look at this. These are readings on the Zerg going back months.”
“But that’s impossible,” said Raynor. “Unless . . .”
“Unless the Confederates knew about the Zerg all the time. They knew they were here. Hell, they may
havebrought them here.”
“Samuel J. Houston on a bicycle,” said Raynor. Mike assumed that was a curse. Then Raynor added,
“Get the disk and let’s move out.”
“Working,” said Mike. The disk burner chugged for a few minutes, then ejected a silvery wafer. “Got it.
Let’s go!”
The moment Mike plucked the disk from the machine, the lighting suddenly went red. From above them
a female voice intoned, “Self-destruct sequence initiated.”
“Crap!” cursed Mike. “It must have been booby-trapped!”
“Let’s move!” said Raynor. “Don’t make any wrong turns!”
Mike, in his lighter armor, led, now unafraid of running into any other surprises. They encountered
nothing but the dead on their way out, the soft tones above them warning them, “Ten seconds to
detonation,” then “Five seconds to detonation.”
Then they were outside, beneath the rotten-orange sky. Mike kept running, intending not to stop until he
reached the dropship.
Raynor caught up with him and threw him to the ground.
Mike bellowed a curse at the marshal, but it was drowned out by the explosion.
The entire side of the mountain rippled from the detonation, focusing a single blast from the mouth of the
installation. A listering hot wave washed over Liberty and the prostrate marines, and the top of the
mountain fell in on itself. Mike hugged the bucking earth and prayed. And once it stopped, he realized
that if he had been standing, he would have been blown away in the blast.
“Thanks,” he said to Raynor.
“Seemed like the right thing to do at the time,” said the former lawman. “Come on, let’s get back before
the Zerg find us here.”
Mengsk was waiting for them on the bridge of his own command ship, theHyperion. Compared to the
bridge of theNorad II, this bridge was smaller and cozier, more of a den/library than the nerve center of a
fleet. The perimeter of the room was dotted by technicians speaking softly into comm units. A large
screen dominated one wall.
Of Lieutenant Kerrigan, Mike noticed, there was no sign.
“There were Zerg there!” said Raynor, handing over the disk. “The Confederates have been studying the
damned aliens for months!”
“Years,” said Mengsk, unsurprised. “I saw Zerg in Confederate holding pens myself, and that was over
a year ago. It’s clear the Confederates have known of these creatures for some time. For all we know,
they could bebreeding them.”
Mike said nothing. The bottom had dropped out of the Confederate secrets market. There was nothing
that they did that would surprise him now.
Raynor’s jaw dropped open. “You mean, they’ve been using my planet as some sort of laboratory for
these . . . things?”
“Your planet and your sister world,” said Mengsk. “And gods know how many more Fringe Worlds.
They’ve sowed the wind, my friends, and now they are reaping the whirlwind.”
For the first time, Raynor was stopped in his tracks. The enormity of the crime, Mike thought, was just
too much for his local law-enforcement rain. Who do you arrest when the crime is genocide? How do
you punish for such crimes?
Mike spoke up. “I’ve got a report to file. Summarizes everything we’ve found so far.”
“We have a scrambled comm setup for your use,” said Mengsk. “But you know they’ll never run the
story.”
“I have to take that chance,” Mike admitted, but inwardly he had to agree with Mengsk. If the Old
Families of Tarsonis were paranoid enough to threaten a scandalmonger like him over a construction
scandal, how willing were they to admit to dealing with planet-devouring aliens?
Mike was suddenly glad that the mind reader wasn’t present.
A soft bell chimed, and one of the technicians announced, “We’re getting warp signatures at mark
four-point-five-point-seven.
“Pull back to a safe distance, scan on maximum,” said Mengsk. “Gentlemen, you may remain if you want
to see the last act of this particularly tawdry passion play.”
Neither Mike nor Raynor moved, and Mengsk turned back to the screen. The huge orange ball of Mar
Sara loomed over them, a few white clouds scattered high across its northern hemisphere. Yet most of
that orange surface was now mottled, spoiled. Overrun by the creep, and the things that lived in it.
The very surface of the land seemed to pulsate and bubble, heaving like a living thing. The creep had
even spread over the oceans in broad mats, writhing like living carpets of algae.
There was nothing human left on the planet. Not alive, at any rate.
A flash blossomed to one side of the planetary disk, and Mike knew that the Protoss had arrived. Their
lightning ships warped into being. A flash of blue-white electricity, and then they were there. The golden
carriers with their moth attendants, and metallic bat-winged creations that wove among the larger ships.
They were breathtaking and deadly, forces of war raised to the level of an art form.
Mengsk spoke softly into his throat mike, and Mike could feel the engines engage. The terrorist leader
was prepared to get out at the first sign that the Protoss had noticed them.
He need not have worried. The Protoss were completely intent on the diseased planet beneath them.
Hatchways opened up in the bottoms of the larger ships, and great beams of energy, so intense as to be
colorless, lanced downward toward the surface. The aliens laid down a withering barrage against the
planet beneath.
Where the energy beams struck, they burned. The sky itself curdled as the beams pierced through the
atmospheric envelope. Air itself was torn away from the planet by the force of the blows.
And where the beams struck the surface, they erupted, boiling the ground where they struck, uprooting
both the creep-infested lands and those that had not yet been infected. Deadly rainbow radiation, more
brilliant than Mike had ever seen, spiraled out from the impact points, churning earth and water
mercilessly, distorting the matter of the planet itself.
Then other ships began firing thinner beams with surgical accuracy, adding to the barrage in places. The
cities, Mike realized. They were targeting the cities and making sure that nothing could survive there. Any
place of human settlement. Including, he knew, the Jacobs Installation itself.
They had cut their timing very close indeed, he thought, and his stomach gave an uneasy lurch.
One of the pulsing beams punched through the crust itself, and the ground erupted in a volcanic
upwelling. Magma pushed to the surface, consuming everything that had been uprooted by the energy
beams. Most of the world’s atmosphere was burning now, torn away from the orb in a veil that trailed it
in orbit, and what was left spiraled in hurricanes and tornadoes, until destroyed by more beams.
Now red volcanic glows covered the northern hemisphere of Mar Sara like welts. The remainder of the
land heaved in a deadly rainbow. Nothing could survive the assault, human or otherwise.
“Exterminators,” said Mike softly. “They’re cosmic exterminators.”
“Indeed,” said Mengsk. “And theycan’t orwon’t tell the difference between us and the Zerg. Maybe to
them there is no difference. We should prepare for departure. They may notice us at any time.”
Mike looked at Raynor. The former marshal was stone-faced and grim, his hands clutching the railing in
front of him. In the light of screens that showed the blue lightning of the Protoss ships, he looked like a
statue. Only his eyes were alive, and they were filled with infinite sadness.
“Raynor?” said Mike. “Jim? Are you all right?”
“No,” said Jim Raynor softly. “I mean, can any of us be all right after this?”
Mike had no response, and sat there as the planet died and Arcturus Mengsk spoke softly into his throat
mike. After a moment, the terrorist leader said, “We are ready for departure.”
“All right,” said Raynor, his eyes never leaving the screen. “Let’s go.”

MARSHAL AND GHOST
James Raynor was the most decent man I ever encounteredduring the fall of the Confederacy.
Everyone else, I cansafely say, was either a victim or a villain, or quite oftenboth.
At first wash, Raynor seems like a backwoods cowboy, oneof those good old boys that you see in
the bars swapping liesabout the days gone by. There’s a cocksureness, an overconfidence about
him that just makes you bridle initially. Yet overtime you come to see him as a valuable ally
and—dare I sayit?—a friend.
It all comes from belief. Jim Raynor believed in himself,and he believed in those around him. And
from that beliefcame the strength that allowed him and those who followed him to survive
everything else the universe threw athim.
Jim Raynor was a most decent and honorable man. I suppose that’s why his is the greatest
tragedy of this godforsakenwar.

MENGSK STRUCK LIBERTY AS JUST ANOTHER politician. For all the ghosts that supposedly
haunted the man, his motivations were as apparent as those of the lowest ward heeler on Tarsonis. He
was still gathering his power, and unwilling to pass on any potential ally. It was, Mike realized, why he
knew the man would keep his word—he was still in a position where it would be dangerous for him if it
got around that he did not.
Mengsk made Raynor a captain for his troubles, and Liberty was granted a series of one-on-one
interviews. Mike avoided the level of propaganda that Mengsk apparently desired, but that made the
charismatic leader even more available to Mike’s questions. Mike’s own resistance made his approval
more desirable to the rebel commander.
Slowly, Mike found himself agreeing more and more with Mengsk’s opinions of the Confederates. Hell,
he himself had said many of the same things, though in a more cautious fashion, in various reports over
the years. The Confederacy of Man was a criminal bureaucracy, filled to the brim with career politicos
and grafters whose battle cry was “Where’s Mine?”
And Mengsk was right about another matter. UNN never ran anything of his report on the destruction of
Mar Sara, or of the Confederate culpability in the attack. They did get around to telling the people that
there was not one but two hostile enemy threats out in the universe, the subversive Zerg and the
sky-blasting Protoss. Both were presented as implacable foes of humanity, and the only solution was to
group together beneath the Confederate flag to repulse them.
“Such is the nature of tyrants,” said Mengsk late one evening on theHyperion ’s observation deck, his
snifter of randy untouched on the table between them. Liberty’s glass had long since been drained and set
down empty beside a chess set of which the white king had been toppled. Mengsk played black as habit,
Liberty usually lost as white. An unused ashtray rested at the far end of the table. Michael had given up
smoking again, but Mengsk made it available to him nonetheless.
Mengsk continued, “Tyrants can only survive by presenting a greater tyrant as a threat. The
Confederacy does not realize the danger of the other tyrants that it has now called down upon all of us.”
“Before the Protoss and Zerg,” Mike noted, “their favorite threat wasyou.”
Mengsk chuckled. “I must admit that I feel that the best form of government is benevolent despotism. I
don’t think the oligarchs in charge agree with that.”
“And areyou pointing at greater tyrants to cover your own abuses?” Mike asked.
“Of course I am,” said Arcturus Mengsk. “But it does help that our foesare greater tyrants than we are.
Or ever intend to be.” He picked up Mike’s toppled king from the board. “Another game, perhaps?”
Mike saw nothing of Kerrigan, and when asked, Mengsk only said, “My trusted lieutenant works best in
the field.” Mike took that to mean that she was out sizing up another planet ripe for rebellion.
He was right. Two days later Mengsk called both Liberty and Raynor to his observation deck. A
graphic display showed another world, this one a ruddy brown. Behind it a gas giant loomed like an
overprotective parent.
“Antiga Prime,” said Mengsk, tapping the screen. “Border colony of the Confederacy of Man. Its
people are very, very tired of the Confederate military, which has gotten a bit heavy-handed since the
Protoss and Zerg first appeared. I want Captain Raynor to help the Antigans get their revolt off the
ground. That means dealing with a unit of Alpha Squadron they’ve got baby-sitting the major road on the
ground.”
“My pleasure, sir,” said Raynor. Mike noted that Raynor seemed calmer, more controlled now than he
had when they left the Sara system. Incorporating his own unit’s survivors with Mengsk’s Sons of Korhal
apparently helped see him through the loss of Mar Sara, and his bold, razen nature was bubbling once
more to the surface. He was itching for action.
Mengsk turned. “And Mr. Liberty, if you want to accompany his unit?”
“You may have overlooked this fact, Arcturus,” said Liberty, “but I’m still not working for you.”
“You’re not working for anyone at the moment, it seems,” replied Mengsk. “The UNN has been
noticeably devoid of your illustrious presence. I only thought you would be professionally interested . . .”
“And . . . ?” prompted Liberty.
“And your glib tongue and clever notepad might e enough to encourage the Antigans to cast off their
shackles.” He smiled a slightly shamefaced grin, and Mike knew that he was going planetside.
Antiga Prime had once been a water world, but the oceans had left without leaving a forwarding
address. All that remained were hard mudflats and low, flat mesas covered with a native shrub with
purple blossoms. Occasionally the whitened bones of some fossilized sea creatures rippled out of the
surrounding strata, the only reminder that life larger than humans had once been here. Pretty in an arid,
lifeless sort of way.
The dropship brought them down on a low plateau that looked like every other low plateau on Antiga.
Mengsk had mentioned that his scout would contact them once they were on the ground. Mike had no
doubt who that scout would be. As the rebels set up a perimeter around the ship, he kept the comm link
open to Mengsk and the regional commanders.
Kerrigan appeared out of nowhere, despite the fact that there was no cover around. She was dressed in
ghost armor—a hostile environment suit—and had a canister rifle slung across her back. Her helmet was
off, and her red hair flashed in Antiga’s too-bright sun.
Kerrigan snapped off a quick salute. “Captain Raynor, I’ve finished scouting out the area and . . . You
pig!”
Mike quickly turned down the volume on his comm unit. Raynor lurched backward as if struck.
“What?” he said. “I haven’t even said anything to you yet!”
Kerrigan’s too-wide lips turned into a nasty sneer. “Yeah, but you werethinking it.”
“Oh yeah, you’re a telepath,” said Raynor, shooting Mike a look that even the reporter could read.And
why didn’t you warn me about this? To the lieutenant he said, “Look, let’s just get on with this, okay?”
Kerrigan snorted. “Right. The command center is a couple klicks due west, up on one of those mesas.
Alpha Squad, but no Duke. Sorry, boys. We take them out, and the indigenous forces would be willing
to rise in rebellion. There are some towers that need to come down if I’m to get in.”
“Right,” said Raynor, frowning. “I don’tneed to tell you to move out.”
“No, you don’t,” said Kerrigan, a touch too hotly. “But there’s another thing.”
“Go ahead, Lieutenant,” said Raynor. “Idon’t read minds.”
“There have been increasing reports of xenomorphs in the area.” Kerrigan almost smiled at the reaction
to her words.
Raynor frowned deeply.
Mike nearly jumped in his seat. “Xenomorphs? Zerg? Here?”
“Cattle mutilations, mysterious disappearances, bug-eyed monsters,” confirmed Kerrigan. “The usual
suspects. Not a lot, but enough.”
“Crap,” muttered Raynor. “Confederatesand Zerg. They seem to go hand in hand. Okay,now let’s roll
out.”
The wide, dried mudflats of Antiga Prime were ideal for speed and lousy for cover. Twice marine scouts
appeared to the south, distracting Raynor in his Vulture to deal with them as Kerrigan, Raynor’s troops,
and Mike slowly crept up on the mesa. They were about three hundred yards shy when a tower cannon
opened up on them.
Mike’s comm link crackled. “Dammit,” said Kerrigan. “They’ve got sensors out the buttcheeks on that
thing. I can’t even sneeze without it picking me up. Can you get reinforcements on that blower?”
“Working on it,” snapped Mike as another shell bounded into the outcropping above him. “Raynor! It’s
Liberty! We’re pinned down! Need your firepower,muy pronto.”
Mike was unsure that the former marshal had gotten the message, until he heard the high-pitched whine
of Raynor’s Vulture engines. The captain topped a nearby rise in a single hop, closing as the tower tried
to traverse its gun to the new target. It was too slow, and with a resounding thump a volley of frag
grenades shot from under the vehicle’s front hood. Blossoms of flame erupted at the base of the tower.
Kerrigan gave a cry, and the remaining pinned troops rolled out of their hiding places and lacerated the
tower with spike fire. Raynor passed for another blitz, but it was overkill: by the time a second string of
explosions lossomed at the base, the tower was already listing, and as Raynor sped off, it toppled
completely in his wake.
Mike’s private line crackled. “Next time, make it something important, buddy!” said the captain.
“What did he say?” Kerrigan asked, then added, “Never mind. He’s a pig, but he’s a pretty competent
pig.”
Mike shook his head. “Captain Raynor is one of the most upright, moral men I’ve met since leaving
Tarsonis.”
“Yeah, he’s that way on the surface,” said Kerrigan. “Everything’s under real tight control. It’s
underneath that he’s a pig, like most people. Trust me on this.”
Mike didn’t know what to say. Eventually he managed, “He has been under a lot of stress lately.”
Kerrigan snorted again. “Yeah, like who hasn’t?”
They were within sight of the command center, another standard-issue half sphere, a portable setup. This
one glistened in the sun, though: the Zerg hadn’t corrupted it yet. Somehow that made Mike feel both
better and worse at the same time.
Another call came in. This time Raynor was looking for reinforcements. Could Kerrigan send down the
troops still with her?
“He says—” Mike began.
“Send them,” said Kerrigan.
“But you’ve got to—”
“I’ve got to get inside. And I can do that either with or without the support troops. They’re just extra
targets. Send them off, and follow when you can.”
Mike relayed the orders, while Kerrigan put up the hood and helmet of her ghost suit. Mike watched her
fasten the helmet, touch a device at her belt, and . . .
Vanish.
No, not quite vanish. There was a ripple around her, one that you could follow if you knew what to look
for, and looked very hard. The guards at the front of the command center did not know what to look for,
and were not looking hard enough. There was a burst of unseen canister fire, and the guards blew apart
in a couple pieces each. Then an explosion at the main gates, which suddenly yawned wide. There was a
silhouette among the smoke for a moment, a female figure with a large gun. Then she was gone, into the
depths of the enemy command center.
Mike followed slowly, very much aware that he lacked the cloaking technology and psionic talent that
made the telepathic ghosts possible. He paused briefly near the dead guards. They wore Alpha Squadron
uniforms, but their bleeding heads were covered with helmets polarized in the Antigan sunlight. He
decided not to remove the helmets: these might be people he knew. People who still owed him poker
money.
Mike sneaked into the devastation of the command center.
It was easy to know where Kerrigan had gone; Mike just followed the path of broken and bleeding
corpses. Men and women in full combat rig had been tossed around like rag dolls and now lay crumpled
in pools of their own blood.
Michael Liberty thought briefly of Lieutenant Swallow and realized that he was now getting used to
freshly dead bodies. Maybe he was growing the necessary emotional armor to survive in a universe at
war.
He found Kerrigan’s canister rifle, rammed through the front plexishield of a toppled Goliath walker.
From up ahead came the sounds of battle. Despite himself, he cradled his own gauss rifle and pressed
forward.
And he was rewarded with the privilege of watching Sarah Kerrigan fight.
It was blood poetry, war ballet. She had reached the center of the command center now, armed with
her knife and a slugthrower. She would wink into existence, slit a throat, then wink out again. Marines
would rush to that location, and she would appear a few feet away, firing a burst point-blank into the
helmet of her target. Then gone, then back again, this time with a spinning kick that roke the neck of a
bellowing officer.
Mike brought his weapon up but found he could not fire. It was more than just a reluctance to take
human life. He could not tell where she was at any one time. And through it all she moved with a cat-like
grace and determination that shredded every opponent she encountered.
Shewas very good with knives. More important, she was like the Protoss—glorious and deadly.
He stood in the entrance for only a minute, but it was enough time for Kerrigan to dispatch every enemy
in the command center. The only survivors were the ones who chose to flee at the outset.
Only then did Kerrigan come fully into view, sinking to her knees in exhaustion, her back to Liberty.
Mike walked up behind her and moved to put his hand on her shoulder.
His hand never reached her. Without hesitation, she spun in place, grabbed his outstretched wrist with
one hand, and brought up her combat knife with the other.
Only when the tip of the knife was inches from Mike’s face did she freeze. Her face was a mask of rage.
Fear flooded Mike’s mind, and in an instant he knew she was aware of that fear.
“Don’t.Do. That,” she said, biting off each word. Then she dropped her knife and put her face in both
hands, “You’re afraid of me.”
Mike hesitated for a moment, then settled on “You betcha.”
“I’m sorry,” she said. “Sorry you had to see this.”
Mike took a deep breath. “I just never visited you at work before. You rest for a moment. I’ve got to
kick off a revolution.”
He shoved a broken body from the communications console, inserted the prerecorded disk, set the
levels, and put out a general signal on all bands.
“This is Michael Liberty, broadcasting from Antiga Prime, with a report that the master command center
for this world has been disabled by rebel forces. Repeat, the master command center has been disabled.
The power of the Confederacy has been interrupted, and there is a strong possibility that it can be
shattered entirely if the people of Antiga rise up to take control of their own destiny. The Confederate
Marines in charge of the command center are either dead or in full retreat, while rebel losses have been .
. .” He looked at Sarah Kerrigan, exhausted, weeping into her hands. “. . . been minimal. We have a
message here from Arcturus Mengsk, leader of the Sons of Korhal. Please stand by.”
Mike popped the preprogrammed cartridge into the player and let the smooth, melodious tones of the
terrorist leader rouse the people to action. Mike went back to Kerrigan, this time circling her so she
knew he was coming.
Her eyes were dry now, but she was shuddering, her arms crossed in front of her, her reathing in short
gasps.
“Its okay,” said Mike. “You got them all.”
“I know,” she said, looking at Mike. “I got them all. And as I killed each and every one of them, I knew
what they were thinking. Fear. Panic. Hatred. Hopelessness. Breakfast.”
“Breakfast?”
“One of the techs had skipped breakfast, and he was really regretting not having had waffles.” Kerrigan
gave a sniffling giggle. “He was about to have his throat slit, and he was worrying about waffles.” She put
her hands along the sides of her head and ran her fingers through her red hair. “It sucks being a telepath.”
“I’ll bet,” said Mike, aware that the fear was still with him. The fear that Kerrigan could cut open his
belly before he could even react. And that she knew he was thinking that.
“I know you’re afraid,” said Kerrigan. “And you can admit it. That makes you smarter than most. God,
what I went through to become this, what the Confederates did to me. Do you know?”
“I know that the Confederacy has a lot of deep holes to hide their secrets in. Deeper and blacker than I
ever imagined. Ghost training was for an elite group of carefully controlled telepaths . . .”
Kerrigan was nodding as he spoke. “Controlled through drugs and threats and brutality, until they owned
you body and soul. They are no better than these Zerg creatures, creating warriors for a larger empire.
We have no lives but the ones the Confederacy allows us, until we are no longer useful, and then we are
discarded, lest we create future problems. Unless . . .”
“Unless you escape,” said Mike. “Or someone helps you escape.” And he suddenly realized why this
former ghost was working for Arcturus Mengsk. She owed him her life.
Kerrigan just nodded in response. “There’s more to it, but yes.”
There were heavy footfalls at the entrance, and Mike rose with his gauss rifle ready. Raynor’s armored
form appeared in the doorway.
“You children okay?” he shouted.
“We’re done here,” said Mike. “Center captured, message delivered.”
“Good,” said Captain Raynor, “ ’cause we’ve got a chunk of Alpha Squad coming up from the south,
and we’re going to need all the help we can get handling them. She okay?”
“I’m fine,” said Kerrigan, rising to her feet. “You can talk to me directly, you know.”
“Maybe I’ll justthink it at you,” said Raynor.
“Jim!” Mike said sharply. “That’s enough.”
“What?” Raynor looked surprised by Mike’s tone.
“That’senough,” repeated Mike, his tone less heated but still grave. His serious voice.
The large captain looked at Mike, then slowly nodded. “Yeah, I suppose it is.” To Kerrigan he said,
“Sorry to offend, ma’am.”
“Used to it, Captain,” said Kerrigan. “You said we had more Confederates to kill. Let’s get a move on.”
She forced her way past both men, phasing invisible as she went.
Captain Raynor shook his head. “Women.”
Mike softened his tone. “She’s been under a lot of stress lately.”
Raynor snorted. “Could have fooled me.”
The pair followed Raynor out of the building. Along the horizon there were small flashes of battle as the
Antigans and Confederates met in combat.
Above them, in the darkening sky, there were other flashes, of another battle. They danced across the
sky like new stars and ended only when a brilliant meteor streaked across the sky, splitting the screaming
atmosphere in its wake.
