“They may know already,” returned Kalthar. “But we cannot afford to wait for them, great Warchief.”
Thrall understood. “You would have me send someone to this place you saw?”
“It would seem most prudent. At least so we may know what we face.”
The Warchief rubbed his chin. “I think I know who. A good warrior.” He looked to the guards. “Brox!
Get me Brox!”
And so Brox had been summoned and told his mission. Thrall respected Brox highly, for the older
warrior had been a hero of the last war, the only survivor of a band of brave fighters holding a critical
pass against the demons. With his war hammer Brox himself had caved in the skulls of more than a dozen
of the fiery foes. His last comrade had died cleaved in two just as reinforcements had arrived to save the
day. Scarred, covered in blood, and standing alone amid the carnage, Brox had appeared to the
newcomers as a vision out of the old tales of his race. His name became almost as honored as that of
Thrall.
But it was more than the veteran’s name that garnered the respect of the Warchief and made him
Thrall’s choice. Thrall knew that Brox was like him, a warrior who fought with his head as well as his
arm. The orc leader could not send an army into the mountains. He needed to trust the search to one or
two skilled fighters who could then report their findings to him.
Gaskal was chosen to accompany Brox because of his swiftness and absolute obedience to orders. The
younger orc was part of the new generation that would grow up in relative peace with the other races.
Brox was glad to have the able fighter at his side.
The shaman had so perfectly described the route through the mountains that the pair were well ahead of
the estimated time the trek should have taken. By Brox’s reckoning, their goal lay just beyond the next
ridge…exactly where the dragon and rider had vanished.
Brox’s grip on his hammer tightened. The orcs had agreed to peace, but he and Gaskal would fight if
need be, even if it meant their certain deaths.
The older warrior forced away the grim smile that nearly played across his face at the last thought. Yes,
he would be willing to fight to the death. What Thrall had not known when he summoned the war hero to
him had been that Brox suffered from terrible guilt, guilt that had eaten at his soul since that day in the
pass.
They had all perished, all but Brox, and he could not understand that. He felt guilty for being alive, for
not dying valiantly with his comrades. To him, his still being alive was a matter of shame, of failure to give
his all as they had done. Since that time, he had waited and hoped for some opportunity to redeem
himself. Redeem himself…and die.
Now, perhaps, the fates had granted him that.
“Get a move on!” he ordered Gaskal. “We can reach ’em before they get settled in!” Now he allowed
himself a wide grin, one that his companion would read as typical orc enthusiasm. “And if they give us
any trouble…we’ll make ’em think the entire Horde is on the rampage again!”
If the island upon which they had landed seemed a dire place, the mountain pass in which they now
descended simply feltwrong. That was the best word Rhonin could use to describe the sensations flowing
through him. Whatever they sought…it should not be. It was as if the very fabric of reality had made
some terrible error…
The intensity of the feeling was such that the wizard, who had faced every conceivable nightmare,
wanted the dragon to turn back. He said nothing, though, recalling how he had already revealed his
uncertainties on the island. Korialstrasz might already regret summoning him.
The crimson behemoth arched his wings as he dropped the final distance. His massive paws sank into
the snow as he sought a stable landing area.
Rhonin clutched the dragon’s neck tightly. He felt every vibration and hoped his grip would last. His
pack bounced against his back, pummeling him.
At last, Korialstrasz came to a halt. The reptilian visage turned the wizard’s way. “Are you well?”
“As well—as well as I could be!” gasped Rhonin. He had made dragon flights before, but not for so
long.
Either Korialstrasz knew his passenger was still weary or the dragon himself also needed rest after such
a monumental trek. “We shall remain here for a few hours. Gather our strength. I sense no change in the
emanations I feel. We should have the time to recoup. It would be the wisest choice.”
“I won’t be arguing with you,” Rhonin answered, sliding off.
The wind blew harshly through the mountains and the high peaks left much shadow, but with the aid of
some magic and an overhang, the wizard managed to keep warm enough. While he tried to stretch the
kinks out of his body, Korialstrasz strode along the pass, scouting the area. The behemoth vanished
some distance ahead as the path curved.
Hood draping his head, Rhonin dozed. This time, his thoughts filled with good images…true images of
Vereesa and the upcoming birth. The wizard smiled, thinking of his return.
He woke at the sound of approach. To Rhonin’s surprise, it was not the dragon Korialstrasz who
returned to him, but rather the cowled, robed figure of Krasus.
In response to the human’s widening eyes, the dragon mage explained, “There are several unstable areas
nearby. This form is less likely to cause them to collapse. I can always transform again should the need
arise.”
“Did you find anything?”
The not-quite-elven face pursed. “I sense the Aspect of Time. He is here and yet he is not. I am
disturbed by that.”
“Should we start—”
But before Rhonin could finish, a horrific yowl echoed harshly through the mountain chain. The sound set
every nerve of the wizard on edge. Even Krasus looked perturbed.
“What was that?” asked Rhonin.
“I do not know.” The dragon mage drew himself up. “We should move on. Our goal lies not far away.”
“We’re not flying?”
“I sense that what we seek lies within a narrow passage between the next mountains. A dragon would
not fit, but two small travelers would.”
With Krasus leading, the pair headed northeast. Rhonin’s companion appeared unbothered by the cold,
though the human had to enhance the protective spell on his clothes. Even then, he felt the chill of the land
upon his face and fingers.
Before long, they came upon the beginning of the passage Krasus had mentioned. Rhonin saw now what
the other meant. The passage was little more than a cramped corridor. Half a dozen men could walk
side-by-side through it without feeling constricted, but a dragon attempting to enter would have barely
been able to get its head in, much less its gargantuan body. The high, steep sides also created even
thicker shadows, making Rhonin wonder if the two might need to create some sort of illumination along
the way.
Krasus pressed on without hesitation, certain of their path. He moved faster and faster, almost as if
possessed.
The wind howled even harder through the natural corridor, its intensity building as they journeyed. Only
human, Rhonin had to struggle to keep pace with his former patron.
“Are we almost there?” he finally called.
“Soon. It lies only—” Krasus paused.
“What is it?”
The dragon mage focused inwardly, frowning. “It is not—it is not exactly where it should be anymore.”
“Itmoved?”
“That would be my assumption.”
“Is it supposed to do that?” the fiery-haired wizard asked, squinting down the dark path ahead.
“You are under the misconception that I know perfectly what to expect, Rhonin. I understand little more
than you.”
That did not at all please the human. “So what do you suggest we do?”
The eyes of the inhuman mage literally flared as he contemplated the question. “We go on. That is all we
can do.”
But only a short distance ahead, they came across a new obstacle of sorts, one that Krasus had been
unable to foresee from high up in the air. The passage split off in two directions and while it was possible
that they merged further on, the pair could not assume that.
Krasus eyed both paths. “They each run near to our goal, but I cannot sense which lies closer. We need
to investigate both.”
“Do we separate?”
“I would prefer not to, but we must. We will each journey five hundred paces in, then turn back and
meet here. Hopefully we will then have a better sense of which to take.”
Taking the corridor to the left, Rhonin followed Krasus’s instructions. As he rapidly counted off paces,
he soon determined that his choice had potential. Not only did it greatly widen ahead, but the wizard
thought he sensed the disturbance better than ever. While Krasus’s abilities were more acute than his,
even a novice could sense the wrongness that now pervaded the region beyond.
But despite his confidence in his choice, Rhonin did not yet turn around. Curiosity drove him on. Surely a
few steps more would hardly matter—
He had barely taken more than one, however, when he sensed something new, something quite
disturbing. Rhonin paused, trying to detect what felt different about the anomaly.
It was moving, but there was more to his anxiety than that alone.
It was moving towardhim …and rapidly.
He felt it before he saw it, felt as if all time compressed, then stretched, then compressed again. Rhonin
felt old, young, and every moment of life in between. Overwhelmed, the wizard hesitated.
And the darkness before him gave way to a myriad flaring of colors, some of which he had never seen
before. A continual explosion of elemental energy filled both empty air and solid rock, rising to fantastic
heights. Rhonin’s limited mind saw it best as a looming, fiery flower that bloomed, burnt away, and
bloomed again…and with each blooming grew more and more imposing.
As it neared, he finally came to his senses. Whirling, the mage ran.
Sounds assailed his ears. Voices, music, thunder, birds, water…everything.
Despite his fears that it would overtake him, the phenomenal display fell behind. Rhonin did not stop
running, fearing that at any moment it would surge forward and envelop him.
Krasus surely had to have sensed the latest shift. He had to be hurrying to meet Rhonin. Together, they
would devise some way in which to—
A terrible howl echoed through the pass.
A massive, eight-legged lupine form dropped down on him.
Had he been other than what he was, the wizard would have perished there, the meal of a savage,
saber-toothed creature with four gleaming green eyes to go with its eight clawed limbs. The monstrous
wolf-creature brought him down, but Rhonin, having magicked his garments to better protect him from
the elements, proved a hard nut to crack. The claws scraped at a cloak it should have readily tattered,
only to have instead one nail snap off.
Gray fur standing on end, the beast howled its frustration. Rhonin took the opening, casting a simple but
effective spell that had saved him in the past.
A cacophony of light burst before the creature’s emerald orbs, both blinding and startling it. It ducked
back, swatting uselessly at flashing patterns.
Dragging himself out of reach, Rhonin rose. There was no chance of flight; that would only serve to turn
his back on the beast and his protective spell was already weakening. A few more slashes and the claws
would be ripping the wizard to the bone.
Fire had worked against the ghoul on the island and Rhonin saw no reason why such a tried and true
spell would not benefit him again. He muttered the words—
…Which, inexplicably, came out in reverse. Worse, Rhonin found himself moving backward, returning
to the wild claws of the blinded beast.
Timehad turned in on itself…but how?
The answer materialized from further in the passage. Krasus’s anomaly had caught up.
Ghostly images fluttered by Rhonin. Knights riding into battle. A wedding scene. A storm over the sea.
Orcs uttering war chants around a fire. Strange creatures locked in combat…
Suddenly he could move forward again. Rhonin darted out of the beast’s reach, then turned to face it
again. This time, he did not hesitate, casting his spell.
The flames burst forth in the form of a great hand, but as they neared the monstrous creature, they
slowed…then stopped, frozen in time.
Swearing, Rhonin started another spell.
The eight-legged horror leapt around the frozen fire, howling as it charged the human.
Rhonin cast.
The earth beneath the abomination exploded, a storm of dirt rising up and covering the lupine creature. It
howled again and, despite the intense forces against it, struggled toward the mage.
A crust formed over the legs and torso. The mouth shut tight as a layer of rock-solid earth sealed it. One
by one, the inhuman orbs were covered by a film of dust.
Just a few feet from its victim, the creature stilled. To all appearances, it now seemed but a perfectly cast
statue, not the actual monster itself.
At that moment, Krasus’s voice filled Rhonin’s head.
At last!the dragon mage called.Rhonin…the disturbance is expanding! It’s almost upon you!
Distracted by the fearsome beast, the wizard had not glanced at the anomaly. When he did, his eyes
widened.
It filled a space ten times higher and, no doubt, ten times wider than the pass. Solid rock meant nothing
to it. The anomaly simply passed through it as if it did not exist. Yet, in its wake, the landscape changed.
Some of the rock looked more weathered, while other portions appeared as if newly cooled from the
titanic throes of birth. The worst transformations seemed to take place wherever the edges of the fiery
flower touched.
Rhonin did not want to think what would happen to him if the thing touched him.
He started running again.
Its movement and growth have suddenly expanded much faster for reasons I do not understand,Krasus
went on.I fear I will not reach you in time! You must cast a spell of teleportation!
My spellwork doesn’t always work the way it should!he responded.The anomaly’s affecting it!
We will stay linked! That should help strengthen your casting! I will guide you to me and we can
regroup!
Rhonin did not care to teleport himself to places he had never seen, the inherent risk being that of ending
up encased in a mountain, but with Krasus linked to him, the task would be a much simpler one.
He focused on Krasus, picturing the dragon mage. The spell began to form. Rhonin felt the world around
him shift.
The fiery blossom suddenly expanded to nearly twice its previous dimensions.
Only too late did Rhonin realize why. It was reacting to the use of magic…his magic. He wanted to stop
the spell, but it was already too late.
Krasus! Break the link! Break it before you’re also—
The anomaly swallowed him.
Rhonin?
But Rhonin could not answer. He flailed around and around, tossed about like a leaf in a tornado. With
each revolution he flew faster and faster. The sounds and sights again assailed him. He saw past, present,
and future and understood each for what it was. He caught a glimpse of the petrified beast as it flew
wildly past him into what could only be described as a whirlpool in time.
Other things flew by, random objects and even creatures. An entire ship, its sails tattered, its hull crushed
in near the bow, soared by, vanishing. A tree on which still perched a flock of birds followed. In the
distance, a kraken, fifty feet in length from tip of head to end of tentacle, reached out but failed to drag
Rhonin along before vanishing with the rest.
From somewhere came Krasus’s faint voice.Rhonin…
He answered, but there was no reply.
The whirlpool filled his gaze.
And as it sucked him in, Rhonin’s last thoughts were of Vereesa and the children he would never know.

He sensed the slow but steady growth of the leaves, the branches, and the roots. He sensed the timeless
wisdom, the eternal thoughts within. Each giant had its own unique signature, as was true with any
individual.
They are the guardians of the forest,came his mentor’s voice.They are as much its soul as I. They arethe
forest. A pause.Now…come back to us…
Malfurion Stormrage’s mind respectfully withdrew from the gargantuan trees, the eldest of the heavily
wooded land. As he retreated, his own physical surroundings gradually reappeared, albeit murky at first.
He blinked his silver, pupilless eyes twice, bringing everything back into focus. His breath came in ragged
gasps, but his heart swelled with pride. Never before had he reached so far!
“You have learned well, young night elf,” a voice like a bear’s rumbled. “Better than even I could have
expected…”
Sweat poured down Malfurion’s violet countenance. His patron had insisted that he attempt this next
monumental step at the height of day, his people’s weakest point of time. Had it been at night, Malfurion
felt certain that he would have been stronger, but as Cenarius pointed out again and again, that would
have defeated the purpose. What his mentor taught him was not the sorcery of the night elves, but almost
its exact opposite.
And in so many ways, Malfurion had already become the opposite of his people. Despite their
tendencies toward flamboyant garments, for instance, Malfurion’s own were very subdued. A cloth tunic,
a simple leather jerkin and pants, knee-high boots…his parents, had they not perished by accident years
before, would have surely died of shame.
His shoulder-length, dark green hair surrounded a narrow visage akin to a wolf’s. Malfurion had become
something of an outcast among his kind. He asked questions, suggested that old traditions were not
necessarily the best, and even dared once mention that beloved Queen Azshara might not always have
the concerns of her subjects foremost on her thoughts. Such actions left him with few associates and even
fewer friends.
In fact, in Malfurion’s mind, he could truly only count three as friends. First and foremost had to be his
own twin, the equally troublesome Illidan. While Illidan did not shy away from the traditions and sorcery
of the night elves as much as he, he had a tendency to question the governing authority of the elders, also
a great crime.
“What did you see?” his brother, seated beside him on the grass, asked eagerly. Illidan would have been
identical to Malfurion if not for his midnight blue hair and amber eyes. Children of the moon, nearly all
night elves had eyes of silver. Those very few born with ones of amber were seen as destined for
greatness.
But if greatness was to be Illidan’s, he first had to curb both his temper and his impatience. He had come
with his twin to study this new path that used the power of nature—their mentor termed it
“druidism”—believing he would be the quicker student. Instead, he often miscast spells and failed to
concentrate enough to maintain most trances. That he was fairly adept at traditional sorcery did not
assuage Illidan. He had wanted to learn the ways of druidism because such unique skills would mark him
as different, as nearing that potential everyone had spoken about since his birth.
“I saw…” How to explain it even to his brother? Malfurion’s brow wrinkled. “I saw into the hearts of
the trees, the souls. Not simply theirs, either. I saw…I think I saw into the souls of the entire forest!”
“How wonderful!” gasped a female voice at his other side.
Malfurion fought to keep his cheeks from darkening to black, the night elf equivalent of embarrassment.
Of late, he had been finding himself more and more uncomfortable around his other companion…and yet
he could not think of himself far from her, either.
With the brothers had come Tyrande Whisperwind, their greatest friend since childhood. They had
grown up together, the three, inseparable in every way until the last year, when she had taken the robes
of a novice priestess in the temple of Elune, the moon goddess. There she learned to become attuned to
the spirit of the goddess, learned to use the gifts all priestesses were granted in order to let them spread
the word of their mistress. She it had been who had encouraged Malfurion when he had chosen to turn
from the sorcery of the night elves to another, earthier power. Tyrande saw druidism as a kindred force
to the abilities her deity would grant her once she completed her own training.
But from a thin pale child who had more than once bested both brothers in races and hunting, Tyrande
had become, since joining the temple, a slim yet well-curved beauty, her smooth skin now a soft, light
violet and her dusky blue hair streaked with silver. The mousy face had grown fuller, much more feminine
and appealing.
Perhaps too appealing.
“Hmmph!” added Illidan, not so impressed. “Was thatall?”
“It is a good start,” rumbled their tutor. The great shadow fell over all three young night elves, stifling
even Illidan’s rampant mouth.
Although over seven feet tall themselves, the trio were dwarfed by Cenarius, who stood well above ten.
His upper torso was akin to that of Malfurion’s race, although a hint of the emerald forest colored his
dark skin and he had a much broader, more muscular build than either of his male students. Beyond the
upper body any similarity ended. Cenarius was no simple night elf, after all. He was not even mortal.
Cenarius was a demigod.
His origins were known only to him, but he was as much a part of the great forest as it was of him.
When the first night elves had appeared, Cenarius had already long existed. He claimed kinship with
them, but never had he said in what way.
Those few who came to him for guidance left ever touched, ever changed. Others did not even leave,
becoming so transformed by their teachings that they chose instead to join the demigod in the protection
of his realm. Those were no longer elves, but woodland guardians physically altered forever.
A thick, moss-green mane flowing from his head, Cenarius eyed his pupils fondly with orbs of pure gold.
He patted Malfurion gently on the shoulder with hands that ended in talons of gnarled, aged
wood—talons still capable of ripping the night elf to shreds without effort—then backed away…on four
strong legs.
The upper torso of the demigod might have resembled that of a night elf, but the lower portion was that
of a huge, magnificent stag. Cenarius moved about effortlessly, as swift and nimble as any of the three.
He had the speed of the wind, the strength of the trees. In him was reflected the life and health of the
land. He was its child and father all in one.
And like a stag, he also had antlers—giant, glorious antlers that shaded his stern yet fatherly visage.
Matched in prominence only by his lengthy, rich beard, the antlers were the final reminder that any blood
link between demigod and night elf existed far, far in the past.
“You have all done well,” he added in the voice that ever sounded of thunder. Leaves and twigs literally
growing in his beard, his hair shook whenever the deity spoke. “Go now. Be among your own again for a
time. It will do you some good.”
All three rose, but Malfurion hesitated. Looking at his companions, he said, “You go on ahead. I’ll meet
you at the trail’s end. I need to talk with Cenarius.”
“We could wait,” Tyrande replied.
“There’s no need. I won’t be long.”
“Then, by all means,” Illidan quickly interjected, taking Tyrande’s arm. “We should let him be. Come,
Tyrande.”
She gave Malfurion one last lingering glance that made him turn away to conceal his emotions. He waited
for the two to depart, then turned again to the demigod.
The descending sun created shadows in the forest that seemed to dance for the pleasure of Cenarius.
The demigod smiled at the dancing shadows, the trees and other plants moving in time with them.
Malfurion went down on one knee, his gaze to the earth. “My shan’do,” he began, calling Cenarius by
the title that meant in the old tongue “honored teacher.” “Forgive me for asking—”
“You should not act so before me, young one. Arise…”
The night elf reluctantly obeyed, but he kept his gaze down.
This made the demigod chuckle, a sound accented by the sudden lively chirping of songbirds. Whenever
Cenarius reacted, the world reacted in concert with him.
“You pay me even more homage than those who claim to preach in my name. Your brother does not
bend to me and for all her respect of my power, Tyrande Whisperwind gives herself only to Elune.”
“You offered to teach me—us—” Malfurion responded,
“what no night elf has ever learned…” He still recalled the day when he had approached the sacred
wood. Legends abounded about Cenarius, but Malfurion had wanted to know the truth. However, when
he had called out to the demigod, he had not actually expected an answer.
He had also not expected Cenarius to offer to be his teacher. Why the demigod would take on so—
mundane—a task was beyond Malfurion. Yet, here they were together. They were more than deity and
night elf, more than teacher and student…they were also friends.
“No other night elf truly wishes to learn my ways,” Cenarius replied. “Even those who has taken up the
mantle of the forest…none of them has truly followed the path I now show you. You are the first with the
possible aptitude, the possible will, to trulyunderstand how to wield the forces inherent in all nature. And
when I say ‘you,’ young elf, I speak entirely in the singular.”
This was not what Malfurion had remained to talk about and so the words struck him hard. “But—but
Tyrande and Illidan—”
The demigod shook his head. “Of Tyrande, we have already spoken. She has promised herself to Elune
and I will not poach in the Moon Goddess’s realm! Of your brother, however, I can only say that there is
much promise to Illidan…but I believe that promise lies elsewhere.”
“I—I don’t know what to say…” And in truth, Malfurion did not. To be told so suddenly that Illidan and
he would not follow the same path, that Illidan even appeared to waste his efforts here…it was the first
time that the twins would not share in their success. “No! Illidan will learn! He’s just more headstrong!
There’s so much pressure upon him! His eyes—”
“Are a sign of some future mark upon the world, but he will not make it following my teachings.”
Cenarius gave Malfurion a gentle smile. “But you will try to teach him yourself, will you not? Perhaps you
can succeed where I have failed?”
The night elf flushed. Of course his shan’do would read his thoughts on that subject. Yes, Malfurion
intended to do what he could to push Illidan further along…but he knew that doing so would be a harder
task. Learning from the demigod was one thing; learning from Malfurion would be another. It would
show that Illidan was not first, but second.
“Now,” added the forest lord quietly, as a small red bird alighted on his antlers and its paler mate did so
on his arm. Such sights were common around Cenarius, but they ever left the elf marveling. “You came to
ask of me something…”
“Yes. Great Cenarius…I’ve been troubled by a dream, a reoccurring one.”
The golden eyes narrowed. “Only a dream? That is what troubles you?”
Malfurion grimaced. He had already berated himself several times for even thinking of distracting the
demigod with his problem. Of what harm was a dream, even one that repeated itself? Everyone
dreamed. “Yes…it comes to me every time I sleep and since I’ve been learning from you…it’s grown
stronger, more demanding.”
He expected Cenarius to laugh at him, but instead the forest lord studied him closely. Malfurion felt the
golden orbs—so much more arresting than even his brother’s own—burrow deep within him, reading the
night elf inside and out.
At last, Cenarius leaned back. He nodded once to himself and in a more solemn voice said, “Yes, you
are ready, I think.”
“Ready for what?”
In response, Cenarius held up one hand. The red bird leapt down to the offered hand, its mate joining it
there. The demigod stroked the backs of both once, whispered something to them, then let the pair fly
off.
Cenarius looked down at the night elf. “Illidan and Tyrande will be informed that you are staying behind
for a time. They have been told to leave without you.”
“But why?”
The golden eyes flared. “Tell me of your dream.”
Taking a deep breath, Malfurion began. The dream started as always, with the Well of Eternity as its
focal point. At first the waters were calm, but then, from the center, a maelstrom rapidly formed…and
from the depths of the maelstrom, creatures burst forth, some of them harmless, others malevolent. Many
he did not even recognize, as if they came from other worlds, other times. They spread in every direction,
fleeing beyond his sight.
Suddenly, the whirlpool vanished and Malfurion stood in the midst of Kalimdor…but a Kalimdor
stripped of all life. A horrible evil had laid waste to the entire land, leaving not so much as a blade of
grass or a tiny insect alive. The once-proud cities, the vast, lush woodlands…nothing had been spared.
Even more terrible, for as far as the eye could see, the scorched, cracked bones of night elves lay strewn
everywhere. The skulls had been caved in. The stench of death was strong in the air. No one, not even
the old, infirm, or young, had been spared.
Heat, horrific heat, had assailed Malfurion then. Turning, he had seen in the distance a vast fire, an
inferno reaching into the heavens. It burned everything it touched, even the very wind. Where it moved,
nothing…absolutely nothing…remained. Yet, as frightening as the scene had been, it was not that which
had finally awakened the night elf in a cold sweat, but rather something he had sensedabout the fire.
It had beenalive. It knew the terrors it wrought, knew andreveled in them. Reveled…and hungered for
more.
All humor had fled Cenarius’s visage by the time Malfurion finished. His gaze flickered to his beloved
forest and the creatures thriving within. “And this nightmare repeats itself with every slumber?”
“Every one. Without fail.”
“I fear, then, that this is an omen. I sensed in you from our first encounter the makings of the gift of
prescience—one of the reasons I chose to make myself known to you—but it is stronger than even I
ever expected.”
“But what does it mean?” the young night elf pleaded. “If you say this is an omen, I’ve got to know what
it portends.”
“And we shall try to discover that. I said, after all, that you are ready.”
“Ready for what?”
Cenarius folded his arms. His tone grew more grave.
“Ready to walk theEmerald Dream.”
Nothing in the demigod’s teachings so far had referred to this Emerald Dream, but the manner in which
Cenarius spoke of it made Malfurion realize the importance of this next step. “What is it?”
“What is it not? The Emerald Dream is the world beyond the waking world. It is the world of the spirit,
the world of the sleepers. It is the world as it might have been, if we sentient creatures had not come
about to ruin it. In the Emerald Dream, it is possible, with practice, to see anything, go anywhere. Your
body will enter a trance and your dream form will fly from it to wherever you need to go.”
“It sounds—”
“Dangerous? It is, young Malfurion. Even the well-trained, the experienced, can lose themselves in the
Emerald Dream. You note I call it theEmerald Dream. That is the color of its mistress, Ysera, the Great
Aspect. It is the realm of her and her dragon flight. She guards it well and allows only a few to enter it.
My own dryads and keepers make use of the Emerald Dream in their duties, but sparingly.”
“I’ve never heard of it,” Malfurion admitted with a shake of his head.
“Likely because no night elf save those in my service has ever walked it…and they only when they were
no longer of your race. You would be the first of your kind to truly take the path…if you so desire.”
The idea both unnerved and excited Malfurion. It would be the next step in his studies and a way,
perhaps, to make sense of his constant nightmare. Yet…Cenarius had made it clear that the Emerald
Dream could also be deadly.
“What—what might happen? What might go wrong?”
“Even the experienced can lose their way back if they become distracted,” the demigod replied. “Even I.
You must remain focused at all times, know your goal. Otherwise…otherwise your body might sleep
forever.”
There was more, the night elf suspected, but Cenarius for some reason wanted him to learn on his
own—if Malfurion chose to walk the Emerald Dream.
He decided he had no other recourse. “How do I start?”
Cenarius fondly touched the top of his student’s head. “You are certain?”
“Very.”
“Then simply sit as you have for your other lessons.” When the slighter figure had obeyed, Cenarius
lowered his own four-legged form to the earth. “I will guide you in this first time, then it is up to you.
Lock your gaze in mine, night elf.”
The demigod’s golden orbs snared Malfurion’s eyes. Even had he wanted to, it would have taken
mammoth effort for him to pull his own gaze away. He felt himself drawn into Cenarius’s mind, drawn
into a world where all was possible.
A sense of lightness touched Malfurion.
Do you feel the songs of the stones, the dance of the wind, the laughter of the rushing water?
At first, Malfurion felt no such thing, but then he heard the slow, steady grinding, the shifting of earth.
Belatedly, he realized that this was how the stones and rock spoke as, over the eons, they made their
way from one point in the world to another.
After that, the others became more evident. Every part of nature had its own unique voice. The wind
spun around in merry steps when pleased, or in violent bursts when the mood grew darker. The trees
shook their crowns and the raging water of a nearby river chuckled as the fish within it darted up to
spawn.
But in the background…Malfurion thought he sensed distant discord. He tried to focus on it, but failed.
You are not yet in the Emerald Dream. First, you must remove your earthly shell…the voice in his head
instructed.As you reach the state of sleep, you will slip your body off as you would a coat. Start from
your heart and mind, for they are the links that most bind you to the mortal plane. See? This is how it is
done…
Malfurion touched at his heart with his thoughts, opening it like a door and willing his spirit free. He did
the same with his mind, although the earthly, practical side of any living creature protested at this action.
Give way to your subconscious. Let it guide you. It knows of the realm of dreaming and is always happy
to return there.
As Malfurion obeyed, the last barriers slipped away. He felt as if he had sloughed off his skin the way a
snake might. A sense of exhilaration filled him and he almost forgot for what purpose he was doing this.
But Cenarius had warned him to remain focused and so the night elf fought the euphoria down.
Now…rise up.
Malfurion pushed himself up…but his body, legs still folded, remained where it was. His dream form
floated a few feet off the ground, free of all restraints. Had he so desired, Malfurion knew that he could
have flown to the stars themselves.
But the Emerald Dream lay in a different direction.Turn again to your subconscious, the demigod
instructed.It will show you the path, for that lies within, not without.
And as he followed Cenarius’s instructions, the night elf saw the world change further around him. A
hazy quality enveloped everything. Images, endless images, overlapped one another, but with
concentration Malfurion discovered that he could see each separately. He heard whispers and realized
that they were the inner voices of dreamers throughout the world.
From here, you must take the path by yourself.
He felt his link to Cenarius all but fade. For the sake of Malfurion’s concentration, the demigod had been
forced to pull back. However, Cenarius remained a presence, ready to aid his student if the need arose.
As Malfurion moved forward, his world turned a brilliant, gemlike green. The haze increased and the
whispers became more audible. A landscape vaguely seen beckoned to him.
He had become part of the Emerald Dream.
Following his instincts, Malfurion floated toward the shifting dreamscape. As Cenarius said, it looked as
the world would have looked had night elves and other creatures not come into being. There was a
tranquillity to the Emerald Dream that made it tempting just to stay forever, but Malfurion refused to give
in to that temptation. He had to know the truth about his dreams.
He had no idea at first where his subconscious was taking him, but somehow suspected it would lead
him to the answers he desired. Malfurion flew over the empty paradise, marveling at all he saw.
But then, in the midst of his miraculous journey, he felt something amiss again. The faint discord he had
sensed earlier increased. Malfurion tried to ignore it, but it gnawed at him like a starving rat. He finally
veered his spirit form toward it.
Suddenly, ahead of him lay a huge, black lake. Malfurion frowned, certain that he recognized the
foreboding body of water. Dark waves lapped its shores and an aura of power radiated from its center.
The Well of Eternity.
But if this was the Well, where was the city? Malfurion eyed the dreamscape where he knew the capital
should have been, trying to summon an image of it. He had come here for a reason and now he believed
that it had to do with the city. By itself, the Well of Eternity was an astonishing thing, but it was the source
of power only. The discord the night elf felt originated from somewhere else.
He stared at the empty world, demanding to see the reality.
And without warning, Malfurion’s dream self materialized over Zin-Azshari, the capital of the night elves.
In the old tongue, Zin-Azshari translated into “The Glory of Azshara.” So beloved had the queen been
when she had made her ascension to the throne that the people had insisted on renaming the capital in her
honor.
Thinking of his queen, Malfurion suddenly beheld the palace itself, a magnificent structure surrounded by
a huge, well-guarded wall. He frowned, knowing it well. This was, of course, the grand abode of his
queen. Even though he had at times made mention of what he believed to be her faults, Malfurion actually
admired her more than most thought. Overall, she had done much good for her people, but on occasion
he believed Azshara simply lost her focus. As with many other night elves, he suspected any problem
there had to do in part with the Highborne, who administered the realm in her name.
The wrongness grew worse the nearer he floated down toward the palace. Malfurion’s eyes widened as
he saw the reason. With the summoning of the vision of Zin-Azshari, he had also summoned a more
immediate image of the Well. The black lake now swirled madly and what appeared to be monstrous
strands of multicolored energy shot up from its depths. Powerful magic was being drawn from the Well
into the highest tower, its only possible purpose the casting of a spell of impossible proportions.
The dark waters beyond the palace moved with such violence that to Malfurion they seemed to be
boiling. The more those within the tower summoned the might of the Well, the more terrible the fury of
the elements. Above, the storm-wracked heavens screamed and flashed. Some of the buildings near the
edge of the Well threatened to be washed away.
What are they doing?Malfurion wondered, his own quest forgotten.Why do they continue even during
weakness of day?
But “day” was only a term, now. Gone was the sun that dampened the night elves’ abilities. Even though
evening had not yet come, it was as black as night above Zin-Azshari…no, even blacker. This was not
natural and certainly not safe. What could those within be toying with?
He drifted over the walls, past stone-faced guards ignorant of his presence. Malfurion floated to the
palace itself, but when he sought to enter, certain that his dream form would pass through something so
simple as stone, the night elf discovered an impenetrable barrier.
Someone had encased the palace in protective spells so intricate, so powerful, that he could not pierce
them. This only made Malfurion more curious, more determined. He swooped around the structure, rising
again toward the tower in question. There had to be a way in. He had to see what madness was going on
inside.
With one hand, he reached out to the array of protective spells, seeking the point that bound them all
together, the point by which they could also be unbound—
And suddenly pain unimaginable wracked Malfurion. He screamed silently, no sound able to voice his
agony. The image of the palace, of Zin-Azshari, vanished. He found himself in an emerald void, caught
within a storm of pure magic. The elemental powers threatened to rip his dream form into a thousand
pieces and scatter them in every direction.
But in the midst of the monstrous chaos, he suddenly heard the faint calling of a familiar voice.
Malfurion…my child…come back to me…Malfurion…you must return…
Vaguely the night elf recognized Cenarius’s desperate summons. He clung to it as a drowning person in
the middle of the sea might cling to a tiny piece of driftwood. Malfurion felt the woodland deity’s mind
reach out to him, guide him in the proper direction.
The pain began to lessen, but Malfurion was exhausted beyond measure. A part of him simply wanted to
drift among the dreamers, his soul never returning to his flesh. Yet, he realized that to do so would mean
his end and so he fought against the deadly desire.
And as the pain dwindled away, as Cenarius’s touch grew stronger, Malfurion sensed his own link to his
mortal form. Eagerly he followed it, moving faster and faster through the Emerald Dream…
With a gasp…the young night elf awoke.
Unable to stop himself, Malfurion tumbled into the grass. Mighty yet still gentle hands picked him back
up to a sitting position. Water dribbled into his mouth.
He opened his eyes and beheld Cenarius’s concerned visage. His mentor held Malfurion’s own water
sack.
“You have done what few others could do,” the stag god murmured. “And in doing so, you almost lost
yourself forever. What happened to you, Malfurion? You went even beyond my sight…”
“I…I sensed…something terrible…”
“The cause of your nightmares?”
The night elf shook his head. “No…I don’t know…I…I found myself drawn to Zin-Azshari…” He tried
to explain what he had witnessed, but the words seem so insufficient.
Cenarius looked even more disturbed than he, which worried Malfurion. “This does not bode well…no.
You are certain it was the palace? It had to be Azshara and her Highborne?”
“I don’t know if one or both…but I can’t help feeling that the queen must be a part of it. Azshara is too
strong-willed. Even Xavius can’t control her…I think.” The queen’s counselor was an enigmatic figure,
as distrusted as Azshara was loved.
“You must think about what you say, young Malfurion. You are suggesting that the ruler of the night
elves, she whose name is heard in song each day, is involved in some spellwork that could be a threat not
only to your kind, but the rest of the world. Do you understand what that means?”
The image of Zin-Azshari intermingled with the scene of devastation…and Malfurion found both
compatible with each other. They might not be directly linked, but they shared something in common.
What that was, though, he did not know yet.
“I understand one thing,” he muttered, recalling the perfect, beautiful face of his queen and the cheers
that accompanied even her briefest appearances. “I understand that I must find out the truth wherever
that truth leads…even if in the end it costs me my very life…”
The shadowed form touched with his talon the small, golden sphere in his other scaled palm, bringing it
to life. Within it, there materialized another, almost identical shadow. The light from the sphere did nothing
to push back the darkness surrounding the figure, just as on the other end the sphere used by the second
form also failed. The magic cast to preserve each one’s identity was old and very strong.
“The Well is still in the midst of terrible throes,” commented the one who had initiated contact.
“So it has been for some time,” replied the second, tail flicking behind him. “The night elves play with
powers they do not appreciate.”
“Has there been an opinion formed on your end?”
The darkened head within the sphere shook once.
“Nothing significant so far…but what can they possibly do save perhaps destroy themselves? It would
not be the first time one of the ephemeral races did so and surely not the last.”
The first nodded. “So it seems to us…and the others.”
“All the others?” hissed the second, for the first time some true curiosity in his tone. “Even those of the
Earth Warder’s flight?”
“No…they keep their own counsel…as usual of late. They are little more than Neltharion’s reflection.”
“Unimportant, then. Like you, we shall continue to monitor the night elves’ folly, but it is doubtful that it
will amount to much more than the extinction of their kind. Should it prove to be more, we shall act if we
are ordered to act by our lord, Malygos.”
“The pact remains unbroken,” responded the first. “We, too, shall act only if commanded by her
majesty, the glorious Alexstrasza.”
“This conversation is over, then.” With that, the sphere went black. The second form had severed the
link.
The other rose, dismissing the sphere. With a hiss, he shook his head at the ignorance of the lesser races.
They constantly meddled in things beyond their capabilities and so often paid fatally for it. Their mistakes
were their own to suffer, so long as the world as a whole did not suffer with them. If that happened, then
the dragons would have to act.
“Foolish, foolish night elvesss…”
But in a place between worlds, in the midst of chaos incarnate, eyes of fire turned in sudden interest, the
work of the Azshara’s Highborne having also reached them.
Somewhere, the one who gazed realized, somewhere someone had called upon the power. Someone
had drawn from the magic in the mistaken belief that they and they alone knew of it, knew how to wield
it…but where?
He searched, almost had the source, then lost it. It was near, though, very near.
He would wait. Like the others, he had begun to grow hungry again. Surely if he waited a little longer, he
would sense exactly where among the worlds the casters were. He smelled their eagerness, their
ambition. They would not be able to stop drawing from the magic. Soon…soon he would find the way
through to their little world…
And he and the rest wouldfeed.

Brox had a bad, bad feeling about their mission.
“Where are they?” he muttered. “Where are they?”
How did one hide a dragon, the orc wanted to know. The tracks were evident to a point, but then all he
and Gaskal could find afterward were the footprints of a human, possibly two. Since the orcs were near
enough to notice if a dragon launched itself into the air—and they had seen no such astonishing
sight—then it only made sense that the leviathan had to be nearby.
“Maybe that way,” suggested the younger warrior, his brow furrowed deep. “That pass.”
“Too narrow,” growled Brox. He sniffed the air. The scent of dragon filled his nostrils. Almost masked
by it was the smell of human. Dragons and wizards.
Treaty or no treaty, this would be a good day to die…if Brox could just find his foes.
Kneeling down to study the tracks better, the veteran had to admit that Gaskal’s suggestion made the
most sense. The two sets of tracks led into the narrow pass while the dragon’s simplyvanished. Still, if the
orcs confronted the other intruders, the beast would surely come.
Not giving his companion any sign as to his true intentions, the older warrior rose. “Let’s go.”
Weapons ready, they trotted into the pass. Brox snorted as he looked it over. Definitely too narrow for
a dragon, even a half-grown one. Wherewas the beast?
They had only gone a short distance when from further in they heard the monstrous howl of a beast. The
two orcs glanced at each other, but did not slow. No true warrior turned at the first sound of danger.
Deeper they went. The shadows played games, making it seem as if unnatural creatures lurked all
around them. Brox’s breathing grew heavier as he sought to keep pace with Gaskal. His ax weighed
heavily in his hand.
A shout—a human shout—echoed from only a short distance ahead.
“Brox—” the younger orc began.
But at that moment, a monstrous vision filled their view, a fiery image like nothing either had ever seen.
It filled the pass, overflowing even into the rock. It did not seem alive, but nonetheless moved as if with
purpose. Sounds—random, chaotic sounds—filled the orcs’ ears and when Brox stared into the center,
he felt as if he stared into Forever.
Orcs were not creatures subject to easy fear, but the monstrous and surely magical vision overwhelmed
the two warriors. Brox and Gaskal froze before it, aware that simple weapons would hardly turn it aside.
Brox had desired a heroic death, not one such as this. There was no nobility in dying so. The thing
looked capable of swallowing him as readily and without notice as it would a gnat.
And that made his decision for him. “Gaskal! Move! Run!”
Yet Brox himself failed to follow his own command. He turned to run, yes, but slipped like an awkward
infant in the slick snow. The huge orc tumbled to the ground, striking his head. His weapon fell just out of
reach.
Gaskal, unaware of what had happened to his comrade, had not fled back, but rather darted to the side,
to a depression in one of the walls. There he planted himself inside, certain of the protection of the solid
rock.
Still trying to clear his head, Brox realized Gaskal’s mistake. Rising to his knees, he shouted, “Not there!
Away!”
But the cacophony of sounds drowned out his warning. The fearsome anomaly moved forward…and
Brox watched with horror as Gaskal was caught on its very edge.
A thousand screams escaped the stricken orc as Gaskal both aged and grew younger simultaneously.
Gaskal’s eyes bulged and his body rippled like liquid. He stretched and contracted…
And with a last ungodly cry, the younger orc shriveled within himself, contracting more and more…until
he completely vanished.
“By the Horde…” Brox gasped, standing. He stared at the spot where Gaskal had stood, still somehow
hoping that his companion would miraculously reappear unharmed.
Then it finally sank in that he was seconds from being engulfed by the same monstrosity.
Brox turned, instinctively seized his ax, and ran. He felt no shame in it. No orc could fight this. To die as
Gaskal had died would be a futile gesture.
But as fast as the orc ran, the fiery vision moved faster. Nearly deafened by the countless sounds and
voices, Brox gritted his teeth. He knew he could not outpace it, not now, but he continued to try…
He managed only two steps more before it swallowed him whole.
* * *
Every bone, every muscle, every nerve in Krasus’s body screamed. It was the only reason the dragon
mage finally stirred from the black abyss of unconsciousness.
What had happened? He still did not quite know. One minute, he had been trying to reach Rhonin—and
then somehow despite not being near it he, too, had been swallowed by the anomaly. His mental link to
the human wizard had literally dragged Krasus along.
Images flashed through his befuddled mind again. Landscapes, creatures, artifacts. Krasus had
witnessed time in its ultimate aspect, all at once.
Aspect?That word summoned another dread vision, one he had thankfully forgotten until now. In the
midst of the swirling chaos of time, Krasus had glimpsed a sight that left his heart and hope shattered.
There, in the center of the fury, he had seen Nozdormu, the great Aspect of Time…trapped like a fly in
a web.
Nozdormu had been there in all his terrible glory, a vast dragon not of flesh, but of the golden sands of
eternity. His glittering, gemlike eyes, eyes the color of the sun, had been open wide, but had not in turn
seen the insignificant figure of Krasus. The great dragon had been in the throes of both battle and agony,
ensnared yet also fighting to hold everything together—absolutelyeverything.
Nozdormu was both victim and savior. Trapped in all time, he also held it from falling apart. If not for the
Aspect, the fabric of reality would have collapsed there and then. The world Krasus knew would have
disappeared forever. It would never have even existed.
A new surge of pain tore through Krasus. He cried out in the ancient tongue of the dragons, momentarily
losing his accustomed control. Yet, with the pain came the realization that he still lived. That knowledge
caused him to fight, to force himself back to full consciousness…
He opened his eyes.
Trees greeted his gaze. Towering, lush trees with green canopies that nearly blotted out the sky. A forest
in the bloom of life. Birds sang while other creatures rustled and scurried through the underbrush.
Vaguely Krasus registered the setting sun and soft, drifting clouds.
So peaceful a landscape, the dragon mage almost wondered if he had after all died and gone to the
beyond. Then, a not so heavenly sound, a muttered curse, caught his attention. Krasus looked to his left.
Rhonin rubbed the back of his head as he tried to force himself up slightly. The fiery-haired human had
landed face-down only a few yards from his former mentor. The wizard spat out bits of dirt and grass,
then blinked. By pure accident, he looked in Krasus’s direction first.
“What—?” was all he managed.
Krasus tried to speak but all that came from his own mouth at first was a sick croak. He swallowed,
then tried again.
“I…do not know. Are you…are you injured in any way?”
Flexing his arms and legs, Rhonin grimaced. “Everything hurts…but…but nothing seems broken.”
After a similar test, the dragon mage came to the same conclusion concerning himself. That they had
arrived so intact astonished him…but then he recalled the magic of Nozdormu at work in the anomaly.
Perhaps the Aspect of Time had noted them after all and done what he could to save the two.
But if that was the case…
Rhonin rolled onto his back. “Where are we?”
“I cannot say. I feel I should know it, but—” Krasus stopped as vertigo suddenly seized hold of him. He
fell back onto the ground, closing his eyes until the feeling passed.
“Krasus? What happened?”
“Nothing truly…I believe. I am still not recovered from what happened. My weakness will go away.”
Yet, he noted that Rhonin already appeared much better, even sitting up and trying to stretch. Why
would a frail human better survive the anomaly’s turmoil than he?
With grim determination, Krasus also sat up. The vertigo sought to overwhelm him again, but the dragon
mage fought it down. Trying to take his mind from his troubles, he looked around once more. Yes, he
certainly sensed a familiarity about his surroundings. At some point, he had visited this region, but when?
When?
The simple question filled him with a sudden dread.When…
Nozdormu trapped in eternity…all time open to the anomaly…
The thick woods and the growing shadows created by the vanishing sun made it virtually impossible to
see enough to identify the land. He would have to take to the air. Surely a short flight would be safe. The
area seemed bereft of any settlement.
“Rhonin, remain here. I will scout from above, then return shortly.”
“Is that wise?”
“I think it absolutely necessary.” Without a further word, Krasus stretched out his arms and began
transforming.
Or rather, hetried to transform. Instead, the dragon mage doubled over in agony and overwhelming
weakness. His entire body felt turned inside out and he lost all sense of balance.
Strong arms caught him just as he fell. Rhonin carefully dragged him to a soft spot, then helped his
companion down.
“Are you all right? You looked as if—”
Krasus cut him off. “Rhonin…I could not change. I could not change…”
The young wizard frowned, not comprehending. “You’re still weak, Master Krasus. The trip through
that thing—”
“Yet, you are standing. Take no offense from me, human, but what we passed through should have left
you in a far worse state than mine.”
The other nodded, understanding. “I just figured that you spent yourself trying to keep me alive.”
“I am afraid to tell you that once we entered it, I could do no more for you than I could for myself. In
fact, if not for Nozdormu—”
“Nozdormu?” Rhonin’s eyes widened. “What’s he got to do with our survival?”
“You did not see him?”
“No.”
Exhaling, the dragon mage described what he had seen. As he did, Rhonin’s expression grew
increasingly grim.
“Impossible…” the human finally breathed.
“Terrifying,” Krasus corrected him. “And now I must tell you also that, even if Nozdormu did save us
from the raw forces of the anomaly, I fear he did not send us back to where we came from…or even
when.”
“You think…you think we’re in a different time?”
“Yes…but as to what period…I cannot say. I also cannot say how we will be able to get back to our
own era.”