The tall, forbidding palace perched atop the very edge of the mountainous cliff, overlooking so
precariously the vast, black body of water below that it appeared almost ready to plummet into the
latter’s dark depths. When first the vast, walled edifice had been constructed, using magic that melded
both stone and forest into a single, cohesive form, it had been a wonder to touch the heart of any who
saw it. Its towers were trees strengthened by rock, with jutting spires and high, open windows. The walls
were volcanic stone raised up, then bound tightly by draping vines and giant roots. The main palace at the
center had originally been created by the mystical binding of more than a hundred giant, ancient trees.
Bent in together, they had formed the skeleton of the rounded center, over which the stone and vines had
been set.
A wonder to touch the hearts of all when first it had been built, now it touched the fears of some. An
unsettling aura enshrouded it, one heightened this stormy night. The few who peered at the ancient edifice
now quickly averted their gaze.
Those who looked instead to the waters below it found no peace, either. The ebony lake was now in
violent, unnatural turmoil. Churning waves as high as the palace rose and fell in the distance, crashing with
a roar. Lightning played over its vast body, lightning gold, crimson, or the green of decay. Thunder
rumbled like a thousand dragons and those who lived around its shores huddled close, uncertain as to
what sort of storm might be unleashed.
On the walls surrounding the palace, ominous guards in forest-green armor and wielding lances and
swords glared warily about. They watched not only beyond the walls for foolish trespassers, but on
occasion surreptitiously glanced within…particularly at the main tower, where they sensed unpredictable
energies at play.
And in that high tower, in a stone chamber sealed from the sight of those outside, tall, narrow figures in
iridescent robes of turquoise, embroidered with stylized, silver images of nature, bent over a six-sided
pattern written into the floor. At the center of the pattern, symbols in a language archaic even to the
wielders flared with lives of their own.
Glittering, silver eyes with no pupils stared out from under the hoods as the night elves muttered the spell.
Their dark, violet skin grew covered in sweat as the magic within the pattern amplified. All but one
looked weary, ready to succumb to exhaustion. That one, overseeing the casting, watched the process
not with silver orbs like the rest, but rather false black ones with streaks of ruby running horizontal along
the centers. But despite the false eyes, he noted every detail, every inflection by the others. His long,
narrow face, narrow even for an elf, wore an expression of hunger and anticipation as he silently drove
them on.
One other watched all of this, drinking in every word and gesture. Seated on a luxurious chair of ivory
and leather, her rich, silver hair framing her perfect features and the silken gown—as golden as her
eyes—doing the same for her exquisite form, she was every inch the vision of a queen. She leaned back
against the chair, sipping wine from a golden goblet. Her jeweled bracelets tinkled as her hand moved
and the ruby in the tiara she wore glistened in the light of the sorcerous energies the others had
summoned.
Now and then her gaze shifted ever so slightly to study the dark-eyed figure, her full lips pursing in
something approaching suspicion. Yet, when once he suddenly glanced her way, as if sensing her
observation, all suspicion vanished, replaced by a languid smile.
The chanting continued.
The black lake churned madly.
There had been a war and it had ended.
So, Krasus knew, history would eventually record what had happened. Almost lost in that recording
would be the countless personal lives destroyed, the lands ravaged, and the near-destruction of the entire
mortal world.
Even the memories of dragons are fleeting under such circumstances,the pale, gray-robed figure
conceded to himself. He understood that very well, for although to most eyes he resembled a lanky,
almost elven figure with hawklike features, silvering hair, and three long scars traveling down his right
cheek, he was much more than that. To most, he was known as a wizard, but to a select few he was
calledKorialstrasz —a name only a dragon would wear.
Krasus had been born a dragon, a majestic red one, the youngest of the great Alexstrasza’s consorts.
She, the Aspect of Life, was his dearest companion…yet once again he dragged himself away from her
to study the plights and futures of the short-lived races.
In the hidden, rock-hewn abode he had chosen for his new sanctum, Krasus looked over the world of
Azeroth. The gleaming emerald crystal enabled him to see whatever land, whatever individual, he desired.
And everywhere that the dragon mage looked, he saw devastation.
It seemed as if it had only been a few years ago when the grotesque, green-skinned behemoths called
orcs, who had invaded the world from beyond, were defeated. With their remaining numbers kept in
encampments, Krasus had believed the world ready for peace. Yet, that peace had been short-lived. The
Alliance—the human-led coalition that had been the forefront of the resistance—had immediately begun
to crumble, its members vying for power over one another. Part of that had been the fault of dragons—or
theone dragon, Deathwing—but much had simply been the greed and desire of humans, dwarves, and
elves.
Yet, even that would have passed with little concern if not for the coming of the Burning Legion.
Today, Krasus surveyed distant Kalimdor, located on the far side of the sea. Even now, areas of it
resembled a land after a terrible volcanic eruption. No life, no semblance of civilization, remained in those
areas. It had not been any natural force, however, that had rent the land so. The Burning Legion had left
nothing in its wake but death.
The fiery demons had come from a place beyond reality. Magic was what they sought, magic they
devoured. Attacking in conjunction with their monstrous pawns, the Undead Scourge, they had thought
to lay waste to the world. Yet, they had not counted on the most unlikely alliance of all…
The orcs, once also their puppets, had turned on them. They had joined the humans, elves, dwarves, and
dragons to decimate the demonic warriors and ghoulish beasts and push the remnants back into the
hellish beyond. Thousands had perished, but the alternative…
The dragon mage snorted. In truth, there had beenno alternative.
Krasus waved long, tapering fingers over the orb, summoning a vision of the orcs. The view blurred
momentarily, then revealed a mountainous, rocky area further inland. A harsh land, but one still full of life
and capable of supporting the new colonists.
Already, several stone structures had risen in the main settlement, where the Warchief and one of the
heroes of the war, Thrall, ruled. The high, rounded edifice that served as his quarters was crude by the
standards of any other race, but orcs had a propensity toward basics. Extravagance to an orc was having
a permanent place to live at all. They had been nomads or prisoners for so long that the concept of
“home” had been all but lost.
Several of the massive, greenish figures tilled a field. Watching the tusked, brutish-looking workers,
Krasus marveled at the concept of orc farmers. Thrall, however, was a highly unusual orc and he had
readily grasped the ideas that would return stability to his people.
Stability was something the entire world needed badly. With another wave of his hand, the dragon mage
dismissed Kalimdor, summoning now a much closer location—the once proud capital of his favored
Dalaran. Ruled by the wizards of the Kirin Tor, the prime wielders of magic, it had been at the forefront
of the Alliance’s battle against the Burning Legion in Lordaeron and one of the first and most prized
targets of the demons in turn.
Dalaran lay half in ruins. The once-proud spires had been all but shattered. The great libraries burned.
Countless generations of knowledge had been lost…and with them countless lives. Even the council had
suffered badly. Several of those Krasus had counted as friends or at least respected colleagues had been
slain. The leadership was in disarray and he knew that he would have to step in to lend a hand. Dalaran
needed to speak with one voice, if only to keep what remained of the splintered Alliance intact.
Yet, despite the turmoil and tribulations still ahead, the dragon did have hope. The problems of the world
were surmountable ones. No more fear of orcs, no more fear of demons. Azeroth would struggle, but in
the end, Krasus not only thought it would survive, he fully believed it would thrive.
He dismissed the emerald crystal and rose. The Dragon Queen, his beloved Alexstrasza, would be
awaiting him. She suspected his desire to return to help the mortal world and, of all dragons, she most
understood. He would transform to his true self, bid her farewell—for a time—and depart before regrets
held him back.
His sanctum he had chosen not only for its seclusion, but also for its massiveness. Stepping from the
smaller chamber, Krasus entered a toothy cavern whose heights readily matched the now lost towers of
Dalaran. An army could have bivouacked in the cavern and not filled it.
Just the right size for a dragon.
Krasus stretched his arms…and as he did, his tapering fingers lengthened further, becoming taloned. His
back arched and from near the shoulders erupted twin growths that quickly transformed into fledgling
wings. His long features stretched, turning reptilian.
Throughout all these lesser changes, Krasus’s form expanded. He became four, five, even ten times the
size of a man and continued to grow. Any semblance to a human or elf quickly faded.
From wizard, Krasus became Korialstrasz, dragon.
But—in the very midst of the transformation—a desperate voice suddenly filled his head.
Kor…strasz…
He faltered, all but reverting to his wizardly form. Krasus blinked, then stared around the huge chamber
as if seeking the source of the cry there.
Nothing. The dragon mage waited and waited, but the call did not repeat.
Shrugging it off to his own uncertainties, he commenced again with the transformation—
And again, the desperate voice criedKorialstra…
This time…he recognized it. Immediately, he responded in kind.I hear you! What is it you need of me?
There was no response, but Krasus sensed the desperation remaining. Focusing, he tried to reach out,
establish a link with the one who so badly needed his aid—the one who should have needed no aid from
any creature.
I am here!the dragon mage demanded.Sense me! Give me some indication of what is wrong!
He felt the barest touch in return, a faint hinting of some distress. Krasus concentrated every iota of his
thoughts into the meager link, hoping…hoping…
The overpowering presence of a dragon whose magic dwarfed his own a thousandfold sent Krasus
staggering. A sensation of centuries, of great age, engulfed him. Krasus felt as if Time itself now
surrounded him in all its terrible majesty.
Not Time…not quite…but he who was the Aspect of Time.
The Dragon of the Ages…Nozdormu.
There were only four great dragons, four Great Aspects, of which his beloved Alexstrasza was Life.
Mad Malygos was Magic and ethereal Ysera influenced Dreams. They, along with brooding Nozdormu,
represented creation itself.
Krasus grimaced. In truth, there had beenfive Aspects. The fifth had once been called Neltharion…the
Earth Warder. But long ago, in a time even Krasus could not recall clearly, Neltharion had betrayed his
fellows. The Earth Warder had turned on them and in the process had garnered a new, more appropriate
title.
Deathwing. The Destroyer.
The very thought of Deathwing stirred Krasus from his astonishment. He absently touched the three
scars on his cheek. Had Deathwing returned to plague the world again? Was that why the great
Nozdormu would show such distress?
I hear you!Krasus mentally called back, now more than ever fearful of the reason for the call.I hear you!
Is it—is it the Destroyer?
But in response, he was once again buffeted by an overwhelming series of astonishing images. The
images burnt themselves into his head, making it impossible for Krasus to ever forget any.
In either form, Krasus, however adaptable and capable, was no match for the unbridled power of an
Aspect. The force of the other dragon’s mental might flung him back against the nearest wall, where the
mage collapsed.
It took several minutes for Krasus to push himself up from the floor and even then his head spun.
Fragmented thoughts not his own assailed his senses. It was all he could do for a time just to remain
conscious.
Slowly, though, things stabilized enough for him to realize the scope of all that had just happened.
Nozdormu, Lord of Time, had been desperately crying out for aid…hisaid. He had turned specifically to
the lesser dragon, not one of his compatriots.
But anything that would so distress an Aspect could only be a monumental threat to the rest of Azeroth.
Why then choose a lone red dragon and not Alexstrasza or Ysera?
He tried once more to reach the great dragon, but his efforts only made his head swim again. Steadying
himself, Krasus tried to decide what to do instead. One image in particular constantly demanded his
attention, the image of a snow-swept mountain area in Kalimdor. Whatever Nozdormu had sought to
explain to him had to do with that desolate region.
Krasus would have to investigate it, but he would need capable assistance, someone who could adapt
readily. While Krasus prided himself on his own ability to adapt well, his species was, for the most part,
obstinate and set in its ways. He needed someone who would listen, but who could also react instantly as
unfolding events required. No, for such unpredictable effort, only one creature would serve. A human.
In particular, a human named Rhonin.
A wizard…
And in Kalimdor, on the steppes of the wild country, a grizzled, aged orc leaned close over a smoky
fire. Mumbling words whose origins lay on another, long-lost world, the moss-green figure tossed some
leaves upon the fire, increasing the already thick smoke. Fumes filled his humble wood and earth hut.
The bald, elderly orc leaned over and inhaled. His weary brown eyes were veined and his skin hung in
sacks. His teeth were yellow, chipped, and one of his tusks had been broken off years before. He could
scarcely rise without aid and when he walked, he did so stooped and slow.
Yet, even the hardiest warrior paid him fealty as shaman.
A bit of bone dust, a touch of tannar berries…all part of a tried and true tradition resurrected among the
orcs. Kalthar’s father had taught him all even during the dark years of the Horde, just as Kalthar’s
grandsire had taught his father before that.
And now, for the first time, the withered shaman found himself hoping he had been taught well.
Voices murmured in his head, the spirits of the world that the orcs now called home. Normally, they
whispered little things, life things, but now they murmured anxiously, warning…warning…
But of what? He had to know more.
Kalthar reached into a pouch at his waist, removing three dried, black leaves. They were almost all of
what remained from a single plant brought with him from the orcs’ ancient world. Kalthar had been
warned not to use them unless he deemed it truly necessary. His father had never used them, nor his
grandfather.
The shaman tossed them into the flames.
Instantly the smoke turned a thick, swirling blue. Not black, but blue. The orc’s brow furrowed at this
change of color, then he leaned forward again and inhaled as much as possible.
The world transformed, and with it the orc. He had become a bird, a huge avian soaring over the
landscape. He flew over mountains without a care. With his eyes he saw the tiniest animals, the most
distant rivers. A sense of exhilaration not felt since his youth almost overwhelmed Kalthar, but he fought
it. To give in would risk him losing his sense of self. He might fly forever as a bird, never knowing what he
had once been.
Even as he thought that, Kalthar suddenly noted a wrongness in the nature of the world, possibly the
reason for the voices’ concern. Somethingwas that should not be. He veered in the direction that felt
correct, growing more anxious as he drew nearer.
And just within the deepest part of the mountain range, the shaman discovered the source of his anxiety.
His learned mind knew that he envisioned a concept, not the actual thing. To Kalthar, it appeared as a
water funnel—yet one that swallowed and disgorged simultaneously. But what emerged or sank into its
depths were days and nights, months and years. The funnel seemed to be eating and emitting time itself.
The notion so staggered the shaman that he did not notice until almost too late that the funnel now sought
to drawhim in as well.
Immediately, Kalthar strained to free himself. He flapped his wings, pushed with his muscles. His mind
reached out to his physical form, tugging hard at the gossamer link tying body to soul and trying to break
the trance.
Still the funnel drew him forward.
In desperation, Kalthar called upon the spirit guides, prayed to them to strengthen him. They came as he
knew they would, but at first they seemed to act too slow. The funnel filled his view, seemed ready to
engulf him—
The world abruptly twisted around the shaman. The funnel, the mountains…everything turned about and
about.
With a gasp, Kalthar awoke.
Exhausted beyond his years, he barely kept himself from falling face first into the fire. The voices that
constantly murmured had faded away. The orc sat on the floor of his hut, trying to reassure himself that,
yes, he now existed whole in the mortal world. The spirit guides had saved him, albeit barely in time.
But with that happy reassurance came the reminder of what he had witnessed in his vision…and what it
meant.
“I must tell Thrall…” he muttered, forcing weary, aged legs up. “I must tell him quick…else we lose our
home…our world…again…”
TWO
An ominous portent,Rhonin decided, vivid green eyes gazing at the results of his divining.Any wizard
would recognize it as so.
“Are you certain?” Vereesa called from the other room. “Have you checked your reading?”
The red-haired mage nodded, then grimaced when he realized that of course the elf could not see him.
He would have to tell her face to face. She deserved that.I pray she is strong.
Clad in dark blue pants and jacket, both gold-trimmed, Rhonin looked more like a politician than a mage
these days, but the past few years had demanded as much diplomacy from him as magic. Diplomacy had
never been an easy thing for him, who preferred to go charging into a situation. With his thick mane of
hair and his short beard, he had a distinct leonine appearance that so well matched his temper when
forced to parlay with pampered, arrogant ambassadors. His nose, broken long ago and never—by his
own choice—properly fixed, further added to his fiery reputation.
“Rhonin…is there something you have not told me?”
He could leave her waiting no longer. She had to know the truth, however terrible it might be. “I’m
coming, Vereesa.”
Putting away his divining instruments, Rhonin took a deep breath, then rejoined the elf. Just within the
entrance, though, he paused. All Rhonin could see was her face—a beautiful, perfect oval upon which
had been artfully placed alluring, almond-shaped eyes of pure sky blue, a tiny, upturned nose, and an
enticing mouth seemingly always halfway to a smile. Framing that face was a rich head of silver-white hair
that, had she been standing, would have hung nearly to the small of her back. She could have passed yet
for a human if not for the long, tapering ears jutting from the hair, pointed ears marking her race.
“Well?” she asked, patiently.
“It’s…it’s to be twins.”
Her face lit up, if anything becoming more perfect in his eyes. “Twins! How fortuitous! How wonderful! I
was so certain!”
She adjusted her position on the wooden bed. The slim but curved elven ranger now lay several months
pregnant. Gone were her breastplate and leather armor. Now she wore a silver gown that did not at all
conceal the imminent birth.
They should have guessed from the quickness with which she had shown, but Rhonin had wanted to
deny it. They had been wed only a few months when she had discovered her condition. Both were
concerned then, for not only had their marriage been one so very rare in the annals of history, but no one
had ever recorded a successful human-elven birth.
And now they expected not one child, but two.
“I don’t think you understand, Vereesa.Twins! Twins from a mage and an elf!”
But her face continued to radiate pleasure and wonder. “Elves seldom give birth and we very, very
rarely give birth to twins, my love! They will be destined for great things!”
Rhonin could not hide his sour expression. “I know. That’s what worries me…”
He and Vereesa had lived through their own share of “great things.” Thrown together to penetrate the
orc stronghold of Grim Batol during the last days of the war against the Horde, they had faced not just
orcs, but dragons, goblins, trolls, and more. Afterward, they had journeyed from realm to realm,
becoming ambassadors of sorts whose task it had been to remind the Alliance of the importance of
remaining intact. That had not meant, however, that they had not risked their lives during that time, for the
peace following that war had been unstable at best.
Then, without warning, had come the Burning Legion.
By that time, what had started as a partnership of two wary agents had become a binding of two unlikely
souls. In the war against the murderous demons, the mage and the ranger had fought as much for each
other as for their lands. More than once, they had thought one another dead and the pain felt had been
unbearable to each.
Perhaps the pain of losing each other had seemed worse because of all those other loved ones who had
already perished. Both Dalaran and Quel’Thalas had been razed by the Undead Scourge, thousands
slaughtered by the decaying abominations serving the dread Lich King, who in turn served the cause of
the Legion. Entire towns perished horribly and matters were made worse by the fact that many of the
victims soon rose from the dead, their cursed mortal shells now added to the ranks of the Scourge.
What little that remained of Rhonin’s family had perished early in the war. His mother had been long
dead, but his father, brother, and two cousins had all been slain in the fall of the city of Andorhal.
Fortunately, the desperate defenders, seeing no hope of rescue, had set the city ablaze. Even the Scourge
could not raise warriors from ash.
He had not seen any of them—not even his father—since entering the ranks of wizardry, but Rhonin had
discovered an emptiness in his heart when the news had arrived. The rift between himself and his
kin—caused in great part because of his chosen calling—had vanished in that instant. All that had
mattered at the time was that he had become the last of his family. He was all alone.
Alone until he realized that the feelings he had developed for the brave elven ranger at his side were
reciprocated.
When the terrible struggle had finally played out, there had been only one logical path for the two of
them. Despite the horrified voices emanating from both Vereesa’s people and Rhonin’s wizardly masters,
the two had chosen to never be parted again. They had sealed a pact of marriage and tried to begin as
normal a life as two such as they could possibly have in a world torn asunder.
Naturally,thought the mage bitterly,peace for us wasn’t meant to be.
Vareesa pushed herself from the bed before he could help her. Even so near the time of birth, the elf
moved with assured swiftness. The elf took hold of Rhonin by the shoulders.
“You wizards! Always seeing the dire! I thought my own people were so gloomy! My love, this will be a
happy birth, a happy pair of children! We will make it so!”
He knew that she made sense. Neither would do anything that would risk the infants. When the two had
realized her condition, they ceased their own efforts to help rebuild the shattered Alliance and settled in
one of the most peaceful regions left, near enough to shattered Dalaran but not too near. They lived in a
modest but not completely humble home and the people of the nearby town respected them.
Her confidence and hope still amazed him, considering her own losses. If Rhonin had felt a hole in his
heart after losing family he had barely known anymore, Vereesa surely had felt a gaping chasm open in
her own. Quel’Thalas, more leg endary and surely more secure than even the magic-ruled Dalaran, had
been utterly ravaged. Elven strongholds untouched by centuries had fallen in mere days, their once-proud
people added to the Scourge as easily as the mere humans. Among the latter had been included several
of Vereesa’s own close-knit clan…and a few from her very family.
From her grandfather she had heard of his desperate battle to slay the ghoulish corpse of his own son,
her uncle. From him she had also heard how her younger brother had been ripped apart by a hungering
mob of undead led by their own elder brother, who later had been set afire and destroyed along with the
rest of the Scourge by the surviving defenders. What had happened to her parents, no one yet knew, but
they, too, were presumed dead.
And what Rhonin had not told her…might never dare tell her…was of the monstrous rumors he had
heard concerning one of Vereesa’s two sisters, Sylvanas.
Vereesa’s other sister, the great Alleria, had been a hero during the Second War. But Sylvanas, she
whom Rhonin’s wife had sought to emulate her entire life, had, as Ranger General, led the battle against
the betrayer—Arthas, prince of Lordaeron. Once the shining hope of his land, now the twisted servant of
the Legion and the Scourge, he had ravaged his own kingdom, then led the undead horde against the
elven capital of Silvermoon. Sylvanas had blocked his path at every juncture and for a time, it had
seemed that she would actually defeat him. But where the shambling corpses, sinister gargoyles, and
gruesome abominations had failed, the dark necromancy granted the traitorous noble had succeeded.
The official version had Sylvanas dying valiantly as she prevented Arthas’s minions from slaying
Silvermoon’s people. The elven leaders, even Vereesa’s grandfather, claimed that the Ranger General’s
body had burned in the same fire that had devastated half the capital. Certainly there had been no trace
left.
But while the story ended there for Vereesa, Rhonin, through sources in both the Kirin Tor and
Quel’Thalas, had discovered word of Sylvanas that left him chilled. A surviving ranger, his mind half
gone, had babbled of his general being captured, not killed. She had been horribly mutilated, then finally
slain for the pleasure of Arthas. Finally, taking her body up in the dark temple he had raised in his
madness, the prince had corrupted her soul and corpse, transforming her from heroic elf into a harbinger
of evil…a haunting, mournful phantom called a banshee that still supposedly roamed the ruins of
Quel’Thalas.
Rhonin had so far been unable to verify the rumors, but he felt certain that they had more than a grain of
truth. He prayed that Vereesa would never hear the story.
So many tragedies…small wonder that Rhonin could not shake his uncertainty when it came to his new
family.
He sighed. “Perhaps when they’re born, I’ll be better. I’m likely just nervous.”
“Which should be the sign of a caring parent.” Vereesa returned to the bed. “Besides, we are not alone
in this. Jalia aids much.”
Jalia was an elder, full-bodied woman who had given birth to six children and midwifed several times
that number. Rhonin had been certain that a human would be leery of dealing with an elf—let alone an elf
with a wizard for a husband—but Jalia had taken one look at Vereesa and her maternal instincts had
taken over. Even though Rhonin did pay her well for her time, he very much suspected that the
townswoman would have volunteered anyway, so much had she taken to his wife.
“I suppose you’re right,” he began. “I’ve just been—”
A voice…a very familiar voice…suddenly filled his head.
A voice that could not be bringing him good tidings.
Rhonin…I have need of you.
“Krasus?” the mage blurted.
Vereesa sat up, all cheer vanishing. “Krasus? What about him?”
They both knew the master wizard, a member of the Kirin Tor. Krasus had been the one instrumental in
bringing them together. He had also been the one who had not told them the entire truth about matters at
the time, especially where he himself had been concerned.
Only through dire circumstance had they discovered that he was also the dragon Korialstrasz.
“It’s…it’s Krasus,” was all Rhonin could say at the moment.
Rhonin…I have need of you…
I won’t help you!the mage instantly responded.I’ve done my share! You know I can’t leave her now…
“What does he want?” Vereesa demanded. Like the wizard, she knew that Krasus would only contact
them if some terrible trouble had arisen.
“It doesn’t matter! He’ll have to find someone else!”
Before you reject me, let me show you…the voice declared.Let me show both of you…
Before Rhonin could protest, images filled his head. He relived Krasus’s astonishment at being contacted
by the Lord of Time, experienced the dragon mage’s shock when the Aspect’s desperation became
evident. Everything Krasus had experienced, the wizard and his wife now shared.
Last of all, Krasus overwhelmed them with an image of the place the other believed the source of
Nozdormu’s distress, a chill and forbidding chain of jagged mountains.
Kalimdor.
The entire vision lasted only a few seconds, but it left Rhonin exhausted. He heard a gasp from the bed.
Turning, the wizard found Vereesa slumped back on the down pillow.
He started toward her, but she waved off his concern. “I am all right! Just…breathless. Give me a
moment…”
For her Rhonin would give eternity, but for another he had not even a second to grant. Summoning the
image of Krasus into his head, the wizard replied,Take your quests to someone else! Those days are
through for me! I’ve got far more important matters at stake!
Krasus said nothing and Rhonin wondered if his response had sent his former patron searching for
another pawn. He respected Krasus, even liked him, but the Rhonin the dragon mage sought no longer
existed. Only his family concerned him now.
But to his surprise, the one he expected most to stand by him instead suddenly muttered, “You will have
to go immediately, of course.”
He stared at Vereesa. “I’m not going anywhere!”
She straightened again. “But you must. You saw what I saw. He does not summon you for some
frivolous task! Krasus is extremely worried…and what worrieshim puts fear intome.”
“But I can’t leave you now!” Rhonin fell down on one knee next to her. “I will not leave you, or them!”
A hint of her ranger past spread across Vareesa’s face. Eyes narrowing dangerously at whatever
mysterious force would separate them, she answered, “And the last thing I would wish would be for you
to thrust yourself into danger! I do not desire to sacrifice my children’s father, but what we have seen
hints at a terrible threat to the world they will be born in! For that reason alone, it makes sense to go.
Were I not in this condition, I would be right at your side, you know that.”
“Of course I do.”
“I tell myself that he is strong, Krasus is. Even stronger as Korialstrasz! I tell myself that I let you go only
because you and he will be together. You know he would not ask if he did not think you capable.”
That was true. Dragons respected few mortal creatures. That Krasus in either form looked to him for aid
meant a great deal…and as an ally of the leviathan, Rhonin would be better protected than anyone.
What could go wrong?
Defeated, Rhonin nodded. “All right. I’ll go. Can you handle matters until Jalia arrives?”
“With my bow, I have shot orcs dead at a hundred yards. I have battled trolls, demons, and more. I
have nearly traveled the length and breadth of Azeroth…yes, my love, I think I can handle the situation
until Jalia arrives.”
He leaned down and kissed her. “Then I’d best let Krasus know I’ll be coming. For a dragon, he’s an
impatient sort.”
“He has taken the burden of the world upon his shoulders, Rhonin.”
That still did not make the wizard overly sympathetic. An ageless dragon was far more capable of
dealing with terrible crises than a mere mortal spellcaster about to become a father.
Fixing on an image of the dragon mage as he knew him best, Rhonin reached out to his former patron.All
right, Krasus. I’ll help you. Where should we rendez—
Darkness enveloped the wizard. Off in the distance, he heard Vereesa’s faint voice call out his name. A
sense of vertigo threatened Rhonin.
His boots suddenly clattered on hard rock. Every bone in his body shook from the impact and it was all
he could do to keep his legs from collapsing.
Rhonin stood in a massive cave clearly hollowed out by more than simply the whims of nature. The roof
was almost a perfect oval and the walls had been scorched smooth. A dim illumination with no
discernible source enabled him to see the lone, robed figure awaiting him in the center.
“So…” Rhonin managed. “I guess we rendezvous here.”
Krasus stretched one long, gloved hand to the left. “There is a pack containing rations and water for
you, just to your side. Take it and follow me.”
“I barely had a chance to say good-bye to my wife…” grumbled Rhonin as he retrieved the large leather
pack and looped it over his shoulders.
“You have my sympathies,” the dragon mage responded, walking ahead already. “I have made
arrangements to see to it that she is not without aid. She will be well while we are gone.”
Listening to Krasus for just a few seconds reminded Rhonin how often the ancient figure made
assumptions about him without even waiting for the young wizard’s decisions. Krasus had already taken
the matter of Rhonin’s agreement as settled.
He followed the tall, narrow figure to the mouth of the vast cave. That Krasus had moved his lair since
the war with the orcs Rhonin had known, but exactly where he had moved was another question. Now
the human saw that the cavern overlooked a familiar set of mountains, ones not at all that far off from his
own home. Unlike their counterparts in Kalimdor, these mountains had a majestic beauty to them, not a
sense of dread.
“We’re almost neighbors,” he remarked dryly.
“A coincidence, but it made bringing you here possible. Had I sought you from the lair of my queen, the
spellwork would have been much more depleting and I have every wish of retaining as much of my
power as possible.”
The tone with which he spoke drained Rhonin of all animosity. Never had he heard such concern from
Krasus. “You spoke of Nozdormu, the Aspect of Time. Have you managed to contact him again?”
“No…and that is why we must take every precaution. In fact, we must not use magic to transport
ourselves to the location. We will have to fly.”
“But if we don’t use magic, how can we possibly fly—”
Krasus spread his arms…and as he did, they transformed, becoming scaled and taloned. His body grew
rapidly and wide, leathery wings formed. Krasus’s narrow visage stretched, twisted, becoming reptilian.
“Of course,” Rhonin muttered. “How silly of me.”
Korialstrasz the dragon peered down at his tiny companion.
“Climb atop, Rhonin. We must be off.”
The wizard reluctantly obeyed, recalling from times past the best manner with which to seat himself. He
slipped his feet under crimson scale, then crouched low behind the dragon’s sinewy neck. His fingers
clutched other scale. Although Rhonin understood that Korialstrasz would do his best to keep his charge
from slipping off, the human did not want to take a chance. One never knew what even a dragon might
encounter in the sky.
The great, webbed wings flapped once, twice, then suddenly dragon and rider rose high into the
heavens. With each beat, miles fell away. Korialstrasz flew effortlessly along, and Rhonin could feel the
giant’s blood race. Although he spent much of his time in the guise of Krasus, the dragon clearly felt at
home in the air.
Cold air assailed Rhonin’s head, making the wizard wish he had at least been given the opportunity to
change into his robes and travel cloak. He reached back, trying to draw his coat up—and discovered his
garment now had a hood.
Glancing down, Rhonin found that he did indeed wear the dark blue travel cloak and robes over his shirt
and pants. Without so much as a word, his companion had transformed his clothing to something more
suitable.
The hood drawn over his head, Rhonin contemplated what lay ahead. What could distress the Lord of
Time so much? The threat sounded both immediate and catastrophic…and surely much more than a
mortal wizard could handle.
Yet, Korialstrasz had turned to him…
Rhonin hoped he would prove worthy, not only for the dragon’s sake…but for the lives of the wizard’s
growing family.
Impossible as it seemed, somewhere along the way Rhonin fell asleep. Despite that, even then he did not
tumble from his seat to certain death. Korialstrasz certainly had something to do with that, although to all
appearances the dragon appeared to be flying blithely along.
The sun had nearly set. Rhonin was about to ask his companion if he intended to fly through the night
when Korialstrasz began to descend. Peering down, the wizard at first sighted only water, surely the
Great Sea. He did not recall red dragons being very aquatic. Did Korialstrasz intend to land like a duck
upon the water?
A moment later, his question was answered as an ominous rock appeared in the distance. No…not a
rock, but an island almost entirely bare of vegetation.
A feeling of dread swept over Rhonin, one he had felt before while crossing the sea toward the land of
Khaz Modan. Then it had been with dwarven gryphon riders and the island they had flown over was Tol
Barad, an accursed place overrun early on by the orcs. The island’s inhabitants had been slaughtered,
their home ravaged, and the wizard’s highly attuned senses had felt their spirits crying out for vengeance.
Now he experienced the same kind of horrific, mournful cries again.
Rhonin shouted to the dragon, but either the wind swept away his voice or Korialstrasz chose not to
hear him. The leathery wings adjusted, slowing their descent to a gentle decline.
They came to a halt atop a promontory overlooking a series of shadowed, ruined structures. Too small
for a city, Rhonin assumed them to have once been a fort or perhaps even a walled estate. In either case,
the buildings cast an ominous image that only reinforced the wizard’s concerns.
“How soon will we be moving along?” he asked Korialstrasz, still hoping that the dragon only intended
to rest a moment before moving on to Kalimdor.
“Not until sunrise. We must pass near the Maelstrom to reach Kalimdor, and we will need our full wits
and strength about us for that. This is the only island I have seen for some time.”
“What’s it called?”
“That knowledge is not mine.”
Korialstrasz settled down, allowing Rhonin to dismount. The wizard stepped just far enough from his
companion to catch one last glimpse of the ruins before darkness enveloped them.
“Something tragic happened here,” Korialstrasz suddenly commented.
“You sense it, too?”
“Yes…but what it was I cannot say. Still, we should be secure up here and I have no intention of
transforming.”
That comforted Rhonin some, but even still he chose to remain as near to the dragon as possible.
Despite a reputation for recklessness, the wizard was no fool. Nothing would entice him down into those
ruins.
His gargantuan comrade almost immediately went to sleep, leaving a much more wound-up Rhonin to
stare at the night sky. Vereesa’s image filled his thoughts. The twins were due shortly and he hoped that
he would not miss their coming because of this journey. Birth was a magic unto itself, one that Rhonin
could never master.
Thinking of his family eased the mage’s tensions and before he knew it, he drifted off to slumber. There,
Vereesa and the as-yet-unborn twins continued to keep him loving company even though the children
were never quite defined as male or female.
Vereesa faded into the background, leaving Rhonin with the twins. They called to him, beseeched him to
come to them. In his dreams, Rhonin began running over a countryside, the children ever more distant
shapes on the horizon. What started as a game became a hunt. The once-happy calls turned fearful.
Rhonin’s children needed him, but first he had to find them…and quickly.
“Papa! Papa!” came their voices.
“Where are you? Where are you?” The wizard pushed through a tangle of branches that only seemed to
tangle more the harder he pushed. At last he broke through, only to find a towering castle.
And from above, the children called again. He saw their distant shapes reaching out to him. Rhonin cast
a spell to make him rise up in the air, but as he did, the castle grew to match his efforts.
Frustrated, he willed himself up faster.
“Papa! Papa!” called the voices, now somewhat distorted by the wind.
At last he neared the tower window where the two waited. Their arms stretched, trying to cut the
distance between Rhonin and them. His fingers came within a few scant inches of theirs…
And suddenly a huge form barreled into the castle, shaking it to its very base and sending both Rhonin
and his children tumbling earthward. Rhonin sought desperately to save them, but a monstrous, leathery
hand snatched him up and took him away.
“Wake up! Wake up!”
The wizard’s head pounded. Everything around him began swirling. The hand lost its hold and once
more he plummeted.
“Rhonin! Wherever you are! Awaken!”
Below him, two shadowy forms hurried to catch him…his children now trying to savehis life. Rhonin
smiled at the pair and they smiled back.
Smiled back with sharp, vicious teeth.
And just in time, Rhonindid awaken.
Instead of falling, he lay on his back. The stars above revealed that surrounding him now was a roofless
ruin of a building. The dank smell of decay assailed his nostrils and a horrific, hissing sound beset his ears.
He lifted his head—and looked into a face out of nightmare.
If someone had taken a human skull, dipped it in soft, melting wax and let that wax drip free, that would
have come close to describing the gut-wrenching vision at which Rhonin stared. Add to that
needle-shaped teeth filling the mouth, along with red, soulless orbs that glared hungrily at the wizard, and
the picture of hellish horror was made complete.
It moved toward him on legs much too long and reached out with bony arms that ended in three long,
curved fingers that gouged into the already ravaged stone. Over its macabre form it wore the ripped
remnants of a once-regal coat and pants. It was so thin that at first Rhonin did not think it had any flesh at
all, but then he saw that an almost transparent layer of skin covered the ribs and other visible areas.
The wizard scrambled back just as the monstrosity grabbed at his foot. The slime-encrusted mouth
opened, but instead of a hiss or a shriek, there came a childlike voice.
“Papa!”
The same voice in Rhonin’s dream.
He shivered at such a sound coming from the ghoul, but at the same time the cry sent an urge through
him. Again he felt as if his own children called to him, an impossibility.
An earth-shaking roar suddenly filled the ruined building, eradicating any urge to fling himself into the
deadly talons of the fiend. Rhonin pointed at the creature, muttering.
A ring of fire burst to life around it. Now the pale monstrosity shrieked. It rose as high as its ungainly
limbs would enable it, trying to climb over the flames.
“Rhonin!” Korialstrasz shouted from without. “Where are you?”
“Here! In here! A place no longer with a roof!”
As the mage replied, the gaunt creature suddenly leapt through the fire.
Flames licking its body in half a dozen places, it opened its maw far wider than should have been
possible, wide enough to engulf Rhonin’s head.
Before the wizard could cast another spell, a huge shadow blotted out the stars and a great paw caught
the ghoulish beast square. With another shriek, the still-burning horror flew across the chamber, crashing
into a wall with such force the stones caved in around it.
A breath of dragon fire finished what Rhonin’s own spell had begun.
The stench almost overwhelmed the wizard. Holding one sleeve over his nose and mouth, he watched as
Korialstrasz alighted.
“What—what was that thing?” Rhonin managed to gasp out.
Even in the dark, he could sense the leviathan’s disgust. “I believe…I believe it was once one of those
who called this home.”
Rhonin eyed the charred form.“That was once human? How could that be?”
“You have seen the horrors unleashed by the Undead Scourge during the struggle against the Burning
Legion. You need not ask.”
“Is this their work?”
Korialstrasz exhaled. Clearly he had been as disturbed as Rhonin by this encounter. “No…this is much
older…and even more unholy an act than the Lich King ever perpetrated.”
“Kras—Korialstrasz, it entered my dreams! Manipulated them!”
“Yes, the others sought to do the same with me—”
“Others?”Rhonin glanced around, another spell already forming on his lips. He felt certain that the ruins
swarmed with the fiends.
“We are safe…for the time being. Several are now less than what remains of yours and the rest have
scattered into every crevice and gap in these ruins. I believe there are cata-combs below and that they
slumber there when not hunting victims.”
“We can’t stay here.”
“No,” agreed the dragon. “We cannot. We must move on to Kalimdor.”
He lowered himself so that Rhonin could climb aboard, then immediately flapped his wings. The pair
rose into the dark sky.
“When we have succeeded with our mission, I will return here and end this abomination,” Korialstrasz
declared. In a softer tone, he added, “There are already too many abominations in this world.”
Rhonin did not answer him, instead taking one last glance down. It might have been a trick of his eyes,
but he thought that he saw more of the ghouls emerging now that the dragon had left. In fact, it seemed to
him that they gathered by the dozens, all of them looking up hungrily…at the wizard.
He tore his gaze away, actually happy to be on the journey to Kalimdor. Surely after a night such as this,
whatever awaited the pair could hardly be worse.
Korialstrasz reached the shores of Kalimdor late in the day. He and Rhonin paused only to eat—the
dragon imbibing in fare away from the wizard’s sight—and then set off again for the vast mountain chain
that covered much of the western regions of the land. Korialstrasz flew with more and more urgency as
they neared their goal. He had not told Rhonin that every now and then he attempted to contact
Nozdormu…attempted and failed. Soon, however, that would not matter, for they would know firsthand
what had so distressed the Aspect of Time.
“That peak!” Rhonin shouted. Although he had slept again, he hardly felt fresh. Nightmares concerning
the sinister island had haunted his dreams. “I recognize that peak!”
The dragon nodded. It was the final landmark before their destination. Had he not seen it at the same
time as his rider, he would have nonetheless sensed the wrongness in the very fabric of reality…and that
meant something terrible indeed awaited them.
Despite that certainty, the leviathan only picked up his pace. There was no other choice. Whatever lay
ahead, the only ones who might stop it were him and the tiny human figure he carried.

But while the sharp eyes of man and dragon had sighted their destination, they failed to notice eyes that
had sighted them in turn.
“A red dragon…” grumbled the first orc. “A red dragon with a rider…”
“One of us, Brox?” asked the second. “Another orc?”
Brox snorted at his companion. The other orc was young, too young to have been much use in the war
against the Legion, and he certainly would not have remembered when it had been orcs, not humans,
who had ridden such beasts. Gaskal only knew the stories, the legends. “Gaskal, you fool, the only way a
dragon’d carry an orc these days would be in his belly!”
Gaskal shrugged, unconcerned. He looked every inch the proud orc warrior—tall and muscular with a
rough, greenish hide and two good-sized tusks thrusting upward from his broad, lower jaw. He had the
squat nose and thick, bushy brow of an orc and a mane of dark hair trailing down between his shoulders.
In one meaty hand Gaskal hefted a huge war ax while with the other he clutched the strap of his goatskin
backpack. Like Brox, he was clad in a thick, fur cloak under which he wore a leather kilt and sandals
wrapped in cloth to preserve heat. A hardy race, orcs could survive any element, but high in the
mountains even they required more warmth.
Brox, too, was a proud warrior, but time had beaten at him as no other enemy could. He stood several
inches shorter than Gaskal, part of that due to a slight but permanent stoop. The veteran warrior’s mane
had thinned and started going gray. Scars and lines of age had ravaged his wide, bullish visage, and unlike
his youthful companion, the constant expression of eagerness had given way to thoughtful distrust and
weariness.
Hefting his well-worn war hammer, Brox trudged through the deep snow. “They’re heading for the same
place as us.”
THREE
Korialstrasz reached the shores of Kalimdor late in the day. He and Rhonin paused only to eat—the
dragon imbibing in fare away from the wizard’s sight—and then set off again for the vast mountain chain
that covered much of the western regions of the land. Korialstrasz flew with more and more urgency as
they neared their goal. He had not told Rhonin that every now and then he attempted to contact
Nozdormu…attempted and failed. Soon, however, that would not matter, for they would know firsthand
what had so distressed the Aspect of Time.
“That peak!” Rhonin shouted. Although he had slept again, he hardly felt fresh. Nightmares concerning
the sinister island had haunted his dreams. “I recognize that peak!”
The dragon nodded. It was the final landmark before their destination. Had he not seen it at the same
time as his rider, he would have nonetheless sensed the wrongness in the very fabric of reality…and that
meant something terrible indeed awaited them.
Despite that certainty, the leviathan only picked up his pace. There was no other choice. Whatever lay
ahead, the only ones who might stop it were him and the tiny human figure he carried.
But while the sharp eyes of man and dragon had sighted their destination, they failed to notice eyes that
had sighted them in turn.
“A red dragon…” grumbled the first orc. “A red dragon with a rider…”
“One of us, Brox?” asked the second. “Another orc?”
Brox snorted at his companion. The other orc was young, too young to have been much use in the war
against the Legion, and he certainly would not have remembered when it had been orcs, not humans,
who had ridden such beasts. Gaskal only knew the stories, the legends. “Gaskal, you fool, the only way a
dragon’d carry an orc these days would be in his belly!”
Gaskal shrugged, unconcerned. He looked every inch the proud orc warrior—tall and muscular with a
rough, greenish hide and two good-sized tusks thrusting upward from his broad, lower jaw. He had the
squat nose and thick, bushy brow of an orc and a mane of dark hair trailing down between his shoulders.
In one meaty hand Gaskal hefted a huge war ax while with the other he clutched the strap of his goatskin
backpack. Like Brox, he was clad in a thick, fur cloak under which he wore a leather kilt and sandals
wrapped in cloth to preserve heat. A hardy race, orcs could survive any element, but high in the
mountains even they required more warmth.
Brox, too, was a proud warrior, but time had beaten at him as no other enemy could. He stood several
inches shorter than Gaskal, part of that due to a slight but permanent stoop. The veteran warrior’s mane
had thinned and started going gray. Scars and lines of age had ravaged his wide, bullish visage, and unlike
his youthful companion, the constant expression of eagerness had given way to thoughtful distrust and
weariness.
Hefting his well-worn war hammer, Brox trudged through the deep snow. “They’re heading for the same
place as us.”