Understanding Karate-do:
A Guide to Unity of Body, Mind, and Soul
Owen Johnston
2005-2011

'The true purpose of budo is the search for truth. In karate,
three elements are important - physical strength, spirit and heart.
The end of do (the way), cannot be achieved in a few years, rather it
is a lifelong search. Perhaps you could say the aim is to make us
good Human Beings.'
- Ohtsuka Hironori (6/1/1892 - 1/29/1982), founder of Wado ryu
karate
5
Understanding Karate-do
Introduction
'The Way is not meant as a way of fighting. It is a path on
which you travel to find your own inner peace and harmony. It is
yours to seek and find.' - Ohtsuka Hironori
Karate-do, as a tool for self-improvement in one's own life and
for the lives of others, is rivaled by few other disciplines on
earth. It may be practiced nearly anywhere, anytime, and by almost
anyone, especially its code of conduct. It is not necessarily a
religion, but indeed a discipline that one may apply to one's
existing beliefs. It is simply one of many methods by which one may
step onto the path of becoming the best person one can possibly be,
where one's ultimate teacher will be life itself.
No book can replace formal, technical instruction; as such, this
book is primarily designed as a companion guide for the existing or
prospective student of Karate-do. Also, as this book is a constant
work in progress, I realize that the histories and lineage provided
are far from comprehensive. However, I do hope that they are passable
as basic, concise sources. For more comprehensive information about
the wide world of karate and more, check out my Sources and
Recommended Viewing.
My lineage: I earned the rank of shodan in Heiwado (Japan
International Karate Center's karate) from Sensei Craig McKenzie. He
was taught by Sensei Kevin Marshall, who in turn was taught by Sensei
Dale Coker. His teacher was Shihan Ronald Woodard. My particular
formulation of Heiwado is based on continued research. More lineage
information is found in Part I of the book.
Author & Publisher:
Owen Johnston
cyriades@yahoo.com
Johnston Karate Home Page:
http://www.johnstonkarate.com
Don't forget to visit the site for free supplementary materials.
Click the link at the top of the page that says 'Free Karate
Downloads' for free videos and other guides.
6
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Karate
Karate-do, in all its various forms, finds its origins in one
place - the Ryukyu islands off the coast of Japan. What we know as
one of the most widely practiced systems of self defense and
discipline in the world is the result of centuries of development.
While Karate-do was introduced as a code of ethics to a peacetime
America only a few decades ago, it began through the need of Ryukyu
natives for better methods of fighting.
There are a few theories about the origins of the fighting arts
that later became collectively known as Karate-do. However, it is
certain that many notable Chinese kung fu practitioners settled in
Okinawa, the capital of the Ryukyu kingdom.
The origins of the Chinese arts themselves are also shrouded in
the mists of time. A widely accepted theory is that Bodhidharma, the
founder of Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism created what would later evolve into
Shaolin kung-fu. The original exercises were used to strengthen his
monks' bodies, minds, and spirits, to help them better fulfill their
duties. This level of personal cultivation carried across to many
Chinese martial arts. By way of transmission to other countries, this
carried across to other martial arts, Karate-do being one of them.
In the year 1429, a weapons ban was passed by King Shohashi.
This led to the rapid development of native unarmed fighting arts.
These arts were primarily influenced by various forms of Chinese kung
fu, which Okinawans began learning in the 14th century.
Okinawans learned forms of Shaolin kung fu from Shaolin masters
who fled China as a result of the oppressive Qing dynasty. Okinawans
also learned various forms of kung fu from Chinese merchants, Chinese
officials on diplomatic missions, and young members of wealthy
Okinawan families who went to China to learn 'Quan Fa' / kung fu to
further their education and martial arts studies. The general name
given to the fighting arts learned and further refined by the
Okinawan martial artists was tode-jutsu (alternately spelled tou-di),
the Okinawan name given to Chinese martial arts.
In February 1609, invasion of Okinawa by the Satsuma clan (of
Kyushu, Japan) triggered another period of rapid development of
native Okinawan fighting arts. Satsuma control lasted until 1879,
when the King of Ryukyu finally abdicated and the country became part
of Japan.
During this period, kobudo (often translated 'classical fighting
method'; commonly used to represent Okinawan weapon fighting)
evolved. Farm implements were used as weapons, as traditional weapons
were not allowed. However, some of the native Ryukyu warrior class
traveled up to the Satsuma clan in the later part of the 19th century
and learned their samurai fighting art Jigen-ryu kenjutsu. It was not
long after this that Sokon Matsumura, 'Toudi' Sakugawa, and Tsuken
7
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Karate continued
Koura, among the many who had made the trip, introduced their
contributions to kobudo.
Ultimately, three major strains were developed from Ryukyu kenpo
karate-jutsu (as tode-jutsu eventually came to be called). These
strains were named Shuri-te, Naha-te, and Tomari-te, for the regions
in which they were developed. All three regions are based in the
southern part of Okinawa. The differences of the three styles may be
traced back to the socio-economic status of those who practiced them.
The lowest rung on the ladder was the worker class studying Tomari-
Te. The middle section was the merchant class studying Naha-Te. The
upper class noblemen were taking up practice of Shuri-te in and
around the capital.
Matsumura is commonly considered the great grandfather of the
karate movement in and around Shuri. He learned native Okinawan
fighting from Sakugawa (who in turn learned from Kusankun and other
masters). He later studied in Fujian and Satsuma. He learned Shaolin
Boxing (Shorin-ryu) under the tutelage of master Iwah. As a result of
the efforts of Matsumura, the fighting arts that surfaced around the
noble / castle district of Shuri came to be known as Shuri-te (Shuri
hand).
The Chinese master Ason taught Zhao Ling Liu (Shorei-ryu) to
Sakiyama, Gushi, Nagahama, and Tomoyori of Naha. This led to the
development of Naha-te. Naha, a coastal city, was a large trade
center at the time. Xie Zhongxiang (nicknamed Ryuru Ko) of Fuzhou
founded Whooping Crane kung fu (hakutsuru) and taught it to a number
of notable karate masters in the Fuzhou province. Wai Xinxian, it is
said, was a Qing dynasty officer, and taught Xingyi kung fu as well
as Monk Fist Boxing. It is also said he assisted Master Iwah's
instruction in Fuzhou province.
Two separate, modern styles developed from Naha-te: Goju-Ryu and
Uechi-Ryu. Goju-ryu stresses deep breathing methods (ibuki). Its
kata, including Sanchin, tend to utilize dynamic tension for power
training. Uechi-ryu uses a number of kata that Kanei Uechi (1877-
1948) learned while in China, as well as several Goju-ryu kata.
Uechi-ryu's Sanchin is done with open hands, and doesn't use the deep
breathing emphasized by Goju ryu.
Naha-te's Chinese lineage can be seen through the influence of
the forms and methods of Crane and other styles. Dragon Boxing
includes the forms Seisan, Peichurrin (also known as Suparimpei),
Saam Chien, and Eighteen Scholar Fists. Tiger Boxing also includes
Saam Chien and Peichurrin, as well as Sanseiru and others. Arhat
Boxing (Monk Fist) has Saam Chien, Seisan, Jitte, Seipai, Useishi,
Peichurrin, and other forms.
8
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Karate continued
While Karate was primarily organized in Shuri and Naha, Tomari
originally had little direct influence. This is because, at that
time, Tomari was inhabited by a simple people; it was a working class
city of fishermen. Tomari had its share of notable masters, however,
with Kosaku Matsumora (1829-1898), Kokan Oyadomari (1827-1905) and
Gikei Yamazato (1835-1905) the most notable. They studied under
Annan, as well as Ason, a Chinese sergeant.
Tomari was located near Shuri, and its fighting arts developed
partly under its influence. Some of the Chinese masters who taught
Tomari villagers, however, did not reach Shuri. Some of these
teachings did later influence Shuri-te, as exchanges eventually took
place. Many of the kata became part of both Shuri-te and Tomari-te.
Some of the kata unique to Tomari-te, however, are Wansu, Rohai, and
Wankan. It is believed that Chotoku Kyan (1870-1945) brought the kata
Ananku from Taiwan in 1895. It is said there are other kata that have
been lost over time.
It is also said that a pirate or sailor (named Chinto, or Annan,
depending on the source), was a castaway from a shipwreck on the
coast. He took refuge in the graveyard of the mountains of Tomari,
and later lived in a cave. Reportedly, Sokon Matsumura formulated the
kata Chinto (a.k.a. Gankaku) from the sailor's White Crane Kung Fu
teachings. Chinto kata, of which there are more than half a dozen
versions, was adopted into shuri-te. The Tomari-te chinto kata has a
Chinese flair, in contrast with the simpler looking shuri-te version.
A one legged stance occurs many times, bearing the image of a crane
poised to strike its prey. The flying kicks of this kata
differentiates it from others.
Matsumora and Oyadomari apprenticed under local masters Kishin
Teruya (1804-1864) and Giko Uku (1800-1850). They learned from Teruya
the kata Passai, Rohai, and Wanshu, and from Uku, the kata Naifanchi.
Matsumora was also versed in the jo-jutsu (short staff technique) of
Jigen ryu. It is often said in Okinawan sources that Matsumora is
Annan's successor. Yamazato followed Matsumora and Oyadomari, who
were close friends. Both masters encouraged their students to
exchange techniques and kata, furthering the development of Tomarite.
Tomari-te became a light form of fighting, with plenty of feints.
The kata Seishan is named after a well known Chinese martial
artist who lived in or near Shuri circa 1700. He was associated with
Takahara Perchin, a map-maker who was the first to teach Tode
Sakugawa. The kata is said to be the oldest still in use, and
translates to '13' or '30'. The naha-te Seisan has a Chinese flair.
The movements are repeated in sets of three, and has pivots and
turning of the head. Hangetsu, the Japanese name for Seisan,
translates to half-moon. This is taken from the stances and footwork,
9
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Karate continued
as well as the hand movements, which use circular paths. As with many
other forms, the kata's movements differ slightly between styles.
Throughout this period, tode-jutsu was taught primarily for
health, philosophy and self defense. In this way, the Chinese
tradition was continued. Tou-di, the karate of old, was not meant for
the competition seen in modern karate. In fact, there were no public
classes, as practicing fighting was forbidden as a way to promote
public order. The to-de masters chose their students with caution
because they were liable for problems that could arise (and
frequently did) from their students' actions. Tode-jutsu had also
become a part of the imperial guards' training. As a result of
Okinawa's annexation to Japan, however, there was a huge unemployment
boom, and poverty spread heavily. Because of this, a number of
chikundun peichin (those who upheld public order in the Ryukyu
kingdom) started teaching tode-jutsu for money.
In the Satsuma occupation's later years, Japan began major
changes as a result of the Meiji restoration. Cultural reforms led to
the abolition of the feudal system, the abasement of the samurai
class, and development of democracy. However, democracy was never
fully implemented, nor were all the ideas of the samurai code and the
feudal system totally abandoned. Japan did not want to totally lose
its strong identity to (primarily Western) foreign influences. Part
of this identity was the bugei (martial arts), which assisted in the
shaping of modern Japan.
The budo (martial ways), as they came to be called, were more
than simply a cultural recreation. The ruling elite used the spread
of budo to further instill moral virtues, the values of bushido (way
of the warrior), and 'Japaneseness' in the Japanese public. In this
Pre-World War II age full of increasing militarism, Japan needed
strong, able men who were willing to fight to the death. Japan also
hoped that young men of good health and mind would be more productive
citizens.
As a result, many budo were introduced to the school system.
Some of these classical budo included Aikido (The Way of Spiritual
Harmony), Jiu Jitsu (unarmed self defense art often focused on
grappling), and Kendo (Way of the Sword), derived from the samurai
fighting traditions. Also, Judo ('Gentle Art') was developed from jiu
jitsu in the later part of the 19th century.
Itosu Anko led a group of Okinawan karate-jutsu experts in a
campaign to introduce the art to the Okinawan school system as a form
of exercise. Many of the dangerous applications were not practiced in
the school system, transforming karate from a hidden art of self
defense into a unique recreation.
Karate was introduced in this form to the Japanese mainland in
10
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Karate continued
1917. The Japanese martial arts association ('Dai Nippon Butokukai')
was interested enough in karate to invite the art's best
practitioner. Their intent was to compare karate-jutsu to Japanese
jiu jitsu in matches of skill.
Gichin Funakoshi was an Okinawan native who taught at the school
'Shoto Gakko', which prepared Okinawans for Japanese civil service.
His life's passion, however, was karate. Because of the respect he
commanded from Japanese gentlemen, and his skill in karate, he was
selected to represent Okinawa's martial art.
He defeated every opponent he faced at the demonstration, and
won great respect. Because of this and his love of Japanese culture,
he stayed on the mainland to further propagate karate. As a result of
the first and further exhibitions, he gained many followers and
ultimately began teaching out of a Kendo dojo.
At first, there were cultural barriers and traditions that
slowed the progress of karate across the mainland. As a result of
Funakoshi's excellence in teaching, however, he broke through the
prejudices against karate. Eventually, he was able to open his own
dojo, which was the first formalized karate dojo. Also during this
time, karate as a whole came to be formalized and 'Japanized'
(although divisions among separate karate styles have not, to this
day, been resolved - primarily due to pride and organizational
politics).
Such formalization included acceptance of the kyu/dan
(class/grade) system as devised by Jigoro Kano (founder of judo).
Also, it became important that all teachers were qualified and
knowledgeable. Finally, it was necessary to institute a standard
curriculum, uniform, and competitive format.
Nationalism and anti-Chinese sentiment made the karate-jutsu
movement consider a more appropriate ideogram to represent their art.
The original 'kara' ideogram of karate meant China, as did the 'tou'
of toudi (Chinese hand, and a reference to the Tang dynasty). The
replacement ideogram means 'empty', and takes on not just a physical
but a spiritual meaning. 'Kara' may represent the 'void', and freedom
from worldly desire.
Also changed was the suffix for karate. Instead of jutsu
(art/science), do (way/path/totality, pronounced 'dao' in Mandarin)
came to be used. In this sense, as a result of the efforts of such
masters as Itosu, karate-do joined kendo, jiu jitsu, aikido, and judo
as a modern budo, in which not only combat is practiced, but also a
cultural discipline for the pursuit of harmony.
11
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Wado ryu
Hironori Ohtsuka founded Wado-Ryu, the 1st Japanese form of
Karate in 1938. It was the result of many years of training in
various forms of Japanese Jiu Jitsu and Okinawan Karate, as well as
Aikido, developed into a single fluid, powerful, yet peaceful martial
art. Wado-Ryu Karate is the Way of Peace and Harmony, and is
practiced as a way of life by millions of people worldwide.
For such a relatively new and widely practiced martial art,
details of its origin are either scarce or hotly debated. There is
also plenty of speculation and rumor. I will give as factual an
outline of the history as I am able. Also, I apologize beforehand if
it seems that any part of this history is vague, which is a result of
the lack of facts pertaining to that particular section. For a more
comprehensive study of Karate, Wado-Ryu, and Ohtsuka-sensei, please
refer to Sources and Recommended Viewing.
Ohtsuka began his martial arts training very young. His great
uncle Chojiro Ebashi began teaching him Jiu Jitsu (alternately
spelled jujutsu and jujitsu), a grappling oriented art beginning at
the age of 3 or 4. He was later enrolled around age 5 or 6 in shindo
yoshin-ryu jujutsu ('Sacred Willow Style' jujutsu) under Shinzaburo
Nakayama-sensei. This form of Jiu Jitsu was founded by Katsunosuke
Matsuoka, a student of Yoshin-ryu jujutsu ('Willow Style'), in the
early to mid 1800s. Shindo Yoshin-ryu emphasizes grace and natural
movement.
This study of natural flowing movement later played a major role
in the development of Wado principles, along with Ohtsuka's training
later in life under Morihei Ueshiba O'Sensei, founder of Aikido. The
use of the opponent's momentum are as important in defeating him or
her as your own movements. Also, Jiu Jitsu's orientation towards
rugged practicality influenced Ohtsuka's modifications to the Karate
techniques he would later learn.
The Jiu Jitsu community of that time generally retained many of
the Samurai traditions and fighting arts from which Jiu Jitsu itself
was derived. Shindo Yoshin Ryu Jiu Jitsu, for example, contained
Kenjutsu influence and a heavier emphasis on striking than many other
Jiu Jitsu forms. The Kenjutsu side was a definite influence on the
body shifting and hand controlling techniques Ohtsuka later included
in Wado-Ryu.
Ohtsuka continued his study of Jiu Jitsu for many years. During
his period at Waseda University (from 1910-1917, where he earned his
Associate's Degree in Economics) he experimented with various Jiu
Jitsu styles to find their best qualities. Even this early on,
Ohtsuka began evolving his techniques and principles.
According to many, on June 1st 1920 Ohtsuka was promoted to 4th
Grandmaster of Shindo Yoshin Ryu Jiu Jitsu. This has been much
12
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Wado ryu continued
debated, however. The 3rd grandmaster of Shindo Yoshin Ryu, Tatsuo
Matsuoka (grandson of the art's founder), did not pass away until
1989, 7 years after Ohtsuka's death. Also, Ohtsuka's instructor,
Nakayama, had previously branched off from the founder to begin his
own style and lineage of Shindo Yoshin-ryu. It is also heavily
debated as to how much or little of the actual shindo yoshin-ryu
jujutsu curriculum was later adopted into Wado ryu. Also, Ohtsuka
had, at some time during the early 1920s, been awarded a 'menkyo
kaiden' certificate. This certification essentially meant he had
gained full proficiency in the system. At the very least, Wado was
heavily influenced by the shindo yoshin-ryu principles, and some of
its waza (techniques).
Nonetheless, Ohtsuka's path as a budoka was set by this point,
and would soon take its first fateful turn. He would soon meet the
father of modern karate, Gichin Funakoshi. In the fall of 1922,
Ohtsuka was giving thought to his future. Although his job at the
bank appeared secure, he was not satisfied. He wanted to devote his
life to his true passion, the martial arts. This interest was
heightened even more when Ohtsuka found out that an Okinawan school
teacher, Gichin Funakoshi, was invited by Crown Prince Hirohito to
perform karate before the Emperor of Japan at a public hall in Tokyo.
Ohtsuka attended the demonstration, and as a result became one of
Funakoshi's 35 original Japanese students.
Because of the popularity gained by the demonstration, Funakoshi
stayed in Japan. Ohtsuka was at Funakoshi's dojo nearly every night,
absorbing the art. By 1924, he became chief assistant instructor. On
April 24th, Ohtsuka was named among the first seven black belts in
modern karate.
Funakoshi came to rely heavily on Ohtsuka. At 32, Ohtsuka's
realized his dream of being a full time martial artist. However, he
found Funakoshi's karate (later named Shotokan) lacking. He felt
there was little sense behind the philosophies, the kata seemed to
have no practical application, and the movements were too confined.
Also, Funakoshi did not allow free sparring, leaving no way to truly
test his karate. Therefore, while still assisting Funakoshi, Ohtsuka
trained with other notable masters. These included Kenwa Mabuni,
founder of Shito-Ryu Karate, as well as Choki Motobu, famous for his
excellent technical and fighting abilities, and Morihei Ueshiba,
founder of Aikido.
Ueshiba O'Sensei helped Ohtsuka find the missing link, and
officially begin the creation of Wado. Like Shindo Yoshin Ryu Jiu
Jitsu, Aikido is a direct descendant of Aikijujutsu (a part of
Samurai combative). The greatness of Aikido is in its reliance on
natural movements, focusing on breathing, relaxation, and 'ki' (life
force; breath; spirit). Whereas most karate tended to generate
13
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Wado ryu continued
tension in performing techniques, Aikido was the opposite. Instead of
meeting force of force, it blended with and redirected the opposing
force or ki.
It was upon learning Aikido that Ohtsuka-sensei began to form a
new budo, a Way of Harmony. He would eventually blend the basics of
Funakoshi's karate, the practicality of Shindo Yoshin Ryu Jiu Jitsu,
and the spirituality of Aikido, as well as the natural, evasive
movements of the latter two. Much like the Jiu Jitsu influence on
Ohtsuka-meijin's budo, Aikido had more influence on the principles
from which techniques are derived, rather than the specific
techniques themselves. Also, it would appear that Shito ryu Karate
and Shindo Yoshin Ryu Jiu Jitsu had a much heavier influence on Wado
than Aikido.
Ohtsuka gradually incorporated knowledge from Jiu Jitsu, Aikido,
and the other karate sensei he trained with, into the classes
Funakoshi-sensei had put him in charge of. This included free
fighting, and weaving his newfound principles into the kata. While
many students agreed with the changes being made, Funakoshi-sensei
viewed them as contrary to his teachings. Due to their disagreements,
it was in 1930 that Ohtsuka-sensei and Funakoshi-sensei finally
parted ways.
Over the 4 years that followed, with help from students who also
left Funakoshi's instruction, Ohtsuka continued his own teaching.
Constantly developing his new budo, he focused on deriving practical
defense from formal art. A major breakthrough was the idea of Kihon
Kumite Kata, which became his greatest contribution to martial arts.
In blending Jiu Jitsu, Aikido, and Karate, he created not only 36 new
kata, but a new budo.
Ohtsuka-sensei created the All Japan Karate-do Research
Organization (Dai Nippon Karatedo Shinko Kai) in 1934, after
encouragement from many of his students. Also, his son Jiro (later
known as Hironori Ohtsuka II), who would later become Ohtsuka's heir,
was born that same year.
Four years later, the All Japan Classical Martial Arts Festival
(Dai Nippon Kobudo Tai Kai) invited Ohtsuka-sensei to demonstrate his
controversial new style. He was asked to name the style prior to the
demonstration, and he registered it as Shin Shu Wado Ryu Karatejujutsu
- New Style Way of Harmony School. The year after, when Dai
Nippon Butokukai requested all Japanese martial arts and their chief
instructors register their names, Ohtsuka-sensei gave the name Wado-
Ryu - Way of Peace and Harmony.
Ohtsuka-sensei continued teaching, and Wado-Ryu eventually
became one of the most highly regarded Japanese martial arts. The 1st
All Japan Wado-Ryu Karate championships were held in 1955. In 1963,
14
Understanding Karate-do
A Brief History of Wado ryu continued
Mr. Arakawa, Mr. Takashima, and Mr. Tatsao Suzuki left Japan to help
spread Wado-Ryu Karate to Europe and America. Emperor Hirohito in
1966 awarded Ohtsuka-sensei with The Grand Order of the Rising Sun
(Kyuokujitsusho). In 1972, the president of International Martial
Arts Federation (Kokusai Budo Renmei) awarded Ohtsuka the title of
'meijin' (master), the first time a karateka had been given such an
honor in Japan. Even now, many years after his death in 1982, people
all over the world are still being affected in a positive way by
Ohtsuka's Wado-Ryu Karate-do, which is his ultimate honor.
15
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Lineage
Any further worthwhile information is accepted and appreciated.
Sokon Matsumura
Student of Kong Su Kung/Kushanku and Sakugawa
Matsumura taught Okinawan Shuri-te which later became known as
Shorin-Ryu. This form was a combination of Sakugawa's tode, and Kong
Su Kung's Chinese Boxing.
Yasutsune Itosu
Student of Sokon Matsumura
Itosu-sensei continued Shorin-Ryu as it was originally taught by
Matsumura-sensei.
Kanryo Higaonna
He practiced and taught the Naha-te style which became known as
Shorei-Ryu (influenced directly by Zhao Long Liu, a Chinese martial
art). After his death, Shorei-ryu was continued by Chojun Miyagi, who
later formulated it into Goju-Ryu.
Kosanku Matsumora
He practiced and taught Tomari-te.
Other practitioners and styles at/around the time:
Hohan Sokan, founder of Matsumuro Seito
Chotoku Kyan, founder of Shobayashi-Ryu
Chosin Chibana, founder of Kobayashi-Ryu
Shosin Nagamine, founder of Matsubayashi-Ryu
Joen Nakazato, founder of Shorinji-Ryu
Kanbun Uechi, founder of Uechi-Ryu
Motubi-Ryu, a family style
Isshin-Ryu, founded by Tatsuo Shimabuku.
Toon-Ryu, founded by Juhatsu Kiyoda.
Shito-Ryu, founded by Kenwa Mabuni.
Okinawan Kempo, a combination of Shuri-te, Naha-te, and Tomarite,
founded by Shigeru Nalamura.
Gichin Funakoshi
Student of Yasutsune Itosu and Sokon Matsumura
The father of modern karate-do, Funakoshi-sensei founded
Shotokan Karate-do in the 1920's after popularizing his martial art
in Japan. He originally studied under not only Matsumura and Itosusensei
but a number of other masters, whom Funakoshi talks about in
detail in his Karate-do: My Way of Life.
16
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Lineage continued
Choki Motobu
Student of Soken Matsumura and Anko Itosu of Shuri, Kosaku
Matsumora of Tomari, and possibly Tokumine
His teaching methods primarily consisted of Naihanchi kata for kihon
(basics), and kumite. He stressed up-close fighting.
Hironori Ohtsuka
Student of Gichin Funakoshi
Founder of Wado-Ryu Karate-do, Ohtsuka-sensei developed the
style as a blend of the basics and kata of Shotokan Karate, the
rugged practicality and natural movements of Shindo Yoshin-ryu Jiu
Jitsu, and the fluidity and peacefulness of Aikido. The Wado-Ryu
symbol represents peace encompassing strength.
In the months leading to his retirement, he decided that his son
was to succeed him as grandmaster of Wado-Ryu. However, some of the
higher level Wado-Ryu Karateka were not in favor of this decision.
Negotiations took place, but no agreement could be reached as to the
next grandmaster. As a result, some of the karateka split off to form
their own associations.
Hironori Ohtsuka II (Ohtsuka Jiro)
Son & Student of Hironori Ohtsuka
Months before his father's death, he and a group split from
Japan Karate Federation-Wadokai. His split is named Wadoryu Renmei.
It is regarded as a private group. In 1989 a new split occurred.
Suzuki Tatsuo, resident in London, founded International Wadoryu
Federation. The succession argument is the one most backed by Jiro as
to the split.
Hironori Ohtsuka III
Grandson of Hironori Ohtsuka
Tatsao Suzuki
Senior Student of Hironori Ohtsuka
Founder of International Wadoryu Federation
Suzuki sensei was one of the primary influences in spreading Wado
throughout Europe. As a result, Wado is currently the most widely
practiced form of karate in Britain.
17
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Lineage continued
Lineage of Heiwado:
Kiyohisa Hirano-soke
Student of Hironori Ohtsuka
Founder of Japan International Karate Center
Hirano-soke founded Heiwa-do, his interpretation of Wado-Ryu
Karate-do. It also blends in ideas from Shotokan, Shito-Ryu, and
Goju-Ryu, as well as Aikido, Iaido, and Judo. The basic strategy and
philosophies are classical Wado-Ryu.
Shotokan's scientific approach to body physics helps students
grasp instruction more easily. Shito's efficiency & superior stances
are also adopted. Also integrated into the movements are Goju-Ryu's
dynamic breathing methods.
The name Heiwa-do uses the first kanji (Japanese set of Chinese
loanwords) of Hirano (Hira, or Hei) & the 1st character from Wado
(Wa). The do in Heiwa-do translates to The Way. Heiwa-do's name was
created out of respect for its origins in Wado-Ryu. Heiwa also
happens to be the Japanese word for peace; therefore Heiwa-do
literally means The Way of Peace.
Shihan Ronald Woodard
Student of Kiyohisa Hirano-soke & current shihan of JIKC
Shihan Woodard is the 1st JIKC instructor in continental US.
Sensei Dale Coker
Student of Shihan Ronald Woodard
Founder of Nippon Kokusai Karate Center
Founder of Japan Karate Institute
Sensei Curtis Boyd
Student of Sensei Dale Coker
Sensei Kevin Marshall
Student of Sensei Dale Coker
18
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Principles for Self Defense
Included herein are generalized principles of the self-defense
side of Karate, meant to be applied to every day life.
A comprehensive listing of all techniques,and variations as
practiced in every family style and branch of karate, as well as the
differences in kata between branches, is beyond the focus of this
book. Also, no book, no matter how technical the explanations and
pictures, can possibly replace formal instruction. Therefore,
included in this and the next two chapters is a general guide to
principles, technique, and kata - based upon my own formulation of
karate - that I hope will serve you alongside your daily training.
The general learning curve intended is for body mechanics,
mental discipline, and ethical precepts to be practiced in the first
phases of training. After such training, application of principles,
mental focus, and personal development may be assisted.
Wa no Michi - The Way of Peace
We should seek unity, harmony, and peace within ourselves and
the world around us.
Karate-do - The Way of the Empty Hand
Do not look to one way of doing things or one technique.
Instead, internalize all you have learned, to become like water, and
take the path of least resistance. Do not meet force with force, but
avoid or stop attacks using body shifting, footwork, stop hits, and
deflection. Blend naturally with opposing energy.
Zanshin
'Remaining mind' / Awareness.
Haragei
Breathing art/'Belly art'/Body Focus. Breathe, relax, and settle
your body, naturally.
Mushin
'Mind-without-thinking'/Mental Focus. Empty your mind and be
fully aware of all angles. Do not concentrate on one technique, but
let your principles guide you according to the situation.
Kiai
'Life force harmony'/Spirit Focus. Exert your spirit in a
powerful yet natural way. Be flexible, intimidating, and untouchable.
21
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Principles continued
Tai Sabaki
Body management/body shifting/'optimum utilization'. These
movements are performed with economy of motion.
The 3 body shifting methods - San mi Ittai
Ten-i - Move away from the attack.
Ten-tai - Turn and realign the body to dodge the attack or reduce the
area on your body that is vulnerable to attack.
Ten-gi - Perform techniques while the attack passes through. Consider
using his/her momentum to your advantage.
Timings for counter attack
Consider uses for the body shifting methods.
Go no Sen - Defensive attack. Counter once the attack is completed,
but before the opponent is able to attack again.
Sen - Simultaneously attack with the attacker. You will complete your
counter first, and/or displace the attacker's movement.
Sensen no Sen - Preempt the attack with your own, by perceiving your
opponent's intent. This will catch him/her off guard, breaking
his/her mental balance.
Defensive movements
Heavily influenced by Shindo Yoshin-ryu jujutsu, these movements
are used to control the opponent's energy. These movements apply maai
and body shifting. Consider uses of the timings for counter attack.
Nagasu - Flowing / Fluidity. Move evasively off the line of attack
but closely enough that the attacker's force can be used to add to
your own. Often combined with penetrating into an opponent's side
(irimi).
Irimi - Move to enter the opponent's attack.
Inasu - Move under, inside, or around the attack.
Noru - Control the opponent's movement.
Musubi
'Connection'. This deals with finding the opponent's center of
gravity. Use as little energy and strength as possible when making
this 'connection'. Focusing on skill in application rather than force
20
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Principles continued
guarantees proper use of principle, and reduce your opponent's
chances of using strength to overpower you. Relax and develop
sensitivity! Once you find this, you will find the same principles in
all 'waza' / techniques. Remember to push with the hands and pull
with the feet.
Ki Ken Tai no Ichi
'Mind and Body as One'. Coordination of mind and body in
movement. Thought and action must become one.
Hei Jo Shin
'Calm mind and body'. When the opponent feints or draws a
weapon, you should not flinch. Instead, fight reflexively with a
focused mind.
Maai
The state of mind and spirit of the combatants, and the distance
between them. Keep enough space to attack and defend. At a high
level, you control the spirit and energy of a conflict. Draw a
reaction from the opponent that will give you a tactical advantage.
Practice the above principles to understand and apply maai.
Continuously study specific tactics to help further your
understanding of this broad strategy. A few technical examples and
training methods are included later.
21
Understanding Karate-do
Basic Techniques and Drills
This is not a comprehensive list of techniques and drills, but
those that I personally teach. Notes and Japanese terms also
included.
Basic Directions/Positions
High - Jodan / Middle - Chudan / Low - Gedan
Left - Hidari / Right - Migi
Centerline - Seichusen, Pattern line – Embusen
Karate Techniques (Basic Strikes, Kicks, Blocks, and Stances)
Strikes:
Knife hand - Shuto
Ridge hand - Haito
Elbow strike - Empi uchi
Hammer fist - Tettsui
Back fist - Ura ken
Four finger spear hand thrust - Yohan nukite
One knuckle punch - Ippon ken
Palm strike - Shotei uchi
Reverse Punch - Gyakuzuki
Kicks:
Front snap kick - Mae geri, Roundhouse kick - Mawashi geri
Side thrust kick - Yoku geri kekomi / sokuto geri
Side snap kick - Yoko geri keagi, Back kick - Ushiro geri
Inward & Outward Crescent kicks - Mikazuki geri
Knee kick - Hiza geri
Blocks:
Brush block; High block - Jodan uke
Outward & Inward middle blocks (Chudan soto uke, Chudan uchi uke)
Low block - Gedan barai uke
Knife hand block - Shuto uke, Support hand block - Morote uke
Elbow block - Empi uke
Cross arm block - Juji uke
Stances:
Attention stance; Ready stance; Horse stance - Kiba dachi
Straddle stance - Shiko dachi
Cat foot stance - Neko ashi dachi
Back stance - Kokutsu dachi
Front stance / "Fighting stance" - Zenkutsu dachi
Hourglass stances - Sanchin dachi, Seishan dachi
Crane stance - Tsuru dachi
22
Understanding Karate-do
Techniques continued
Footwork:
Some basic types of footwork used in getting closer to the opponent.
Yoriashi - move the front foot, then the back foot.
Ayumiashi - the back foot moves forward (as if walking).
Suriashi / Tsugiashi - back foot steps up to the front foot (no
crossing over).
Surikomi - crossover step using the back foot.
muay Thai Techniques:
Front push, Switch kick, Inside leg kick, Power kick, Cut kick,
Clinchwork
Boxing Techniques:
Punches - jab, cross, hook, uppercut, shovel hook, overhand cross
Parries - inward, outward, low, glove parry, slipping parry
Grappling:
This includes throws, takedowns, as well as seizing &
controlling techniques such as joint locks, chokes, gripping, and
small joint manipulation. These deal with various body points,
including vital organs, muscles, joints, and nerve clusters. When
using locks, maintain pressure and use pain to control or subdue the
opponent.
Control all the joints in the arm when applying wrist / arm
locks, and to push with your hands rather than pull. Do not allow the
opponent to use his or her strength to resist - find the center of
gravity and attack their weak line of movement. Use circular
movements to defeat the linearity of the human body. Study kuzushi
and sensitivity to understand not only grappling, but striking.
Some Basic Locks:
Various wrist and arm locks, Rear naked choke, Guillotine choke, leg
and ankle locks
Some Basic Sweeps, Throws, Takedowns:
Major outer and inner reaps - Osoto gari, Ouchi gari
Minor outer and inner reaps - Kosoto gari, Kouchi gari
Foot sweep - Okuriashi harai, Forward foot sweep - Deashi harai
Hip toss, Shoulder throw variations
Sacrifice throw variations, Double or single leg takedown
Basic Ground Positions:
Mount, side mount / control, guard, half guard
23
Understanding Karate-do
Techniques continued
Drills:
Alternate sparring
Take turns striking, with no blocking or hard contact.
Call sparring
Call a technique or series of techniques, and wait for your
partner to confirm that he or she is ready before attacking. Your
partner's goal is to successfully defend all techniques (via evasion,
parrying, and/or blocking). It is then your partner's turn to attack.
When both partners have improved at this drill, they may both
simply take turns delivering a short series of attacks without
calling out techniques. At first, this drill should be done at half
intensity with light to no contact. Also, counterattacks should not
be used in this drill, as the goal is to develop quick, reflexive
defenses. However, once skill is gained, counterattacks may be
drilled using the following routines.
Slip and duck (Reaction and combination drill)
This drills additional body shifting against punches at close
range. The key is to develop both looseness and quick reactions when
cornered. At first, the hands simply protect the face. As you
improve, add counter punches during and after slips and ducks. This
drill may be practiced with or without striking pads.
Sensitivity drill
You and a partner face each other in fighting stances, with your
hands open in guard position. You and your partner should keep your
hands or arms in contact with each other throughout the drill.
Practice redirection using soft techniques that flow into one
another, while maintaining good posture. As often as possible,
simultaneously redirect and counter attack. Do not rush the drill at
first - you and your partner will both slowly use redirection on one
another - 'countering counters', so to speak. This helps 'musubi' /
connection and sensitivity to direction of force, as well as bunkai.
It will also help you to not depend only on your eyes at close range.
This drill helps with clinchwork, Ki Ken Tai no Ichi and Hei Jo Shin.
Kuzushi (Balance breaking)
Clinch with your partner, and use momentum, body mechanics,
sticking hands, foot sweeps/reaps, etc. to try to break one another's
balance. Try to create openings for takedowns. Major outer reap uses
the back leg on their opposite leg. Major inner reap aims for the
inside (mirror image). Minor outer reap uses the front leg on the
same side (mirror image). Minor inner reap aims to the opposite leg.
24
Understanding Karate-do
Techniques continued
Shadow Boxing
Practice performing "freestyle" combinations on your own.
Footwork, breathing, rhythm and flow of techniques, slipping, and a
continuous active guard are among the most important things in shadow
boxing. Visualize an opponent as you practice - imagine different
scenarios and fighting rhythms.
If you are new to this, do it for three 1-minute rounds at half
speed. As your technique and/or stamina improve, build up to at least
three 3-minute rounds at full speed. Always take a one minute rest
between rounds. Of course, one can always perform more rounds as
desired / needed.
Once you are ready, do it with a partner at half speed. Maintain
some distance from one another - and read each other's movements as
you attack, defend, and use footwork. Watch angles, body language,
and rhythm as you apply what you learned in previous drills. Partner
shadow boxing helps adapt technical skills to a real sparring
situation. Eventually, move on to light sparring. Perform strikes
closer to your partner, and at full speed. However, use little to no
contact until you have improved control, and have gotten used to
techniques being thrown at you.
25
Understanding Karate-do
Kata
'A kata may be regarded as an integration of offensive and defensive
techniques, but it is more than that. One should try to understand
the spirit of the master karateka who created the kata, for it has a
life of its own and requires five or six years to be mastered.'
- Hironori Ohtsuka, Wado-Ryu founder
Kata - 'Formal movements'; in the context of Japanese martial
arts, an 'imaginary fight'.
Bunkai - Principles and application of kata.
Kata:
Wado-Ryu kata tend to use the Okinawan names. Alternate names
included are the Japanese / Shotokan names, unless otherwise
indicated. The kata included in any particular dojo's curriculum may
vary from this list, however. As such, this list is intended to be
informative to those interested in kata history, rather than
suggestive of what should be required to learn. I also do not pretend
that my information is complete / perfect, due to a lack of written
records in early 'te' history, and ongoing debate. I have also listed
various other kata I am aware of.
Kata list
Wado ryu kata
Pinan (Heian) series: Shodan, Nidan, Sandan, Yodan, and Godan
'Peaceful Mind' Numbers 1-5. Said to be created by Anko Itosu in 1905
or 1906, basing them on Kushanku, and a forgotten kata called
Channan. There is some debate as to whether Kushanku was instead
formulated from the Pinan series, however. Ohtsuka-meijin studied the
Pinan series under both Funakoshi- and Mabuni-sensei. Ohtsuka later
made modifications to these kata under the direction of Mabuni, and
also used influences from Shindo Yoshin ryu jujutsu.
Kushanku (Kanku Dai)
'Gazing heavenward', 'viewing the sky', or 'contemplating the sky'.
Said to be the most advanced of all Okinawan kata. Ohtsuka-sensei
studied Kushanku under Funakoshi- and Mabuni-sensei.
Chinto (Gankaku)
'Fighting to the East' / 'Crane on a Rock'. Formulated in Tomari from
the teachings of a Chinese sailor of the same name, this kata was
based mostly on White Crane Kung-Fu and later adopted into shuri-te.
Ohtsuka-sensei studied variations of this kata under masters
Funakoshi and Mabuni.
26
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
Seishan (Hangetsu)
'13 Hands'/'Crescent Moon'. It is based on movements brought from
Fukien to Okinawa circa 1700. Ohtsuka-sensei also knew and taught the
shuri-te version of Seishan.
Naifanchi / Naihanchi (Tekki Shodan)
'Holding your ground', 'The Iron Horse', or 'Battlefield'. Named
after naihanchi dachi, which the kata centers around. This kata was
transmitted by Matsumura-sensei throughout Shuri and Tomari sometime
before 1825. Master Ohtsuka learned Naifanchi from Motobu-sensei.
Bassai
'Extract from a fortress' or 'remove an obstruction'. An Tomari-te
kata that uses dynamic stances and hip rotation. The Shotokan, Shito,
and Wado ryu versions of Bassai are directly based upon Master
Itosu's Bassai. Ohtsuka learned Bassai from Funakoshi.
Wanshu (Empi)
'Dumping Form'. A Tomari-te kata based on movements brought to
Okinawa in 1683 by Wanshu, which is the Okinawan adapted name of the
Wang Ji. Wanshu was a practitioner of the Shaolin tradition of Fujian
White Crane. Ohtsuka-sensei learned Wanshu from Master Funakoshi.
Jion
'Temple Sounds' / 'In the Jion-ji Shaolin Temple'. A Tomari-te kata,
it is named after Jion-Je, a Buddhist temple. Ohtsuka studied this
kata under Funakoshi and Mabuni.
Jutte (Jitte - alternate spelling)
'Ten Hands'. It is said that anyone who masters this Tomari-te kata
has the strength of 5 men. Ohtsuka studied this kata under Funakoshi
and Mabuni.
Rohai (Meikyo)
'Vision of a crane' or 'vision of a heron'. Originally a Tomari-te
kata, a version of it was taught by Itosu-sensei, who formulated
three versions of it (Rohai Shodan, Rohai Nidan, Rohai Sandan). Itosu
Rohai was taught by Master Mabuni to Ohtsuka. The Rohai practiced in
Wado is known as Rohai Shodan, in Shotokan. The Shotokan version,
Meikyo, translates 'clear mirror' or 'mirror of the soul'.
Suparimpei (Pechurrin - Chinese name)
'108 Steps' (represents the 108 evil spirits of man). Developed from
a Chinese form used in systems including Dragon Boxing and Tiger
27
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
Boxing. Practiced in Wado.
Niseishi (Nijushiho)
Transmitted by Ankichi Aragaki, variations of this Shuri-te kata
exist in Shotokan, Shito, and Wado.
Unsu (Unshu - alternate spelling)
'Defense of a Cloud' or 'Cloud Hand'. This Tomari-te kata is
practiced in Shotokan, Shito, and Wado.
Kihon Kumite Kata (Basic Sparring Forms):
These kata are two-person drills.
Ipponme / Nihonme / Sanbonme / Yohonme / Gohonme
Rokuhonme / Shichihonme / Hachibonme / Kyuhonme / Juhonme
List of other kata (terribly incomplete!)
Kihon Kata Shodan / Nidan / Sandan
Basic Forms 1, 2, and 3. Variations exist in many styles.
Sei Shi
'24 Steps'. A Shorin-ryu kata performed in 3 directions - the points
of a triangle.
Seipai
Variations exist in Goju-ryu and Shito-ryu. It was influenced by
White Crane Kung-Fu.
Annan
A Shito-ryu kata that primarily uses open hand techniques. It also
has a Goju variation. Annan has great versatility and speed in its
self defense techniques.
Useishi (Gojushiho Sho)
'54 steps' number one. A Shotokan kata.
Gojushiho Dai
'54 steps' number two. A Shotokan kata.
Ji'in
Variations exist in Shotokan, Shito & Wado.
Nipaipo
A Shito kata with a Chinese flair.
28
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
Bunkai
Bunkai, or application of technique, assists in understanding
the movements once they have been learned. Kaisetsu, or learning the
principles behind the movements, may then be drilled, so as to assist
in learning how to adapt and apply kata. As such, there should not be
any one prescribed method for teaching bunkai. As such, drilling the
following bunkai is not meant to be 'the only way', but instead meant
to help gain a basic understanding of "kaisetsu".
Kihon Kata Shodan
Basic awareness, stances, defenses, attack angles, economy of
motion, & focus. High Blocks 2 & 3 may be used as strikes.
Kihon Kata Nidan
This kata builds on the previous one by drilling kick-punch
combinations.
Kihon Kata Sandan
It teaches power generation through hip twisting and body torque
as well as momentum.
Pinan Shodan
This kata helps movements become stable, efficient, and
intimidating. The first technique, 'c block', sets up for a
redirection. Even the sword hand blocks can become attacks.
Pinan Nidan
This kata instructs further on timing, distance management, and
counter-attacking quickly.
Pinan Sandan
This kata teaches a continuous guard. It also helps become body
shifting, consistency of stances, and redirection of attack. The
middle & low blocks in the beginning may be termed 'continuous
block', which may be interpreted in many ways. The turn after the
spearhand strike, and follow-up with the outward tetsui, is twisting
out of the opponent's grappling of your arm, and countering.
The use of the elbows in naihanchi dachi may be either strikes
or strong blocks. This may be interpreted in many ways in close
quarters. The last moves of the kata may be seen as elbowing to both
the back and front, breaking rear grapples with an elbow to each
opponent's abdomen and a hook to the face, or a powerful hook or
elbow to an opponent in front.
29
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
Pinan Yodan
Stepping into a back stance as you double block disrupts the
opponent's movement, as you simultaneously block and counter.
Blocking behind you immediately after the initial blocks cuts a sneak
attack short. The low block, front snap kick, and elbow combination
will block, stumble, and knock out an opponent. The sequence after
the second elbow assists in learning how to follow through with
attacks, and helps practice economy of motion.
The cross-block that begins the second half of the kata counters
a grab attempt. Pulling the hand back as you kick may be interpreted
as trapping the opponent's arm under yours, and pulling him/her into
a kick to the groin.
Pinan Godan
The high cross block sets up for an arm lock, tetsui, and
finishing punch. The jump ends with a strike to a fallen opponent.
The palm strikes followed by pulling motions represent attacking the
groin and causing severe trauma to it.
Kushanku
The Pinan kata help understand Kushanku, as there are many
similarities. The slow motions are used for breathing and focus, but
may often be used as blocks and/or attacks. Practice consistency in
stances, torque, and momentum in this kata.
In the second half, the sequence that ends with a punch to the
ground represents blocking a kick, throwing the opponent, and
knocking him/her out. The next sequence blocks and throws an
opponent, then jumps over him/her to kick another, and follows
through with a finishing strike. The last sequence is a takedown with
a knockout blow.
Naihanchi
Naihanchi develops lower body strength. It also teaches one to
settle all one's strength in the abdomen/center and draw from it. The
methods employed in Naihanchi are best applied and
interpreted in a narrow space.
Bassai
Bassai builds a stronger, more efficient defense. The first two
middle blocks may be seen as a kick counter and takedown; the
backfists near the end may also be used this way by performing
scooping blocks to set up for the attacks. The crescent kick
redirects an attack, so as to set up for the elbow strike. After the
elbow is 3 sets of double strikes to counter a rear grapple attempt.
30
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
Wanshu
Wanshu, like Bassai, is technical and efficient, but is of a
more aggressive nature. It is also a study in timing and followthrough.
Stepping into side stance as you set up for a low block may
be seen as body shifting to dodge an attack, as you move in to punch
the opponent. The jump represents stomping on a downed opponent while
preparing to block an attack from another.
Jion
Jion is very direct, yet powerful, stable, and technical. Its
use of stances will greatly assist your footwork. Remember, the
physical side of fighting is done from the ground up.
The first technique may be considered as a striking block, and
its uses are numerous. Compare this to Pinan Sandan. The low block
and middle block in back stance sequence sets up for a pulling block
and punch counter. Performing low block in back stance, then a
supported backfist in jigotsu dachi may represent blocking a low
punch, then sweeping a kick.
Seipai
As an Okinawan kata, Seipai uses a small structure to reinforce
mobility. Due to the Crane influence, Seipai is a study in entering
and parrying. The first combination blocks and pulls
a low attack, then knocks the attacker down. The rolling motion of
the arms after the turn, low block, middle block, and mawashi uke
combination represents a damaging arm lock. In a variation of Seipai,
juji uke is performed just before the sweep. The last two strikes of
the kata knock the opponent down, then out.
Gojushiho Sho
This kata is a study in close quarters techniques. The first
sequence is a double wrist block, and counter attack. The sequences
after the elbow strike represent a kick counter, nukite, and grapple
counter. The last sequence represents blocking an attack to the
midsection, blocking a grapple attempt, then counter attacking to the
collar bones.
Annan
Annan contains many practical, efficient counter attack methods.
It is also useful in practicing breathing and focus. Raising the knee
and striking with the finger may represent blocking a kick, then
hitting the vital point below the ear. Stepping into horse stance,
extending the hands, and clinching them into fists will jam the
opponent, and grab him/her to gain control for the side kick. The 'ox
31
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
jaw' wrist blocks near the end block a middle punch, then knock the
shoulder out of joint.
Shu Shi no Kon / Shuji no Kon
The bo (staff) is known for its versatility, speed, power, and
adaptability, and ease of use. Shu Shi no Kan is a great example of
this, as well as an excellent training aid. Once learned and
understood staff skills may be applied to makeshift weapons.
The usage of both ends of the staff allows a great degree of
control. This also enables may long range (yet deceptively fast)
block-and-counter techniques. The use of centrifugal force also adds
to the power. We must remember, however, to treat the staff as an
extension of our existing karate techniques - and practice
accordingly.
Seishan
Seishan is direct yet graceful. The primary stances used are
seishan dachi, tate seishan, and shikodachi. The footwork and a
number of the techniques utilize forward whipping movement for speed
and impact. The open handed blocks near the beginning may counter
grappling as well as strikes. These blocks may also be seen as double
spear hands. Also, in the second half of the kata, what appears to be
a shortened high block may be used as a wrist block, and the jammed
front snap kick becomes a knee kick.
Overview:
Aside from the dojo precepts, kata is traditionally Karate-do's
primary tool for personal development. It is the textbook of Karatedo
that is to be learned, understood, and applied. It is the tool by
which Karate-do demonstrates fighting principles, but also creates
unity in one's body, mind, and soul.
What may seem unnatural motions become second nature with
training and practice. Kata assists in drilling good habits, and
replacing bad ones. Once the techniques have been absorbed, patterns,
principles, and body mechanics may be understood. The 'art' of
'martial art' is understanding these underlying ideas, that guide
techniques and give them meaning. A technique is not just a strike or
block, but also the factors necessary for those to work (timing,
movement, and so forth). By practicing kata, and drilling 'bunkai',
you will learn to apply principles with no extra 'clutter'.
The fighting principles, when well applied, will work in many
situations. Awareness and defensive principles help avoid, assess, or
diffuse encounters. The search for unity means we should use lethal
force as a last resort. The key is to move last, but hit first. In
32
Understanding Karate-do
Kata continued
this way, there is no first strike in karate, but we meet force with
a passive counter. Look for new ways to interpret kata - many secrets
may be found...or created.
Mentally, kata teaches focus, and attention to all angles. One
must cut through disclarity of mind to understand kata, and with this
a growing process takes place. You will find bunkai where you did not
before, as you imagine the problems the kata creators faced. This
problem solving that kata teaches is invaluable. It balances the mind
and grounds it to a reality that is still unpredictable, yet enriched
by clearer understanding.
Physically, kata enforces proper use of body structure. It also
strengthens the muscles through natural body weight exercises.
Practiced vigorously, kata improves cardiovascular efficiency. Kata
is therapeutic and empowering.
Spiritually, kata provides a path of self awareness. In
practicing or even creating new kata, one builds resolve. In aiming
for mastery, one builds patience. In either, one has to continually
search in and outside of themselves, that one may learn how to apply
the truths contained within kata.
33
Understanding Karate-do
Philosophy
The material in this and the next chapter are what I personally
teach in my own classes. However, regional and personal differences
will necessarily make for different experiences in every martial arts
school.
Purpose of Karate Training
To stand for peace, harmony, and truth!
Dojo Precepts
1) Perfect one's character!
1) Dedicate oneself to others!
1) Uphold honor, bravery, and justice!
1) Never stop learning!
1) Obtain victory without conflict!
Mukso (Meditation)
Meditation warms up the mind before training, and cools down the mind
after training. After training, meditate on what you did well, and
what you want to work on next time.
Bowing
Shomen ni rei - Bow to the front
Otagai ni rei - Bow to each other
Traditions
1) Do not wear anything on your feet on the training floor, or
anything that inhibits training.
2) Courtesy / Respect: Bow when entering and leaving the training
floor. Bow when a teacher enters or leaves the training floor.
Say 'Thank you' or 'Arigato' and 'Hai, sensei' often. Ask the
teacher first before you leave the floor for any reason.
3) Relationships: Teacher-Student (oyabun-kobun) and Senior-Junior
(sempai-kohai). In Japanese tradition, the relationship of
master and apprentice is comparable to that of parent and child.
4) Honor: Carry yourself in an honorable fashion in dealing with
people in and out of the dojo. In the dojo, this includes
respecting your classmates and teachers by giving them your
best. Outside of the dojo, this includes doing the best you can
for others.
34
Understanding Karate-do
Terms
Pronunciation
Ei is like long a, ai is like ie in pie, y is like long e
General
Dojo - 'Place of the Way'; The training hall
Sensei - 'One who comes before'; Instructor
Sempai - Senior Student
Kohai - Junior Student
Hai - Yes
Osu - A greeting used in various styles.
Karate-do - 'Way of the Empty Hand'; Founded in Okinawa as a
system of self-defense & conduct
Commands
Yoi - Ready
Kiyotsuke rei - Line up, bow
Jiyu kumite - Free sparring
Hajime - Start
Yame - Stop
Mawate - Turn
Seiza - Formal Japanese sitting position
Mukso - Concentration / Meditation
Shomen ni rei - Bow to the front
Otagai ni rei - Bow to each other
Tate - Stand up
Moichido - One more time
Counting
Ichi - One / Ni - Two / San - Three / Shi - Four / Go - Five
Roku - Six / Shichi - Seven / Hachi - Eight / Ku - Nine
Juu - Ten
(Note: 'Shi' may also be pronounced 'yo' or 'yon', since 'Shi' can
also mean death. 'Shichi' is alternatively pronounced 'nana', and
'Ku' is alternatively pronounced 'kyuu'.)
35
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Precepts
Perfect one's character:
Do not harbor hatred and bitterness. Negativity breeds
negativity. Love one another. Enough cannot be said on this.
Dedicate oneself to others:
And not just to oneself. Selfishness leads to hate, which leads
to anger. Anger consumes all in its path and is never quenched,
except by effort, which rebuilds. This may be one's own effort, or
the effort of another, changing your nature and your life from the
inside out. This will influence those around you.
Uphold honor, bravery, and justice:
In these you will find right paths. Selfishness corrupts.
Patience instructs. Only time will tell.
Never stop learning:
Always consider following right paths. Think not on the way of
life or death. Do not settle for less than truth, or you will be
deceived. Letting go of life too quickly is not always honorable. Let
go of concern for your life or death; seek only honor and truth.
Focus only on these, then pain and deception turn into lessons, or
blessings. You must always seek greater understanding, so you may
seek greater truth. 'Obstacles are what you see when you lose sight
of your goal.' - Anonymous
Obtain victory without conflict:
The paramount of skill is victory without conflict. Preserve the
whole using your empty hand. You must practice preserving the whole
in every thing.
36
Understanding Karate-do
Karate Principles
'The ultimate aim of karate lies not in victory or defeat, but in the
perfection of the character of its participants.' - Gichin Funakoshi,
founder of Shotokan Karate
The underlying principles of karate-do (Way of the Empty Hand)
include not only self-defense, but a system of learning that provides
one with a tool for self-improvement. Its accessibility is shown by
its ability to be practiced hard or soft, by nearly anyone, and
nearly anywhere, even in one's own mind. Its precepts and discipline
can lead us on in the difficult times of our lives. This is the
connection of body, mind, and soul.
'There is no first strike in karate.' - Gichin Funakoshi
Karate-do is a way of life that teaches one to be the best he or
she can be, in spite of and because of the worst situations that one
faces. Karate is a code of conduct that avoids conflict; its level of
force is only stepped up if absolutely necessary. In this way, karate
may be used to defend oneself and others without striking a single
blow.
Way of the Empty Hand
Karate is not simply a method of empty handed combat, but also a
way of peace. Keep your mind open to the situation, and to the Truth.
Do not miss the forest for the trees. Cut through all the hype and
find understanding. Your hand, the human hand, is the most versatile
physical tool on the planet. Your mind is an even more versatile
tool. It is the tool of your human soul, human instincts. In that
way, your mind is a hand, reaching out for truth, greater things.
Therefore, Karate is the way of uniting body, mind, and soul, that
one may be a sharpened tool. Once one has learned Karate, its
textbook of technique, philosophy, kata, one should digest it and
make it part of one's nature. Continue to sharpen yourself, refining
what you have learned, using it to your advantage and the good of
others.
37
Understanding Karate-do
Strategy
In the broad view, a warrior must uphold the values of his or
her society to be of any honorable use. We all depend on one another.
The warrior must quell disorder, promote peace, and cultivate
character. In practicing the ways of war, one has an obligation to
not use them in an illegal or immoral fashion.
Let us now consider fighting tactics. First, we must understand
self defense. One should exercise caution in the use of force.
Awareness must have the highest priority.
In self defense, one must be able to read the situation and
potential adversary. Pay attention to the neighborhood, your own
mental and physical state, as well as the mental state of potential
attackers. One can never be too careful. When visiting a new area,
stay in well lit areas that seem safe. Also try to find good
information on the right places to stay if you are going to be in
town for a while.
There are many articles on the uses of makeshift weapons, and
weapon disarms. Not all such articles are realistic, nor are any of
them a substitute for hands-on defense training. They may be a
supplement to such training from a true instructor. The broken rhythm
of fighting, the form without form, and the warrior's mindset are
difficult to learn without guidance.
Blend with or break the opponent's energy, rhythm, or attitude.
Read timings/habits quickly. This is applied to hand to hand combat,
large scale combat, and overall strategy. You must be ready to defend
yourself as soon as you leave your home, even if you are sick, caught
off guard, outnumbered, or overwhelmed by a stronger attacker. You
must be prepared for the worst. End the fight as soon and as
peacefully as possible; simplicity and instinct are key!
Many fights actually begin at or near home; before a
disagreement turns into an altercation, try to defuse the situation.
In any altercation, use positive reinforcement. 'I know / am sure
you're a nice person, but I would rather not (fill in the blank).'
Remember, martial arts are not just collections of fighting
techniques, but 'arts' by which we defend the quality of life for
ourselves and others.
'Budo' and 'kung fu' have rather holistic meanings for everyday
life, and not simply 'martial arts', as they are so commonly
translated. In this sense, 'martial art' may itself take on a new
meaning. 'Martial' certainly connotes fighting tactics, yet 'art'
presents a deeper level of understanding. Do everything you can to
'preserve the whole'. Do not fight if possible, or to take the path
of least resistance if conflict is inevitable. Fight out of
necessity rather than hostility.
An attacker believes he/she has an advantage. This may include a
38
Understanding Karate-do
Strategy continued
weapon, surprise, strength, and so forth. He / she is also more
likely to attack you if he / she sees you as a potential victim.
Therefore, be cautious when you are fatigued or alone, and do not
appear timid, even if you are smaller than potential attackers.
Always try to stay aware, and prepared to talk your way out of a
situation, or defend yourself.
The environment, mindset of the attacker, and effects of panic
will further handicap you. Your attackers do not come at you in
prearranged patterns. You have to be ready to fight back, and take
the initiative, because every second counts!
The best defense is a good offense. Use distance and the
environment; be spontaneous. This is all very important against
multiple assailants! Your movements must be fluid, economical, and
not overly mechanical. The longer the fight, the more dangerous it
becomes! When in unfamiliar territory, scan for escape routes, taking
potential obstacles into account. Don't forget pepper spray,
pinching, biting, etc. to provide distractions. Overall, you want to
be as prepared as possible for potential violence.
When faced with a heavy handed puncher, his or her hand speed
and upper body defenses may be hard to match or get past. In this
case, timing and creativity are of high priority. In a street
situation, you do not have time to memorize his or her habits. Watch
for openings in the attacks, and draw out your opponent for a timed
hit. Don't forget use of body shifting; especially to the outside of
the opponent, which will present you with a strategic advantage. This
reduces his / her options by 50%. This will be easier or harder to do
depending on the attacker's training; such is hard to judge
immediately, so it is instead better to take the initiative and/or
counter-hit as quickly and efficiently as possible. Untrained
punchers, however, tend to have a large amount of telegraphing
(movements that signal a certain attack).
Against a kicker, remember that people are already on the brink
of disaster on two feet, and taking another foot off the ground ruins
balance even more. Also, a kick generally takes longer than a punch
to reach its destination. You will want to react to the opponent's
starting movement as quickly as possible with a jamming technique or
combination. Be extra careful when the attacker does manage to raise
a kick. A well trained kicker can often change a kick's height or
target before putting his or her foot down.
You must maintain a strong cover from which you can counter
swiftly, and off-balance your opponent while their kicking foot is
still traveling. Make an opportunity to close with the kicker, and
reduce his or her options. Elbows and knees are particularly
effective for striking away kicks. Use caution, however, if your
39
Understanding Karate-do
Strategy continued
attacker appears trained in a heavily body-conditioning oriented
flavor of Muay Thai / Thai boxing, Kyokushin karate, or the like.
Counter striking to vital areas that cannot be conditioned (solar
plexus and so forth) will be even more important in these cases.
Many fights end up hitting the ground. If you are not
comfortable working from the ground, then maintain a solid fighting
distance and avoid in-close fighting as much as possible. Adding to
the danger of ground fighting is the possibility of more attackers
arriving, glass on the ground, weapons, and your most immediate
attacker being much heavier, as well as numerous other factors. A
grappler will have methods of closing the fighting distance with you,
and taking you out of the range from which many types of strikes can
be thrown solidly. In this case, use standing submissions, reversals,
makeshift weapons, and/or muay Thai style clinching (using elbows and
knees as well). Do not to over-extend your strikes, or leave them
extended for long after delivery, against a seasoned grappler.
When faced with an attacker who you suspect has a weapon, you
will, of course, have even more reason to seek means of escaping the
situation other than hand to hand combat. It is possible that if you
comply with your attacker, they will let you alone afterwards.
However, do not always be quick to believe that he or she shares your
belief system; they could very well harm or even kill you after
getting what he / she wanted.
The attacker may also be on drugs such as PCP, which would make
him or her very dangerous to deal with. Pain compliance may not work
as well against such an assailant. Use the environment even more so,
such as getting free to run and throwing things in his / her path. If
at close range, attempt to stop any weapon from even being drawn. If
this is not possible, dodge an attack or jam it as your opponent
comes at you. Control the wielding arm, and strike at your opponent
with your free limbs, head butts, etc. until you can disarm or
subdue. It's also very important not to get caught off guard with a
handgun, which would put you at a severe disadvantage. In this case,
use distraction or other methods to diffuse the situation, and disarm
if necessary.
Overall, there is no way anyone can plan ahead for all
situations. However, one should constantly learn, as well as use
strategy, adaptability, and heart to one's advantage. In life, stay
truthful to yourself and loved ones. Be honorable as possible in
every situation - your enemy today may become your ally tomorrow.
Also remember that what protects and upholds you today may hinder you
tomorrow. Watch carefully, ask questions, and never stop learning.
40
Understanding Karate-do
Peace, Harmony, and Truth
Practice the Way of the Empty Hand to become as an empty vessel.
This is so that you may take natural courses of action, like water,
that you may find the path of least resistance. This is in order to
better understand and utilize your nature, as it relates to the
universe, and universal truth.
Practice the Way of Peace and Harmony in every way possible.
Strength of mind, body, and soul is a tool for peace and harmony.
Peace and harmony give strength meaning.
Life, like the ocean, is an ebb and tide, a give and take. Learn
to subside and crash upon the shores of life. Study, recover, train,
become...Then give it all back. This all relates to not just combat,
but life itself.
Like the ecosystem, people all depend on each other. Do not
hesitate to plant a good seed. Though 'an eye for an eye' makes the
world blind, a favor for a favor makes the world a garden.
In your search for peace, harmony, and truth, strip away the
unessential. Make leaps of faith; give it all your best effort. Do
not ever hesitate, or stop learning. Reach to the bottom of the lake
of your soul. I wish you the best, and God bless you.
41
Understanding Karate-do
On Teaching
'True karate-do is this; that in daily life one's mind and body
be trained and developed in a spirit of humility; and that in
critical times, one be devoted utterly to the cause of justice.' -
Gichin Funakoshi, Karate-do Kyohan
The major concern in teaching martial arts is helping others.
While it is not wrong to make a living from teaching, prestige is
nothing without setting a good example. We can not have desirable
progress in the 'martial ways' or peace and happiness without mutual
respect.
To ensure continued progress in the effectiveness of philosophy
and technique of our own arts, we must study our arts diligently
while being open to other perspectives. Teachers must set an example
for students by also being model students. This level of modesty can
take years to cultivate, and is one of the ultimate goals of our
training. Also, before we can realize our full potential in teaching
others, we must honestly learn our own strengths and weaknesses. Let
us look at ourselves in the mirrors of truth and good standards,
while chasing the rainbow of perfection.
'The technique of the martial arts is like the universe - there
is no limit to knowledge. One must realize no limit to one's
performance.' - Hironori Ohtsuka
Most of all, we should be respectful and modest. We must
remember to have and give respect as least as much as we get it. It
is easy to lose modesty under a pile of well-practiced technique.
Yet, without modesty, one has gained nothing from training. We learn
the realities of fighting so as to know how to avoid fighting and
take the most honorable approach. There are no winners in war - only
losers. With this in mind, we must punch and kick not to win or lose,
but to learn from each other in martial brotherhood.
'Have no regard for the martial aspects when training, but
rather adhere to the way of peace.' - Hironori Ohtsuka
42
Understanding Karate-do
Walking the Path
'From one thing, know ten thousand things.' - Musashi, Go Rin no
Sho (Book of Five Rings)
It is hard to describe the true experience of kata ('set
forms' / 'formal movements' in various Japanese arts) with words, in
the way it is hard to describe a symphony with sheet music alone.
Similarly, it is difficult to understand the true way of karate after
having practiced kata only a few times. Life is in the living -
swimming is in the water - karate is in the empty hand. Karate is not
in the clenched fist, but in the open mind and tempered spirit. This
is the true path of budo.
Much practice and study of technique are required for its
digestion and understanding. In this way we slowly come to view the
true path. While we may begin with 'a way', a style of technique,
this gives us the foundation to find 'the way'. What we call our
style is simply a symbol for what we practice and absorb, and should
not be confused with the true way. However, practicing a well-taught
style may teach us many things. In diligent, proper training, we find
the flexibility and focus of not just our bodies, but also our minds.
A tempered spirit is a tool that solves according to internal
principle, and guides technique. In light of this, listed below are a
few general factors that we should train in ourselves, for others,
along the martial path.
Power and endurance: Explosive strength is a must in the
performance of athletic skill. Ways to develop power include (but are
not necessarily limited to) plyometrics, body weight exercises (with
or without partners), cardiovascular training, and stance training.
One must also have mental fortitude to press on past the comfort
zone. Spiritual development occurs as a natural result. Every day
provides fresh lessons.
Rhythm, timing, distance: Fighting and music have often been
compared to one another. If you understand rhythm, you will know how
to break your own - and find your opponent's. Timing, then, is a
necessary consideration in employing the use of rhythm and broken
rhythm. To develop rhythm, we may start with kata, then understand
bunkai (application of kata), and then learn how to adapt naturally.
In this way, one may control the distance between oneself and one's
opponent - both physically and mentally. Many different sparring
drills may be employed. The serious study of rhythm and timing may
provide many lessons on understanding the ebb and tide of life's many
seasons.
Awareness and adaptability: While we by nature depend highly on
vision, we may train ourselves to more fully use our senses.
Knowledge is nothing without being mentally aware of its application,
43
Understanding Karate-do
Walking the Path continued
or the spiritual flexibility to adapt to change in a positive
fashion. Let us train diligently so that we may do our best, and be
prepared for the worst.
In this way, we can see that disciplining our bodies develops
our mental clarity. In cutting away the inessential, we develop our
mental focus and begin to see the true path. Thus, we make progress
in our spiritual perception. In this way, we will take a positive
direction spiritually and morally, as we have already done mentally
and physically. Thus, we will make a positive effect on the world
around us.
44
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection
In this series of articles, I hope to set out an outline of the
philosophy, techniques, principles, and training curriculum of my own
formulation of Karate. The primary influences are Heiwado Karate, as
well as various other karate styles, Western Sport Boxing, and
Brazilian Jiujitsu.
In the pursuit of perfection of character - the ultimate aim of
karate-do - one learns a new mode of self-expression. In this way,
verbal and body language take on new forms and meanings. As a result,
we may better effect positive changes within - and without -
ourselves, as well as more honestly and clearly express our inner
hopes and desires.
In this light, let us remember that life is a give and take. In
all fairness, we must treat others as we would like to be treated. In
this way, we may try to find the universal good and absolute
morality. Overall, we must seek the best possible solution in every
situation. Studies of ancient wisdom, and hard - yet efficient -
training, will provide the answers.
What is invisible must become visible. What is visible must
become invisible. The rhythms, seasons, and cycles of life and nature
are easily observed, but are hard to understand without much study.
To improve our own nature is even more difficult. Yet, let us look at
acorns. Depending on factors in the environment surrounding it, the
small acorn disappears in the ground and grows into a grand oak tree.
In time, this oak produces acorns of its own. Let us always remember
that our only strength is the truth, for it will always stand. Let us
continue to seek the true path.
Remember these factors for external strength - power, speed,
technique, agility, balance, control, endurance. Remember these
factors for internal strength - love, hope, faith, discipline,
looseness, determination, fighting spirit. Many subtleties and shades
are contained within! The factors for internal strength take time to
foster, but are infinitely more important. Difficult external
training, and the wisdom of others will strengthen you on the inside
- but only as long as you want to learn. Also, adversities in life
develop one's mental and spiritual depth.
Massive strength and extraneous movements should not be
necessary in technique or application. Rather, we should consider
power - smooth, explosive movement. Much practice and training are
required to gain the proper efficiency. Yet, unlike raw strength,
there is virtually no limit to skill development. Remember this in
your physical, mental, and spiritual training.
45
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection – Part II
Many martial arts use forms to help teach not only the technique
systems, but the qualities and types of power that I put forth in the
previous article. Proper rhythms - and broken rhythm - must be
understood. This is not simply for fighting, but also for life.
As such, I detail below a series of drills. The influences on
these drills are primarily Karate, Boxing, and Brazilian Jiujitsu.
The drills help train the following: bunkai (applications) and
kaisetsu (principles), footwork, evasion, efficient counterattacking,
standup grappling / clinchwork, and breakfalls.
The general goal is to unify many techniques and methods into
one structure, which is loose, agile, and cat-like. The following
qualities are very important: efficiency, flexibility, power
(including strain energy, falling energy, momentum, explosive power,
and short power), springy evasive movement, trapping hands and feet,
as well as simultaneous attack and defense.
Shuffling
This is a set of drills which will help develop speed,
efficiency, timing, softness, and rhythm in footwork.
Side and straight line shuffles. First, shuffle side to side,
slowly then quickly. Practice this with left or right leg in front,
then switch and practice again. The three types of side shuffles -
side, behind, across. Next, shuffle forward and backward, shooting
out punches as you do so.
Also try performing kicks as part of shuffle practice. One drill
is to perform two small hops in which you switch feet, then perform
kick of choice with the back leg. Before setting the foot down, pivot
to the opposite side of the kick and perform a full turn in that
direction. (If you kicked with the right foot, then turn to the
left.) As you are planting your feet, shoot forward with a jab with
the lead hand.
Pivot shuffles. Best done with a partner. Step forward along the
line of his or her attack, then pivot the back leg behind the front
leg, using a hip motion. If your partner is using a straight punch,
use a parrying strike while trapping your his or her lead hand or arm
(to set up for grappling and/or further strikes). If your partner is
kicking, use the motion to begin a takedown. Once you have pivoted
your back leg out, pivot back in while blocking with the lead hand.
Circular shuffles. Shuffle around your practice area, switching
your balance. Stay on the balls of your feet, for lightness of foot.
Then, use sliding circular shuffles - with feet more planted – to
46
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection II continued
practice shifting your balance with solid, but light steps. In this
way, you practice for real fighting, where you need not only agility,
but power and stability.
Parry shuffles. Coordinate both hands and both feet in
simultaneous movement, attack, and defense. Blocking isn't always
necessary - better not to be in the way of the attack!
Smashing / Lunging
The basic technique is to perform a brushing block with the lead
hand as your back foot steps across to set up for a step-across
karate reverse punch. As you improve, add a deeper lunge to the
punch, then explode with a kick. Then set the kicking leg forward and
perform another lunging punch with the other side. This sets up for
very explosive movements.
Next, drill a continuous straight blast. Concentrate on
controlling and/or jamming the opponent's movement. This straight
blast may be used to back your opponent into an obstruction. If the
opponent moves off the line of attack, quickly transition into the
next technique.
Once you have improved with these, add techniques that require
both forward movement and circular pivoting for full power, such as
elbows, roundhouse kicks, and hooks. Concentrate on boxing in the
opponent and making him or her panic, or change tactics. Next, add
pulling / clinching / controlling techniques. Lastly, fast, welltimed,
evasive attack along your opponent's line of attack should be
drilled. Utilize techniques for parrying and bridging the gap while
simultaneously attacking. Quickly transition to off-balancing /
sweeping / groundwork techniques.
"Pulling Hands" / Standup grappling and clinching
The key is to push with the hands and pull with the feet. The
ultimate goal is to take away your opponent's free range of movement.
Leverage and positioning are key. Firstly, review standing armbar
submissions and wrist locks, then move into clinchwork. The key is to
control the opponent's momentum, so that you may effect an
unbalancing technique.
If the opponent resists a standing armbar, use your control of
his or her arm off-balance them in a different direction, setting up
for a standing wrist / arm lock or similar technique, and a takedown.
However, if the opponent reacts to your "pushing hands" by trying to
pull you back, push in and effect a blood choke or similar submission
technique. Also, as needed, use strikes, clinch work, and seizing or
pain compliance techniques (aim for joints, vital points, and
47
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection II continued
muscles). Lastly, takedowns, throws, and sweeps allow easy
transitions to various ground submissions.
In the case of multiple opponents, you may throw one into
another, or use an opponent as a shield. Of course, these are just
the basics. Keep training and studying to find what works for you.
Switching
The goal of switching is to use clever strategy to throw your
opponent off his or her rhythm / pattern. The basic technique is to
quickly move forward with the lead foot while performing a fast
technique the lead hand. As you step, pivot the back leg around and
past the front leg, using a quick twist of the hips. This looks like
a shortened step-forward-and-pivot body shift.
The dip of the back leg may be large or small, but it must be
fast and performed immediately after the first technique. The dip
sets up for a side kick with the front leg. After the kick, retract
the leg, come back to a front stance, and perform a roundhouse kick
with the back leg. Retract that leg to a front stance (pulling it
back or setting it forward), then perform a front kick with the other
leg. Of course, one may change the techniques, but the idea is to
trick your opponent, "box" him or her in, and limit their movement.
One may also vary the switch, of course, to pivot and turn at
various angles. This may be used as a variation of "Pivot shuffles".
The idea is quickly shutting down your opponent's movement with
tricky footwork. One could add in continuous strikes, making this
similar to sticking smash. Next, drill a turning step. As with the
basic switch, move in with the lead foot and hand, then pivot the
back leg. However, after this, follow-up with pivoting the body
completely around. One should land in a stance with the same leg in
front as before. Perform techniques while using this footwork.
Lastly, vary your angles of movement while practicing such steps. Try
it with a partner - you will try to throw each other off-guard.
Sinking step
Move away or along the line of attack using a deep, lunging
style of angular footwork, while pivoting the upper body to evade a
straight line punch. The hands should remain up, ready to parry. The
legs should remain loose but stable, so that you can move quickly to
the next position. A roundhouse kick or hook may be used together
with a sinking step. A sinking step also sets up for a quick counter.
Sinking steps may also assist in performing jumping kicks. However,
such kicks are only used here to assist speed and power training. In
a real scenario, one could counter with brush block and powerstepping
roundhouse kick. A sinking step may also setup for pivoting
48
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection II continued
into the opponent and performing a fast combination.
Wedging in. Sink backwards with brush blocks, then sink forward
with penetrating sword hand blocks. This is to not only continue the
idea of pulling and smashing, but to also add your own momentum, as
well as "uprooting" the opponent. The idea is to twist your opponent
and "cut" through their stance – possibly effecting a takedown. This
may be modified to setup for various types of takedowns.
Rockfall step. Sink away from an attack into a low stance while
parrying / trapping, then fall / wedge in with the lead leg. With a
partner, practice using a knife hand block against his or her punch
while entering his or her stance with your own side facing cat
stance. The goal is to gain control of their center of gravity and
knock him or her off balance while using leverage (such as using a
trapped arm) and strikes (such as shoulder / elbow / body checks).
While maintaining control of your partner, you may pivot away from
him or her to create the momentum needed for a takedown, or use
leverage to throw the opponent.
Spinning step
This is a quick evasive pivot that sets up for techniques such
as throws, back hands, and back kicks. Like the basic switch step,
move in with the lead foot and hand, then pivot the back leg.
However, follow-up by completing a full turn on the back leg. This
back leg turn may be compared to the pivoting often seen in karate
kata. This type of step is more of a drill than a direct application.
As such, one may adjust it to include techniques such as spinning
back kicks, or throwing one opponent and turning with the back leg to
face another. As with switch steps, one may vary the spinning step to
pivot and turn. Practice pivoting to one side, then the other.
Finally, adjust it to include defensive and offensive techniques, as
well as various kinds of steps (depending on what you need to
practice). Spinning steps may also include practice of throws.
Falling / Breakfalls
This helps practice ground work. Kicks, elbows, takedowns,
setups for various submissions, etc. may be practiced in conjunction
with the rolls, falls, and position changes. Simply keep moving,
attacking, and transitioning. When breaking falls, use both momentum
and every part of the body to lesson the impact on any one part.
Back roll. This may be used effectively when falling backwards,
and not just straight down (in which case a side fall may be better).
49
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection II continued
Forward roll. Remember to "check" with the hand that is on the
side you are falling to, and "rocket" with the balls of the feet.
This will help you roll with the momentum and clear the ground. Do
not land flat on your back, but instead bridge over quickly on your
shoulder as you keep your head tucked in.
Back control. This includes setting up a guard position and
submissions when on one's back. Also, practice changing positions
from the ground, especially when it comes to sweeps from the guard.
Forward control. This is when you are engaged in standup
grappling. Practice sprawls, guard passes, mounts, ground strikes,
submissions. Also practice spinning while giving the opponent no
space, so as to gain the best position.
Side fall. Sometimes you may have to use a side break fall as
not to get the wind knocked out of you, or take damage to your back.
Remember to loosen up as you fall and use your arm to soften the
blow. From here, use one or more kicks as you try to regain position
and control. This may be followed with a technical rise, clinch,
shoot, leg sweep, and so forth.
In Summary
The ultimate goal is near-constant movement. One must be able to
move in any direction with agility. The best defense is a good
offense. Press the advantage, cut your opponent short, and jam their
attack by sensing their pattern, their rhythm. It would take many
pages to break down the body mechanics of techniques, much less
describe further application in actual fighting.
Overall
Always engage in well rounded, sober training in the martial
ways. Anything less is to shortchange ourselves and all who we come
in contact with. We must not be hostile, violent, or proud, but ready
to survive, protect, and lead. Do not mistake the truth for an
interpretation of the truth. Let us study "a" way for a while to gain
an understanding of "the" way - whose goals include perfection of
character and dedication to others. This will increase our knowledge
of the internal factors, which we may call wisdom. Both our external
and internal strength should be used to carry ourselves with a
positive attitude through life. The mind and body are incredibly
adaptable. The soul is capable of great depth - and great height as
well. Lastly, personal progress begins not in action, but choice. Let
us decide within ourselves to follow our goals and dreams.
50
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection - Part III
Let us diligently train the external factors. This will help us
develop power - not just physical power, but strength that may help
us walk the path of truth. Let our inner hopes, then, shine through.
Nonetheless, I will detail a few ideas for external training.
The following routine is just an outline. Feel free to adjust this
routine to suit personal goals & concerns. Also, one may instead use
the Pavel's Ladder method and/or a push/pull routine for one's
exercises of choice.
http://www.cbass.com/Pavel%27sLadders.htm
http://www.exrx.net/Workouts/Workout2PP.html
Warmup routine:
5 minutes of stretching
3 minute round of skipping rope
1 minute of pushups
3 minute round of skipping rope
1 minute of crunches
3 minute round of skipping rope
1 minute of squats
Take a water break
High intensity interval training routine
The idea is to supercharge your running routine by sprinting,
then jogging, then sprinting, and so forth. Highly useful in losing
excess fat (and therefore toning up) as well as building your overall
cardio. Also, in any form of fighting, one needs both long term
endurance and quick bursts. No matter how tired one gets, one should
always have that one last burst.
One way to start H.I.I.T. is to begin with a four minute cycle.
Sprint for 30 seconds, and then jog for 30 seconds, four times. Each
week, one may add a sprint and a jog to the routine. Work up to doing
15 minutes or more of H.I.I.T.
This routine may be done every day that you are working out.
However, it is recommended to have a nutritious, high-protein drink
and "power snack" (such as a fruit or granola bar) after H.I.I.T.
Also, after doing H.I.I.T., rest at least two hours before heavy
weight lifting. On other workout days, rest at least half an hour
before beginning another routine. However, be sure to consult your
own age and health, as well as a local fitness instructor, to help
design a well-rounded plan.
51
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection III continued
Martial arts routine:
Personalized variations of this routine may be performed every
day that you are working out. However, after completing your martial
arts routine, get at least one hour of rest and a nutritious "power
snack" before performing a heavy routine with a weight bar.
Three 3 minute rounds of shadow boxing with one minute of rest
between rounds.
Three 3 minute rounds of heavy bag work with one minute of rest
between rounds.
Three 3 minute rounds of speed bag with one minute of rest
between rounds.
Three 3 minute rounds of partner shadow boxing. One minute of
rest between rounds.
Three 3 minute rounds of partner pad work. One minute rest
between rounds.
Two or three minutes of slow stretching and breathing, then take
a water break.
Three 3 minute rounds of light boxing with a partner, or three 3
to 5 minute rounds of light sparring using MMA rules. Use the
appropriate equipment. One minute rest between rounds.
Three 5 minute rounds of grappling with a partner. One minute
rest between rounds.
Two or three minutes of slow stretch and breathing, then take a
water break.
Depending on your goals, add additional rounds of one or more of
the above. Do not forget water breaks every several rounds.
Body weight conditioning routine #1 - Upper body:
This routine may be performed every day that you are working
out. On days when you are doing a heavy weight routine with a weight
bar, complete this routine first as a warm up for your muscles. One
minute rest between rest between each exercise, and each set.
Pushups:
One minute rest between each exercise, and each set. Once you
have mastered these exercises, no longer perform knuckle or regular
pushups, and slowly increase the number of reps and sets for the
other two types of pushups.
Knuckle or regular pushups - until failure.
Incline pushups - one set of 25 to 50 incline pushups with your
feet posted up at a 45 degree angle.
52
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection III continued
One armed pushups - one set of 10 per arm. Build up to doing at
least two sets of 20 per arm.
Pull-ups:
Two sets of 10, then pull-ups until failure
Abdominal:
One minute rest between each exercise, and each set.
Incline sit-ups - Perform 2 sets of 10. Eventually build up to
doing at least 3 sets of 15.
Crunches - perform 25-50. Only the shoulders should be raised
off the floor, as you breathe out and tense the upper abs, and then
relax. A light to medium weight held slightly above the chest may be
used to provide resistance. Build up to doing at least 3 sets of 25.
Double ended crunches - pull your knees as close as possible to
your chest as you perform a crunch. Perform this 25 times.
Six inches
Lay your back flat on your exercise area. Your palms should be
also flat on the ground, with your legs straight out and knees
locked. Slowly raise your feet to 6 inches off the ground. If new to
Six inches, keep your feet in this position for intervals of 30
seconds until you have held the position for a total of 2 minutes.
Slowly build the intervals until you are able to hold the position
for the entire 2 minutes without dropping your feet. Bruce Lee would
commonly hold this position for 45 minutes while watching a
television program!
Body weight conditioning routine #2 - Legs:
This routine should be only be performed on days that you are
not doing a heavy weight routine with a weight bar. I personally
recommend performing this routine after your martial arts workout. Be
sure to eat a moderately sized, nutritious, high protein meal after
this routine. One minute rest between each exercise, and each set.
Squat kicks - squat as low as you possibly can, and as you come
back up, perform a front snap kick. Alternate legs with each
repetition. One set of 20.
One legged squats - use a door or wall to assist balance.
However, one should try to maintain balance during this exercise
53
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection III continued
without relying too much on objects. To perform this exercise, one
may place one leg in front of or behind the body (depending on what
one feels more comfortable with) and squat with the other leg. At
least one set of 10 each leg. Once proficient with one legged squats,
add a dumbbell.
Normal squats - One set of 20, a set of 40, then perform squats
until failure.
Horse stance training - sit deep in a very wide horse stance. To
add difficulty, one may practice strikes, perform calf raises in this
stance, and/or add two dumbbells (which may be balanced on the upper
thighs, which should be perpendicular to the floor). Without weights,
try to hold the horse for at least several minutes. With weights, try
at least two minutes total (even if one has to do this exercise for
one minute, rest, then go for the second minute).
Ankle weights may be used to provide resistance for the next
three exercises.
Bear crawls - get on hands and feet, with the body close to the
floor (knees and elbows should be bent). Move forward swiftly while
staying low. Choose an area (20 to 50 feet) to bear crawl across.
Grass and matted floors are preferable. Bear crawling the length of
it, and back, is a lap. Do 4 laps, or until failure.
Bunny hops - completely bend at the knees while keeping your
back straight, and your hands up. Jump forward explosively from the
ground. Tuck your feet back in as you jump, and land lightly. The
goal is to perform bunny hops in quick succession. Grass and matted
floors are preferable. However, if using sidewalks to bunny hop, use
excellent running shoes and a bit of caution. Do at least 10 bunny
hops. Eventually build up to bunny hopping the length of your
choosing. Masahiko Kimura, the legendary Judo player, once bunny
hopped a kilometer!
Duck walk - start in bunny hop position, but instead move one
foot in front of the other without coming up at all. The goal is to
move swiftly without dragging one's feet, or losing balance. Do 3
laps of duck walking on grass or a matted area or until failure. One
may also use a sidewalk to duck walk, but remember to take the same
precautions.
Dumbbell routine - upper body
If necessary, start with light weights - 5 or 10 pounds. Exhale
54
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection III continued
sharply when performing a repetition, and to inhale deeply in-between
repetitions (or reps, for short). This routine should be performed 3
times a week, on the same days as heavy weight training with a weight
bar.
Rows - these work arms and back. Best with two dumbbells, which
should be placed beside one another, and within arm's reach on the
floor in front of you. A.) Start with your feet shoulder width apart,
then lean forward and stretch down your right arm and grab the right
dumbbell. Use your left hand and leg for support if needed. B.) Then,
pull the right dumbbell up as you bend your arm back to waist level,
and carefully lower the dumbbell back to the floor. This should be
done quickly. C.) From there, grab the left dumbbell and perform the
same exercise. Perform 2 sets of 25.
Weighted shoulder shrugs - perform at least one set of 10 each.
Dumbbell curls - best done sitting, so as to enforce proper
technique.
Dumbbell flies - lay flat on your back on a weight bench, with
your feet planted on the floor. The dumbbells should be placed within
arm's reach, one beside each arm. Grasp both dumbbells from under -
palms facing up. Instead of a curl-like motion, keep the elbows
mostly locked, and squeeze your arms close enough together that the
dumbbells touch. Perform one set of 10, then perform until failure.
Dumbbell routine - legs
If necessary, start with light weights - 5 or 10 pounds.
Remember proper breathing during reps. This routine should be
performed 3 times a week, on days when not doing heavy weight
training with a weight bar.
Weighted calf raises and squats - at least one set of 10 each.
Weighted one legged squats - at least one set of 10 per side.
Weighted horse stance - at least one minute in deep horse stance
with a dumbbells resting on each thigh, placed near the hip. Hold the
dumbbells in place with your hands as necessary. Build up to using
heavier dumbbells and longer intervals.
Weight bar routine
Only perform this routine three days a week so as to give your
55
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection III continued
upper body enough time to recuperate. Remember to maintain a healthy,
high protein diet. Creatine supplements and fruits are highly
recommended.
Power cleans - start with light weight on the bar at first to
practice the technique. The bar should be a few inches in front of
your toes. Bend your knees slightly, and bend over to grasp the bar,
with palms facing the floor. Your hands should be outside of your
knees. Jump with an exploding movement as you jerk the weight
upwards. As you do this, allow your elbows to bend in front of the
body and the hands to come to shoulder level. Also, the knees should
bend deeply as you land. Basically, you will be landing under the
weight.
Put enough weight on the bar that you will not be able to
perform more than 12 power cleans. If you are unable to perform 10,
then you are using too much weight. Once you have completed 10 to 12
bench presses, take a one minute rest. Add enough weight such that
you will be able to perform 8 to 10 reps.
Weighted jumping jacks - With palms facing down, pick up the bar
and raise it to chest level, and bend deeply at the knees (it should
look as if you just performed a power clean). Jump your feet outwards
widely while quickly pressing the weight over the head. Then jump the
feet back in as you bring the bar back to chest level. That is one
repetition. Put enough weight on the bar that you will be able to
perform 8 to 10 reps.
Military presses - With palms facing down, pick up the bar and
lift it above your head. Lower the bar so as to let it almost
completely rest on neck and shoulders. Slowly press the bar upwards
above the head. That is one repetition. Perform at least one set of
10.
Dead lifts - At least one set of 10 at 2/3rd of your max.
Bench presses – Always take at least a one minute rest between
sets. If you are toning and / or building stamina, put enough weight
on the bar that you will not be able to perform more than 15 bench
presses. If you are unable to perform 12, then you are using too much
weight. Take at least a one minute rest between sets. Complete 12 to
15 for the first set, and rest. Add enough weight such that you will
be able to perform 10 to 12. Complete this second set, and rest. Add
such weight that you can perform 8 to 10. Complete your third set,
and rest. Add a few more light sets as needed.
56
Understanding Karate-do
In Pursuit of Perfection III continued
If you are lifting heavy – for size and/or strength - you may
not want to perform more than 3 or 4 sets. Your first set should be
enough weight such that can perform 6-8 or 10-12, depending upon your
goals. Your following sets should move up in weight such that you
will perform a few less reps per set. Take a 2 to 3 minute break if
needed between sets.
For the advanced level, I recommend trying the cluster flux
routine.
http://www.muscleandfitness.com/high_intensity_growth/videos/196
"Strength comes from health, speed comes from efforts, technique
comes from experience, will power comes from faith, serenity comes
from old knowledge, progress comes from new knowledge - today is
now!" - Peter Urban, founder of American Goju-ryu Karate
57
Understanding Karate-do
Sources and Recommended Viewing
Sources:
'Bible of Karate - Bubishi' translated with commentary by Patrick
McCarthy. Contains much in-depth information, analysis, and history.
'The Complete Idiot's Guide to Karate' by Randall G. Hassell and
Edmond Otis. An excellent starting point for potential students.
'The Karate Dojo' by Peter Urban
'Karate-do: My Way of Life' by Gichin Funakoshi
The official Wado-Ryu Japan site http://www.wado-ryu.jp
The Japan Karate Institute homepage http://www.japankarate.net
More details on Ohtsuka's life and the expansion of Karate
http://www.msisshinryu.com/history/tomari-te/
Detailed explanation of the Tomari's role in karate's development.
http://www.hogia.net/karate/karate/history.htm
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karate_kata
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karate
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boxing
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brazilian_jiujitsu
Recommended Viewing:
'The Art of War' by Sun Tzu
'A Book of Five Rings' by Miyamoto Musashi
'Karate - Technique & Spirit' by Tadashi Nakamura. A wonderful,
inspiring pictorial guide to Karate and many of its techniques.
USA National Karate Federation website http://www.usankf.org/
Great listing of kata by karate ryu (style).
Takamura ha Shindo Yoshin Ryu http://www.shinyokai.com
Jarek's Chinese Martial Arts Pages http://www.chinafrominside.com/ma/
Information about Chinese internal martial arts.
Japan International Karate Center homepage http://www.jikc.org
Understanding Karate-do:
A Guide to Unity of Body, Mind, and Soul
Owen Johnston
cyriades@yahoo.com
http://www.johnstonkarate.com
http://cyriades.webs.com