Novels

There are currently two novels set in the Dragon Age universe. The first, Dragon Age: The Stolen Throne, was released March 3, 2009.[1][2] The second Dragon Age novel is titled Dragon Age: The Calling and was released on October 13, 2009.[3][4][5] A third novel, Dragon Age: Asunder is set to be released December 3, 2011, by David Gaider through Tor Publishers.
[edit] Facebook game


Dragon Age Legends is a strategy RPG developed by EA for Facebook. Dragon Age Legends gives players their experience of the Free Marches, the setting of Dragon Age II. "Dragon Age Legends gameplay will unlock items within Dragon Age II. The game features character customization and an upgrade system that is similar to the real game.[6]
[edit] Flash game

A three-episode Flash game spin-off by EA 2D is under development, entitled Dragon Age Journeys. The first chapter of the game, The Deep Roads was released for free. Players can unlock achievements in the game, which will unlock unique items in Dragon Age: Origins. The second and third chapters are purchase-only.[7]
[edit] Tabletop role-playing game


A tabletop role-playing game, titled Dragon Age, was released on January 25, 2010 by Green Ronin.[8] Green Ronin has stated that the game uses "an all-new game system"[8] using three six-sided dice. The game's initial release is a boxed set including a Player's Guide, Game Master's Guide, map of Ferelden and three dice. An electronic (PDF) version of the game is also available, offered for free to those pre-ordering the box set.
[edit] Anime

An anime adaption was announced on June 7, 2010. It will be co-produced by BioWare, EA and anime company Funimation Entertainment. It is scheduled to be released in 2012.[9] The film will be called 'Dragon Age: Dawn Of The Seeker' with Funimation Entertainment releasing a teaser trailer on their website.[10]
[edit] Comic

Dragon Age: Origins, a webcomic by artist Penny Arcade, was made available in 2010 and it tells a story about a group of Templars sent on a search and destroy for Flemeth, The Witch of the Wilds. The timeline is set before the game Dragon Age: Origins as Morrigan has not yet been recruited by The Warden.

Another webcomic, Dragon Age: Origins - Awakening, was also released in 2010 by Penny Arcade. This short story tells how Nathaniel Howe broke into Vigils Keep prior to his arrest in Awakening right before meeting The Warden.

Dragon Age: The Revelation, written by David Gaider, was published in 2010 on Bioware's website and features art from Aimo. The story is based on a script from the video game Dragon Age: Origins that did not make the final release. It details a meeting between Morrigan and Alistair after the Grey Wardens learn from Riordan that in order to kill an Archdemon the warden who slays the beast must die. Morrigan seeks out Alistair to ask his advice on the lengths one would go to help a friend in need. The story ends with Morrigan on her way to The Warden's bedroom to offer The Dark Ritual.

IDW Publishing released a 6 issue Dragon Age comic.
[edit] Action Figures

A series of four action figures was released by DC Direct. Series one includes action figures of Morrigan, Duncan, Loghain and a Genlock. Each highly detailed figure features game-accurate accessories and can be found in game and hobby shops and various online retailers.
[edit] Web Series

It was announced on February 15, 2011, that actress Felicia Day, in partnership with BioWare, will be releasing a six-part web series called Dragon Age: Redemption sometime in the summer of 2011. The series is written by Day, who also serves as a co-producer. Filming took place over a dozen days in January 2011 in the L.A. area, with associate producer Peter Winther (Independence Day) as director and John Bartley (Lost) as cinematographer. It was teased as #mysteryproject on Day's Twitter feed for several weeks before the announcement.

It has been revealed that the web series is due to air around the same time as the release of the new Dragon Age II DLC, Mark of the Assassin.
Dragon Age: Origins is a single-player role-playing video game developed by BioWare's Edmonton studio and published by Electronic Arts. It is the first game in the Dragon Age franchise. The game was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on November 3, 2009, and for Mac OS X on December 21, 2009.

Set in the fictional kingdom of Ferelden during a period of civil strife, the player assumes the role of a warrior, mage or rogue who must unite the kingdom to fight an impending invasion by demonic forces. BioWare describes Dragon Age: Origins as a "dark heroic fantasy set in a unique world", and a spiritual successor to their Baldur's Gate series of games, which took place in the Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting of the Dungeons & Dragons franchise.[14]

Upon its release, Dragon Age: Origins was lauded with overwhelmingly positive reviews and considered a critical success. Aggregate review site Metacritic ranks the PC, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 versions of the game with scores of 91, 87, and 86, respectively.[15][16][17] The game also received multiple awards from numerous outlets, ranging from IGN's "PC Game of The Year (2009)"[18] to the Academy of Interactive Arts & Science's "Role-Playing/Massively Multiplayer Game of the Year 2009".[19]

An expansion to the game, titled Dragon Age: Origins – Awakening, was released in March 2010, and the official sequel, Dragon Age II, was released in March 2011.[20][21] BioWare intends for Dragon Age: Origins to serve as the foundation for a much broader intellectual property. Even before its release, plans to expand the universe introduced by the game were underway; this included sequels, pen and paper games, books, and comics that would expand the scope of the Dragon Age franchise.[22] Several of those projects have since been released.
Gameplay

The game incorporates "origins" for each race and some classes. For example, a dwarf noble begins the game as part of the royal family in one of the dwarven cities, whereas the dwarf commoner origin story begins on the streets of the city. Origin stories determine the background of the player's character prior to the main events of the game's story, forming an introduction to the world (and a gameplay tutorial) while also comprising hours of play. Events of an individual origin are reflected in the following game. Characters that the player meets during the origin story may reappear throughout the game, some as adversaries.[23]

There is no tracking of moral alignment as in previous BioWare games,[24] but the moral choices of the player will still affect the story throughout the game. The player will accomplish different goals depending on if they choose to be good or evil, but the decisions that the player makes in the process will change the game world accordingly – deciding who will become king, for example, and affecting nations, races and their places in the world. These decisions will also influence the companion NPCs, possibly causing an NPC to leave the party[25] or even attack the player if they disagree strongly with his or her actions.[26]

The game has been described as the spiritual successor to Baldur's Gate by BioWare co-CEO Ray Muzyka,[27] as players are able to issue orders to NPCs in real time, but pause the game to queue up actions such as spells and special attacks, a game mechanic from the Baldur's Gate series.[28] There are three base classes to choose from: warrior, mage, and rogue.[29] These classes can be upgraded into a specialized class such as the berserker or templar for the warrior class,[30] shapeshifter or spirit healer for the mage class,[31] and assassin or ranger for the rogue. The game uses a party system similar to that of the Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, another BioWare roleplaying game, featuring the main character with up to three active party members chosen from a pool of NPCs.

The game features a degree of interactivity between spells, such as a fire spell igniting a grease slick before being put out by a blizzard. The game contains many combinations which can be discovered by the player either by accident, or by finding clues as to which combinations are valid.[32]
[edit] Game view

The camera is a third-person, over-the-shoulder view which can be rotated around the active character. Unlike the console versions, only the PC version has the ability to change game views by zooming in or out. Zooming out affords players a detailed overhead view, allowing them to spot important features in a scenario that may be positioned up above, such as a dangerous lurking creature. The HUD details are not visible in the zoomed in view. When zoomed out, the camera is an isometric-style view.
[edit] Plot
[edit] Synopsis

BioWare has described Dragon Age: Origins as being a "dark heroic fantasy" story told on an epic scale with mature themes.[33]

The game is set in Ferelden, one of several countries that makes up the mythical continent of Thedas. The game opens with an animation which details the origins of demonic creatures called the darkspawn, that dwell within the Deep Roads, an underground highway system created by the dwarves long ago, deep beneath the surface of Thedas. Every few hundred years, the darkspawn swarm the surface world in a movement known as a Blight. Beginning with the first Blight, Thedas relied on the legendary order of warriors known as the Grey Wardens to drive the darkspawn back. Dragon Age: Origins begins on the eve of Thedas's fifth Blight.

The player begins the game by completing one of the six origin stories corresponding to the race and background of the character he or she created upon choosing a new game; the choices are Human Noble (for Human Warriors or Rogues), Magi (for Elven or Human Mages), Dalish Elf or City Elf (for Elven Warriors or Rogues), Dwarf Commoner or Dwarf Noble (for Dwarven Warrior or Rogue). The origin section introduces the players to the mechanics of the game and the fictional world through a personalized context. The origin story determines the biography of the character and how NPCs react to the player for the rest of the game. For example, elves are often viewed as second class citizens by humans, while mages are treated with suspicion and fear, while the human noble is treated with respect.[33] In every origin story, the player is introduced to Duncan, a Grey Warden who is trying to find recruits to fight the Blight. By the end of his or her origin story, the player's character is selected as a potential Grey Warden, and leaves with Duncan.

The player and Duncan journey to a fortress called Ostagar in southern Ferelden, to join Cailan, the king of Ferelden, and Loghain, a legendary general and Cailan's father-in-law. The three leaders plan to make a stand against the encroaching darkspawn before the Blight can overwhelm Ferelden. Duncan can sense the influence of an archdemon, a god-like being hosted in the body of a powerful dragon that commands the darkspawn, which means that this would be the first true Blight in over 400 years. It is of utmost importance that this Blight is ended before it can gain momentum, as previous Blights have left Thedas all but in ruins.

Duncan initiates the player into the Grey Wardens through a dangerous ritual called the Joining. The Joining involves imbibing darkspawn blood, which can either kill a person or imbue him or her with the powerful darkspawn essence known as the Taint. After surviving the Joining, the player and Duncan attend a council of war, where it is decided Cailan's army and the Grey Wardens will lure the darkspawn into attacking. The player, along with another Grey Warden, Alistair, is given the task of lighting a beacon at the top of the fortress which signals Loghain's men to charge the horde's flank, breaking the darkspawn and ending the Blight. After fighting through many darkspawn, the player lights the beacon. Loghain, upon seeing the signal, inexplicably abandons the battle along with his army. King Cailan and Duncan are quickly overwhelmed by the darkspawn horde, who kill them, massacre Cailan's army, and seize control of Ostagar and southern Ferelden.

The player's Warden and Alistair are nearly killed at Ostagar as well, but are saved by Flemeth, a powerful witch who lives in a secluded hermitage with her daughter and apprentice, Morrigan. The player, along with Alistair and Morrigan, decide that in order to stop the Blight from destroying Ferelden, and possibly all of Thedas, they will need to gather a new army and slay the archdemon. Using ancient Grey Warden treaties, the player's Warden must travel across Ferelden to enlist the aid of the Dalish elves, the dwarves of Orzammar, the Circle of Magi, and Arl Eamon of Redcliffe. Unfortunately, all of these factions are facing problems of their own, which the player must help resolve to secure their allegiances. Meanwhile, Loghain returns to Ferelden's capital city, Denerim, to inform Queen Anora, his daughter, of King Cailan's death. Loghain blames the Grey Wardens for abandoning the battle and betraying Ferelden, outlawing the order and hunting down any survivors. While Queen Anora inherits her husband's authority, Loghain quickly declares himself her regent and effectively seizes control of the kingdom. Loghain swiftly becomes a brutal and tyrannical ruler, igniting a civil war between himself and Ferelden's nobility, who refuse to acknowledge his authority.

While exploring Ferelden, the player will be presented with the opportunity to partake in numerous side-quests to flesh out the Dragon Age mythology, acquire powerful equipment, and earn experience points. Potential companions with their own special combat specialties and back-stories will also present themselves and offer to join the player's quest.

After the player successfully obtains the assistance of all the primary factions, a meeting known as the Landsmeet is called among the nobles of Ferelden. There, the player confronts Loghain and rallies support from the rest of the kingdom to face the darkspawn. The player is also presented with the option of executing Loghain for his crimes or sparing his life. Sparing Loghain causes Alistair to leave the player's party in anger and disgust (if Alistair has already agreed to marry Anora and become king, he will remain in Ferelden and be present at the end of the game, but he will not rejoin the player's party for the final battle). If Loghain is spared, he is forced to undergo the Joining and takes Alistair's place as a Grey Warden.

At this point, the player learns that only a Grey Warden can slay the archdemon because of the Taint present in a Grey Warden's body. Killing the archdemon releases the demonic essence within it, which is automatically drawn to the Taint in the Grey Warden who slew it, and effectively kills him or her as well; if anyone else slays it, the archdemon's essence survives and finds a new host in the nearest darkspawn, making the monster effectively immortal. On the night before the final battle, Morrigan offers the player's Warden a way to slay the archdemon without sacrificing anyone: Morrigan believes that if the player succeeds in conceiving a child with her, that the child would also carry the Taint. Once the archdemon dies, its demonic essence would be drawn away from any Grey Warden to safely merge with the unborn child instead. The resulting child would be born a demigod, which she plans to raise on her own. Morrigan admits that this was her true motive for joining the player's campaign all along. The player can accept Morrigan's offer, convince Alistair or Loghain to take part instead, or refuse the witch's proposal, causing her to leave the party. If the Warden is female, she can only refuse Morrigan or convince Loghain or Alistair to do it.

The next day, the player and the newly assembled army of Ferelden fight their way through the city of Denerim, which is now overrun by the darkspawn. After fighting their way through the darkspawn horde, and an epic final battle against the archdemon atop Denerim's highest tower, the player is given the chance to deliver the killing blow or to let Alistair/Loghain do it. Either way, the archdemon is killed and the rest of the darkspawn army retreats from Denerim, marking the end of the fifth Blight. Unless the player chose to sleep with Morrigan, whoever slew the archdemon also perishes.

The story ends with a ceremony attended by the people of Ferelden during which the player and his or her companions are honored for saving the kingdom. The game then presents an epilogue in text and pictures which details the ramifications of the player's in-game choices on the future of Ferelden and the lives of his or her companions.
[edit] Characters
Main article: Characters of Dragon Age

The chief protagonist of Dragon Age: Origins is the player-controlled character, whose biography and combat specialization are customized at the start of the game. While the player can choose his or her avatar's first name, the character is usually referred to as "The Warden" by other characters and the game's narration.

Players also have the opportunity to recruit companion characters who appear throughout the game and volunteer their services. Companions for the game include Alistair, a reluctantly heroic Grey Warden with a sarcastic wit; Morrigan, the sultry but cynical dark mage who has little regard for authority and social mores; Leliana, an ex-member of Ferelden's religious Chantry whose optimistic and virtuous demeanor belies an aptitude for espionage and combat; Sten, a proud but stoic warrior of the militaristic Qunari people; Oghren, a dwarven brute whose love of alcohol is only matched by his penchant for violence; Wynne, an Elder Mage of the Circle, and a maternal figure to the party; Zevran, a rakish elven assassin who is fond of treasures and innuendo; and a loyal Mabari War Hound, which the player can name and use for scouting and combat. In the DLC, Shale, a sarcastic Golem with a mild ornithophobia is also available.

Adding these companions to the Warden's party enables the player to control them during combat and exploration. Through conversation, the player unlocks unique quests and dialog which furthers Dragon Age's lore. A relationship system in the game tracks approval and disapproval between each companion and the player's Warden. The player can gain or lose approval with each companion based on conversation choices and quest-related decisions made throughout the game. The player may also influence a companion`s approval points with gifts. Most gifts give positive approval, although a DLC called “Feastday Pranks¨gives you gifts for each character that greatly reduce approval. Each gift has a character it is meant for; although almost every gift gives positive approval to any character, certain gifts work best for certain characters. Some gifts, if given to the right character, start a cut scene and can sometimes even unlock a quest. These extremely special gifts can be given only to the designated character. A high approval rating improves a companion's morale, resulting in bonuses to combat abilities. A significant approval rating also makes it possible for the Warden to pursue a romantic relationship with certain companions. Conversely, lowering a companion's approval to a significant degree can result in him or her leaving the party or turning on the player.

Other than companion characters, NPCs significant to Origin's plot include Duncan, the Grey Warden who recruits the player; King Cailan, Ferelden's naive, but courageous leader and son of the legendary King Maric; Queen Anora, Cailan's wife, whose youth and beauty are matched by a commanding personality and political-savvy; Eamon Guerrin, the noble Arl of Redcliffe who lends political support to the player's Warden; Riordan, a Grey Warden from the neighboring kingdom of Orlais (though born in Ferelden); and Flemeth, Morrigan's mother, who appears to be a harmless old woman in public, but in truth is an infamous dark witch of Ferelden legend. The game's main antagonists, other than the faceless Darkspawn horde and their monstrous leader, the archdemon Urthemiel, are Teyrn Loghain Mac Tir, once a respected war hero and father of Queen Anora, now gone mad with ambition and paranoia, and Rendon Howe, the greedy Arl of Amaranthine who allies with Loghain to further his own ambitions.
[edit] Voice acting
Main article: Characters of Dragon Age

The game contains a large amount of voice acting recorded in the US and the UK. [4] Actors include Tim Russ, Steve Valentine, Kate Mulgrew, Mark Rolston, and Claudia Black.[34] A considerable amount of ambient dialogue takes place between the non-player characters in the adventuring party, adding to their background story and lending more depth and credibility to the characters.[35] Conversations involving the main character are complex and varied, and conversation options can have a significant effect on gameplay. Translations and voice-overs were made for several languages other than English. An automatic lip-syncing algorithm was used to provide passable facial animations for all dialogue.[36]
[edit] Development
[show]System requirements

Dragon Age: Origins was first announced during E3 2004 as Dragon Age.[39] On July 10, 2008, the title was changed to Dragon Age: Origins.[40] The PlayStation 3 version of the game was originally delayed. However, BioWare later retracted that statement and announced that, in North America, it would be released on the same day as the other versions.[41]

The Dragon Age Character Creator was released on October 13, 2009, allowing players to create a character in advance and to import it into the full game upon release.[42] BioWare also released a "developer-grade" toolset to allow extensive modification and customization of the game exclusive to the PC version.[43]

The retail PC version of Dragon Age: Origins does not use the SecuROM copy protection software used by other EA games, opting instead for a standard disc check.[44]

The developers have cited "realistic" fantasy fiction such as George R. R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire and fantasy paintings by artists such as Frank Frazetta as inspiration for the game.[45] The soundtrack for the video game contains the song "This Is War" by 30 Seconds to Mars,[46] while the original score itself was composed by Inon Zur. In the development of the lighting of the game BioWare used Turtle, a rendering and baking plugin for Autodesk Maya used for lighting and content creation, made by Illuminate Labs.

BioWare has stated that the game runs "very well" on Windows 7,[47] and a Mac OS X version of the game was released on December 21, 2009, as a download, using TransGaming's Cider Portability Engine.[5]
[edit] Downloadable content

BioWare announced on October 8, 2009, that two pieces of downloadable content (DLC) will be available on the game's launch: The Stone Prisoner and Warden's Keep. By November 12, 2009, BioWare announced that sales of downloadable content had generated over one million dollars of sales revenue.[48]
[edit] The Stone Prisoner

The Stone Prisoner adds Shale to the game, a stone Golem and a party member. Shale is a powerful character, and has a back story, voice acting, and a unique quest. The Stone Prisoner also adds new locations and items. New copies contained a promotional code to receive The Stone Prisoner for free, which was valid until April 30, 2010. The code does, however, still work for those who have not used it prior to April 30, 2010.[49][50]
[edit] Warden's Keep

Warden's Keep adds the fortress of Soldier's Peak to Dragon Age: Origins, granting the player the opportunity to understand why the Grey Wardens were exiled from Ferelden. The player can set up a base of operations, with an area to store party members' surplus equipment. The download also adds new talents, spells, trophies/achievements, and items.[50]
[edit] Blood Dragon Armor

Blood Dragon Armor adds a set of "massive" armor that can be purchased in-game. In addition, registering the code used to obtain this DLC also lets the player download a similar set of armor to use in BioWare's Mass Effect 2 and Dragon Age II.[50]
[edit] Return to Ostagar

Return to Ostagar was announced on November 19, 2009, and was originally scheduled to be released during the 2009 holiday season.[51] It was then delayed to January 5, 2010, at which time it was delayed indefinitely. It was released on the Xbox 360 on January 13, 2010, but withdrawn again due to bugs. It was re-released on January 29, 2010, though only for Xbox 360 and PC. The PS3 release date was March 11, 2010.[52] On March 14, 2010, it has also been reported by the community as running on the Mac Platform, despite contrary claims by EA.[53] (An official Mac version has since been released) It features a return to the first battlefield of Ostagar, where the Grey Wardens were nearly wiped out by the Darkspawn invasion. It allows the player to unravel King Cailan's and Loghain's agendas, discover the armor of the late King Cailan and the arms of the last Grey Warden Commander, Duncan, and provides another opportunity to recruit a loyal Mabari War Hound. It also includes one achievement, and other new items.[54][55]
[edit] Feastday gifts and pranks

On April 1, 2010, BioWare released a set of DLC items in honor of a fictional holiday within the Dragon Age universe called "Feastday," which mirrors April Fools' Day. The complete set contains ten unique gifts and ten unique prank items which the player can give to specific companions, and positively or negatively affect their attitude towards the player, as well as grant special in-game bonuses or penalties. The prank and gift items can be purchased separately for 160 BioWare points each, or 240 points altogether.[56]
[edit] The Darkspawn Chronicles

On May 5, 2010, the game's official site announced The Darkspawn Chronicles to be released later that month. A brief synopsis indicates that the DLC, described as a module, will allow players to replay the final battle at Denerim as the Darkspawn army. The story alters the game's plot by presupposing that the player's Grey Warden did not survive the Joining, so the Ferelden army is led by Alistair, instead.[57] This new DLC was released on May 18, 2010 for the price of 400 Microsoft or Bioware Points.
[edit] Leliana's Song

Released on July 6, 2010, this DLC is a standalone campaign that stars Leliana, and is set several years before the events of the main campaign. Players assume the role of Leliana while she was an Orlesian Bard, and experience the events that inspired her to join the Chantry. The DLC features fully voiced cinematics, and a transferable reward for both Origins and Awakening.[58]
[edit] The Golems of Amgarrak

Released on August 10, 2010, this DLC sends the player's Warden on a campaign in the Deep Roads of the Dwarven Kingdom to investigate the disappearance of a dwarven expedition that was searching for the lost secret behind constructing golems. Players can import their Warden from Origins or Awakening, and completing the DLC unlocks a special item that can be used in those campaigns. BioWare advertises that this campaign is recommended for experienced players, because of its difficulty.[59]
[edit] Witch Hunt

Released on September 7, 2010, the Witch Hunt DLC sets the player on a campaign to investigate reports that Morrigan has returned to Ferelden, two in a half years since her disappearance at the end of Origins. Players can import their character from Origins, Awakening, Golems of Amgarrak, or create an entirely new character. BioWare advertises that Witch Hunt provides closure to Morrigan's storyline, rewards that transfer into Origins and Awakening, and that it is the final DLC to be released for Origins.[60]
[edit] Marketing
Retail editions

Three retail editions of Dragon Age: Origins were made available for purchase.

The "Regular" edition of the game was made available for purchase across all platforms through retailers such as Wal-Mart, Amazon.com, and Best Buy. Windows users could also obtain the Regular version through download services such as Steam and Direct2Drive. The standard version of the game includes a one-use redemption code to download the Stone Prisoner and Blood Dragon Armor DLC for free.[61]

The "Collectors' Edition" was released for Windows, Mac, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360, but only in boxed retail form and not through download. This version comes in a steelbook, having different artwork from the regular edition. Like the regular edition, the Collector's Edition includes a redemption code to obtain the Stone Prisoner and Blood Dragon Armor DLC for free, but adds three exclusive in-game items, a bonus disc containing a making-of documentary, concept art, trailers, the game's original soundtrack, and a cloth map of Ferelden.[62]

The "Digital Deluxe" version of the game is available for download on Windows and Mac operating systems. The Digital Deluxe edition includes the game's original soundtrack (in an expanded version) and desktop wallpapers in downloadable form, as well as all the free DLC content of the Collectors' Edition (not in the UK version), plus a code to download the Warden's Keep DLC for free.[63]

The "Ultimate Edition" was released on October 26, 2010. It includes the base game, expansion pack, and all 9 DLC packs. It does not come with the pre-order bonus items nor the Collector's Edition exclusive items. A remix of the song "Closer to the Edge" by the rock band 30 Seconds to Mars is used for the soundtrack.[64] The PC and Xbox 360 version is on 2 disks whilst on PS3 is on a single Blu-ray disk. However, it is reported that the "Return to Ostagar" is missing from the European PS3 version. Bioware has suggested that people should contact EA support to download the DLC from PSN.[65] The PC version is also available via download.
[edit] "Sacred Ashes" trailer

In October 2009, a four-minute trailer was released by Electronic Arts to promote Dragon Age: Origins. The trailer, entitled "Sacred Ashes" was produced by Blur Studio and created using custom CGI animation rather than any actual in-game footage or assets.[66][67] An instrumental version of the song "This Is War" by the rock band 30 Seconds to Mars is used for the soundtrack, while Claudia Black and Corinne Kempa provide brief dialog for their characters.

The trailer shows a human male Grey Warden leading Morrigan, Sten, and Leliana up a narrow mountainside amidst fierce wind and snow. The Warden remarks that the tomb they are searching for is ahead, but they are suddenly ambushed by the Darkspawn army. After defeating the Darkspawn, a massive dragon appears and the Warden's team works together to slay it.
[edit] Soundtrack

The game features an orchestral soundtrack with choir, used both in-game and during cutscenes. The tracks were composed by Inon Zur and performed by the Northwest Sinfonia.[68][69] The song "I Am the One" from Dragon Age won "Best Original Song" for a video game at Hollywood Music in MediaTM Awards. It was composed by Inon Zur and Aubrey Ashburn while being performed by Aubrey Ashburn. Dragon Age also won the award for "Outstanding Music Supervision" at the Hollywood Music in MediaTM Awards. The award was given in the name of Simon Pressey, audio director of BioWare.

The player has the option to either import his or her character from the main game or start over as a Warden from Orlais: a whole new origin. If a new character is created, the story from the main game is set to a default ending. If the character is imported, the story in Awakening will continue from that determined by the player in Origins and the character will retain his or her attributes, skills, spells etc. as well as certain equipment. The expansion continues the story, including five new recruitable party members and Oghren from Dragon Age: Origins, new spells and abilities, a raise in the level cap, new enemies such as the Inferno Golem and the Queen of the Blackmarsh, and new items.[4] There are no romances available.[5]
[edit] Synopsis
[edit] Plot
Main article: Characters of Dragon Age#Characters in Dragon Age: Origins – Awakening

Set six months after the events of Dragon Age: Origins in the land of Amaranthine, Dragon Age: Origins - Awakening places the player in the role of a Grey Warden trying to rebuild the order while also dealing with political matters as the Arl of Amaranthine.

Named the Warden Commander, the player travels to Vigil's Keep to assume command of the Grey Wardens there. However, the keep is discovered to have been assaulted by Darkspawn, and something amiss is noticed as such an organized attack would have taken an intelligent leader to direct, something thought impossible without the presence of an Archdemon. The player is able to clear the keep with the aid of Mhairi, an able female warrior, and two others: Anders, an apostate mage who seeks refuge away from the Tower of Magi, and Oghren. A new, talking Darkspawn, a Disciple, is discovered to have been the leader of the enemy forces and is defeated. With the keep secured, the player then sets forth on a journey to help garner support for the Grey Wardens and new recruits to join the order's ranks while also looking for clues as to solve the mystery of the intelligent Darkspawn.

Throughout the game, the player journeys to several locations and recruits party members who may undergo the Joining ritual to become Grey Wardens. Along his or her travels, the player meets the "Architect", a strange figure whose intentions remain unclear until the end of the game, and learns about the "Mother", who is a sentient broodmother.

After recruiting all available party members, the player learns of an oncoming war, as Darkspawn advance towards the city of Amaranthine. The player travels to the city with a small band of allies, but soon learns of another Darkspawn force that is headed for Vigil's Keep. Depending on his or her decisions, the player may either order Amaranthine to be burned down after deeming it too late to be saved, causing all the Darkspawn and civilians inside to die, and head back to the Keep, or stay and fight to rid Amaranthine of Darkspawn forces, thus forcing Vigil's Keep to be on its own against the Darkspawn attack there.

Regardless of his or her choice, the player aids in the destruction of the enemy forces and then travels to Drake's Fall, where the "Mother" is presumed to be residing. The player meets the "Architect" once again, and learns of his intention to free the Darkspawn from the impulse to commence a Blight and annihilate the corrupted "Mother." The player may either ally with the "Architect" or kill him. He or she then locates the "Mother", where he or she learns of the ongoing antagonism between the "Architect" and the "Mother" and finds out that the "Architect" had been the one who had awakened the archdemon from the main game after a failed experiment. Ultimately, the player kills the "Mother", and the ending may vary depending on the actions and decisions of the player during the course of the game, and some or none of the party members may perish.
Dragon Age II is a role-playing video game developed by Bioware's Edmonton studios, and published by Electronic Arts. It is the second major game in BioWare's Dragon Age franchise. The game was released for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Mac OS X on March 8, 2011 in North America, March 10, 2011 in Australia and March 11, 2011[2] in Europe.

Set in the same mythical world introduced in Dragon Age: Origins, the player assumes the role of Hawke, a human mage, warrior, or rogue who arrives in the city of Kirkwall as a lowly refugee but becomes its legendary champion over a turbulent decade of political and social conflict.

Set in the mythical world of Thedas, Dragon Age II tells the story of Hawke,[2] who fled the nation of Ferelden during the events of Dragon Age: Origins and traveled across the Waking Sea to the Free Marches and the city of Kirkwall as a refugee. Within the span of a decade, Hawke would rise in power and influence to become the legendary "Champion of Kirkwall", and the center of events that change the course of Thedas forever. The game focuses on Hawke's rise to power and is framed through flashbacks by one of Hawke's old companions, Varric, who relates the Champion's "true story" to Cassandra Pentaghast, a Seeker of Thedas' religious Chantry. Hawke's companion characters are Fenris (an elf and former slave in the Tevinter Imperium), Merrill (a Dalish elf rejected by her clan), Isabela (a pirate captain stranded in Kirkwall after her ship crashed), Anders (a former Grey Warden and apostate), Aveline Vallen (a Fereldan refugee who becomes a guard), Varric Tethras (a dwarf who maintains a spy network in Kirkwall) Sebastian Vael (a former prince of Starkhaven brought up in Kirkwall's Chantry), and either Carver (Hawke's brother) or Bethany (Hawke's sister). Some companion characters contribute to the storyline in significant ways, such as Anders destroying the Chantry in Kirkwall or Isabela stealing a Qunari artifact which led to the Qunari staying in Kirkwall longer than they had to (thus creating conflict between the Qunari and the people of Kirkwall).[5]
[edit] Features

Dragon Age II has a linear framed narrative story, mainly based on the protagonist's choices.[2][4] Romance is possible with five party members in the game.[2] New combat experiences and spells have been added.[2] Dragon Age II is set in a city called Kirkwall[2] located in the region known as Free Marches, which is referenced in Dragon Age: Origins - Awakening but not shown.[2] Unlike Origins, Dragon Age II features a fully voiced main character,[2] which is part of the reason the main character's race is fixed, and a new dialogue wheel based on the dialogue system from the Mass Effect series has been added.[6] In addition, races such as the elves, dwarves and qunari have been redesigned.[4] Saved information can be imported from Origins as well as Awakening. This data will affect the background story of Dragon Age II.
Development of Dragon Age II was announced in July 2010[8] and BioWare's Greg Zeschuk stated when interviewed by Joystiq that "I think one of the key things we're working on in Dragon Age II is the technology. I can confirm that we're doing a lot of work on the Dragon Age engine, and doing a lot of stuff to pump it -- to make it visually super hot."

A trailer for Dragon Age II was released on August 17, 2010,[2] showing some of the new characters and places that Dragon Age II is based on.

Dragon Age II uses an enhanced graphic engine and the controls are more responsive. The combat system is same as the previous game for the PC version but different in console versions, tailored to the strengths of the control pad.[6]

A special feature of Dragon Age II is that the "story" will span a decade. In-game events and dialogues would warrant a longer "run" of years. As the main character moves on year by year, the choices that the player made in the past will affect the present and the future.[9]

The original "dialogue" system is replaced by the "wheel" system previously seen in the Mass Effect series. Unlike its original version, however, the "wheel" will now clearly indicate what tone the main character's response will have (such as anger and flirting).[6]

During the pre-development of the game, Brent Knowles, a veteran lead designer who had been with Bioware for a decade and the central figurehead behind Dragon Age: Origins, decided to resign during the designing process of Dragon Age 2 and eventually left the company, stating “I’m not the same person I was when I started, and BioWare isn’t the same company.”[10] He later went on to clarify his decision to leave, elaborating "I never thought Dragon Age 2 would be a terrible game. It was just that a highly cinematic, action-leaning RPG wasn’t what I wanted to work on. That is all."[11] After playing the game's demo, he praised how polished and immersive it was, but mentioned that its combat had identity issues and did not seem to fit properly into either the action or RPG genre. In an overall assessment he felt that it was a strong title, especially considering the short development cycle, and called the demo "promising", though the amount of changes from the first title in the series seemed excessive to him, citing gameplay issues and the lack of ability to play as another race than human.[12]


By February 11, 2011, the game had gone gold for all platforms and was set for release.[13] On February 22, the demo was released across all platforms.[14]


BioWare released Dragon Age II on March 8, 2011 in North America and March 11 in Europe. Two versions were released: the normal edition and the "Signature Edition", the latter including the Day 1 DLC known as "The Exiled Prince", premium packaging, a download code for the game's soundtrack, and 4 in-game items. The Signature Edition was available for pre-order until January 11, 2011 and was priced the same as the normal edition.[15]
[edit] Bonus and downloadable content


Orders placed before January 11, 2011 were automatically upgraded to the Dragon Age II: BioWare Signature Edition, with additional content.[16] Orders placed before March 8 qualify for pre-order bonuses.[17] In an attempt to discourage purchasing used copies of the game, purchasers of a new copy (before or after the release date) receive access to additional features.[18] Further in-game bonuses can be obtained by completing the free Dragon Age II demo,[19] through Penny Arcade,[20] and by signing up to the newsletter.[21] Purchasing the game Dead Space 2 before March 31, 2012 also unlocks a Dead Space themed armor item.[22] Bioware announced that 2 in game items would be unlocked for all users if the total number of demo downloads reached 1 million in the course of one week (which occurred), and that a further and more powerful item would be unlocked if each post on the official Facebook account between February 28 and March 4 received 1 million impressions the day it was posted. [23]
[edit] Downloadable content
[edit] Exiled Prince


When his family is brutally murdered, leaving Sebastian Vael as the sole surviving heir. Choose to either avenge Sebastian's murdered family and reclaim his title or direct his holy vengeance on your enemies in Kirkwall. Exiled Prince also allows the player to add Sebastian Vael into your party. [24]
[edit] Legacy

Released July 26, 2011, Playable from any point in the Dragon Age II campaign, Legacy Tells an untold part of the story of the main protagonist, Hawke. It adds several new locations including a prison constructed by the Grey Wardens, And adds a new powerful class-specific weapon. [25]
[edit] The Black Emporium


This DLC is available to people who purchase Dragon Age II new, It adds A Mabari War Hound that will fight at your side, The Mirror of Transformation, which allows the player to change their appearance & stores that sell new magic and crafting ingredients. [26]
[edit] Mark Of The Assassin


On September 16, 2011, Bioware announced a new DLC for Dragon Age II, Mark of the Assassin, due for release on October 11, 2011. Mark Of The Assassin adds a new party member Tallis an Elf Assassin, voiced by Felicia Day, who is also featured in the Dragon Age: Redemption webseries. With Tallis at your side, you must Infiltrate an Orlesian estate outside Kirkwall and steal a precious relic. [27]
[edit] Sequel


Bioware's Creative Development Senior Director Alistair McNally[28] confirmed that the studio was going forward with the third installment in the fantasy RPG series, Dragon Age III. Bioware posted job opportunities, calling for "exceptional environmental artists."[29]

Dragon Age II has received generally positive reviews, holding a Metacritic score of 82/100 (PC version). Yet the site's professional scores and user reviews show a wide disparity, with user scores nearly halved (42/100) relative to their professional counterpart. However, even Critic reviews have been less positive than its predecessor, which holds a Metacritic score of 91/100 (PC version). David Radd from Industrygamers noted that "Dragon Age II has had the most mixed critical reception for a full-retail BioWare product perhaps ever (assuming Sonic Chronicles: The Dark Brotherhood is not counted)."[49]

PC Gamer UK magazine highly praised Dragon Age II mentioning the improved combat system, dialogue wheel, skill-trees, and solid storytelling as its strong points. The game earned their "Editor's Choice" award and was stated to be, "The best RPG of this decade? Nine more years will tell, but for now, yes."[46] Official Xbox Magazine gave the game a 9 out of 10 mentioning that although it was slightly altered from its predecessor, the game "offers some of the deepest, nerdiest, most worthwhile 40 to 60 hours you'll ever love losing sleep over."[45] Gametrailers gave the game high marks and stated, "Though it doesn't hold a candle to its predecessor when it comes to sheer breadth, Dragon Age II has quite a bit more soul" and that it had "some of the most gratifying RPG combat we've played in a long time."[43]

Not all of the reviewers have praised the changes however. VideoGamer said the game "never progresses beyond the identity issues it had with Origins", criticized the lack of noticeable characters, small area of setting, while adding "simplification of combat doesn't work in the game's favour".[47] Game Informer gave the PC version of the game a score of 7.75 and the console versions an 8.25, criticizing the poorly designed combat system, stating "On all platforms, Dragon Age II caters to an audience that didn’t connect with Origins, while alienating those who did" and "improving the polish doesn’t do much good when the basics still need work".[38]

Eurogamer settled for saying the game is "never quite as great as it could be" but also conclude that it is still a "Satisfying epic", awarding it 8/10[50] while Gamespot noted that the game suffered from "unnecessary simplification and unfocused storytelling" but still left a strong impression.[51] RPG Site awarded the game 80%, arguing that "the discussion about Dragon Age II doesn't need to be 'is it good?' - It is - but needs to be 'is this what fans wanted from a sequel to Dragon Age: Origins?'", suggesting that is where some of the fan animosity towards the title may arise from.[52]

Dragon Age II's lead designer, Mike Laidlaw, in an interview with Gamespot, addressed the fans' concerns toward the changes in Dragon Age II by stating that Bioware will "[despite Dragon Age's players' criticisms] continue to tune and capitalize on that 'fusion' between the Origins experience and Dragon Age II". Additionally, he also noted that a return to the more hardcore RPG style of Dragon Age: Origins is unlikely, proclaiming "The big key is to not adjust 180 degrees again, because we've done this."[53]

One million copies of Dragon Age II were sold within two weeks of the launch, faster than Dragon Age: Origins.[54] Within two months of the launch, the game sold-in "over two million copies", meaning that over two million copies have been distributed to retailers. The sales rate of the game has been decreasing fast since its release, selling in later weeks less than what Origins sold in the same numbers of weeks after launch.

In June 2011, in an interview with GameRant.com titled "Fans ‘Were Not Pleased’ with ‘Dragon Age 2' Says EA", EA Games Label President Frank Gibeau acknowledged the fans' disappointment over the direction Dragon Age 2 took, and proclaimed: "As we think about where we take the franchise next, we’re going to take that into consideration and really engage them”[1].
[edit] Controversies

In March 2011, reports began emerging from consumer-advocacy website Reclaim Your Game that Dragon Age II was being distributed with the controversial DRM software SecuROM, despite assertions from EA that it would not be.[55] Producer Fernando Melo stated that although the game uses software made by the makers of SecuROM, it is a different program completely. "They have the same support site through which is the URL you're seeing." The software is a form of release-date checker, designed to prevent copies of the game from being played before the release date in that territory. The software runs from the disc, and does not install anything on the system.[56] BioWare confirmed that there is no SecuROM DRM in the game and clarified that in the case of downloaded versions, the release date check program's executable deletes itself after having performed the check.[57]

Further issue arose when a player was unable to activate his purchased copy of the game due to being temporarily banned from the BioWare forums for posting "Have you sold your souls to the EA devil?". BioWare's Stanley Woo replied to the user in support of the ban by pointing to sections 9 and 11 of EA's terms of service, which state "EA may terminate access to any online or mobile products and/or EA Services at any time by giving you notice of such termination within the time period specified when you joined the particular EA Service."[58] Woo clearly acknowledged that “These bans can affect access to your game and/or DLC,” adding that players should “consider it an added incentive to follow the rules you say you're going to follow.”[59] Technology news website Ars Technica called the incident a "potentially dangerous precedent, where saying something inflammatory about a developer or publisher could result in the company revoking the player's right to play a game he or she lawfully acquired."[58] When the story was later picked-up by several news websites, EA's Andrew Wong said the entire incident was actually an unforeseen glitch, and that the player's account had been reactivated.[60]

A BioWare employee was caught posing as a consumer on the review site Metacritic. The employee, Chris Hoban, who posted under the name of Avanost gave a score of 10/10 saying "Anything negative you'll see about this game is an overreaction of personal preference." A representative for EA responded after much online controversy saying "Of course the people who make the game vote for their own game. That's how it works in the Oscars, that's how it works in the Grammys and why I'm betting that Barack Obama voted for himself in the last election", though it is unclear if Hoban acted on his own behest or on that of the company.[61][62]

The novel opens with the country of Ferelden occupied by the neighbouring Orlesian Empire. Queen Moira, who sought to expel the Orlesians has been murdered by traitor nobles, but her son Maric has escaped. While attempting to flee the assassins who killed his mother, Maric encounters Loghain, who is part of a band of Fereldan outlaws. Having no real alternatives, Maric joins up with them. However Maric is not able to stay at the outlaw camp long, as an Orlesian army looking for Maric attacks. Yet, Loghain is able to lead Maric to safety by taking him to the Korcari Wilds, a region avoided by most due to its danger. Here they meet the mysterious Witch of the Wilds, who enables them to pass through the Wilds safely. She provides this help on the condition that Maric makes her a promise. What this promise is is unknown. She also warns Maric that Loghain will betray him if he keeps him close, and warns Maric a Blight will one day come to Ferelden.

After escaping the Wilds, Maric and Loghain are led to the remaining rebel army by Maric's betrothed, Rowan Guerrin, just in time to defeat an Orlesian army about to attack them using Loghain's aptitude for strategy. The next few years see Maric, Loghain and Rowan become close friends as they strengthen the rebel army until it is in a position to take Gwaren, a Fereldan town. Katriel, an elf woman who claims to be a messenger, warns them of an impending attack on Gwaren and they are able to repel it. After this, Katriel and Maric begin a relationship. However, Katriel is a spy for Meghren, the Orlesian King of Ferelden. She provides Maric with false information that convinces him to attack the town of West Hill. This attack results in massive loss of life for the rebel army, and Maric, Loghain and Rowan being separated from the remainder of the army.

Regretting her deception and developing real feelings for Maric, Katriel leads Maric, Loghain and Rowan to the Deep Roads, a series of underground tunnels, in order to return to Gwaren. After facing the dangers of the Deep Roads, including giant spiders and darkspawn, and escaping in the company of a dwarven warband, whom Maric convinces to join the rebellion. Once they return to Gwaren, they find the remnants of the rebel army and once again secure the town. By this time, Loghain and Rowan have formed a romantic bond (in part due to Maric abandoning Rowan for Katriel), but Loghain has also discovered Katriel’s betrayal and reveals it to Maric, omitting that Katriel had reneged on her orders out of love for Maric. After discovering her actions, Maric kills Katriel in blind rage, only to discover later that Katriel had been loyal out of love for him; Loghain wished to impress on Maric the importance of a king doing what has to be done, opposed to what he wants to do. Following her death, Loghain encourages Rowan to become Maric’s wife and queen, for Maric and Ferelden’s benefit. She agrees and with increased momentum and growing outrage at the continuing cruelty of the Orlesians, there is now widespread support for Maric and the rebel cause. Victory is all but assured for the rebels. Maric also exacts justice on the traitor nobles who murdered his mother, luring them to a meeting under the pretense of a truce, then killing them for their crimes, before Loghain and Rowan break the back of Meghren's armies at the Battle of River Dane, ensuring Meghren's downfall and the eventual defeat of the occupation.

The novel closes with Mother Ailis, who once lived within the outlaw camp, telling Maric and Rowan’s son Cailan stories of his father; after three more years of war, Denerim fell to the rebels after a long siege, Meghren was executed for his crimes and Maric is crowned as king. Ailis tells that Maric has become a popular king, Loghain has become a powerful lord and has married and had a daughter, and that Rowan has died after a long illness. After relating this, Ailis hobbles after Cailan, who has run off into the distance.