
 
Atlantis
Atlantis: We will never know

Fantasy is a tough sell in the twentieth century.
        The world has been fully discovered and fully mapped. Popular media has 
effectively minimized the legend and the fantastic rumor, though to make up for 
 this it has generated falsities not as lavish but just as interesting. Satellites have 
mapped and studied the earth, leaving only a space frontier that is as yet unreachable. 
 But standing out is a charming fantasy the modern world has yet to verify or condemn: 
the lost continent of Atlantis.
        The father of the modern world's perception of Atlantis is Plato (circa 428-
circa 347 b.c.). (1)  The Greek philosopher spoke in his works Timaeus and Critias of a 
continent in the Atlantic ocean larger than Africa and Asia Minor combined which rivaled 
Athens as the most advanced in the world. (2)  According to the legend surrounding 
Plato's dialogues, the island of Atlantis was violently thrown into the sea by the 
forces of nature, and its few survivors managed to swim ashore and relate their story. 
(3) There the legend was passed by word of mouth until an Egyptian priest related the 
story to Solon, a character in Timaeus. The priest admired the achievements of 
prehistoric Athenians, because when the rulers of Atlantis threatened to invade all of 
Europe and Asia the Athenians, on behalf of all Greeks, defeated the Atlanteans to avoid 
enslavement. (4) 
        The works of Plato opened the floodgates to endless speculation on whether the 
continent described was fact or fiction. Atlantis has since been placed in Spain, 
Mongolia, Palestine, Nigeria, the Netherlands, Brazil, Sweden, Greenland and Yucatan. 
Every nook and cranny of the globe has been hypothesized; mountain peaks, desert lands, 
the ocean floor and even the barren wasteland of Antarctica have been mentioned in 
theories. (5)
        While some of these theories are compatible with Plato's works and are within 
relative reason, numerous crackpot theories have been developed using the lost continent 
as a basis. One of these theories, posted on the computer internet where it has access 
to over fifteen million people, talks in twenty-one pages of pre-historical lands with 
names like Oz and Luxor. These world wide web pages list over two hundred separate 
articles of proof for the existence of Atlantis, as in the following: (6)
        "Most all ancient civilizations believed  in the TITANS, the race of giant 
humans that inhabited Earth long ago. Different races knew them by different names. 
These 7 to 12 foot humanoids were thought to be legendary until the excavation of over a 
dozen skeletons 8 to 12 feet tall, around the world, shocked archeologists. These 
skeletons were positively human. Some of these skeletal remains are on Maui in lava 
caves near Ulupalakua and Olowalu. The Spanish Conquistadors left diaries of wild 
blond-haired, blue-eyed 8 to 12 foot high men running around in the Andes during the 
conquest of the Incas. A couple were reportedly captured but died en route to Europe. If 
giant animals (dinosaurs) were possible then why not giant men? And why are these 
goliaths populating both Eurasia and the Americas? Only on a land bridge created by the 
vast continent of Antarctica can there be a sufficient bridge for the spread of these 
giants."(7)
        This text, written by self-proclaimed  Atlantologist Steve Omar, represents 
Plato's text taken to the extreme- using his ideas as a basis for outlandish and 
unfounded ideas. 
        These unverified fantasies make a dubious complement to the other dark side of 
the Atlantean fantasy: hoaxes. Atlantis has been "discovered" many times, but most 
notably in the fall of 1912 by Dr. Paul Schliemann. Schliemann introduced himself as the 
grandson of the famous Heinrich Schliemann, the archeologist who discovered the ruins of 
ancient Troy in 1873. His "discovery" made front page news (The New York American, 
October 1912.) and boasted of an advanced civilization with aircraft, power-driven boats 
and the like. Schliemann said his grandfather told him on his deathbed of the family's 
secret: the location of Atlantis. Schliemann's claims made waves, but didn't hold water; 
when pressed for details, Schliemann was unresponsive and eventually disappeared from 
public view. (8)  
        Unfortunately, the falsities concerning Atlantis frequently overshadow the 
possibilities. The subject has gathered its share of honest journalists as well. 
Ignatius Donnelly wrote the first extensive study of the possibility of existence in 
1882, and his views have not been found to be false with twentieth century technology. 
Donnelly believed in Atlantis, but believed it to be worldly; his reasons for Atlantis's 
existence are unable to be proven, but make sense. Some examples:

-There is nothing improbable in Plato's narrative; it describes rich, cultured and 
educated people but doesn't mention things of fantasy like giants, hobgoblins etc. (9)

-Plato speaks of hot and cold springs in the center of Atlantis, a feature common to 
islands with volcanic activity. Chances are Plato didn't know this. (9)

-Plato says in his stories that the Poseidon, the Greek god of the sea, is always seen 
on a chariot with horses because he was originally the god of Atlantis, where horses 
were domesticated. But when Atlantis fell to the sea, the Greeks believed Poseidon 
brought his horses with him. (9)

        Responding partly to Donnelley's theories and partly to the urge to discover, 
some 20th century archeologists have used twentieth century technology to look for 
Atlantis. But many have dismissed Atlantis as glorified myths of volcanic eruptions in 
the island of Thera in 1450 b.c. The eruption may have destroyed that island and caused 
a small earthquake and tsunamis that ruined the civilization of Crete, but didn't sink a 
continent. (10)
 
        Therefore, none of Donnelley's theories can be proved without the actual 
discovery of the continent. The legend of Atlantis is only a huge collection of theories 
and guesses, but theories and guesses also led to the discovery of the lost Roman cities 
of Pompeii and Herculaneum, discovered after being buried and preserved by the volcanic 
ash of nearby Mt. Vesuvius. Because of this, the mystery of Atlantis's existence will 
tantalize the world until the continent is either proven or disproven. (11)
 

 
Being a Hero

Thesis: Despite his accomplishments and the glory associated with his life, Aeneas only achieves the status of hero through divine intervention, and this god-given position causes him just as much grief as it does splendor.


	What is a hero?  We would like to think that a hero is someone who has achieved some fantastic goal or status, or maybe someone who has accomplished a great task.  Heroes find themselves in situations of great pressure and act with nobility and grace. Though the main character of Virgil's Aeneid, Aeneas, is such a person, it is not by his own doing.  He encounters situations in which death is near, in which love, hate, peace, and war come together to cause both good and evil.  In these positions he conducts himself with honor, by going along with what the gods want.  Only then goes on to pave the way for the Roman Empire.  His deeds, actions, and leadership would never have come to be if it were not for the gods.  The gods took special interest in Aeneas, causing him misfortune in some cases, giving him assistance in others.  On the whole, the gods constantly provide perfect opportunities for Aeneas to display his heroism.  Without them, Aeneas would not be the hero he is.  This gift does not come without a price, though; he must endure the things heroes endure to become what they are.  Despite his accomplishments and the glory associated with his life, Aeneas only achieves the status of hero through divine intervention, and this god-given position causes him just as much grief as it does splendor.
	Aeneas is the son of Venus.  This fact alone brings about much of the hero in him.  Venus, a concerned mother, always looks out for her son.  She does everything she thinks will help to ensure his safety and success.  At the beginning of his journey from Troy, she prevents his death at sea.  Juno has persuaded King Aeolus to cause vicious storms, rocking Aeneas' fleet and nearly killing all of  them.  Venus then goes to Jupiter and begs him to help Aeneas: 
Venus appealed to him, all pale and wan,
With tears in her shining eyes:
				"My lord who rule 
The lives of men and gods now and forever,
And bring them all to heel with your bright bolt,
What in the world could my Aeneas do,
What could the Trojans do, to so offend you? 
Jupiter then assures Venus that he will keep his promise to allow Aeneas to live on to set the stage for the coming of the Romans.  In this case, without Venus' watchful eye and concern, Aeneas would have no kind of protection or security as he made his way to Italy.  
	Another instance in which Venus uses her influence to assist Aeneas is during the fifth book.  When Aeneas and the Trojans leave Sicily, Venus fears that Juno will attempt to kill Aeneas again, and so asks Neptune for safe passage over the ocean:
Beset with worries, Venus turned to Neptune,
Unfolding from her heart complaints and pleas:
"Juno's anger, and her implacable heart,
Drive me to prayers beneath my dignity.
...
But as to what comes next, I beg you, let them
Safely entrust their sailing ships to you"
Once again, Aeneas would have to deal with the wrath of Juno on his own, if it were not for the divine influence of his mother.  
	In book eight of the Aeneid, with war between the Trojans and the Italians imminent, Venus once again fears for the safety of her son. To ensure the well-being of Aeneas, she cajoles her husband, Vulcan into making a suit of armor for Aeneas:  
"Most dear husband,
I never wished to tax you, make you toil
In a lost cause, however much I owed
To Priam's sons, however long I wept
Over Aeneas' ordeals.  Now, however, ...
I do come, begging your sacred power
For arms, a mother begging for her son."
Venus is willing to put on this facade of extreme passion for her husband in order to help Aeneas.  She goes to lengths that many mothers would not.  This is not quite enough, though;  average mother's concern alone does not make Aeneas a hero.  A divine mother's concern makes him a hero.  Without her willingness for personal sacrifice, Aeneas would never survive through the Aeneid.  
Occasionally, as is the case with most mothers, Venus' judgment of what is best for Aeneas contradicts what fate and the other gods have in store for him.  During the Trojans' time at Carthage, Juno and Venus both agree that a union between Dido and Aeneas is in order.  They use the attraction that Aeneas and Dido already have for each other and use it to cause them to fall in love.  The intensity of this love is enough to cause Dido to break her vow of fidelity to her dead husband and she neglects her responsibilities to the development of the city.  Jupiter disapproves of this union, and sends Mercury to remind Aeneas of his responsibility to Rome:  
Approach the Dardan captain where he tarries
Rapt in Tyrian Carthage, losing sight
Of future towns the fates ordain.  Correct him,
Carry my speech to him on the running winds:
...
What has he in mind? What hope, to make him stay
Amid a hostile race, and lose from view
Ausonian progeny, Lavinian lands?
The man should sail:  that is the whole point.
Aeneas is in love with Dido and would gladly stay with her, building up Carthage, but the gods know that there is more important business to which he must tend.  Jupiter has to intervene to get Aeneas to do what his destiny dictates him to do in the first place.  He would not have done his duty as a hero.
Naturally, Aeneas' own mother would don the role of his protector, but not all the gods deemed his plight worth of support.  Juno, specifically, did nearly all she could to hinder him.  From the start of his journey, Juno makes things difficult for Aeneas; as is previously mentioned, Juno has Aeolus nearly sink all of the Trojans' ships.  The survival of the storm and the leading of his followers to safety are good examples of Aeneas' heroism, but he would not even have had this opportunity to be a hero without Juno.  In addition, if it was not for Neptune's help, he would not have survived the incident. 
In book seven, Juno realizes that she cannot change the fate of Aeneas and the Trojans, but is still so bitter that she decides to make things as difficult as possible for them.  She summons Allecto to incite hatred and hostility within the residents of Italy, resulting in a desire for war against the Trojans.
 Here is a service all your own
That you can do for me, Daughter of Night,
Here is a way to help me, to make sure
My status and renown will not give way
Or be impaired, and that Aeneas' people
Cannot by marriage win Latinus over,
...
Break up this peace-pact, scatter acts of war,
All in a flash let men desire, demand,
And take up arms.
	Allecto arouses Queen Amata's animosity toward Aeneas. She also spurs Turnus to believe that Aeneas is the enemy, and to fuel the flame that is Turnus' jealousy toward Aeneas.  Allecto's work is successful;  it helps give rise to the war between the Italians and the Trojans.  Juno also directly helps the war happen when she personally descends from the heavens and bursts open the doors of the temple of Janus:
Heaven's queen
At this dropped from the sky.  She gave a push
To stubborn-yielding doors, then burst the iron-bound
Gates of war apart on turning hinges.
All Ausonian lands as yet unroused,
Unawakened, now took fire.
The Italians look at this as a good sign and many people rally for the war.  Juno has almost turned all of Italy against Aeneas, and single-handedly starts the war against the Trojans.  This war, and the fact that the Trojans prevail is a large part of what makes Aeneas a hero.  Despite the fact that she was not trying to help him become a hero, Juno does help him achieve this status by starting the war and giving him this opportunity to use the help of the other gods to come out and shine.  
	Aeneas accomplishes much and earns immense glory throughout the Aeneid.  Nevertheless, this achievement of hero status relies on the assistance of the gods, and this assistance does not necessarily come in a positive form.  Juno causes storms, hate, and war, either to stop Aeneas or at least make things more difficult for him.  Venus, the divine mother, does everything she can to counteract the obstacles that Juno makes. Other gods and supernatural beings all play a part in affecting Aeneas' life.  Without all this divine intervention, Aeneas would have been an uninteresting, average Joe.
 


 
James walker                                                  Mr.Johnson
E3                                                           December 20, 1996                                                                                                                                                                                                                          



The Chinese culture


This report is about the myths and beliefs of the Chinese culture.  It's about the stories the Chinese created to explain the world around them, and generally how they perceived their surrounding environment.  This report deals with ancient myths and the people who believed them, and what the current believes of these people are.

The Southwest Creation Story

The Southwest creation story is a myth which explains why people are different.  The myth begins by saying that there were people on earth who were all alike, meaning there weren't  people who were black, white, oriental, etc..  It states that the humans on earth all generally were the same.  There were also gods who lived above the clouds in the heavens.  And there was a huge heavenly ladder which started on a mountain and reached all the way up to heaven's door.  It goes on to tell a story of a man who had two children.  One was a girl and the other was a boy.  						

They lived in a house which had a huge very thick roof.  The man had built the roof so thick because it rained almost every day.  He hated the rain.  He knew it had its benefits but too much of it ruined his crops, destroyed his livestock and every time it rained the roof of the house was destroyed.  And every time the man rebuilt it, he made it thicker and thicker.  He blamed all his misfortune on the Duke of Thunder.  The Duke of Thunder was one of the gods who lived in the heavens.  He was the god of rain and thunder.  The man dispised the Duke very much and had a pure hatred of him.  			

Every time it rained the Duke would descend from the heavens and stand on a hilltop.  There he would watch with pure delight as the rains and thunder came down harder and harder.  Finally the man had had enough.  One day he took his axe and waited on the hilltop for the Duke to arrive. When the rains came so did the Duke, and the man slashed him in the back. 		The Duke was hurt but not killed because he was a god.  The man caged him and brought him home.  He put him in a corner and warned the kids not to go near him.  And to especially not give him water.  The next morning was a beautiful sunny one, but the Duke looked horrible almost as if he was dehydrating.  The man told the children he had to go to the market and said again not to go near the Duke no matter what he does and don't give him water.  After the man left the Duke started moaning.  He begged the children to give him some water but they refused following their father's orders.  The Duke pretended he was dead with his mouth hung open and he had his lips very dry.  												
The girl was worried, she thought he was dying so she gave him one drop of water.  The Duke instantly jumped back up and tore apart the cage.  The children were terrified.  He came over to them and promised them that they will be rewarded for their deed.  He gave them a small egg and told them to plant it in the ground and then he left.  When the man came back he was shocked by what had happened.  He knew the Duke would be very angry and would punish him.  So he didn't waste any time and started to build a ship.  After a month's time the ship was finished.  It was built out of the strongest material known to him.  										

Meanwhile the egg the children planted had grown to a size of about two small people.  Then one day what the man had anticipated came.  Huge torrential downpours of rain started and there were tremendous floods.  The man jumped into the ship he built, in his panic he had forgotten about the children.  They had ran into the egg which had become soft.  The floods were so great that the man in his ship reached all the way to the door of the heavens.  He banged the doors and yelled let me in! The gods didn't want mortals in the heavens, so the Duke was ordered to recede the floods.  He took the floods back so fast that the man fell back to the earth and was crushed by his ship.  											

The children in the soft egg bounced back to the ground safely.  When they came out, they saw everything was destroyed.  They were the only ones left.  They lived happily for a while and after some time they had a child.  Because they were brother and sister the child was deformed and died a short time later.  The two kids chopped up the baby into tiny pieces and put him in a bag, and they started climbing up the heavenly ladder.  																The bag ripped before they could reach to the top and all the pieces fell back to earth.  They fell all over the continents, and from them the new people developed.  They were different in appearance from each other depending on where they lived.  This myth explains why there are people who look so much different from each other.  This myth suggests that man was more responsible for the creation of the new humans than the gods.  Because of the actions of the man the people were created.

The Heritage of a King

This is a myth about fate.  In this myth a man named Zoa chi who is a king tries to find out his fate.  Zoa was a survivor.  When he was little his parents were assassinated.  An attempt at his life was also made but his older brother protected him.  The murderer was his uncle who betrayed his father and overthrew his power.  He stayed in exile with his brother until he was older.  Over the years his hatred of his uncle had made Zoa a very stern man.  He had wowed to get his revenge.  He became a great fighter and started a group of followers who also were against the king.  						
Then finally the day he had been waiting for had arrived.  With his small army he overpowered the kings army.  Growing up on the streets had made Zoa a great strategy leader, so he was able to defeat the huge overconfident king's army.  He killed the king and took over the throne.  Years went by and he himself became overconfident and selfish.  He created a fantasy image of himself as a great man.  He thought that nothing on this planet could defeat him.  As time went by he became just like his uncle.  Absolute power had corrupted him.  							

Then one day he declared to all his subjects that he was a god and expected to be worshipped. This was too much for the people, they rebelled but Zoa crushed all their resistance.  One of his advisors told Zoa that he knew a magician who could greatly help him in keeping down further rebellions.  He said that this man could see the future and help him stop protesters before they could organise and challenged him.  The king immediately called the man to his castle.  The man's name was Hou.  He told the king that there will be a man who will kill him soon.  And that man would be a close relative of his.  																					The king knew exactly whom Hou was talking about.  Zoa's son Zhuan was almost the age where he could become king if something happened to his father. Immediately Zoa ordered Zhuan to be imprisoned.  He said this was another example of how clever he was, he said he saw the future and beat fate's destiny.  He even said that he was better than any other god the people believed in.  When he went to see Zhuan his older brother went with him.  Zhuan pleaded with Zoa and said he would never even think of killing his own father.  But Zoa didn't believe him.  																			He sentenced Zhuan to death.  But before Zhuan could be killed older Zoa's brother beheaded him when he facing his son.  Zoa was killed by his own brother who was ashamed of what his younger sibling had become.  What the magician didn't tell Zoa was which close relative would kill him.  Zoa who had become overconfident wasn't as great as he thought he was.  And he was too arrogant to not know that the gods should not be challenged.  This myth tells that becoming overconfident will eventually hurt you and that no one could beat their destiny.  The Chinese in this story believed in the gods, they were very religious people and this myth tells that the gods should not be challenged. 							

Both of these myths were written a long time ago and I don't think that the people today still believe in these myths as strongly as the people who wrote them did.  I think it's like Halloween in our culture.  We still practice the custom as the ancient people did but we don't have as much as a strong believe in ghosts and goblins as our ancestors did.



Bibliography




Birch, Cyril.  Chinese Myths And Fantasies.  Great Britain: London,  1992.


Fei, Charles.  Strange Creatures.  New York, 1990


Ke, Yuan.  Dragons And Dynasties.  China: Beijing,  1993


*Chinese Myths.*  Grolier Encyclopaedia, 12th ed. 1996.
  

 
Egyptians, Babylonians, and Hebrews have similarities yet also differences in their religions.  The importance is not in the similarities as much as it is in the differences that distinguish the cultures from each other and their views on life.  I would like to point out each civilization's creation and flood story.  By analyzing these stories we can come to a better understanding of their world views.
The Hebrew creation story from the book of Genesis is one that most people know well.  In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.  The earth was without form and void.  God said, "let there be light," and there was light.  He then separated the light from the darkness.  He also created the land, plants, and animals.  He saw everything he created and, behold, it was good.  The heavens and earth were completed and all that dwelled within them.  On the seventh day he rested.  The earth was complete, but there was nothing to take care of this creation.  So, God created man in the image of himself.  Man was created from the dust of the ground.  God gave him the breath of life and the man became a living soul (Moses 1:1-2:7).  With the background of that story, one should  look at the Egyptian interpretation of the beginning.
At first there was nothing but chaos that contained the seed of everything to come.  In this confusion the sun god dwelled.  By an effort of his will he emerged from chaos as Ra and gave birth to Shu, the god of air, and Tefnut, the goddess moisture.  Shu and Tefnut gave birth to Geb and Nut, the earth god and sky goddess.  Thus the physical universe was created.  People were created from Ra's tears.  Time passed and Ra grew frail, so the ungrateful race of men plotted against Ra.  When Ra learned of this he called the gods together.  The gods decided that mankind must be destroyed.  Tens of thousands of men were killed until only a few were left.  Then Ra relented and man was spared.  Nevertheless Ra was sick of the world and retreated into the heavens, leaving Shu to reign in his place.  At that time the present world was established.
The Babylonians have their own interpretation of the beginning.  All things came from the water.  From the mixture of sweet water, Aspu, with salt water, Tiamat, the gods arose.  Aspu and Tiamat gave birth to a pair of gigantic serpents, Lakhmu and Lakhamu.  These two serpents produced Anshar and Kishar, the heavens and the earth.  Anshar and Kishar then conceived Anu, Enlil, and Ea.  Aspu and Tiamat grew angry because the younger gods were noisy.  So, they decided to destroy the new gods.  Ea, the all knowing, learned of this plan and used his magic to capture Apsu.  Tiamat became furious and created and army of gods and monsters to punish Ea and the others.  Marduk was asked to stand against Tiamat and her army.  Marduk promised  to defeat Tiamat if he was given supremacy over the gods.  Marduk defeated Tiamat and her army.  While he was cutting up Tiamat's body he used half her body and created the dome of the heavens.  With the other half he made the earth.  Then to make the other gods happy he created men from the blood of the battle.   He then made rivers, plants, and animals completing creation.  
With these stories' background one can now analyze the likeness and differences among them.  The Egyptian and Babylonian stories show several gods in charge of creating the world.  The difference between these two is that Marduk was given leadership by the gods bestowing their powers upon him.  The Egyptians do not actually raise one god above another.  The Hebrews have only one God, who created the earth.  The gods from each story created man from different items.  The Egyptian and Babylonian gods created man from tears and blood respectively.  The Hebrew God created man from dust, but in the image of himself.  This seems to forge a connection or bond between the Hebrews and their god.  They are not gods themselves, but with his image they have the ability to be godlike.
The flood stories of the cultures also show how they view their gods and the attitude the gods have toward the people.  The Hebrew God flooded the world because people had turned their backs on God and were no longer worshipping him.  In short, one could say that the people in a way deserved the punishment they received.  This is also shown in the Egyptian creation story when the people turned against Ra.  Both of these gods showed compassion and remorse after the killing was done.  However, the Babylonian gods flooded the earth because it was so noisy that they could not sleep.  Not a fitting punishment for the crime committed.  The Babylonian gods were outraged when they realized Utnapishtim was delivered from the catastrophe.  The Egyptians do not have a flood story, is this because of the regularity of the Nile's flooding.  The Egyptian saw balance and harmony with the Nile's example.
The different cultures' attitude toward their gods is also shown in their literature.  The Egyptians and Hebrews loved and worshipped their gods.. This is shown in the Egyptian "The Hymn to the Aten" and the Hebrew "Psalms."  Each of these works praises and exalts their respective god.  The Babylonians feared their god as they did their rivers that were unpredictable.  The lifestyles and geography of each civilization helped shape each cultures view of their gods.  For nature was the only physical manifestation of their gods.

 Works Cited

Fiero, Gloria K.  The Humanistic Tradition.  1992  Madison: Wm. C. Brown Communications.  1995
Godolphin, F, ed.  Great Classical Myths.  New York: Modern Library, 1964.
Moses.  "Genesis."  The Holy Bible.  Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1976.
The Epic of Gilgamesh.  Translated by N. K. Sanders.  Baltimore: Penguin, 1960.
 



 
EXCALIBUR

	"Guards, Knights, Squires; prepare for battle!"  hollers one of the kings noble knights.  The rumbling thunder of  horses trotting across the wooden mote bridge echoes throughout the castle.  Brave knights gallop their horses into the foggy mist where swords and shields smash, the sounds of their armor and their striking metals echo across the land they battle over.  Blood oozes from severed bodies as limbs are sliced off men like cheese.  These barbaric and berserk behaviors were the everyday duties of men during the Middle Ages.  Becoming a knight was the ideal manhood during this time.  Every aspect of a mans life revolved around their desire to one day serve their king as a knight.  The yearning aspiration to become a knight is portrayed in several ways in John Boorman's movie, Excalibur.  Arthur's responsibility as a squire (before he was king), Lancelot's challenge of worthiness and Perceval's ambition illustrate the urge that exists in men to serve their king as a knight.
	The responsibilities of a squire serving a knight is one way in which a man is eventually knighted.  In the early opening scenes of the movie Excalibur,  young Arthur serves as a squire to his brother Kay.  Squires were the duties of young men who served their knights by preparing their armor and weaponry.  During some of the jousting scenes squires retrieve jousts and pass them over to their knights, but never really assist in combat.  Just from the experience and duties as a squire, it is typical that a young squire may eventually become a knight.  However, in the movie during an Easter afternoon the knights are jousting for the right to attempt to draw the sword from the stone, and young Arthur forgets his brother's sword.  So young Arthur runs back to the camp to retrieve it and finds it has been stolen.  He chases after the peasant thief into the woods but the thief gets away.  Arthur then turns and faces the sword in the stone and unintentionally draws the sword from the stone and he becomes king.  If Arthur had not been the pre-chosen king, he probably would have grown up as an ordinary squire and then eventually become knighted.
	Later in the movie when Arthur is an admirable king, he and his knights come across a bridge where they meet a knight by the name of Sir Lancelot of the Lake.  Lancelot and King Arthur's men joust to cross the bridge but Arthur's knights fail.  Although Lancelot is already a knight, he seeks a king worthy of his skill to serve under.  So King Arthur and Sir Lancelot joust each other; it is evident that Lancelot was supposed to win the battle but Arthur's rage for power overcomes him and he calls upon the magical power of Excalibur to win his battle with Lancelot.  Since the sword's power was meant to unite all men and Arthur uses it to defeat Lancelot, the sword snaps in half like a chocolate bar.  Arthur tosses the broken sword into the lake.  After Arthur recognizes what he has done, the lady of the lake returns Excalibur to King Arthur in perfect condition and Lancelot is revived. Arthur then makes Lancelot his champion and Lancelot becomes Arthur's noblest knight.  
	While Lancelot is resting in the forest, a  peasant comes across Lancelot and attempts to steal Lancelot's sword.  But Lancelot is too keen to have his sword stolen by a peasant boy.  The boy, Perceval wants to become a knight and wants to follow Lancelot back to Camelot to be knighted.  Lancelot offers the boy upon the horse back to Camelot, but the boy wishes to run behind Lancelot all the way to Camelot even though it is twenty days away.  The persistent boy who craves to become a knight follows behind Lancelot all the way to Camelot, to prove his worthiness one might conclude.  But he is not knighted right away.  Later on, Gawain accuses Lancelot for his betrayal to the Kings wife.  During the middle ages the process for settling disputes was not by any form of court, but they choose to settle by jousting.  Unfortunately, Lancelot does not show up in time for the trial joust.  Not one knight steps forward to take Lancelot's place , so Perceval steps forward and chooses to champion the queen.  Therefore Arthur has no other choice but to knight Perceval in order for him to joust Gawain.  Just in the nick of time Lancelot shows up and Perceval is relieved from any danger.  Although jousting was extremely dangerous, Perceval saw it as his only chance to become a knight and serve King Arthur.
	During the Middle Ages it was important for men to have the honor to serve their king.  Honor, humility, faith, pride, purity and nobility were Medieval virtues that men cherished.  Men strived at the chance to become a knight and be member of the kings aristocracy, the knights of the round table.  
 

 
The Celtic myth, "The Dream of Oenghus," relates the tale of Oenghus the Celtic god of love and his long search for true love.  Oenghus is the son of Boann and Daghdhae.  Boann the white cow goddess, and Daghdhae the father of all gods, the "good god."  

In a dream Oenghus sees "the loveliest figure in Ireland..."   His memory of this vision makes him ill with loneliness and he begins to waste away.  With the help of his mother, and another of his fathers' sons, Bodhbh, he begins his search for the girl he dreamt of.  When, after years, he successfully completes his search the lovers' travels to Bruigh Mac, his home. 

Chronologically and geographically distant, Apuleius second century record of the original Greek myth of Cupid and Psyche also relates a story of amorous pursuit.  In Apuleius account Psyche is the most beautiful of all mortals.  "The fame of her surpassing beauty spread over the earth...åand menç would even say that Venus herself could not equal this mortal."   Out of jealousy, Venus commands Cupid to make Psyche fall in love with "the vilest and most despicable creature in the whole world."   However,  dispatched on his errand Cupid is astonished by her beauty and "as if he had shot one of his arrows into his own heart" falls completely in love with her.   






Cupid dumbfounded by the love he suddenly feels carries Psyche off.  Although Psyche is never able to gaze on Cupid she is confident of the love her unseen paramour expresses in the dark each night.  Eventually, prompted by her unbelieving and somewhat envious sisters she lights a lamp and discovers that her lover is Cupid.  Unfortunately, Cupid hurt by both the oil sputtering from the lamp and her faithlessness fees.  Psyche deeply grieved by her lack of faith and  subsequent loss of love pledges to search for Cupid forever.  "I can spend the rest of my life searching for him.  If he has no more love left for me, at least I can show him how much I love him."   Eventually after many trials and tribulations, largely at the inspiration of the still jealous Venus, she is reunited with Cupid and comes to live the live of the immortals.

These myths share a common fundamental theme.  In both instances, the myths document a  love between a mortal and a god.  Moreover, both of the courtship's involve long periods of separation, difficult and desperate journeys in pursuit of the beloved, and deep ongoing uncertainty as to the ultimate outcome of the fat of the lovers.  Clearly, it is not unreasonable to contend that they cover some common ground and address a conventional human dilemma.




At the same time one can identify significant differences in the myths.  "The Dream Of Oenghus" a god, Oenghus, pursues a mortal.  In "Cupid And Psyche" a mortal Psyche, must illustrate her love for the immortal, Cupid.  Oenghus, receives the willing assistance of other immortals in his search for his beloved.  Cupid is also occasionally assisted by other immortals.  However, Cupid and Psyche also endure the wrath of Venus and her endless demands on Psyche.  In their relationship they must labor	 against malevolent gods.

In the "Dream Of Oenghus"  Caer, the mortal object of Oenghus' passion, is remarkably free of the influence of the gods.  Oenghus must seek her, he must identify her, and he cannot simply buy her.  In the tale of "Cupid and Psyche" it is psyche who must demonstrate her love and endure humiliation and hard labor to win back her ideal and supernatural lover, Cupid.

Thus, these myths share a common theme, courtship and the pursuit of love:  Specifically, the pursuit of divine or ideal love.  However, their representations of this vary significantly.  Nevertheless, these variations serve to reveal a great deal about the assumptions underlying these myths.  Assumptions that relate to the nature of the gods, human nature, and the experience of love.  The remainder of this discussion will focus on these slight but specific variations in an effort to enlighten the assumptions  underlying  offer significant information about the perceptions of love in Celtic and Roman culture.


It would be a serious understatement to suggest that the course of love runs smoother  for Oenghus than it does for Psyche.  Following his vision Oenghus is overwhelmed by melancholy, a depression so pervasive that he falls into a generalized malaise.

However, when the root of his affliction is diagnosed by Finghin, "you have fallen in love in absence," the assistance of Boann is immediately enlisted.  When this is of no use both Daghdhae and Bodhbh willingly join the search.  The gods are united in their assistance to Oenghus.  

On the other hand, the gods are remarkably incapable of influencing mortal behavior.  When the girl is identified the gods cannot simply seize her.  Oenghus is taken to identify her, which he does, and Bodhbh explains, "Even if you do recognize her, I have no power to give her, and you may only see her."   

To actually obtain the girl they must enter into a complex bargaing process.  First the Daghdhae travels to Ailill and Medhbh and requests that they give the girl to his son.  They explain that they cannot, thus the  Daghdhae's men are forced to attack the fairy hill and capture Ehal Anbhuail, the girl's father, they demand that he hand the girl over.  He refuses.  They then threaten him with death, he confesses he cannot for she has magical powers.

Yearly she alternates between human form and animal form.  If Oenghus truly wants her he must follow certain procedures.  Having identified her in human form he must do the same when she is in the shape of a swan.  (which he does.) Then he must request her companionship on her terms.  Finally, when he promises, "I pledge your protection," the two are united.   

Oenghus is enthralled with the mortal, Caer.  In fact, their separation makes him ill.  Nonetheless, the lovers can only be together if Oenghus satisfies Caer's condition:  He must prove his love to her.  He must illustrate that he recognizes her human and animal  essence.  He must guarantee her freedom, and he must pledge himself to her protection before she will come to him.

This tale captures the distinct nature of the Celtic gods.  According to Noma Chadwick the "Irish gods" do not emerge as gods in the usual meaning of the term.  They are neither worshipped nor sacrificed to.  They are supernatural beings with magical powers...   If such a name is not appropriate, they might be described as mundane or pedestrian gods.







In this tale it is the male, and the immortal that must earn his beloved.  Caers appear indifferent to the struggle being waged for her affections.  He must prove that Caer is the woman of his dreams and that he knows her in any guise.  Also he must accept her terms and guarantee her safety before she will commit herself to him, and satisfy his longing.

In essence, it Oenghus that yearns for Caer.  It is the god who must pursue, woo and win the hand of Caer, the mortal woman (although she possesses magical powers).  In Apuleius tale it is the mortal, the female, Psyche, who must toil to win her beloved Cupid.  In Celtic myths the gods crave the love of mortals while in the classical myths it is the mortals who crave the love of the gods.  Moreover, in "The Dream Of Oenghus" the gods must satisfy mortal conditions to win their true love.  In the tale of "Cupid and Psyche" it is Psyche, the mortal, who must satisfy the conditions of fate amoung the gods.

When Psyche's search for Cupid proves fruitless and her plea for sympathy and relief  have been completely repulsed she decides to throw herself on Venus's mercy and to satisfy her rage with meekness.  Venus challenges Psyche to a series of tasks, that lead up to her making a trip to Hades, the underworld. Through favorable and periodically divine intervention Psyche is able to complete all these tasks although a second act of faithlessness condemns her to exhaustion.

However, at this point Cupid has recovered from his wound, and is wasting away from loneliness for Psyche, he takes leave from his chamber, and finds Psyche.  A touch of one of his arrows awakens Psyche and he pledges to fulfill their relationship.  Cupid obtains Jupiter's blessing and the two are wed.  Eventually, their union produces a daughter who comes to be named Pleasure.

In certain senses, both of these myths deal with the reunion of lovers.  Cupid and Psyche are united only to be separated by her faithlessness.  Oenghus has already seen Caer in a vision, and realized his infatuation with her, when he sets out to find her in the world.  Therefore, they are, in essence, both tales are of how to obtain love.

In the Celtic tale one obtains love by proving its divine inspiration-by recognizing the beloved in both human and animal form-and by meeting her demands for freedom and protection.  Oenghus gathers all of his resources to convince Caer of his love.  He solicits the help of his father and many other people along the way.  They use their influence, and negotiating skills to aid Oenghus in his pursuit.  In fact, in stark contrast to the Roman Myth, the gods are united in their support for Oenghus's quest.  There is none of the indifference's and deceit of the classical gods.

Ultimately though, Oenghus's divine resources only present him with the opportunity to plead Caer for her love.  His divine powers only set the stage.  He wins the 
his true love through his altogether human expression of love.  His use of divine power stands as evidence of his desire and just how intense it was.  It does not, however, insure his success in his quest for Caer's affection.

	On the otherhand, Psyche's attempts to return to Cupid are carried out with the direct and aggresive hostility of Venus.  Repeatedly, Venus demands that Psyche undertakes tasks that appear humanly impossible to complete.  However, in each instances natural forces abide with Psyche and assist her.  When she must sort grain, the ants aid her; when she must obtain the golden fleece, she is advised by a reed; and, finally, her trip to Hades is facilitated by a sympathetic tower.

	In this sense true love is identified with nature in both myths.  In "The Dream Of Oenghus," proof of his true love is provided by his ability to separate Caer from a crowd of other swans.  In "cupid and Psyche," Psyche only survives the arduous tasks assigned by Venus because she has the support of the sympathetic natural realm. A behavior that is in sympathy with, and supported by the natural order.

	Also, in both myths trust is seen as a fundamental element of natural love.  It is lack of the faith that leads Psyche to illuminate Cupid and ultimately forces them apart.  On the other hand, it is Oenghus's faith in his love and Caer's integrity, and trust, that leads him to promise Caer freedom and protection; the very conditions that win her love.  Ultimately, it is Psyche's dedication to her search for Cupid, an expression of trust, that leads to the reunion of the two lovers.

	Thus, in general terms' one can identify certain similarities in the two myths' portrayals of love.  In both myths love is aligned with the natural order and predicated on mutual trust and respect.  Moreover, the lovers can become physically sick when they are separated.  Thus, beyond these broad similarities the two myths present remarkably different perceptions of love.

	In the Celtic tale the god of love is captivated of human a human and he must use all his resources to win her affection.  He is assisted in his pursuit by all of the divine family and even all of the mortals they must deal with.  Only, Caer's father, the fairy king, refuses to help and that is because he cannot: His daughter's magical powers is stronger than his.  In this sense, love is, in the Celtic myths, a relatively straightforward  proposal.  A lover, committed to his beloved, and willing to demonstrate that commitment, may encounter obstacles but ultimately, the gods do not interfere with his pursuit and the natural world sympathizes.

	In Roman mythology the course of love does not run as smoothly.  Cupid and Psyche are in love with on another.  Nevertheless, for that very reason, coupled with Psyche's extreme beauty, Venus is resentful of their relationship.  Consequently, her malevolent jealousy is a constant theme in their relationship.  The classical god's war with  one another, and exhibit human emotions in contrast to the united front of the Celtic gods.  Love must triumph over adversity and ill will in "Cupid and Psyche," while Oenghus's love only confront adversity.

	Moreover, in the Celtic tale true love can proceed once the lovers have satisfied one another.  In the classical tale true love can only proceed when it has the blessing of Jupiter himself-who can then restrain the other gods from interfering.

	In general terms a more natural conception of love is presented in the Celtic myth.  Divinely inspired by a vision Oenghus' pursuit of Caer is remarkably prevalent.  While he must verify the divine inspiration for his love by identifying Caer on the basis of his dream, he pursues her in a very traditional manner.  He seeks out her father and requests her hand.  After doing so he then seeks her, and charms her with his care and concern as well as devotion for her well-being and needs.

	On the other hand Cupid and Psyche must battle divine anger and vengeance, a trip to Hades , and numerous other unnatural interventions in the world in pursuit of their relationship.  Despite its naturalness love must satisfy the needs and desires of the gods before it may progress.  These gods act more like a dysfunctional family than divinity-Love, must satisfy the natural order and confront the cruel hand of fate in the classical myth.  The only natural element of Psyche and Cupid's love is that their final union produces Pleasure.




The Celtic myth, "The Dream of Oenghus," relates the tale of Oenghus the Celtic god of love and his long search for true love.  Oenghus is the son of Boann and Daghdhae.  Boann the white cow goddess, and Daghdhae the father of all gods, the "good god."  

In a dream Oenghus sees "the loveliest figure in Ireland..."   His memory of this vision makes him ill with loneliness and he begins to waste away.  With the help of his mother, and another of his fathers' sons, Bodhbh, he begins his search for the girl he dreamt of.  When, after years, he successfully completes his search the lovers' travels to Bruigh Mac, his home. 

Chronologically and geographically distant, Apuleius second century record of the original Greek myth of Cupid and Psyche also relates a story of amorous pursuit.  In Apuleius account Psyche is the most beautiful of all mortals.  "The fame of her surpassing beauty spread over the earth...åand menç would even say that Venus herself could not equal this mortal."   Out of jealousy, Venus commands Cupid to make Psyche fall in love with "the vilest and most despicable creature in the whole world."   However,  dispatched on his errand Cupid is astonished by her beauty and "as if he had shot one of his arrows into his own heart" falls completely in love with her.   






Cupid dumbfounded by the love he suddenly feels carries Psyche off.  Although Psyche is never able to gaze on Cupid she is confident of the love her unseen paramour expresses in the dark each night.  Eventually, prompted by her unbelieving and somewhat envious sisters she lights a lamp and discovers that her lover is Cupid.  Unfortunately, Cupid hurt by both the oil sputtering from the lamp and her faithlessness fees.  Psyche deeply grieved by her lack of faith and  subsequent loss of love pledges to search for Cupid forever.  "I can spend the rest of my life searching for him.  If he has no more love left for me, at least I can show him how much I love him."   Eventually after many trials and tribulations, largely at the inspiration of the still jealous Venus, she is reunited with Cupid and comes to live the live of the immortals.

These myths share a common fundamental theme.  In both instances, the myths document a  love between a mortal and a god.  Moreover, both of the courtship's involve long periods of separation, difficult and desperate journeys in pursuit of the beloved, and deep ongoing uncertainty as to the ultimate outcome of the fat of the lovers.  Clearly, it is not unreasonable to contend that they cover some common ground and address a conventional human dilemma.




At the same time one can identify significant differences in the myths.  "The Dream Of Oenghus" a god, Oenghus, pursues a mortal.  In "Cupid And Psyche" a mortal Psyche, must illustrate her love for the immortal, Cupid.  Oenghus, receives the willing assistance of other immortals in his search for his beloved.  Cupid is also occasionally assisted by other immortals.  However, Cupid and Psyche also endure the wrath of Venus and her endless demands on Psyche.  In their relationship they must labor	 against malevolent gods.

In the "Dream Of Oenghus"  Caer, the mortal object of Oenghus' passion, is remarkably free of the influence of the gods.  Oenghus must seek her, he must identify her, and he cannot simply buy her.  In the tale of "Cupid and Psyche" it is psyche who must demonstrate her love and endure humiliation and hard labor to win back her ideal and supernatural lover, Cupid.

Thus, these myths share a common theme, courtship and the pursuit of love:  Specifically, the pursuit of divine or ideal love.  However, their representations of this vary significantly.  Nevertheless, these variations serve to reveal a great deal about the assumptions underlying these myths.  Assumptions that relate to the nature of the gods, human nature, and the experience of love.  The remainder of this discussion will focus on these slight but specific variations in an effort to enlighten the assumptions  underlying  offer significant information about the perceptions of love in Celtic and Roman culture.


It would be a serious understatement to suggest that the course of love runs smoother  for Oenghus than it does for Psyche.  Following his vision Oenghus is overwhelmed by melancholy, a depression so pervasive that he falls into a generalized malaise.

However, when the root of his affliction is diagnosed by Finghin, "you have fallen in love in absence," the assistance of Boann is immediately enlisted.  When this is of no use both Daghdhae and Bodhbh willingly join the search.  The gods are united in their assistance to Oenghus.  

On the other hand, the gods are remarkably incapable of influencing mortal behavior.  When the girl is identified the gods cannot simply seize her.  Oenghus is taken to identify her, which he does, and Bodhbh explains, "Even if you do recognize her, I have no power to give her, and you may only see her."   

To actually obtain the girl they must enter into a complex bargaing process.  First the Daghdhae travels to Ailill and Medhbh and requests that they give the girl to his son.  They explain that they cannot, thus the  Daghdhae's men are forced to attack the fairy hill and capture Ehal Anbhuail, the girl's father, they demand that he hand the girl over.  He refuses.  They then threaten him with death, he confesses he cannot for she has magical powers.

Yearly she alternates between human form and animal form.  If Oenghus truly wants her he must follow certain procedures.  Having identified her in human form he must do the same when she is in the shape of a swan.  (which he does.) Then he must request her companionship on her terms.  Finally, when he promises, "I pledge your protection," the two are united.   

Oenghus is enthralled with the mortal, Caer.  In fact, their separation makes him ill.  Nonetheless, the lovers can only be together if Oenghus satisfies Caer's condition:  He must prove his love to her.  He must illustrate that he recognizes her human and animal  essence.  He must guarantee her freedom, and he must pledge himself to her protection before she will come to him.

This tale captures the distinct nature of the Celtic gods.  According to Noma Chadwick the "Irish gods" do not emerge as gods in the usual meaning of the term.  They are neither worshipped nor sacrificed to.  They are supernatural beings with magical powers...   If such a name is not appropriate, they might be described as mundane or pedestrian gods.







In this tale it is the male, and the immortal that must earn his beloved.  Caers appear indifferent to the struggle being waged for her affections.  He must prove that Caer is the woman of his dreams and that he knows her in any guise.  Also he must accept her terms and guarantee her safety before she will commit herself to him, and satisfy his longing.

In essence, it Oenghus that yearns for Caer.  It is the god who must pursue, woo and win the hand of Caer, the mortal woman (although she possesses magical powers).  In Apuleius tale it is the mortal, the female, Psyche, who must toil to win her beloved Cupid.  In Celtic myths the gods crave the love of mortals while in the classical myths it is the mortals who crave the love of the gods.  Moreover, in "The Dream Of Oenghus" the gods must satisfy mortal conditions to win their true love.  In the tale of "Cupid and Psyche" it is Psyche, the mortal, who must satisfy the conditions of fate amoung the gods.

When Psyche's search for Cupid proves fruitless and her plea for sympathy and relief  have been completely repulsed she decides to throw herself on Venus's mercy and to satisfy her rage with meekness.  Venus challenges Psyche to a series of tasks, that lead up to her making a trip to Hades, the underworld. Through favorable and periodically divine intervention Psyche is able to complete all these tasks although a second act of faithlessness condemns her to exhaustion.

However, at this point Cupid has recovered from his wound, and is wasting away from loneliness for Psyche, he takes leave from his chamber, and finds Psyche.  A touch of one of his arrows awakens Psyche and he pledges to fulfill their relationship.  Cupid obtains Jupiter's blessing and the two are wed.  Eventually, their union produces a daughter who comes to be named Pleasure.

In certain senses, both of these myths deal with the reunion of lovers.  Cupid and Psyche are united only to be separated by her faithlessness.  Oenghus has already seen Caer in a vision, and realized his infatuation with her, when he sets out to find her in the world.  Therefore, they are, in essence, both tales are of how to obtain love.

In the Celtic tale one obtains love by proving its divine inspiration-by recognizing the beloved in both human and animal form-and by meeting her demands for freedom and protection.  Oenghus gathers all of his resources to convince Caer of his love.  He solicits the help of his father and many other people along the way.  They use their influence, and negotiating skills to aid Oenghus in his pursuit.  In fact, in stark contrast to the Roman Myth, the gods are united in their support for Oenghus's quest.  There is none of the indifference's and deceit of the classical gods.

Ultimately though, Oenghus's divine resources only present him with the opportunity to plead Caer for her love.  His divine powers only set the stage.  He wins the 
his true love through his altogether human expression of love.  His use of divine power stands as evidence of his desire and just how intense it was.  It does not, however, insure his success in his quest for Caer's affection.

	On the otherhand, Psyche's attempts to return to Cupid are carried out with the direct and aggresive hostility of Venus.  Repeatedly, Venus demands that Psyche undertakes tasks that appear humanly impossible to complete.  However, in each instances natural forces abide with Psyche and assist her.  When she must sort grain, the ants aid her; when she must obtain the golden fleece, she is advised by a reed; and, finally, her trip to Hades is facilitated by a sympathetic tower.

	In this sense true love is identified with nature in both myths.  In "The Dream Of Oenghus," proof of his true love is provided by his ability to separate Caer from a crowd of other swans.  In "cupid and Psyche," Psyche only survives the arduous tasks assigned by Venus because she has the support of the sympathetic natural realm. A behavior that is in sympathy with, and supported by the natural order.

	Also, in both myths trust is seen as a fundamental element of natural love.  It is lack of the faith that leads Psyche to illuminate Cupid and ultimately forces them apart.  On the other hand, it is Oenghus's faith in his love and Caer's integrity, and trust, that leads him to promise Caer freedom and protection; the very conditions that win her love.  Ultimately, it is Psyche's dedication to her search for Cupid, an expression of trust, that leads to the reunion of the two lovers.

	Thus, in general terms' one can identify certain similarities in the two myths' portrayals of love.  In both myths love is aligned with the natural order and predicated on mutual trust and respect.  Moreover, the lovers can become physically sick when they are separated.  Thus, beyond these broad similarities the two myths present remarkably different perceptions of love.

	In the Celtic tale the god of love is captivated of human a human and he must use all his resources to win her affection.  He is assisted in his pursuit by all of the divine family and even all of the mortals they must deal with.  Only, Caer's father, the fairy king, refuses to help and that is because he cannot: His daughter's magical powers is stronger than his.  In this sense, love is, in the Celtic myths, a relatively straightforward  proposal.  A lover, committed to his beloved, and willing to demonstrate that commitment, may encounter obstacles but ultimately, the gods do not interfere with his pursuit and the natural world sympathizes.

	In Roman mythology the course of love does not run as smoothly.  Cupid and Psyche are in love with on another.  Nevertheless, for that very reason, coupled with Psyche's extreme beauty, Venus is resentful of their relationship.  Consequently, her malevolent jealousy is a constant theme in their relationship.  The classical god's war with  one another, and exhibit human emotions in contrast to the united front of the Celtic gods.  Love must triumph over adversity and ill will in "Cupid and Psyche," while Oenghus's love only confront adversity.

	Moreover, in the Celtic tale true love can proceed once the lovers have satisfied one another.  In the classical tale true love can only proceed when it has the blessing of Jupiter himself-who can then restrain the other gods from interfering.

	In general terms a more natural conception of love is presented in the Celtic myth.  Divinely inspired by a vision Oenghus' pursuit of Caer is remarkably prevalent.  While he must verify the divine inspiration for his love by identifying Caer on the basis of his dream, he pursues her in a very traditional manner.  He seeks out her father and requests her hand.  After doing so he then seeks her, and charms her with his care and concern as well as devotion for her well-being and needs.

	On the other hand Cupid and Psyche must battle divine anger and vengeance, a trip to Hades , and numerous other unnatural interventions in the world in pursuit of their relationship.  Despite its naturalness love must satisfy the needs and desires of the gods before it may progress.  These gods act more like a dysfunctional family than divinity-Love, must satisfy the natural order and confront the cruel hand of fate in the classical myth.  The only natural element of Psyche and Cupid's love is that their final union produces Pleasure.


           

The Celtic myth, "The Dream of Oenghus," relates the tale of Oenghus the Celtic god of love and his long search for true love.  Oenghus is the son of Boann and Daghdhae.  Boann the white cow goddess, and Daghdhae the father of all gods, the "good god."  

In a dream Oenghus sees "the loveliest figure in Ireland..."   His memory of this vision makes him ill with loneliness and he begins to waste away.  With the help of his mother, and another of his fathers' sons, Bodhbh, he begins his search for the girl he dreamt of.  When, after years, he successfully completes his search the lovers' travels to Bruigh Mac, his home. 

Chronologically and geographically distant, Apuleius second century record of the original Greek myth of Cupid and Psyche also relates a story of amorous pursuit.  In Apuleius account Psyche is the most beautiful of all mortals.  "The fame of her surpassing beauty spread over the earth...åand menç would even say that Venus herself could not equal this mortal."   Out of jealousy, Venus commands Cupid to make Psyche fall in love with "the vilest and most despicable creature in the whole world."   However,  dispatched on his errand Cupid is astonished by her beauty and "as if he had shot one of his arrows into his own heart" falls completely in love with her.   



The Celtic myth, "The Dream of Oenghus," relates the tale of Oenghus the Celtic god of love and his long search for true love.  Oenghus is the son of Boann and Daghdhae.  Boann the white cow goddess, and Daghdhae the father of all gods, the "good god."  

In a dream Oenghus sees "the loveliest figure in Ireland..."   His memory of this vision makes him ill with loneliness and he begins to waste away.  With the help of his mother, and another of his fathers' sons, Bodhbh, he begins his search for the girl he dreamt of.  When, after years, he succes


 
"My Eyes Have Seen The Glory"



1st-My eyes shall see the glory of the firing
                                        of the fools;
They are tramping on our county, they are
                                        breaking all the rules.
We will march into their office and remove
                                        the Sheriff's men;
then truth shall go marching once again.
	-Glory, Glory, alleluia, the law
                          should have all new rules.
	We will draw them up short and haul
                                           them in to court,
and they won't tramp on our county anymore!

2nd-We have seen their flashlights a' circling
                                            in the parks;
are they looking for a clue , are they looking
                                            for their marks?
Well, they couldn't find a clue if it bit
                                            them on the leg,
and the truth just leaves them in the dark.
	-Glory, Glory, alleluia, they are out
                                             to stick it to you.
We will grab them by the pants and fill
                                             them full of ants,
and they won't go out patrolling anymore!

3rd-Maybe they think they come from Russia
                             far away across the sea,
they want to take our freedoms away from 
                                              you and me.
If they think that they can do that, then they
                             are way out of their tree;
because we will go marching 'till we're free.
	-Glory, Glory, alleluia, we are 'o so
                                               tired of you.
We have become enraged with the way you
                                             rant and rave,
and we just won't take it anymore!!

 
Myth or Reality, Today's Perception on Monsters

	Monsters, which are seemingly just myth and fantasy, do have some truths to their legend. In fact, some creatures may have actually existed and still do today, even though they should not be percieved as monsters.
	What if the stories of a giant "ape-like" creature that have circulated over the globe for centuries were true? There have been numerous sightings and first-hand accounts of this creature everywhere in the world, from the United States to the Himalayas. One of the more famous sightings took place at Bluff Creek in 1967. Roger Patterson and a friend were horse back riding when they saw a huge hair covered creature. It began to run away when it noticed the two men, but not before Roger shot some film of the creature. The creature that was filmed was a female, while you cannot see in this view, breasts are clearly visable in other frames of the film. Scientists who have studied the film have said that the estimated stride of the creature is larger than that of a man. They also say it would have been very difficult for a man to simulate this larger stride. Footprints were the same type as typically found at a Bigfoot sighting. A more recent sighting of Bigfoot took place last year on July 11, in the Wild Creek area in the foothills of Snoqualmie National Forest.The picture was obtained from the photographer bt Cliff Crook, the director of Bigfoot Central. The cameraman was out on a hike when he heard splashing coming from the stream below him. He then found himself face to face with the creature. Usually after most sightings, footprints of the usually large creatures can be found. Footprints have been found everywhere including at these two mentioned sightings. The length of the prints has varied between 1' to 2.5' indicating from scientific study that Bigfoot could be as tall as nine feet. Also the deep inprint that is left indicates that the creature could weigh as much as 600 pounds. Researchers at Ohio State University hope to come within a hair of verifying the existence of Bigfoot. Scientists are using a new DNA matching process to determine whether there may be more to the Sasquatch legend than some blurry film footage and a few giant footprints. The evidence consists of two tufts of hair, each with about a dozen individual strands, recovered in Washington State after a recent sighting. "This is the first time that I'm aware of that anybody will be able to do any DNA extractions on Bigfoot," said Frank Poirier, chairman of Anthropology. "I don't expect anything to happen because I'm pretty sceptical about this. But good science requires some wild goose chases from time to time." The hair that is being tested was from creatures reportedly observed at a distance of about 100 feet in a dence, dark forest. If the Washington hair samples turn out to be from an unknown primate, it will be compared with hair samples reputed to be from the ancient Chinese "wildman", a human-like primate that was investigated in Asia. There is much evidence that to prove that a Sasquatch could be an actual species of ape, maybe even a decendant of Human beings themselves.
	The Loch Ness Monster is one of the most compelling myths in human lore, and for good reason because some of the scientific fact that lay behind it is amazing. The vast majority of the Earth's oceans and seas are unexplored. Is it really hard to believe that there are creatures that live so far down or in such remote areas, that they are rarely, if ever, seen by humans. The Giant Squid was thought of as a creature of myth and legend until recently, when scientists found corpses of such a creature. Many of these "sea serpents" descriptions are similar to creatures that are thought to be extinct. The Coelacanth was thought to be extinct for 70 million years until it was discovered alive and well in 1938.Loch Ness is located in the North of Scotland and is one of a series of interlinked lochs which run along the Great Glen. The Great Glen is a distinctive incision which runs across the country and represents a large geological fault zone. For many years it has been supposed that there is a large dinosaur-like "monster" resident in Loch Ness. The evidence for it's existence are a series of sightings of a Plesiosaur-like dinosaur throughout the last 100 years. The case has been occasionally been supported by indistinct photographic evidence. However, several scientific studies have been conducted, including thorough sonar surveys of the Loch, and these have not revealed any presence of such a "monster". Many people believe that the size (21 square miles) and great depth of the Loch (almost 800 feet), together with potential underwater caves, gives the monster many places to hide. Regardless of the truth, suggestion of the monster's existence makes Loch Ness one of Scotland's top tourist attractions. One of the more famous sightings of the monster occured on July 22, 1933. Mr. and Mrs. George Spicer of London were driving along the Loch Ness Lakeshore Road returning from a holiday in Northern Scotland when their car nearly struck a huge, black long-necked creature. The "prehistoric animal," as Mr. Spicer described it, shambled across the road, slithered through the underbrush, and splashed into the murky Loch. Had the Spicers experienced a rare land encounter with the Loch Ness Monster? To date there have been over 3000 recorded sightings of the celebrity monster, according to cryptozoologist Roy P. Mackal, author of "The Monsters of Loch Ness". This figure may be on the high side, but whatever the figure is, Nessie is certainly one of the most-sighted monsters in the world. Only a month before the Spicer sighting a less-talked about sighting had been reported by James MacIntosh. He was travelling home to Inverness after a fishing trip with his son, also named James. Young James had first sighted the unidentified object, telling his father, "Dad, that's not a boat." "I was concentrating on my driving but I looked over the Loch and I suddenly saw this brown thing with a neck like a giraffe break the surface. It was was an eerie experience. It was swimming quite swiftly at the time," recounted the elder MacIntosh. While the world first learned of a Loch Ness Monster in July, 1933, there had been numerous earlier sightings of a large unidentified creature in the Loch, dating back to St. Columba's oft-mentioned encounter with an unknown creature in the River Ness in 565 A.D. Now with all the popularity of Nessie in the 30's there have been quite a few hoaxes. One insodent involved a couple of teenagers building a raft which looked like Nessie and taking a picture. The picture made them famous but was exposed as a hoax shortly after. One theory on the Loch Ness Monster still holds true today. The theory is that Nessie is a Plesiosaur, a dinosaur which was thought to be extinct along with all the other Dinosaurs. Not only could there be on Monster, but it would make more sense to say that there is a community of Plesiosaurs living in the Loch. Plesiosaurs were air breathing amphibians, which would explain why there have been so many sightings of a sea creature, even on land. Because of numerous sightings, and some good scienific theory, Nessie has built a reputation for being a possible reality.
	Sharks, viewed as monsters by most, are just part of the ecosystem and deserve to be treated as any other predator, not as monsters. In the movie "Jaws", a shark is seen terrorizing a small community of people in the heat of Summer. The shark in this movie is a Great White, which nowadays is the largest and most feared shark at up to 15 feet long. However the movie does exaggerate quite a bit, and the shark is made to be 22 feet long, a huge exaggeration by any means. This movie made sharks out to be massive, unthinking maneaters, which in real life is not true. Most people, even now have that same attitude about sharks, which is completey ignorant. Personally, after I saw the movie, I was afraid of the swimming pool, but as I was educated about the subject, I lost my fear completely. A trip to Sea Worldand the Florida Keys, where I swam with sharks proved that I was over that. Most shark attacks happen for some reason, whether it be because the shark confused the surfboard for the underside of a seal, or the bright colours of the man's swimsuit peaked the sharks curiosity. Besides, shark attacks are so few and far between that you are more likely to die from a bee sting than a bite. Very few people actually know what goes on when a shark feeds. Just imagine........a young Californian sea lion splashes about on the surface of the Pacific Ocean but ten metres from it's safehold, a massive rookery of the sea lions all basking on the rockey shores of Northern California. Luckily, the unexperienced sea lion is among a small "raft" of older sea lions, a tactic used by sea lions to ward off predators that go after sole, lone individuals.........and then the young pup strays a little far from the frolicking adults, out into the open waters. The pup looks around, confused as to  where everyone has gone. He at once spots the raft, and starts a feeble attempt towards them. Splashing about like a puppy dog walks, the young sea lion inches towards the group of adults, nearly there. Suddenly from behind the pup, a wall of water rises up in the sinister outline of a large shark , it's caudal fin swishing violently from side to side. The pup keeps swimming, but it is no match for the twelve foot long Great White Shark closing in from behind. The shark takes the pup quickly and quietly, closing it's massive jaws and jerking it's head repeatedly. This feeding described was a more passive attack, by the Great White's standards. Usually the first encounter is a massive blow from the snout of the shark or a small bite to get a feel for it's prey. That is also why 90% of shark attack victims survive, humans do not taste as good as a fatty seal and can usually escape after the enitial contact. Even though sharks have the capacity to behave like monsters, they act on instinct alone and do not hunt humans beings purposely.
	Monsters, whether they be fictional or not, all have some truth in them. Whether they be real or not all depends in how you see them.
 


 
									JR Audije
									English 2nd Period


	In "The Odyssey", Athene helped Odysseus numerous ways physically and 

mentally by aiding him, Telemachus, and Penelope. 
	
	In book I, Athene urged Telemachus to give up boyhood, act like a man, present 

his case to search for his father to the assembly, and take stronger steps to search for his 

father. After Telemachus presented his case to the assembly and no action was taken on 

his request for a ship to enable him to search for his father, Telemachus prayed to Athene 

for help. In response to his prayer, Athene appeared as Mentor and borrowed a ship and 

crew for Telemachus. Athene also helped Telemachus by appearing to him in a dream, 

urging him to return to Ithaca and warning him about the ambush of the suitors.
	
	Athene helped Penelope numerous way also. Athene helped her by comforting her 

so she would not go into a nervous break down over all her stress, the suitors and 

Odysseus returning or not. Athene gave Penelope hope of Odysseus returning. Athene 

even made Penelope appear more beautiful than she really was, because Penelope was 

actually really ragged. Athene also helped Penelope by giving her a dream of gulls, 

representing the suitors, and an eagle, representing Odysseus, killing the gulls.

	Athene helped Odysseus numerous ways as well. She helped by persuading the 

gods to free Odysseus from Calypso. Athene even helped Odysseus by telling Naussicaa 

to do her laundry at the beach and telling her to help the man she meets.

So when Odysseus came to shore he was ugly and  he scared the other women on the 

beach away, except Nausicaa. Nausicaa washed Odysseus up, gave him clothes, and told 

him how to act when they return to her place. As they were going to Naussicaa's place 

Athene made Odysseus invisible so the guards would not see him and Athene made 

Odysseus look better by making him look taller, stronger, and giving him more hair on 

his head. Athene also helped Odysseus by counseling him on how to handle the suitors, 

and she disguises him as an old begger so no one will recognize him immediatly. Athene 

later restores Odysseus to his own form when he reveals himself to his son and together 

after twenty years they plan a vengeance on Penelopes wooers. As Odysseus was fighting 

the suitors, Athene made Odysseus appear to look stronger to strike fear in the suitors. 

Athene also made the Odysseus' enemies miss with their attacks and Athene gave 

Odysseus precise aim. 

	Athene last and final help was when she interrupted the relatives of the suitors 

from attacking in revenge of the suitors deaths. Athene spoke stating ,"men of Ithaca, 

cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at once without further bloodshed." Then 

Zeus sent a lighting bolt that struck in front of Athene, so Athene said to Odysseus, 

"Odysseus, noble son of Laertes, stop this battle, or Zeus will be angry with you." Then 

Odysseus gladly agreed, and in the voice and form of Mentor she made a covenant of 

peace between the two parties.
	 



 
Structural Levels of The Iliad


	Wars are often very complex in nature and are fought for many diverse
reasons.  The school boy may fight in order to get money for college, the patriot may fight to bring life, liberty and justice to some poor soul, and a coward may fight because he was drafted by force.  In the Iliad, powerful gods, great nations, and heroic people all fight for many different reasons.  This wide variety of fighting results in unique situations, problems, and structural levels to the war.  These structural levels are of special interest, because they help define the consequences and outcomes of the war.  The universal war of the gods, social war of the Greeks and Trojans, and the private war of Achilles' honor are structural levels of the Trojan war.  These structural levels seem to influence and shape each other in many distinct ways.
	The universal war between the gods over the apple of discord consequently lead to the social war between the Greeks and the Trojans. For example, Aphrodite promised Paris that he could have the most beautiful woman in the world if he gave the apple of discord to her.  He did so, and decided to go and get his reward.  Unfortunately, the most beautiful women in the world, Helen, was the wife of the Greek King Menelaus.  The abduction of Helen by Paris lead to the Trojan war.  The promise made by Aphrodite to Paris in order to get the apple of discord resulted in the abduction of Helen and the start of the Trojan war.  Therefore, Aphrodite, in the universal war, set the stage for the social war of the Greeks and Trojans. Another time the gods influenced the social war was when the Greeks and Trojans had a one on one battle to decide the outcome of the war.  The Greeks chose King Menelaus and the Trojans chose Paris.  Menelaus and Paris fought, but when Paris was about to be killed he was whisked off by Aphrodite.  Both sides agreed that the Greeks had won.  Zeus decided to start the war again, and he sent Athena to trick Pandaros to shoot at Menelaus, breaking the truce between the Greeks and Trojans.  This intervention by Zeus lead to another outbreak of war between the Greeks and Trojans.  The universal war of Athena and Hera versus Aphrodite had Zeus so caught up in it that he did not want the social war to end.  A god in the universal war once again created the social war between Troy and Greece. The universal war was the cause of the social war of Greece and Troy.
	The private war of Achilles' honor was an outgrowth of the social war between the Greeks and the Trojans. During the social war, Apollo grew angry at the Greeks for the abuse of his priest, Chryses.  The Greeks had abused Chryses when Agamemnon took Chryses'  daughter, Chryseis,  during the raid of the town of Thebes.  Agamemnon wanted a replacement for Chryseis, so he took Briseis from Achilles.  This deeply wounded the honor of Achilles, and he decided to stop fighting in the social war until his honor was amended.  Achilles was angered by an event that occurred in the social war, thus providing the need for Achilles to reclaim his honor.  The social war was the cause of the private war of Achilles. The opportunity for Achilles to carry out his private war came after the death of his comrade, Patroclus.  Because Achilles would not fight, Patroclus asked him if he could wear his armor.  Patroclus thought that this might make others think he was Achilles, so that the Trojans might be scared and the Greeks might gain courage and confidence.  Achilles consented, and during the ensuing battle Patroclus was killed by Hector.  Achilles now had a way to go out and fight gloriously, in order to avenge Patroclus' death as well as to mend his honor that was so wounded by the ransack of Briseis.  The social war then influenced the outcome of the private war of Achilles. Events that occurred in the social war created and influence the private war of Achilles to reclaim his honor.
	The universal war of the gods was deeply impacted by the private war of Achilles. In some instances, the private war of Achilles fueled the universal war of the gods.  An example of this was when Achilles was killing Trojans left and right in the river Scamandros.  All of the dead Trojans in the water made Scamandros angry, and he chased Achilles with a huge wave.  Athena and Posiedon both saw this, and they called on Hephaistos to burn the river with fire.  This massive conflict between the gods was fueled by the result of Achilles' private war.  Essentially, Achilles' private war was a source of major conflict between the gods. The universal war of the gods was also resolved by some of the effects of Achilles' private war.  The universal war occurred mainly because Hera and Athena felt that Aphrodite should not have received the apple of discord.  This resulted in a symbolic social war that mirrored the war of the gods.  Achilles' effect on the social war, during his private conquest, caused the social war to come to an victorious end for the Greeks.  In a way, the victory of the Greeks was a reward to Hera and Athena, in order to compensate for the fact that Aphrodite had received the coveted apple of discord.  The private war of Achilles swayed the social war to the extent that it effected the resolution of the universal war of the gods. The private war of Achilles motivated the gods to fight and to resolve the universal war.
	All of these examples show the numerous consequences and influences that the structural levels of the Trojan war had on each other and the outcome of the Trojan war.  The universal war of the gods over the apple of discord created the social war between the Greeks and Trojans.  This social war lead to Achilles' war to redeem his honor.  Achilles' private conquest then had a enormous effect in giving the Greeks victory of the social war.  The resolution of the social war eventually lead to peace on Mt. Olympus.  The three structural levels of the Iliad thus created, carried out, and concluded the Trojan war.

 
 
				The Hope of the Phoenix 
	

The word phoenix had symbolize immortality, but for the people in Fahrenheit 451,  their only hope was that the phoenix would be burn out, and be reborn again.  The myth of the phoenix gave optimism to the life of Montag, to the books, and to the world of Fahrenheit 451.  The world was now dying,  and nobody seemed to care, because the government had brainwashed the people.  It was a situation, where not only the brave, but the ones who can think for themselves, who can help break the government's control.

	The life Montag had been a bumpy road.  He thought he had a good life, because he enjoyed his job, and was happy.  Soon Montag discovered that he was not happy at all, and that his life was nothing.  His wife Mildred did not love him at all, and his only friend (that he could remember) Clarisse died in a car crash.   All of sudden, he was not happy, but he did not know why.   He thought maybe because his wife had pulled the fire alarm on him,  but really it was he did not love her at all.  "It's strange, I don't miss her at all(155)" Montag had uncertainly about his marriage, because marriage was suppose to be bonded with love, but with his marriage love was extinct and nowhere to be seen.  His life had died, when his wife Mildred pulled the alarm and had told the firemen that Montag had books.  To Montag, the books was like a sweet piece of candy.  He did not know why he liked them, but he always wanted more.  But when Captain Beatty forced Montag to burn his own house, Montag's soul had died, but then resurrected.  His life which was suppose to be happy was burning right in front of his eyes.  How ironic, that Montag was a fireman himself but like the phoenix, Montag rose from his own ashes.  Montag was now reborn, because he knew his life was wrong, and that the world was wrong.  He did not know why it was wrong, but he knew that he had to do something about it.  He started that by burning Captain Beatty into "a charred wax doll(119)". Montag now had the feeling of hope, not much since he believed he could not do anything.  But Montag had now broken the control of the government and was using the books as his aid.	
How ironic, in the real world, people were always talking about how people wasted paper, which mean wasting trees, but in the world of  Fahrenheit 451, every tree that had been cut down, and was use for books was now being burned away.  To the people of  Fahrenheit 451 "books show the pores the face of life,(83)".  The people were scared and uncertain about books, so society decided to hire firemen to burn the books.  Although most people were scared of  books, the books acted like their own phoenix by giving people some hope.  People like Montag, and Faber.  If it wasn't for the law of prohibiting books, Montag might have never seen the light, and if wasn't for the old woman burning herself with books, Montag might have seen what the books actually meant to people, therefore the books themselves have been reborn.  Ironic, that books were made to be read, but even without reading, Montag was able to see what they meant to society.
	The world of Fahrenheit 451 WAS quite different from the world now.  Instead of people fighting for equal rights, people were already equal.  Equal in everything from physical abilities to mental abilities.  No problem right? But one constant problem was everyone were always trying to commit suicide.  They tried this, because living in the world of Fahrenheit 451 was like hell, because nobody was allowed to think, express their ideas, or to enjoy life.  It seemed the world had no hope in changing, because the government thought that they had destroyed the main force against them, books.  But the people themselves were optimistic about living a better world, and now had formed an alliance to help restore the world. Montag was one of them, he and many others believed a new world with individuality.  All a sudden the phoenix symbolized  the suicides, the books  and hope.  If it wasn't for the suicides, the books, the hope, many people in Fahrenheit 451 would be still living in a nightmare, because they would live in a world, where they would living a life that was controlled by someone.   Like the old saying goes out of the old and in with the new really fitted as the motto for the world of Fahrenheit 451 .  Many people were dying because they just wanted to escape from the world, but some believed that if they die, a new world will be born with individuality, hoping this time the world would not fly too close to the sun.   

	Hope was a word, many people used to help them succeed in something, but for the people in Fahrenheit 451,  the word phoenix was the driving force that would help them fly over the fire.  This was a world, which many people had hoped to live in, because in this world nothing happened, and that was the problem.  Nothing did happen.  Nothing. It was a world where being equal had a price, a  price which many people would never want, their  individuality.  How ironic, although the government tried hard to control the people, it was a myth that came and helped guide the people  through the way.  A myth that came from books, that were now being burned.  It was a  myth which people were not allowed to read about, but at the end, the myth over came all obstacles  and now had brightened the sun for many. This event had helped proved that not everyone could every be equal, because there would always be people who would write the other way.


								Written by: Vivian Chan
 



 
The Riddle of the Sphinx


      
     The study of myths probably began in the 4th century. BC. when Euthemerus explained
them as exaggerated adventures of historical individuals.  The allegorical interpretation of
myths , stemming from the 18th century  study , says that at one time myths were invented 
by wise men to point out a truth, but after a time myths were taken literally. The linguistic
corruption interpretation says that myths could be understood as allegory for events found in
nature. The Jungians school  denoted myths as a mechanism of wish fulfillment. Sir James
Frazer, believed that all myths were originally connected with the idea of fertility in nature,
with birth, death, and resurrection of vegetation as a constantly recurring motif. Though the
modern interpretation of myths is not general but a specific explanation for myths of a single
people. The theological interpretation states that myths are foreshadowings of facts of the
Scripture or corruptions of them. This view, which is not contemporarily popular, is
surprisingly enlightening when attention is paid to the meaning of names of characters and
places in relation to Biblical stories. Even recent fairy tales which fall into the category of
myth, often reveal through metaphor more truth in scripture than one would anticipate.

         The most relevant and necessary topic for the understanding of the imagery and
symbolism of myth is found in the framework of the celestial zodiac. The pictures found
today in the zodiac were not developed by the Greeks, but were in place perhaps as early as
4000 B.C. predating even the civilizations of Sumaria. The pictures were not arranged in
haphazard order to aid in the tracking of the star movements but with order and purpose of
depicting an epic narrative. This understanding of the zodiac reveals an intelligence and
scientific understanding that was corrupted through time . The symbolism which remains can
be analyzed to reveal the basic truth behind it.   

       The story of the sphinx is an excellent example of the zodiac / myth connection. The
sphinx a composite creature with the head of a woman or man and the body of a lion was
associated with the guarding of sacred sites of antiquity. It represented the whole of the
narrative of the zodiac, with the head of a woman, Virgo the beginning of the celestial cycle
and the body of a lion, Leo,the end of the cycle. In fact, the actual design for what  scripture
calls a cherub is in actuality,a sphinx. The angels were beings whose sole purpose was to
reflect the will and the glory of the God who created them. They were depicted symbolically
as composite creatures whose parts reflected the zodiacal narrative. The Greek myth
Oedipus Rex contains symbols of relevance to corrupted truth.  When Oedipus encountered
the Greek sphinx, he was asked a riddle., "What speaks with one voice, yet in the morning
walks on four legs, walks at noon on two legs and in the evening walks on three legs?" 
Oedipus was the only man to answer correctly. The answer was "man". Upon hearing her
riddle solved the sphinx screamed in rage, threw herself to the rocks below her lofty perch
and died.

    Such a simple answer to this enigmatic question leaves one to ponder its significance.What
more can be gleaned from the content of the story? The sphinx as it has been stated was
actually a symbolic depiction of an angel. This angel was not, however, anything like the
dutiful messengers of God described in scripture but a horrible monster bent on the destruction of
any man it came in contact with. The biblical basis for such a creature is found in Ezekial 28.
The "king of Tyre" or "King of the rock" as he is symbolically addressed, was the greatest of
all angels. In fact so great was his splendor that he believed himself  as great as his creator.   



 

Theseus Athens great hero


	At birth Theseus  an unknown father. His mother , Aethra , was friendly with both Poseidon and Aegeus (Hunt 3-6). Before Theseus was born Aegeus said to Aethra ." If we are to have a son , when he is grown have him take my sword and sandals from under this boulder to me ," then he was off to Athens. Theseus was born in a small town called Troezen and grew up there, in a normal way. 	
	When Theseus was old enough Aethra  took Theseus to the boulder where the sandals and sword were and told him what Aegeus had said. Theseus lifted the giant boulder with ease and immediately wanted to go to Athens. He insisted  on going by land even though it is much more dangerous  for there are thieves and he did not want to heed his mother's warnings. So he was off to Athens on foot to meet his father.
	On the journey Theseus met many thieves and out whited every one of them from asking to see there nice weapons and using them agents the thieves to seeing what they were trying to do to him and using that to hurt or usually kill them. Either way Theseus showed courage and wisdom in his quick thinking that would make him a great hero that would be remembered for many years to come.
	The first day in Athens Theseus started looking for Aegeus' castle  but what he did not know was that  Aegeus was ,at the time, under the power of a sorcerer by the name of Medea.  She could see the power in him from afar and saw that he would take her power so she told Aegeus to kill him. At this time either Aegeus nor Theseus knew  that  they were related. Media told Aegeus to invite Theseus to a party or ball coming in the near feature and to poison his drink. Aegeus poisoned his drink and gave it to Theseus. Just before Theseus drank the wine Aegeus dashed the glass to the ground for he had just recognized his sword. 
	Aegeus and Theseus became good friends and lived together for a time. One day Theseus saw ships with black sails coming and heard that there were taking 20 people to the labyrinth where they would be killed by a monster called the Minitor. Theseus had to stop this annual occurrence and went on the boat and promised if he lived to change the sails from black to white to tell Aegeus that Theseus was alive. 
	Theseus went on the ship to the labyrinth in Crete and  met Ariadne  , who he fell in love with immediately, who gave him a ball of silk for which to get out of the maze. Theseus got all of the others to follow him and finally found and killed the Minitor by himself. He then followed the silk back out. He loved Ariadne and took her home with him. On the way Dionysis said that he was already to be wed with Ariadne and took her with him. Theseus was so sad that he forgot to change the sails. Aegeus saw the black sails from atop a high cliff while watching for his son and jumped into the sea below him killing himself in what is now called the Aegean sea.  
 


 
THESEUS  
GOT A  B+  (89%)	
	In Greek mythology, Theseus can truely be thought of as the greatest Athenian hero. 
He was the  son of  Aegeus, king of Athens, and Aethra, princess of Troezen, and daughter of
Pittheus, king of Troezen. 
	Before Theseus was born his father Aegeus left Aethra in Troezen of Argolis and
returned to Athens before he was born. But before he left king Aegeus put his sword and his
pair of sandals under a large rock and said to Aethra that when Theseus was old enough to lift
the heavy rock that  Theseus should take the sword and sandals  and come to see him in
Athens.  
	At the age of 16 after being brought up in Troezen,  Theseus was finally able to lift the
heavy rock.  Theseus with  his long blond hair then took the sword and the sandals and began
his journey  to Athens to claim Aegeus as his father.  The young Theseus made his hazardous
journey by the coast road along the Isthmus, clearing the road of  six  villains, murderers, and 
monsters which inhabited the road. Theseus killed these villains by the same method by which
they had murdered their own victims.  Among the villains that Theseus killed, were Sciron,
Sinis,  Procrustes and Phaea.
	 Theseus arrived in Athens wearing a sword and a pair of sandals that Aegeus had left
for him in Troezen. He was then   greeted by his father  Aegeus  and  his stepmother Medea
who was a sorceress. But she was jealous of his influence over Aegeus so Medea tried to kill
him by sending him to kill a wild bull.  But Theseus succeeded and sacrificed the bull to Apollo. 
He then returned to Athens and was almost poisoned by  Medea, but as soon as Aegeus got
wind of her plot, he proclaimed Theseus his son and heir to the thrown and banished Medea
from Athens and she escaped to what is now Asia.
	According to legend, the people of Athens had to send seven youths and seven
Maidens every year as a tribute to Minos, the king of Create, to be eaten by the Minitor, who
was a terrible monster, half man and half bull. 
	Theseus decided to go as one of the youths and try to kill the minitor.  When he
reached Create, Ariadne, the beautiful daughter of Minos fell in love will him and helped  him 
kill the Minitor by giving him a sword which he killed the Minitor with and a ball of thread to
help him find his way out of the labyrinth in which the Minitor lived.  Theseus  then left Create
with Ariadne but dumped her on the way back to Athens.  
	 On his return from Create to Athens, however, in his hurry to get home, he forgot to
hoist a white sail signaling his success against the Minotaur.  So when Aegeus saw a black
sail, he  believed that  his son was dead and was so sad that he  threw himself from a high
rocky cliff into the sea, which has ever since been known as the Aegean Sea in his honor.
	Theseus then became the King of Athens.  And as king of Athens, Theseus was wise
and generous, and  united the many small communitties of the Attic plain into a strong and
powerful nation and brought prosperity and civilization to the people.
	But he kept his love of danger and adventure and during a war with the Amazon
Women he abducted the Amazon Hippolyta, who bore him a son who was named Hippolytus.
He took part in the Calydonian boar hunt and in the quest of the Argonauts for the Golden
Fleece. He was a devoted friend of Pirithous, king of the Lapithae, whom he accompanied to
the underworld to rescue the goddess Persephone. Both men were imprisoned by the god
Hades for their rash deed, but Theseus was subsequently rescued by Hercules.
Returning to Athens, Theseus found his kingdom in disarray, torn by rebellion and corruption.
Unable to reestablish authority, he sent his children away and sailed to the island of Skyros,
where Lycomedes, king of Skyros, murdered him by throwing him from a cliff into the sea.
Later the Delphic oracle commanded the Athenians to gather Theseus's bones and bring them
back to Athens. The Athenians then paid him great honor by building him a tomb dedicated to
the poor and helpless whom he had befriended.

 