
 
	A persons surroundings can influence him. In "12 Angry Men" by Reginald Rose a young mans 

life is held by twelve men with contrasing views. Eight a caring man, who wishes to talk about why the 

other jurors think that the boy is guilty, clashes with Three, a sadistic man who would pull the swith 

himselfto end the boys life. Accroding to Rose, several elements can infulence a jury's verdict, such as the 

emotional make-up of individual jurors.

	Many elements can change a jurors decision. Juror Three, who is convincd that the boy is guilty, 

is allied with Four who is eventually convicedEights showing of how the two testimonies given by the old 

woman and old man are lies, votes guilty. Three outraged by this exclames "A guilty man's gonna be 

walking the streets... he's got to die! Stay with me." (23) But Four sees the truth that Eight has brought 

into th light and still votes guilty. Eight tries to convince Three how the boy is not guilty beyond 

reasonable doubt but Three does not listen adn would rather see the boy die. "For this kid, you bet I'd pull 

the switch."(17) This shows how emotionally unstable Three is. He is a grown man living in a civilized 

community and would like to see a boy who he does not even know die by his own hands Eight does not 

think highly of Three for what he says about killing the boy and shouts "your a sadist."(17) which is the 

absolute truth about Three.

	The emotional make-up of a juror can change his desicision on wther or not to let a man live or 

die. When someone is asked judge someone else, shoud not you look at al the facts to be sure beyond a 

shoadow of a doubt that the man who cimmitted the crime is guilty? Yes, a juror should look at all the 

facts but some do not, they just judge the person on how that person feels.
 


 
A Comparison of the Status of Women in Classical Athens and Early Christianity


	Since the beginning of time the treatment of women has improved dramatically.  In the earliest of times women were mere slaves to men.  Today women are near equals in almost all fields.  In 411 B.C., when Lysistrata was written, men had many stunning advantages to that of their female counterparts.  Although women's rights between 30 and 100 A.D., the time of the New Testament, were still not what they are today, the treatment of women was far better. Overall, the equality of women in the New Testament exceeds that of the women in Lysistrata in three major ways:  physical mobility, society's view of women's nature, and women's public legal rights.
	Albeit in Lysistrata the women were shown as revolutionaries rising up against the men, women in classical Greece were never like that.  Aristophanes created the play as a comedy, showing how the world might be in the times of the Peloponesian war if women tried to do something.  It was the women's job to stay home and tend to the house, and never leave, unlike they did in the play, the women were shown as revolutionaries rising up against the men, women in classical Greece were never like that. 
	The activities of women in Classical Athens were confined to "bearing children, spinning and weaving, and maybe managing the domestic arrangements. No wandering in the beautiful streets for them."   The suppression of women went so far as to divide the house into separate areas for males and females.  While the women stayed home, the men were usually out fighting, and when they weren't fighting, they were entertaining their friends and having sexual favors performed by courtesans.  
	The rights of women in early Christianity were a far cry from today, although they were much better off than their Athenian counterparts.  In the Christian church, women were treated as equals.  The first evidence of this is when the woman with hemorrhages touches Jesus' clothing and he says that her faith has made her well (Mark 5:34).  This shows that both sexes are treated equally in that eyes of god even though at this time the hemorrhages that the woman was having was a symbol of uncleanness, and that good things can happen to both if they have enough "faith."  
	The rights of women are also extended in the New Testament when the rights of husband and wife are shown as equals.  It is stated that each should show affection to their partner, and that each partner controls their mate's body (I Corinthians 7:3-4).  This shows that each person should be equal in the marriage, unlike in Lysistrata where the man did whatever he wanted to whomever he wanted while the woman slaved at home .
	Women were also considered to be more "enpowered" in the times of the New Testament.  This is displayed when the women nearly monopolize the practice of speaking in tongues, or even speaking at all (I Corinthians 14:36).  Speaking in tongues was thought to be much like talking from the angels, which was considered to special talent. 
	Overall the women of early Christianity had a better quality of life than those in classical Athens.  They were not only allowed to leave the house more, but they were also treated more as equals in society's view of women, and their public rights.  	
 


 

			A Time of  Prosperous Change
In the early nineteen hundreds when women used to be treated as objects who were only good for cooking and cleaning. These women were expected to stay home and do nothing but take care of the children. Authors were rarely women .Now in the present day a women is thought of as having a mind of her own. She is thought of as a independent, an individual who has a peace of mind of her own who is allowed to work and make a living as she pleases. Even we don't think of Weldon every time someone mentions a popular contemporary author we know she deserves to be mentioned. Both in  the Critical Survey of Long Fiction  and in  Love and Marriage in the Novels of Anita Brookner and Fay Weldon  Weldon  is mentioned with great honor and respect. Anna Ericson uses more past situations in Fay Weldon's own life while contrasting her to Anita Brookner while in contrast the Critical Survey of Long Fiction  criticizes the works without much comparison to others. Both the Magill  and Anna Ericson have strong points on a women's individualism but Anna Ericson proves Weldon's choice of personality for the main character was one reflecting Weldon's  own thoughts and morals.
In the The Life and Loves of a She Devil Ruth is a character who is well developed who one can feel one with because of the fact that  the author creates great depth to her as a character. In the  Critical Survey of Long Fiction the author states that "In her fiction, 
								
Fay Weldon explores women's lives with wit and humor. She is caustic in her implicit condemnation of injustice but avoids preaching by characters say and what they do"(Magill 3474). On the other hand Ericson has more of a formula to Weldon's novels unlike the Critical Survey of Long Fiction. "The Weldon narrator is usually omniscient; she is wise, sad and cynical"(Ericson 1). which shows that  the characters must be well developed to have such a personified personality. Magill  rarely states how Ruth's personality had come about  in  The Life and Loves of a She Devil.
Love was not an issue to Weldon when writing this novel this may be due to the lack of love in her very own life. Love was never thought of importance in  the Critical Survey of Long Fiction. On  the other hand in Love and Marriage in the Novels of Anita Brookner and Fay Weldon   Ericson uses the subject of lack of love as the focus of his theories and that Weldon was a unwed mother  who had to deal with the pressures of having a child instead of receiving love from his father. Even though Weldon wed eventually she later learned of what love was which gave her the experience to right about such a unloved character. Magill on the other hand focuses on their married relationship rather that the lack of love from Ruth and Bobo's relationship " The plot tells the story of a middle-class, suburban housewife, Ruth......."(Magill 3474).
Weldon always makes the heroine hidden or makes her in hiding so the reader has to figure out for themselves which is being done. Ericson states "The general Weldon heroine is not so easily described"(Ericson 2).  In The Life and Loves of a She Devil  
Weldon uses great technique to make her main character Ruth go in hiding she makes her hide not only her motives and desires but herself.
								
The author uses great technique in making the reader choose for themselves if the main character is the antagonist of protagonist. In The Life and Loves of a She Devil Weldon makes Ruth out to be a helpless women who firsts depends on her husband Bobbo for everything but in a underhanded manner she steals her husbands money and gets him to be charged with embezzlement "But all the time he was planning his great flight, the new life, with someone altogether different, and on his client's money, too."(Weldon 226). 
The author goes to great distances to make Ruth's personality change in drastic manners. Ruth went from one extreme to another she was once dependent, and unsatisfied  and later became dependent and satisfied by her husband's lack of composure. Ruth changed just as if times were changing from the early 1900's to the later 1900's. Weldon writes that:
	"It seemed to Ruth that at last the times had come to return to the High Tower. She could walk with ease, even run a little. She could life a two-pound weight in either hand. Her circulatory problems were under control. She no longer needed the Hermione Clinic. She no longer needed anyone. She danced with Mr.Ghengis in the dew of the morning, as the sun rose red and round over the escarpment, and with every step it was as if she trod on knives; but she thanked him for giving her life and told him she was going."(239).
In both Criticisms the authors use reasoning to justify the use a almost happy ending to the novel. Ericson states "Strangely enough, I have yet to read a Fay Weldon novel without an almost unbelievably happy ending. Still , the happy ending is usually based on coincidence, fate or supernatural occurrences,. And practically never on the
								
 actions of the characters" (Ericson 3474). But on the other hand in The Life and Loves of a She Devil the author makes the main character achieve whatever is achieved by herself.
Also in the Critical Survey of Long Fiction the author sums up the ending as so "Ruth is in command, while Bobbo has been humiliated and accepts his fate like owntrodden wife"(Ericson 3476). 
	Both criticisms are unique in a way of their own. But I feel as if Ericson does a better point of proving how Weldon's life plays a major role in the development in her characters. Even though the author of  Critical Survey of Long Fiction doesn't establish this he still has done a very concise job of stating his views. The Life and Loves of a She Devil is a very good novel showing the dramatic change of time contrasting with the life of Ruth the main character in The Life and Loves of a She Devil .
		
Work Cited
Ericson, Anna. Love and Marriage in the Novels of Anita Brookner and Fay Weldon.     
	World Wide Web, The Internet. January 14 1997
Magill, N. Frank, ed. Critical Survey of Long Fiction. Pasedena: UP of California, 1991.
	Vol. 8 of English Language Series 8 vols. 1969-1994
Weldon, Fay. The Life and Loves of a She Devil. London: Coronet, 1983.
 












 
A Woman's Identity

	Women lose their identity as soon as they get married and
begin a family.  Every little girl dreams of getting married and
raising a family, because this is what women are taught to seek
at an early age.  When a woman achieves this goal, she loses her
identity due to the many roles that she is now forced to play. 
Once married, a woman is expected to be a mother, nurturer,
housekeeper, teacher, doctor, cook, chauffeur, and more
increasingly, a career woman.  Women are forced to carry out
these roles because of society's traditional view of the role
women should play, and young women are pressured to follow in
their mother's footsteps.  Because a woman's life revolves around
her children and husband, her responsibilities are never far from
thought.  Consequently, women lose their identity because they
are so caught up in being a wife and mother that they no longer
have time to pursue their own desires and goals.  
	Women are increasingly becoming career women, while raising
a family at the same time.  Despite the fact that women have the
job of raising their family, many women also have full time
careers because the extra income is often needed in the family. 
Some men criticize women for trying to act too much like men, but
women are being forced by society to move between the traditional
definitions of male and female roles, because of the many
different tasks they have to carry out from day to day.  For
example, in order for women to enter the "male" world of work,
they have to obtain "masculine" traits and leave their "feminine"
traits at home.    
	Bearing children is expected in today's society, because
nurturing and child care are viewed as feminine traits.  Women
are conditioned at a young age to believe that once they are
adults they will become mothers.  If a middle aged, married woman
doesn't have any children, people often assume that there is a
biological reason for her lack of children.  Motherhood is
expected by society, but contrary to popular belief, many
psychologists believe that it is not instinct, but a learned
desire.  In Betty Rollin's essay, "Motherhood: Who Needs It," one
psychiatrist explains that, "women don't need to be mothers any
more than they need spaghetti."  Once a woman has children her
life becomes an extension of her children's life.  She has to
provide for and take care of her children and she can no longer
put herself first, because she is expected to always have her
family's best interests in mind.  
	Most women, if posed with the question, "Are you happy?"
will say that they are, but after some soul searching it is
evident that on the surface they appear to be, while on the
inside they are unhappy and often feel suffocated.  It isn't
until things in life are going poorly, that women let themselves
realize that they have feelings.  Women have lost touch with who
they are and are many times running away from their feelings,
because they have been busy masking themselves in order to
maintain their family.  
	Women are imprisoned by the many roles they have to play,
but it is essentially self-imposed.  Although, this imprisonment
wouldn't be self-imposed, if it weren't for society's pressure on
women to fit into the traditional female mold.  Due to these
expectations that are placed on women, eventually a woman who is
married and has children, will become only a empty and hollow
image of a mother and wife, instead of a living and breathing
person with feelings and a mind of her own.
 

 
				  Abortion



	In Roman times, abortion and the destruction of unwanted children was permissible, but as out civilization has aged, it seems that such acts were no longer acceptable by rational human beings, so that in 1948, Canada along with most other nations in the world signed a declaration of the United Nations promising every human being the right to life. The World Medical Association meeting in Geneve at the same time, stated that the utmost respect for human life was to be from the moment of conception. This declaration was re-affirmed when the World Medical Association met in Oslo in 1970. Should we go backwards in our concern for the life of an individual human being?
	The unborn human is still a human life and not all the wishful thinking of those advocating repeal of abortion laws, can alter this. Those of us who would seek to protect the human who is still to small to cry aloud for it's own protection, have been accused of having a 19th Century approach to life in the last third of the 20th Century. But who in reality is using arguments of a bygone Century? It is an incontrovertible fact of biological science - Make no Mistake - that from the moment of conception, a new human life has been created. 
	Only those who allow their emotional passion to overide their knowledge, can deny it: only those who are irrational or ignorant of science, doubt that when a human sperm fertilizes a human ovum a new human being is created. A new human being who carries genes in its cells that make that human being uniquely different from any and other human being and yet, undeniably a member, as we all are, of the great human family. All the fetus needs to grow into a babe, a child, an old man, is time, nutrition and a suitable environment. It is determined at that very moment of conception whether the baby will be a boy or a girl; which of his parents he will look like; what blood type he will have. His whole heritage is forever fixed. Look at a human being 8 weeks after conception and you, yes every person here who can tell the difference between a man and a women, will be able to look at the fetus and tell me whether it is a baby boy or a girl.
	No, a fetus is not just another part of a women's body like an appendix or appendage. These appendages, these perfectly formed tiny feel belong to a 10 week developed baby, not to his or her mother.
	The fetus is distinct and different and has it's own heart beat. Do you know that the fetus' heart started beating just 18 days after a new life was created, beating before the mother even knew she was pregnant? By 3 months of pregnancy the developing baby is just small enough to be help in the palm of a man's hand but look closely at this 3 month old fetus. All his organs are formed and all his systems working. He swims, he grasps a pointer, he moves freely, he excretes urine. If you inject a sweet solution into the water around him, he will swallaw because he likes the taste. Inject a bitter solution and he will quit swallowing because he does not like the taste. By 16 weeks it is obvious to all, except those who have eyes but deliberately do not see, that this is a young human being.
	Who chooses life or death for this little one because abortion is the taking of a human life? This fact is undeniable; however much of the members of the Women's Liberation Movement, the new Feminists, Dr. Henry Morgentaler or the Canadian Medical Association President feel about it, does not alter the fact of the matter. An incontrovertible fact that cannot change as feelings change.
	If abortion is undeniably the taking of human life and yet sincere misguided people feel that it should be just a personal matter between a women and the doctor, there seems to be 2 choices open to them. (1) That they would believe that other acts of destruction of human beings such as infanticide and homicide should be of no concern of society and therefore, eliminate them from the criminal code. This I cannot believe is the thinking of the majority, although the tendency for doctors to respect the selfish desire of parents and not treat the newborn defective with a necessary lifesaving measure, is becoming increasingly more common. (2) But for the most part the only conclusion available to us is that those pressing for repeal of the abortion laws believe that there are different sorts of human beings and that by some arbitrary standard, they can place different values on the lives of there human beings. Of course, different human beings have different values to each of us as individuals: my mother means more to me than she does to you. But the right to life of all human beings is undeniable. I do not think this is negotiable. It is easy to be concerned with the welfare of those we know and love, while regarding everybody else as less important and somehow, less real. Most people would rather have heard of the death of thousands in the Honduras flooding disaster than of a serious accident involving a close friends or favourite relatives. That is why some are less disturbed by the slaughter of thousands of unborn children than by the personal problems of a pregnant women across the street. To rationalize this double standard, they pretend to themselves that the unborn child is a less valuable human life because it has no active social relationships and can therefore, be disposed of by others who have an arbitrary standard of their own for the value of a human life.
	I agree that the fetus has not developed it's full potential as a human being: but neither have any of us. Nor will any of us have reached that point: that point of perfect humaness, when we die. Because some of us may be less far along the path than others, does not give them the right to kill us. But those in favour of abortion, assume that they have that right, the standard being arbitrary. To say that a 10 week fetus has less value that a baby, means also that one must consider a baby of less value than a child, a young adult of less value than an old man. Surely one cannot believe this and still be civilized and human. A society that does not protect its individual members is on the lowest scale of civilized society. One of the measures of a more highly civilized society, is its attitude towards its weaker members. If the poor, the sick, the handicapped, the mentally ill, the helpless are not protected, the society is not as advanced as in a society where they are protected. The more mature the society is, the more there is respect for the dignity and rights of all human beings. The function of the laws of the society, is to protect and provide for all members so that no individual or group of individuals can be victimized by another individual group. Every member of Canadian society has a vital stake in what value system is adopted towards its weak, aged, cripple, it's helpless intra-uterine members; a vital stake in who chooses life or death.
	As some of you may know, in 1969, the abortion laws were changed in Canada, so that it became legal for a doctor to perform an abortion if a committee of 3 other doctors in an eccredited hospital deemed that continuation of the pregnancy constituted a severe threat to the life and health, mental or physical of the women. Threat to health was not defined and so it is variously interpreted to mean very real medical disease to anything that interferes with even social or economic well being, so that any unwanted or unplanned pregnancy thus qualifies. What really is the truth about the lasting effect of an unwanted pregnancy on the psyche of a womem? Of course there is a difference of opinion among psychiatrists, but if unbiased, prospective studies are examined certain facts become obvious. (1) The health of women who are mentally ill before they become pregnant, is not improved by an abortion. In fact in 1970 an official statement of the World Health Organization said, "Serious mental disorders arise more often in women previous mental problems. Thus the very women for whom legal abortion is considered justified on psychiatric grounds, are the ones who have the highest risk of post-abortion psychiatric disorders. (2) Most women who are mentally healthy before unwanted pregnancy, despite a temporary emotional upset during the early weeks for the pregnancy, are mentally healthy after the pregnancy whether they were aborted or carried through to term.
	Do we accept killing a human being because of a temporary, emotional upset? All obstetricians and gynaecologists know of many cases where the mother, be her single or married, has spoken of abortion early in the pregnancy and later on, has confessed her gratitude to those who have not performed the abortion. On the other hand, we have all seen women what have been troubled, consumed with guilt and development significant psychiatric problems following and because of abortion. I quote Ft. John L. Grady, Medical Examiner for Florida State Attorney's Office, "I believe it can be stated with certainty that abortion causes more deep-seated guilt, depression and mental illness than it ever cures".
	We used to hear a lot about the risk of suicide among those who threatened such action if their request for abortion was refused. How real is that risk - it is not - in fact, the suicide rate among pregnant women be they happy of unhappy about the pregnancy, is 1/4 of the rate among non-pregnant women in child-bearing years. An accurate 10 year study was done in England on unwed mothers who requested abortions and were refused. It was found that the suicide rate of this group was less than that average population. In Minnesota in a 15 year period, there were only 14 maternal suicides. 11 occurred after delivery. None were illegitimately pregnant. All were psychotic. In contrast, among the first 8 deaths of women aborted under the liberal law in the United Kingdon, 2 were from suicide directly following the abortion.
	Are there any medical indications for abortion?? Is it valid for a doctor to co-operate in the choice for abortion? The late Dr. Guttmacher, one of the world leaders of the pro-abortion movement, has stated: "Almost any women can be brought through pregnancy alive unless she suffers from cancer or leukemia, in which case abortion is unlikely to prolong her life much less save it."
	 












 
Abortion

	Abortion.  What is it?  Why do people do it?  Is it killing a human life?  What are the benefits for having an abortion?  Should it be made illegal?  These  questions I will try and answer on the key issue right now on abortion.  I  will tell you my side and how I fell, and hope that after this you would agree with my opinion.

	Abortion is the killing of a child before the birth.  They usually take a needle and put it into the mothers womb, and kill it.  Although that is not the only way to do it.  There are other ways also of killing a child.  There is a abortion called have abortion.  It comes out of the womb half way, then they kill it.  To me that is just sick.  I think that it is in humane to kill a live child.  Just think, it is alive.  It needs oxygen to breath.  It needs food to live. And if you don't take care of the baby, it wouldn't come out.  Like if you do drugs or alcohol, it will ruin the child.
	
	There is one exception  that I would have is if the girl got raped.  Even though I still wouldn't approve of it, I think there should be an exception.  I think that if the woman had any brains, that she would want to have the loving child.  Just think  you come home from work one day, and all of the sudden your kid gives you a great big hug.  That shows love.  And after a long days work, wouldn't anybody want some love from a child.  Yeah when they are little they scream, and kick, but they also give love, and affection, and can be the cutest thing.  And if you abort, you wont get that will you?

	Some people also just want to make amends for what they have done.  Maybe they have screwed up in their life and don't want there parents to know.  Or maybe they just aren't ready for a kid.  Well let me tell you, you should have thought  about that before you had sex.  My mom once told me and this has stuck in my mind, that the best kind of safe sex is no sex.  That has stuck in my mind, and because of that, I will not have sex until I am married.  That way I can have the love and affection of kids, and not have to worry about it.  That is my opinion, and I plan on sticking to it.
	 I think that in no circumstances it should be made legal.  I am sure you have heard of Jack Covorkian and how he thinks it is all good and legal, but I don't see how he can't have feelings for the little kid.  Don't you think that the kid would want to grow up in this world, and enjoy all the ups and downs of this world?  I just think that he doesn't have a heart.  But I could be wrong.  From what I see, I don't think there are any benefits to having an abortion.  You don't get love, or to see what your child could grow up to be, you would have to live with your self forever, wondering whether you made the right choice, and you will miss out on seeing a baby grow up.  To me that would be the most wonderful experience there is.

	In conclusion you obviously know by now how I feel about abortion.  I know not everyone thinks the way I do.  If I changed just one persons mind in this essay, I feel I would have done my job.  I feel I am in the right about this topic, and will never change my mind about it.  Never, not even if I was forced into that situation.  As a closing thought just remember this,  What happens if your parents aborted you?  What if they didn't want you?  You wouldn't be here right now arguing.  Do you like your life that much?  Well give the opportunity for someone else to like life! 
 

 
                                 ABORTION

    During the past quarter century, abortion has joined race and war as
one of the most debatable subject of controversy in the United States. It
discusses human interaction where ethics, emotions and law come together.
Abortion poses a moral, social and medical dilemma that faces many
individuals to create a emotional and violent atmosphere. There are many
points of view toward abortion but the only two fine distinctions are
"pro-choice" and "pro-life". A pro-choicer would feel that the decision to
abort a pregnancy is that of the mothers and the state has no right to
interfere. A pro-lifer would hold that from the moment of conception, the
embryo or fetus is alive. This life imposes on us a moral obligation to
preserve it and that abortion is tantamount to murder (Kolner 5).

    In the United States about 1.6 million pregnancies end in abortion.
Women with incomes under eleven thousand are over three times more likely
to abort than those with incomes above twenty-five thousand. Unmarried
women are four to five times more likely to abort than married and the
abortion rate has doubled for 18 and 19 year olds. Recently the U.S. rate
dropped 6 percent overall but the rate of abortion among girls younger than
15 jumped 18 percent. The rate among minority teens climbed from 186 per
1,000 to 189 per 1,000.

    The most popular procedure involved in abortions is the vacuum
aspiration which is done during the first trimester (three months or less
since the women has become pregnant). A tube is simply inserted through the
cervix and the contents of the uterus are vacuumed out. The most commonly
used type of second trimester abortion is called dilation and evacuation.
Since the fetus has bones, bulk and can move, second trimester is not as
simple. When as much of the fetus and placenta are vacuumed out then
tweezers are used to remove larger parts. After this, or the beginning of
the fifth month abortion is serious and actually induced as childbirth.
That is, the mother is given substances which puts her into labor and
delivers the fetus as she would a full-term baby. About 40 percent of
Americans believe that abortion should remain legal and 40 percent believe
it should be banned except when the pregnancy threatens the life of the
mother or is the result of rape or incest. Also 15 percent b eveit should
be illegal in all cases. Although abortion is regarded as a women's right,
it should be banned with exceptions because it's considered murder, has
many psychological side effects and there is an alternative.

    Abortion is a women's own right and choice. In 1973 the Roe v. Wade
decision proved this by recognizing abortion as a fundamental constitution
right and made it legal in all states. The law now permits abortion at the
request of the women without any restrictions in the first trimester and
some restrictions in the second trimester to protect the women's health.
The National Abortion Right Act League argues that without legal abortion
women would be denied their constitutional right of privacy and liberty.
The women's right to her own body subordinates those of the fetus and the
U.S. Supreme Court in Roe v. Wade argued that the women's "right to
privacy" overruled the     fetus's right to life. If abortion was illegal
it would force poor women to bear and raise children they can't afford to
bring up. There would be a number of unsafe abortions in back allies. It
would also force women to give up their dreams and stay home  to bring up
babies. Worst of all, it would condemn victims o apeand incest to carry and
nurture the offspring of their rapist.(Kolner 5) Abortion is necessary for
women to have control over their own bodies and life. One activist said,
"If I hadn't had that abortion my life would have been a disaster. I
wouldn't have made it to medical school. I was married at that point to a
very ill man and it would have been terrible to have to have my baby.
People who need abortions are in some kind of turmoil and it's really a
life-saving thing."(Blender 4) To ignore the rights of others is selfish
and injustice. Women must have the right to control the functions of their
own bodies. Revern George Gardiner pastor of the college Hill United
Methodist Church, told the council that the ordnance would have done little
good. "Young women need the freedom to make choices for their reproductive
life when their family can't guarantee them parental support."(Lynn B6-7)
Women should not be forced to have babies they don't want. They must be
able to decide what happe ns to them and have a safe plus legal way of
doing so. Women are in control of their own bodies and lives. Legislators
have no right to interfere. The practical assertion that since pregnancy
involves a women's body, the choice of continuing that pregnancy must be
hers alone. This was the first given buerful theoretical articulation and
defense by Judith Thomson.(meilander 3)

    However, abortion is considered murder by half of all Americans.
Pro-lifers believe that human life begins at the moment of conception. When
the merge of the egg and sperm is complete, they are  fertilized and known
as the "zygote". The zygote contains a full set of 46 chromosomes which is
required to create a human life. Scientists identify that at the moment of
fertilization the ovum takes on a entirely different destiny, life. About
15,000 genes from the sperm and ovum form a unique combination. This is
nothing less than a new human life at its earlier stage of life. In the
United States many infants will not make it to puberty, old age or even
their second birthday. Just because of their shortened life, it doesn't
mean that it never existed. Dr. Nathanson stopped preforming abortions
after becoming aware of the horrors he observed. "A woman has the right to
go to bed with who she wants, but she can not choose death for her child.
It's a direct violation of human rights." (Koval i grid c-7) Anthony
Simpson has a photo of a aborted fetus and believes that abortion is
nothing less but ruthless murder. In southern Kentucky, Robert Hollis
brutally assaulted his wife in effort to abort the fetus he suspected
wasn't his. He successfully did so and Caroll believed Hollis set out
intentionally to kill that fetus and that is in fact murder. Kristina Kleg
a graduate from high school has recently become pregnant and decided
against abortion. She feels that it's an innocent child inside of her. It
has a brain and a heart therefore it also has a right to life. "Abortion is
the unnatural end of pregnancy. That child has a right to life that is
equal to the mothers right. One cannot kill another human being just
because they wished it wasn't around. Abortion is murder of the innocent
practiced on a national scale." (Abortion: The Personal, Medical and Social
Dilemma) Overall it has been proven that the fetus is a real person. It
responds to noise, has feeling and fears. To h ave an abortion it will
destroy an innocent life which is directly connected to murder.

    Scientific research has successfully shown that abortion causes many
psychological side effects. It leaves the woman with many strong feelings
about their desicion. They feel sadness, wishing things could have been
different and grief for a lost life. Guilt arises because they know a fetus
represents an independent life. Anger builds up towards other people having
to do with their desicion. Sometimes the mother may feel that she has
infact been abandoned. Most of all the mother feels ashamed and
embarrassed
about her action. People close to the mother may be angry at her for ending
her pregnancy and make it difficult for her to deal with. Even years after
the abortion, women tent to remember the regretful experience. They usually
wonder what the baby would have looked like and its birthday. Thirty-three
year old Michelle Urbain of south Florida has had five abortions so far.
She realizes now that they all left emotional scares her that are
unbearable. "It wasn't just a mass of cell t was children I was killing."
(Kovaleski c-7) It maybe a month or a year but feelings do catch up with
the mother. Symptoms like nightmares, panic attacts and flashbacks are
signs of a recently discovered Post Abortion Syndrome (PAS). According to a
study published by Association for Interdisciplinary Research in Valves and
Social Change, one in five women studied had diagnosable stress disorders.
(Lyons d-11) Also two in five had sleep disorders and flashbacks following
abortion.
 











 

    Abortion has been one of this country's most controversial topic on
hand. But if one sees the constitutional infringement to women by the
restriction of abortion, the torment to the unwanted child and the anguish
society has to sustain,then this topic would not be so debatable.  Too many
people do not see the cause and effect of not being able to have abortions.

    All human beings are given some inalienable right guaranteed by the
Constitution.  One of those privilege is the right to pursue happiness.  A
baby can sometimes disrupt a woman's pursuit of happiness.  Even if she
decides to give it up for adoption, she still has the burden of carrying
the fetus for nine months.  Having the option to perform an abortion can
solve that obstacle.  Taking away this right would be invading on a woman's
constitutional liberty.

    The unwanted child also suffers.  Most of the time the mother of the
unwanted child is very young and inexperienced or too poor to take care of
the child.  The child is usually malnourished, has no medical care, and
gets very little attention or love.  The foster care system isn't any
better.  Only a small percentage of the children are adopted by suitable
parents.  But the rest remain in the foster care system, where there is
little or no personal care.   In both cases, the child has a poor education
because of the lack of attention and discipline. He grows up to be
unproductive individual or a menace to society.  Many get involved in drugs
and crimes.  These individuals are also very violent, lacking morality due
small amount of care they received themselves. In the long run, not only
does the child suffer but also society, who has to tolerate his violent
behavior and crimes.

    An abortion can be seen as putting the child out of misery while he
doesn't have the ability to reason or fear.

    In short, abortion allows a woman to retain her constitutional rights,
it relieves a would be suffering child out of his distress and it
establishes a safer and more peaceful society.  On these grounds, abortion
should be kept legal, and even encouraged to specific individuals, for
benefits to all of us.
 








 
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson issued Executive Order #11246 at Howard
University that required federal contractors to undertake affirmative action
to increase the number of minorities that they employ. He wanted to ensure
that minorities were recruited to have real opportunities to be hired and
then eventually get a promotion.

In 1969, the Department of Labor exposed widespread racial discrimination of
the Construction Department so President Richard M. Nixon decided to
encorporate a system of "goals and timetables" to evaluate federal
construction companies according to affirmative action. This idea of "goals
and timetables" provided guidelines for companies to follow and comply with
affirmative action regulations. 

During the presidency of Gerald R. Ford, he extended affirmative action to
people with disabilities (3) and Vietnam veterns (4) but there were no goals
or timetables for these two groups. This type of affirmative action required
recruitment efforts, accessability, accommodation and reviews of physical and
mental job qualifications.

President Jimmy Carter consolidated all federal agencies that were required
by law to follow the affirmative action play into the Department of Labor.
Before Carter did this, each agency handled affirmative action in its own
individual way, some were not as consistant as other agencies were. He
created the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program (OFCCP) in 1978 to
ensure compliance with the affirmative action policies. 

Affirmative action began to go downhill when Ronald Reagan and later George
Bush came into office. Affirmative action lost some gains it had made and was
mor or less ignored by the Republicans in the White House and in Congress.
Affirmative action was silently being "killed" by our federal administrators.
But among this destruction there was one positive aspect, the passage of
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (5).

Finally to the Presidency of Bill Clinton. The Republicans are attempting to
scare people into changing their party lines by misusing affirmative action.
They are saying that affirmative action is nothing more than a quota (6) or
reverse discrimination (7).

As you can see, there have been many additions to the policy of affirmative
action. People from the Vietnam War, people with disabilties, and minority
groups have made gains in the workforce but more research needs to be
conducted as to the qualifications of all of these people to make sure that
race is not a determining factor in the giving and receiving of jobs. The
best person for the job, no matter what race, should be given the job.
 




 
Affirmative action policies do not benefit those who are supposed to be 

helped in any way. Instead of  Affirmative action decisions in their favor, 

minorities and females are entrenched in their status because of the lowering of 

standards and expectations imposed on them by businesses and educational 

institutions due to the cries of racism and sexism in standards by advocates of 

AA.  Ernest Van Den Haag put it best, when he declares that. " Affirmative action 

has done as much injury to black scholars as to black students."  Isn't it time to 

return to hiring people on individual merit, and return the millions spent on 

Affirmative action. That money could be better spent on bringing minority and 

female applicants up to standards. I believe the most qualified person should be 

awarded the job, regardless of race, ethnicity, or disability.Affirmative action policies do not benefit those who are supposed to be 

helped in any way. Instead of  Affirmative action decisions in their favor, 

minorities and females are entrenched in their status because of the lowering of 

standards and expectations imposed on them by businesses and educational 

institutions due to the cries of racism and sexism in standards by advocates of 

AA.  Ernest Van Den Haag put it best, when he declares that. " Affirmative action 

has done as much injury to black scholars as to black students."  Isn't it time to 

return to hiring people on individual merit, and return the millions spent on 

Affirmative action. That money could be better spent on bringing minority and 

female applicants up to standards. I believe the most qualified person should be 

awarded the job, regardless of race, ethnicity, or disability.


 
Scot Ferguson
11-12-96
period 2
Essay

African and Native American Slavery

	The 1500's, a time of discovery, was when the
Europeans came to dominate most of the New World.  The
Europeans traveled to Africa and captured Africans to help
develop their land and satisfy their need for power.  I feel
that the treatment of the Indians and Africans by the
Europeans was completely unjustifiable.  While the Indians
and Africans were less technologically advanced and the
Europeans were uneducated, in this particular field, nothing
can compensate for the actions of the Europeans.
	As Europeans began to settle new lands they began
their exploration of the foreign worlds.  What they found
was the opposite of what they expected.  They found what
they thought was a new breed of humans.  In reality they
were just Native Americans.  These Indians were less
technologically advanced than the Europeans. They also
worshipped different and multiple gods and ate different
foods. Europeans saw this as barbaric, so they treated them
as barbarians.
	In the beginning Native Americans hadn't the faintest
idea of what the Europeans had in mind when they said
trade.  They figured that when the White Man came and
showed all that hospitality they meant it.  Of course, they
didn't, the Europeans captured the Indians to be used as
slaves.  They were also slaughtered and raped because of
resistance to leave their land.  If any Indians refused to
leave their land they would be killed.  The women were raped
for sick and disgusting reasons.  Europeans didn't feel that
the women, or men for that matter, were worth anything as
humans so they were beat and raped without any thought
about what they might be doing.
	As we watched the movie Roots, I noticed a part in the
movie where they were on a ship and a man brings in a black
woman, who was a slave.  The man offered her to the ship's
captain and referred to her as a belly warmer.  That got me
to thinking what could be going on in that man's head as he
said that.  When I heard that I was shocked that a man
could treat someone like that.  People have feelings and
cannot be treated as objects.  Maybe the Europeans didn't
realize that these people were, in fact people, and that
drove them to this awful conclusion that they could treat
people this way.
	As Europeans settled their land and began to build
houses, farms and plantations, they realized that they
needed servants to assist them in their farming.  So people
would travel to Africa capture blacks and then sell them to
merchants and plantation owners.  They would then beat
them and put them to long, grueling work.  They would treat
them as they did the Indians, and for much the same reason. 
They figured that since the blacks were black and appeared
to be less advanced then they must be less significant. 
	People of the next generation whose parents owned
slaves and grew up thinking slaves were okay is
understandable.  I just don't feel that anything could justify
treating the slaves they way they did. they had absolutely no
respect for them.  They would savagely beat them to get
them to work harder than humanly possible and they would
rape the women.  I don't think that I will ever know how any
one could do such a thing.
	I conclusion I strongly feel that the way Europeans
treated people that were less technologically advanced is
completely and utterly wrong.  It is difficult to contemplate
what was going on in their heads as they were capturing
them, killing them and even raping them.  I can not believe
how they could think that the color of someone's ones skin or
religious beliefs could make them less human.  I am glad I
live in a country based on the belief that all men are created
equal.
 

 

	Andrea Dworkin has been an influential write, speaker, and activist for over two decades.  She claims to be a feminist, and that her ideas are beneficial to women.  This paper will show that many of her most popular beliefs are not only detrimental to society, but also not in the best interests of women.  
	In letters from a war zone, Andrea Dworkin presents a collection of speeches and short articles she has composed during her career as a writer and activist.  Many of her articles deal with censorship and pornography.  One claim is central to all of these, pornography is an act and not an idea, thus censorship is not relevant to it.
	In response to a New York Time Review of her 1981 book, Pornography: Men Possessing Women, Dworkin writes, "Pornography says the women want to be hurt, forced, and abused; pornography says women want to be raped, battered, kidnapped, maimed;  pornography says women want to be humiliated, shamed, defamed, pornography says that women say no but mean yes - Yes to violence, yes to pain."(Dworkin p 203)
	In response to Dworkin's fiery rhetoric, Wendy Mcelroy writes that Dworkin has scientific backing and even cites evidence to the contrary.  "In Japan, where pornography depicting violence is widely available, rape is much lower per capita than in the United States, where violence in porn is restricted."  Mcelroy attacks the belief that pornography cause violence, stating that even if a correlation is present, is does not necessarily mean there is a causal relationship.  (McElroy 102)
	Lynne Segal sees in inherent harm in trying to link the two together.  She believes that feminists who try to do so are wasting valuable time that could be spent on other important issues.  "In the end, anti-pornography campaigns, feminist or not, can only enlist today, as they have invariously enlisted before, guilt and anxiety around sex, as well as lifetimes of confusion in our personal experiences of sexual arousal and activity."  "In contrast, campaigns which get to the heart of men's violence and sadism towards women must enlist the widest possible resources to empower socially." (Gibson 19)
	Another argument of Dworkin's is that pornography should not be protected as free speech under the first amendment.  It is her contention that protecting what pornographers say, is protecting what pornography does.  Pornography is more than words.  They are acts against women.  "Pornography happens to women."  As a result, bans on such material are warranted, not only because it is harmfully and discriminatory to women, but also because there are no civil liberties that are violated in preventing an act.  (Dworkin 185)
	Since it is uncertain whether there is even a correlation between violence against women and pornography, any attempt to ban it must be viewed as censorship.  What ever it is referred to, it still has the same effect.
	In many of Dworkin's writings, she laments the silencing of women.  She is partially responsible for this silencing.  In 1992, The Canadian Supreme Court ruled in favor of  a legal restriction on pornography based on the psychological damage it does women.  "Ironically, this obscenity law has been used almost exclusively against gay, lesbian, and feminist material." (McElroy 87)
	The effect of censorship is absolutely detrimental the weaker voice, as is the case with the Butler decision.  Dworkin herself fell victim, when her book, Pornography, was seized by Canadian customs officials.  Censorship in contradictory to feminist goals, because freedom of speech is the most powerful weapon in the feminist arsenal.  Medical journals used by medical students, and the testimony of women victimized by sexual abuse are prime targets of censorship.  (Strossen 77)
	An episode involving Dworkin and her cohort in censorship, Catherine MacKinnon, demonstrates the dangers of censorship.  At a symposium at A Michigan law school, at which Dworkin and MacKinnon were speaking, a group of feminists had prepared a series of documentaries of the topic of the conference, prostitution.  Dworkin refused to speak at the symposium if adversarial speakers were there, so the documentaries were the only voice of opposition to them.  When work got out that the documentaries could possibly pornographic, Dworkin and MacKinnon insisted on their removal.  When the presenter refused, they coerced the students with threats of leaving, to force the removed of the documentary exhibit.  What had started out as an academic symposium quickly turned into a forum for the exclusive advocacy of Dworkin ideals.  Her action epitomized the danger of censorship to society and other feminists, she silenced the weaker voice. (Strossen 211-214)
	Dworkin's opinions on pornography are summed up nicely by Wendy McElroy; Pornography is morally wrong; Pornography leads directly to violence against women; Pornography, in and of itself, is violence against women.  Five individual allegation are made based of the third point; Women are physically coerced into pornography; Women in porn who have not been coerced have been so traumatized by patriarchy that the cannot give real consent;  Capitalism is a system of 'economic coercion' that forces women into pornography in order to make a living;  Pornography is violence against women who consume it, and thereby re-enforcing their own oppression;  Pornography is violence against women, as a class, who must live in fear because of the atmosphere of terror it creates. (Mcelroy 91)
	The first three allegations deal with coercion.  The first claim is based on a few isolated cases and should not be used to characterize the entire industry.   The second allegation is not only arrogant, but degrades women because it undermines a woman's ability to choose.  "If women's choices are being trashed, why should radical feminists (i.e. Dworkin) fare better than other women?"  This sends a dangerous message that woman lack full capacity to make choices.  The third allegation fails in a similar manor as the second.  Dworkin draws no line between consent and coercion, and thus she rejects a woman's right to contract. (McElroy 92-95)
	The fourth and fifth claim of Dworkin's are also in contradiction with women's best interests.  The fourth claim completely ignores the possibility that women might actually enjoy pornography without falling victim to it.  Allowing women access to a means of sexual expression with actual sex grants them increased sexual freedom.  The final allegation is based on the notion that, "Women are not individuals, but members of a class with collective interests."  In making this claim, Dworkin must destroy the notion of individuality, and condition unsuitable for not only women, but all humanity.  (McElroy 96)
	Another criticism of Dworkin, is that many of her arguments contain logical inconsistencies or outright contradictions.  For one thing, Dworkin wants to validate the experience of women who have be silenced by patriarchy yet refuses to accept the voices of women who participate in pornography.  Dworkin also believes that pornography is the bastion of patriarchy, yet conservatives, tradition champion of patriarchy, also crusade against pornography.  (McElroy 98)
	In one of writings of cesarean sections, Dworkin make staunch, graphic, remarks about the topic.  It is laced with information about conspiracies and loaded with vulgarity.  Such extreme language may work against the interests of women, because even though a problem might exist, it might be written of by readers due to Dworkin's 'hyperbolic harangue.'  (Strossen 196)
	In general, Dworkin's writings while claiming to be feminist, are often in direct conflict with mainstream feminist agenda.  Many of her views portray women as helpless victim incapable of rational thinking.  In her support of censorship, she is also met be harsh resistance from prominent women's groups such as N.O.W..  Many of her view are seen as harmful to the cause of women's equality, and in this regard are more dangerous then anti-women's factions, because it is written under the banner of feminism.  (Gibson 118)
	Andrea Dworkin's influence has created an environment where free speech and equality are compromised.  Though she claims it to be in the best interest of society, this just is not true.  Most feminists reject her ideas as counterproductive to their goals.  Her writing are not only detrimental to women, however, everyone is affected.  By advocating censorship, she undermines every principle that this country was founded on and every ideal that keeps it unified and free from oppression.  Ironically, Dworkin seeks freedom from oppression for women, but in doing so advocates universal oppression for all people, women and men.

Works Cited

1. Dworkin, Andrea  Letters from a War Zone.  Lawrence Hill 1993.
2. McElroy, Wendy  A Woman's Right To Pornography  St. Martin Press 1995
3. Gibson, Pamela Church and Gibson, Roma  Dirty Looks British Film Institute 1993
4. Strossen, Nadine Defending Pornography Doubleday 1995

 

 
Black and White


	Following the Civil War, just prior to the turn of the century, many American novelist were writing more freely of the previous slave culture.  Two of these writers being Mark Twain and Charles Chesnutt.  Mark Twain was a popular "white" author by this time. Charles Chesnutt, the son of free blacks, decided to pursue a dream of becoming an author in order to remove the spirit of racism.  By studying these authors in particular, the views of a white raised in the slave holding south are juxtaposed with the views of free black.  Both Twain and Chesnutt satirize whites in different ways through their literature.  Twain also displays some unfavorable preconceptions of blacks.  This can be attributed to his own upbringing in the slave holding south.
	The main character of the Chesnutt stories is an old Negro man, previously a slave, who engages his new white employers in many tales about life on the plantation.  Uncle Julius relays these stories with much detail.  Though, at the conclusion of each, the reader is left wondering whether the tale was true or if Uncle Julius had conceived of it merely to satisfy his own desires.  Chesnutt has added to the end of each story an ulterior motive of  Uncle Julius that seems to be met by the telling of his tales.  By doing this, Chesnutt discretely satirizes whites in general.
	In the first story, The Goophered Grapevine, Uncle Julius tells of a conjure woman putting a "goopher" on the grapevines, causing all blacks that eat the grapes to die within one year.  This story is relayed upon the first meeting of the northern white couple (John and Annie) and the native South Carolinian.  After telling his tale of Henry and the others that suffered from this spell, Uncle Julius concludes that these northerners should not buy this vineyard, adding conveniently that he is not afraid to eat the grapes because he know the "ole vimes fum de noo ones."    
	John decides to buy the farm in spite of Uncle Julius's warnings, but he does offer him employment as a coachman.  It seems as if Uncle Julius had been trying to guarantee his usefulness on the plantation even after its sale.  Was white man tricked into believing Julius' knowledge would be useful in the renewing of the vineyards?  Chesnutt lets the reader wonder, but regardless of his tale being the reason for his employment, Uncle Julius gets to stay on the land and receives a wage to compensate for any money he may have lost in the sale of the vineyard.
	As the family settles into their new home the wife sees a need for a new kitchen.  There is an abandoned schoolhouse on the corner of the property that could serve for some of the wood to build with.  Uncle Julius hears of the idea and is immediately reminded of another story.  
	Chesnutt has titled this story Po' Sandy.  In this story Uncle Julius tells of a strong, hardworking slave, Sandy, that was tired of being sent away to wok for the Master's grown children.  His wife Tenie, conjure woman, places a spell on Sandy turning him into a tree.  Sandy continued to have problems in this state.  Tenie decides to turn him back and run off with him one night.  Unfortunately, Tenie was sent to nurse her master's daughter-in-law and by the time she returned the tree had been sent to the mill.  Sandy was used to build the kitchen, that later became the old schoolhouse at the corner of the plantation.  Tenie died on the floor of that schoolhouse mourning her husband.  
	This story so disturbed Annie that she refused to use any old lumber from the schoolhouse.  At the conclusion Annie also admits that she has given Uncle Julius permission to use the old schoolhouse for meetings of the new Colored Baptist Church.  Yet again Uncle Julius has received some sort of benefit from the telling of his tales.    This leads the reader to believe that he had this ulterior motive in mind the entire time.  Chesnutt seems to be satirizing the unknowing white woman.
	In the final selection chosen from the works of Chesnutt, Uncle Julius tells the story of Dave's Neckliss.  Dave, a good Christian slave, is accused of stealing a ham from the smokehouse and forced to wear a ham chained around his neck for punishment.  Wiley, the real thief, had set Dave up because he loved the girl that Dave had been going around with.  When this was discovered, the master tried to make reconciliation by telling all the slaves.  Dave had already lost his senses a little and thought he was a ham.  Uncle Julius later found him hanging the smokehouse.
	Uncle Julius explains how he cannot eat more than two or three pounds of ham without having to stop and think about Dave.  John asks for ham at breakfast the next morning.  Annie first claims that ham was too heavy for breakfast, but admits that she had given it all to Uncle Julius.  Annie has been outsmarted once more by a black man.
	These three example show Chesnutt is satirizing the whites.  He shows, through Uncle Julius' stories, that blacks have the ability to beguile whites in order to have their own motives met.  Thus Chesnutt portrays blacks possessing greater intelligence than many at the time accepted.   He does this very discretely through the black folk stories of supernatural, but the surrounding satire is still apparent.
	Twain also satirizes whites in his novel Pudd'nhead Wilson, more specifically the whites of the slave holding south.  This is brought out originally in the scene where Wilson receives his name.  The serious attitudes of property prevents the white towns people from understanding the joke Wilson makes about the dog.  For the reader it is apparent that Twain is pointing out the stupidity of the towns people rather than that of Wilson.
	Twain also shows Roxy as a black that is in a small way superior to the townsfolk.  She is able to outsmart the entire town, including her own master, by switching her own child with her master's son.  Ironically, the only white who figures out this scheme is Wilson, the person the townspeople labeled a "pudd'nhead."  Here, Twain again satirizes the whites of the south by showing their ignorance.  These people are so preoccupied with the idea of race, yet they cannot tell the difference between a person they would label "nigger" and a white.
	Twain also raises some questions regarding the nature of race.  Are their innate qualities of race or does it depend entirely on ones upbringing?  Twain questions nature versus nurture.  In the story Tom is a white boy that possesses black blood and Chambers is "white."  Twain spends some time comparing these boys as they grow up.  He says, Tom "was a bad baby from the very beginning."  He was given anything he desired.  Tom grew to be small and weak, while Chambers grew big and strong.  Twain points to the difference in diet and activity.  Tom ate sweets and was waited on, while Chambers was "coarsely fed" and worked around the house.
	Although Twain states that Tom was bad from the start, the reader is left wondering what would have happened if he had received Chambers discipline, diet, and work load.  At the conclusion of the book, the white townspeople of Dawson's Landing blame Tom's awful behavior on the drop of black blood that he possesses.  Though, Twain seems to be saying that it was his white upbringing that made him into the man became.  This also satirizes the whites of Dawson's Landing, showing them as simple minded.  
	Twain also questions the self-concept of blacks.  Here we see some of Twain's racist attitudes displayed.  He tries to show the irony of the blacks view of themselves in the case of Roxy.  Though Roxy has no physical characteristics that distinguish her as black in her own mind that is what she is.  From the very start of her life she has worn that label and her personality has been patterned after that.  Her dialect is poor and uneducated just as she herself is.  She has not been schooled as to the proper manners of a lady and thus she is crass and vulgar at times.  All of these outward facets of Roxy's personality expose her as black, though her features do not.  
	Even being raised in this manner, Twain portrays Roxy as feeling superior to the other slaves because of her white heritage.  At one time she says to Jasper, another slave, "I got somep'n' better to do den 'sociat'n' wid niggers as black as you is."  This was all in jest, but throughout the book Twain shows Roxy as having a low view of blacks, especially her own black heritage.  When scolding her son Tom for refusing to challenge the twins, Roxy blames his cowardice on "de nigger" in him.  After noting all of the predominant white members of his pedigree, she concludes that "de nigger" is his soul.
Twain seems to have some assumptions of his own that blacks have no pride in their own heritage. 
	Twain and Chesnutt both satirize whites, but in different ways.  Twain, being a white, satirizes the slave holding south, rather than whites in general.  Chesnutt, on the other hand, uses a couple from the north in a story set in the free south.  Chesnutt also is more descrete in his satire, while Twain pokes fun directly.  Twain also displays some of his own prejudices, being a white trying to explain the black culture.  On the contrary, Chesnutt honestly portrays blacks from an inside perspective.  Roxy was ashamed of the black blood in her, while Uncle Julius seemed to be a proud old man, happy to tell of his black friends and past.  From the analysis these literary selections we can gain a greater understanding of racial views but, one may say that everything is not as simple as black and white


















Black and White 


 

     More than a hundred years ago the Europeans brought slaves to North America. The
blacks found themselves in the midst of prejudice whites with no way out. When the blacks came
over Jim Crow laws were incorporated. With these laws it was near impossible for blacks to rise
in the white world. Booker T. Washington was the first black to rise to any prominence in this
time. In the early 1900's blacks however began to fight back. In 1909 black advancement
organizations began to increase all over North America. Unfortunately with the rise of these
groups also came the rise of racist white groups like the Ku Klux Klan and others brutally killing
blacks. All blacks coming into N. America were being brought into a very hostile environment.
     The first sign of blacks becoming more equal was the blacks to fight in the World War.
For the first time they were looked upon as war veterans instead of black slaves. Although
progress was beginning a black man named Garvey believed that the whites would never change,
because of this he started an association called "Back to Africa". At the coming of the Second
World War, blacks participating in the war were being more important positions than ever before.
     Franklin Roosevelt was the first president to make a strong contribution to the Civil
Rights movement. He had signed a declaration that stated no one could be discriminated in the
work place and other areas based on race. Also the high court passed a law that enabled black
children to have the same education opportunities as white children.
     It was in December 1955 that Rosa Parks made a big step for civil rights by doing a very
small but courageous thing. She was arrested for not giving up her seat to a white man on a bus,
which broke one of the many Jim Crow laws. With that one action black activist hired Martin
Luther King Jr. to boycott the bus laws. This boycott of the Jim Crow transportation laws was a
complete success, launching Martin Luther King Jr. into national stardom with the
accomplishment. King often acted on and admired the ways of M. Gandhi. Soon blacks all over
began to non-violently protest many segregated places. In turn many places were desegregated.
President John F. Kennedy was a strong force also in the fight for black civil rights and his
assassination in 1963 did cause setbacks. The blacks in the North felt that they had to do more
than the blacks in the South to make a difference but they didn't have a voice. That was until
Malcolm X joined the voice of Martin Luther King Jr. Malcolm X did make a difference but he
was not liked by many whites and even was strongly disliked by black Muslims. Soon later black
Muslims shot and killed Malcolm X, not much later Martin Luther King Jr. was also assassinated,
and another great voice was silenced.
     Jesse Jackson arose the killing in 1965. He started many organizations to help support
blacks and civil rights. Also to show that the equality between blacks and whites was getting
stronger Jackson ran for President of the United States in both 1984 and 1988, not only becoming
a threat in the civil rights movement but as a political icon also. His message was and still is well
liked by both blacks and whites, as he sends the message of true equality and not just power to
blacks. Poverty, education, and racism are still part of today's society and in political battle with
each other, but the efforts of all the blacks are paying off for everyone. The world does seem to
be getting better.  




 
BLACKS, PRISON, AND INSTITUTIONAL RACISM

Description: The title pretty much says it all in this one. This paper
addresses the issue of blacks in prison and explores the socio-economic
causes and solutions. This paper uses many govermentally commissioned
reports.

Blacks, Prison, and Institutional Racism

Introduction
Criminal justice and security is one of the largest industries in the United
States. Such a statistic is (and rightly so) of great concern to Afro-Americans
because a disproportionate percentage of individuals under the control of
the US Criminal Justice System are from the Black community. This paper
will look at the alarming statistics and attempt to trace the roots of the
disparity. It will then consider the affects and explore possible solutions
to the expanding problem.

The Imprisoned Black Youth
Black communities throughout the U.S. are witnessing the institutionalization
of their youth. Of course institutionalization is nothing new to Afro-Americans,
it is something Blacks have faced since their existence in this country.
In the beginning Blacks were forced into the institution of slavery. After
the abolition of slavery Blacks faced institutional racism, that is, racism
legitimated by the whole of society directed against the few of society.
As a facet of that institutional racism Blacks are now forced to persevere
the increasing trend of control by the US Criminal Justice System. Control
by the USCJS includes the probation, parole, imprisonment, and death of
Blacks. A study conducted by the Sentencing Project in 1989 found tat more
than one-fourth of all Blacks between the age of 20 and 29 are under the
control of the USCJS . This alarming figure becomes more so when you consider
their are more Blacks in prison in this age group than their are all Blacks
in college . This clearly reveals what is meant by the institutionalization
of our Black youth. Black communities are being legally robbed of their
youth by a system that locks up those who pose a threat to the status quo
of institutional racism. The consequences of this are detrimental indeed.
The children are the future, but what future does a community have whose
children are all locked up. By virtue of robbing the Black community of
their youth, the USCJS robs Black communities of their future leaders and
role models . With such a condition at hand entire communities are lost
and the ills of the urban ghettos are augmented. To help explain why Blacks
are being locked up, and what part of imprisonment plays in institutional
racism it would be helpful to first look at the roots of institutional racism.

Institutional Racism And It's Roots
Institutional racism was a term first coined by Stokley Carmichael in his
book Black Power. Concerning racism, Carmichael and co-author Charles V.
Hamilton made the following observation:

Racism is both overt and covert. It takes two, closely related forms; individual
Whites acting against individual Blacks, and acts by the total of White
community against the Black community. We call these individual racism and
institutional racism. 
The authors go on to state that it is the covertness of the second type,
the institutional racism, that makes it so dangerous. Because institutional
racism is less obvious and it is less apparent were it is emanating from
(and it is emanating from everywhere) creeps up on you and overwhelms you
when you are not looking . Institutional racism, though coined by Carmichael,
existed long before it was conceived of in Black Power. As I have stated
it has existed since Blacks were first brought to this country. The leaders
of early America sought intentionally to oppress Blacks and do so legally.
Of course back then they did not bother with probation, parole or even long
prison sentences. Back then Blacks who went against the grain and objected
to his treatment in even the slightest was simply killed. Public lynching
were a crowd drawer and a crowd pleaser in the early American South. Blacks
were not imprisoned as much because they were seen as either useful our
useless. A good &quot;field hands&quot; or &quot;house niggers&quot; tended
to their chores, did as they were told, and never caused a problem, and
were therefore worth their weight in gold. An &quot;uppity nigger&quot;
was no good to anyone and was either beaten into submission or put to death
. This reveals a very important aspect about the imprisonment of Blacks
today. During the period of slavery in the US Blacks were needed as workers
and were therefore used as so . What are Blacks needed for now? Despite
the many accomplishments of such great inventors as Granville T. Woods and
Benjamin Bannicker, it would seem that White society would have no use for
Blacks. During the period of slavery Blacks deemed useless were killed.
In today's society Blacks are less often killed, but are very often imprisoned.
And by virtue of doing so Blacks are again used. As I stated in the beginning
criminal justice and security is one of the largest industries in the US.
The prison system is a multi-billion dollar industry and it is rapidly increasing.
So in an attempt to isolate and control the pariah, the poor Black, an economic
niche was filled. There is almost an incentive to lock up Blacks because
in doing so two birds are killed with one stone; the threat to status quo
and its members is contained and a buck is made in the process. It seems
the US has matriculated very little from the barbarism of the early 19th
century. Again White society is using Blacks for economic gain, again the
system is legitimated and legalized by the US Government, and again the
burden on Blacks is severely great.

The Value Of Black Life
Slavery in the 90's? A scary, but none the less real condition. But what
about when Blacks go beyond their usefulness. What about when the threat
that Blacks pose is a greater consideration than the economic prosperity
they bring? Just as in the period of slavery Blacks are killed. A study
conducted by the United States General Accounting Office (USGAO) found that
the death of Whites was the single greatest determinant in imposing capital
punishment . In other words, you are more likely to be legally killed, if
you murder a White man than if you kill a Black man. It would seem then
that the value of a White life is diametrically greater than that of a Black
life. To fully understand this you must look at it from all vantage points.
If you kill a White you are worth more dead; if you kill a Black you are
worth more alive. Another way to view the perceived greater wealth of a
White life is this: a White man who kills a Black man has a greater chance
of living. A Black man who kills a White man has a greater chance of dying.
From every vantage point the value of White life is greater than that of
Black life. This is the single most fundamental aspect of institutional
racism. The belief that White life is greater than Black life is the source
of the problem. So much effort is put into maintaining this status quo that
Blacks find themselves time and time again put in the position of subjection
they are in today, and have been in since they first arrived in the United
States 400 years ago. 

Looking For Solution
Solutions to the problem of the institutionalization of Black youth will
not come easy. To plea for White society to stop imprisoning our future
leaders would likely fall on deaf ears. Most leaders do not look past their
term of government so they take the time to consider the long term implications
of their legislation. In other words, leaders do not consider the results
of having the future leaders of the Black communities imprisoned.
Also most do not care. In the sentencing project it was pointed out that
the &quot;get tough&quot; approach to crime in which there was an increase
of arrests, convictions and lengthy sentences has decreased victimization
rates less than 5% since 1973 . Despite the statistics the &quot;get tough&quot;
trend, which is disproportionately aimed against Blacks, has continued.
What I feel the only solution is, degrading as it may be, is for Blacks
to prove their worth. Blacks must prove that they are worth something to
White society beyond the economic niche they help fill in prison. Blacks
must prove that they are a benefit which Whites cannot do without. Once
We have established ourselves as benefactors then We can begin to break
down the walls of institutional racism, stop the digression of our communities,
and truly advance.
 

 
BLACKS, PRISON, AND INSTITUTIONAL RACISM

Description: The title pretty much says it all in this one. This paper
addresses the issue of blacks in prison and explores the socio-economic
causes and solutions. This paper uses many govermentally commissioned
reports.

Blacks, Prison, and Institutional Racism

Introduction
Criminal justice and security is one of the largest industries in the United
States. Such a statistic is (and rightly so) of great concern to Afro-Americans
because a disproportionate percentage of individuals under the control of
the US Criminal Justice System are from the Black community. This paper
will look at the alarming statistics and attempt to trace the roots of the
disparity. It will then consider the affects and explore possible solutions
to the expanding problem.

The Imprisoned Black Youth
Black communities throughout the U.S. are witnessing the institutionalization
of their youth. Of course institutionalization is nothing new to Afro-Americans,
it is something Blacks have faced since their existence in this country.
In the beginning Blacks were forced into the institution of slavery. After
the abolition of slavery Blacks faced institutional racism, that is, racism
legitimated by the whole of society directed against the few of society.
As a facet of that institutional racism Blacks are now forced to persevere
the increasing trend of control by the US Criminal Justice System. Control
by the USCJS includes the probation, parole, imprisonment, and death of
Blacks. A study conducted by the Sentencing Project in 1989 found tat more
than one-fourth of all Blacks between the age of 20 and 29 are under the
control of the USCJS . This alarming figure becomes more so when you consider
their are more Blacks in prison in this age group than their are all Blacks
in college . This clearly reveals what is meant by the institutionalization
of our Black youth. Black communities are being legally robbed of their
youth by a system that locks up those who pose a threat to the status quo
of institutional racism. The consequences of this are detrimental indeed.
The children are the future, but what future does a community have whose
children are all locked up. By virtue of robbing the Black community of
their youth, the USCJS robs Black communities of their future leaders and
role models . With such a condition at hand entire communities are lost
and the ills of the urban ghettos are augmented. To help explain why Blacks
are being locked up, and what part of imprisonment plays in institutional
racism it would be helpful to first look at the roots of institutional racism.

Institutional Racism And It's Roots
Institutional racism was a term first coined by Stokley Carmichael in his
book Black Power. Concerning racism, Carmichael and co-author Charles V.
Hamilton made the following observation:

Racism is both overt and covert. It takes two, closely related forms; individual
Whites acting against individual Blacks, and acts by the total of White
community against the Black community. We call these individual racism and
institutional racism. 
The authors go on to state that it is the covertness of the second type,
the institutional racism, that makes it so dangerous. Because institutional
racism is less obvious and it is less apparent were it is emanating from
(and it is emanating from everywhere) creeps up on you and overwhelms you
when you are not looking . Institutional racism, though coined by Carmichael,
existed long before it was conceived of in Black Power. As I have stated
it has existed since Blacks were first brought to this country. The leaders
of early America sought intentionally to oppress Blacks and do so legally.
Of course back then they did not bother with probation, parole or even long
prison sentences. Back then Blacks who went against the grain and objected
to his treatment in even the slightest was simply killed. Public lynching
were a crowd drawer and a crowd pleaser in the early American South. Blacks
were not imprisoned as much because they were seen as either useful our
useless. A good &quot;field hands&quot; or &quot;house niggers&quot; tended
to their chores, did as they were told, and never caused a problem, and
were therefore worth their weight in gold. An &quot;uppity nigger&quot;
was no good to anyone and was either beaten into submission or put to death
. This reveals a very important aspect about the imprisonment of Blacks
today. During the period of slavery in the US Blacks were needed as workers
and were therefore used as so . What are Blacks needed for now? Despite
the many accomplishments of such great inventors as Granville T. Woods and
Benjamin Bannicker, it would seem that White society would have no use for
Blacks. During the period of slavery Blacks deemed useless were killed.
In today's society Blacks are less often killed, but are very often imprisoned.
And by virtue of doing so Blacks are again used. As I stated in the beginning
criminal justice and security is one of the largest industries in the US.
The prison system is a multi-billion dollar industry and it is rapidly increasing.
So in an attempt to isolate and control the pariah, the poor Black, an economic
niche was filled. There is almost an incentive to lock up Blacks because
in doing so two birds are killed with one stone; the threat to status quo
and its members is contained and a buck is made in the process. It seems
the US has matriculated very little from the barbarism of the early 19th
century. Again White society is using Blacks for economic gain, again the
system is legitimated and legalized by the US Government, and again the
burden on Blacks is severely great.

The Value Of Black Life
Slavery in the 90's? A scary, but none the less real condition. But what
about when Blacks go beyond their usefulness. What about when the threat
that Blacks pose is a greater consideration than the economic prosperity
they bring? Just as in the period of slavery Blacks are killed. A study
conducted by the United States General Accounting Office (USGAO) found that
the death of Whites was the single greatest determinant in imposing capital
punishment . In other words, you are more likely to be legally killed, if
you murder a White man than if you kill a Black man. It would seem then
that the value of a White life is diametrically greater than that of a Black
life. To fully understand this you must look at it from all vantage points.
If you kill a White you are worth more dead; if you kill a Black you are
worth more alive. Another way to view the perceived greater wealth of a
White life is this: a White man who kills a Black man has a greater chance
of living. A Black man who kills a White man has a greater chance of dying.
From every vantage point the value of White life is greater than that of
Black life. This is the single most fundamental aspect of institutional
racism. The belief that White life is greater than Black life is the source
of the problem. So much effort is put into maintaining this status quo that
Blacks find themselves time and time again put in the position of subjection
they are in today, and have been in since they first arrived in the United
States 400 years ago. 

Looking For Solution
Solutions to the problem of the institutionalization of Black youth will
not come easy. To plea for White society to stop imprisoning our future
leaders would likely fall on deaf ears. Most leaders do not look past their
term of government so they take the time to consider the long term implications
of their legislation. In other words, leaders do not consider the results
of having the future leaders of the Black communities imprisoned.
Also most do not care. In the sentencing project it was pointed out that
the &quot;get tough&quot; approach to crime in which there was an increase
of arrests, convictions and lengthy sentences has decreased victimization
rates less than 5% since 1973 . Despite the statistics the &quot;get tough&quot;
trend, which is disproportionately aimed against Blacks, has continued.
What I feel the only solution is, degrading as it may be, is for Blacks
to prove their worth. Blacks must prove that they are worth something to
White society beyond the economic niche they help fill in prison. Blacks
must prove that they are a benefit which Whites cannot do without. Once
We have established ourselves as benefactors then We can begin to break
down the walls of institutional racism, stop the digression of our communities,
and truly advance.