
 


Communication over the internet, and  the effects it will have on our economy.

Thesis: Communication over the internet is growing at a rapid rate, this rate of growth may destroy the monopoly taking place with the major telecommunication giants.


In this day and age we as a global community are growing at a super fast rate. Communication is a vital tool which aids us in breaking the distance barrier. Over the past decades there has been a monopoly in the telecommunications business, but  now with the power of the internet, and super fast data transfer rates people can communicate across the globe and only pay local rates.
· In essence the local phone companies almost promote this.

- When you log on to the internet chances are that you are logging on through a local internet provider. You will use  your computer modem to dial up and create and data link with your net provider. Where does the net provider get his super fast net connection from? He gets the connection from the local phone company.

· How logging on the internet is almost like logging right onto the local telephone company. 
-It all boils down to, the local phone company approving the use of the internet for any means. 

· How phone companies are going to bring them selves down.
-I feel that because of this phone companies will be the cause to their own downfall. 
· Methods of communication over the net
-There are many ways of communicating over the net: Inter relay chat (text only)
-Video/Audio: there are many net applications which allow the user to simply plug in a mini video camera( which can be purchased anywhere from $150+) and speakers and a microphone and establish a net connection and be able to view to and hear.
-There are also applications such as the internet phone which enables the user to talk with other people, this works almost like a conventional telephone.

· New technologies and what to expect in the near future.
There have been many new breakthroughs in communication s recently, we are unfolding new ideas and new and faster ways in communication. Fiber optic technology is probably the next major wave in technology. Fiber optic communication over the internet will mean that it will be a lot easier to communicate. 
· Why there is no jurisdiction over this means of communication.
A major principal of law and order is to control a certain area and population. Laws that apply to one state or province don't necessarily apply to another. Just like in Amsterdam you can order a slice of hashish with your coffee and if you did the same in Singapore you would be executed. The internet does not reside somewhere nor is it a physical thing. The internet has no boundaries, there is no way in which we can control it. There is no one person liable for what happens on it, there is no board of control therefore nobody has any jurisdiction of what happens on the internet. This should be  a major concern to large telecommunication companies. 
· Advantages/Disadvantages with the technology available to the normal person
-There is a downside however to the communication on the internet, for example when talking on the internet phone, you can not talk both ways, one person says something the other waits until he/she is done, then the other person can respond. On the other hand if you have a problem of cutting people off then this would be a good solution for you.
· How  corporations other than the telecommunication companies will boom
These new technologies will dramatically lower the cost of  communication, not to mention advantages of online service. For example it is quite easy for a technician to log on to your machine and fix up any problems which may occur.
 · How the government gain/loose from this new technology.
The government will gain money from the people as a whole because they reduce there costs enabling themselves to purchase desired goods which are taxable.
 · The aftershocks of the effects on the economy i.e. decrease unemployment.
People might argue that there will be major job cuts due to new technologies, but what do the telephone companies plan to do any ways in the next five to ten years, they are all looking at technology as well to reduce there costs. Costs such as man labour. The new technology will also create jobs for graduating students from Universities, there will be a large demand for programming skills, computer oriented network managers, system operators etc..

Technology is a tool in which we will improve your quality of  life, it will aid us in making life easier  so that we can enjoy it to the fullest. Communication over the internet will help a lot from sending faxes,  to chatting with someone from Australia, to video conferencing with a boss. Communication over the internet will effect our economy.


   

 
         The Communication Decency Act
(The Fight For Freedom of Speech on the Internet)

	The Communication Decency Act is a bill which has insulted our right as American
citizens.  It a bill which SHOULD not pass.  I'll share with you how Internet users are
reacting to this bill, and why they say it is unconstitutional.
	Some individuals disagree with one part of the bill.  According to
http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ query/z?c104:s.652.enr:, which has the Communications
Decency Act on-line for public viewing,:  "Whoever uses an Internet service to send to a
person or persons under 18 years of age......any comment, request, suggestion, proposal,
image,........or anything offensive as measured by contemporary community standards,
sexual or excretory activities or organs.....shall be fined $250,000  if the person(s) is/are
under 18....... imprisoned not more than two years.......or both."
	The wording of that section seems sensible.  However, if this one little paragraph is
approved, many sites such as the: Venus de Milo site located at:
http://www.paris.org/Musees/Louvre/Treasures/gifs/venusdemilo.gif; the Sistine Chapel
at: http://www.oir.ucf.edu/wm/paint/auth/michelangelo/michelangelo.creation and
Michelangelo's David @ http://fileroom.aaup.uic.edu/FileRoom/images/image201.gif
could not be accessed and used by anybody under the age of 18.  These works of art and
many other museum pictures would not be available.  The bill says these sites show
indecent pictures. 
	The next part of the CDA has everybody in a big legal fit. We, concerned Internet
users, took the writers of this bill to court, and we won.
	This part of the bill states: "Whoever....makes, creates, or solicits...........any
comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, or other communication
which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent.......with intent to annoy, abuse,
threaten, or harass another person......by means of an Internet page..........shall be fined
$250,000 under title 18......imprisoned not more than two years....or both......"
	The writer of that paragraph of the bill forgot something.   It violates the
constitution.  The First Amendment states: "Congress shall make no law....prohibiting or
abridging the freedom of speech......the right of the people peaceably to assemble.....and to
petition the Government.............." 
	This bill does exactly that.  It says we cannot express our feelings cleanly.  I
understand that what may be of interest to me, may be offensive to others.  Many people
put up warning signs on their websites stating,  "This site may contain offensive material. 
If you are easily offended you may not want to come here."  If the writers of this bill
would have listed that as a requirement there would have been no trouble. 
	Here is the way I look at it. I think that some things should be censored on the
Internet. Child pornography, for instance, is already illegal, so it follows that it should also
be illegal on the Internet. Besides, psychologically, it damages the children involved.
	Something else that should be banned from the Internet are "hacker" programs
meant to harm other Internet users. Some examples of such programs are AOHell which
can give you access to America On-line for free and E-mail Bomb, or otherwise harass
others using the service (American On-line just passed a bill that gave them the right to
allow users to let them scan their mail for such harmful things.)  Another thing that could
be banned are text files which describe how to complete illegal actions, such as make
bombs.  The most famous is the "Anarchist Cook Book," which shows Internet users
some of the above problems.
	I also believe that the use of log-ins, passwords, and rating systems on pages for
the Internet are a good idea, and are not violations of our civil rights. They simply allow
the user to choose what they want to see. Some of these systems are already in use today,
along with programs that watch for obscene and profane keywords, and links to
pornographic sites. 
	What have Internet users learned from the courts?  After all was said and done, we
have learned that passing unconstitutional laws like the CDA is not the exception but the
rule these days in Washington, DC.  
	Next, the people responsible for giving us the CDA are respectable Republicans
and Democrats, not liberals and conservatives. If someone would have asked an Internet
user who is opposed to the CDA to vote for Clinton or Dole this past fall, they would say,
"Wouldn't that have been like being given a choice between cancer and heart disease?" In
other words, disrespect for the President and Congress seem appropriate.
	Third, the White House recognizes that it is cheaper to pass this bill, by saying, this
is the law.  Live with it.  Doing this would prove to me this country is run by politicians
who do not care about the people, their rights, or the law.  This bill, if passed, would only
prove to me that all the government cares about is themselves and their money.  A great
president by the name of Abraham Lincoln once said, "This country was made for the
people, and run by the people..."  America can now only hope, for another man like
Lincoln, to step up, and lead this country, bringing it back to what it used to be. 
	Also, it is time to focus on the things we need to have in this country, like building
a new society. After World War II and Vietnam, I believe it is the computer generation's
destiny to rebuild our family and give community abilities to evolve, solve problems,
generate and distribute wealth, promote peace, and personal security.
	Finally, freedom is struggle, by definition.   Freedom on the Internet is not a gift.
It's the space we ourselves own, in the face of the government and the media, who have
seemingly tried to take that space away from us.
	CDA will also take away some sites such as: The Library of Congress Card
Catalog, which some say contains "indecent" language.  We will not be able to view such
literature as Mark Twain's The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn and Nathaniel
Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter, because the CDA says those "classics" contain offensive
material.  The act also prevents any sites in existence which tell teens about safe sex and
Sexually Transmitted Diseases.  Most  on-line newspapers such as USA TODAY, will
have to be blackened out when the monitor's screen shows them articles about sex.
	"Ignorance is caused by stupidity!"  That has become a familiar "battle" cry of
Internet users.  The goverment knows hardly nothing about the pride Internet users take in
having their own "world."  That is the stupidity part of it.  The ingnorance is the politicians
refusing to listen to us.  They do not want to understand.
	Some ways you can help fight this terrible bill would be to march through
Washington, DC on July 30, 1997.  Many people have turned their web pages
backgrounds black to show they are protesting.  Some display blue ribbons to show an
Internet users' displeasure with the CDA.
	Another way to show you care is to e-mail high political officers. I have e-mailed
the current president (9:23 PM, 11-5-96) Bill Clinton and the vice-president Al Gore.  I
have also mailed Bob Dole and Jack Kemp.
	On the more local level I have e-mailed Senators: Rick Santorum and Arlen
Specter and Representatives: Jon Fox, Paul Kanjorski, Paul McHale, John Murtha, Robert
Walker, and Curt Weldon.  I have mailed: Gov. Tom Ridge, Lt. Gov. Mark Schweiker
and Senators Roy Afflerbach, Gibson Armstrong, Clarence Bell, David Brightbill, J. Doyle
Corman, Daniel Delp, Vincent Fumo, Jim Gerlach, Stewart Greenleaf,  Melissa Hart, F.
Joseph Loeper, Roger Madigan, Robert Mellow, Harold Mowery Jr., John Peterson,
James Rhoades, Robert Robbins, Allyson Schwartz, Joseph Uliana, Noah Wenger, Rep.
Lisa Boscola, Rep. Italo Cappabianca and Rep. Lawrence Curry have been contacted by
myself as well.  I have e-mailed Happy Fernandez, a Philadelphia City Councilwoman. 
The message I sent them is a smaller version of this one: 
"To whom it may concern,
	I am writing to you about the Communications Decency Act.  I believe the act is
unconstitutional.  Amendment I states: "Congress shall make no law......abridging the
freedom of speech...."  This alone should prohibit this act.  The Communications Decency
Act will force many educational Internet sites to close.  I, as a student, use the Information
Super Highway for exactly that, information.  It is very helpful to have updated facts and
so forth.  With the Communications Decency Act such sites as the Library of Congress
Electronical Card Catalog would be kept away from me because of "indecent" titles.  I use
the word indecent in quotation marks because I feel it is being used improperly.  Some
other sites, will be closed because of nudity.  Such sites as Michelangelo's David, because
of the "nudity."  There again I use quotations.  Sites informing teenagers such as myself of
the dangers of Unprotected Sex and AIDS, as well as other STD's will not be allowed to
be shown.
	I know I may be taking this the wrong way, so I would appreciate  response telling
me why this act should pass.  I hope you consider what I, and many others, have been
saying.

			Thank you for your time,
				Ryne Crabb <seuss@usa.net>"
	Another huge part of this world-wide protest was the Electronic March on
Washington, DC.  People, of all ages, who care about the unconstitutionality of the CDA,
went to the White House and made signs, etc. while marching around the White House's
property.  Also, everybody was asked to e-mail the president in protest.  President Clinton
got over 10,000 e-mail messages on that day.  I think it opened a lot of eyes.
	Black Thursday was another big issue.  Over 82% of the Internet's websites had a
"blackout."  "Yahoo!" the famous search engine also blackened all of their pages in
protest.  It was beautiful how many heads were turned.  Major businesses such as AT&T
and ESPN also did their part in this battle by making comments about it to less informed
Internet users.
	Although there are other things happening in cyberspace, this issue remains a
major problem.  Chances are, however, when this piece of legal mess is settled, happily or
not, another will come up.  I can almost see what is next on the list.  Some countries are
taxing the Internet. Trust me, we do not even WANT to get into that, yet.
	I hope this opened your eyes as to the importance of this fight.  We need to show
the government this country still is made for the people, and run by the people.  That is
written in the constitution.  We do not want to change the document our forefathers wrote
expressing their wishes for our future generations.  That document protects our freedoms. 
It is important that the constitution remains intact so that it can preserve all of our
freedoms including use of the Internet as we see fit. 



 


Introduction

	The intention of this project is to demonstrate the function of production planning in a non - artificial environment.  Through this simulation we are able to forecast, with a degree of certainty the monthly requirements for end products, subassemblies, parts and raw materials.  We are supplied with information that we are to base our decisions on.  The manufacturer depicted in this simulation was actually a General Electric facility that produced black and white television sets Syracuse, New York.  Unfortunately this plant is no longer operational, it was closed down and the equipment was shipped off to China.  One can only wonder if the plant manager would have taken Professor Moily's class in production management the plant still might be running.
	Modern production management or operation management (OM) systems first came to prominence in the early half of the twentieth century.  Frederick W. Taylor is considered the father of operations management and is credited in the development of the following principles.  

a.  Scientific laws govern how much a worker can produce in a day.
b.  It is the function of management to discover and use these laws in operation of productive systems.
c.  It is the function of the worker to carry out management's wishes without question.

	Many of today's method's of operation management have elements of the above stated principles.  For example, part of Material Requirement Planning system (MRP) is learning how workers to hire, fire, or lay idle.  This is because it we realize the a worker can only produce so many widgets a day, can work so many hours a day, and so many days a year.  
	I will disagree with principle "c" in that the worker should blindly carry out the wishes of management. Successful operations are based upon a two-way flow of thought and suggestions from management to labor.  This two-way flow of ideas is incorporated into another modern system of operations management, the Just - In - Time system.  Eastman Kodak gives monetary rewards to employees who devises an improvement in a current process or suggests an entirely new process of manufacturing.  Often a small suggestion can yield a big reward when applied to a mass-produced item.  












Body

	In this project we are presented with the following information: bounds for pricing decisions, market share determination, the product explosion matrix, sales history (units per month at average price), unit value, setup man-hours, running man hours, initial workforce, value of inventory, on hand units.  We also know that we have eight end products, four subassemblies, eight parts, and four raw materials.  The eight end products are comprised entirely from the  subassemblies, parts, and raw materials.  From this information I was able to determine how many units of each final product, how many units of parts to produce in a month, how many units of raw material to order every month and how to price the final products.
	The first step that I took in this project was to develop product structures for each product (please refer to the Appendices for product structures on all eight products, plus new product nine).  This information was presented in product explosion matrix.    For example, I determined that product one used one subassembly nine and one part thirteen.  Part thirteen consisted of raw material twenty-one.  Sub-assembly nine consists of part thirteen (which includes raw material twenty-one), raw material twenty one and raw material twenty-four.  From this product explosion matrix I have realized that an end product does not just happen; they consist of many subassemblies, parts and raw material.  
	We also determined the minimal direct costs to each of the eight products.  The minimal direct product is the cost of the raw material, plus the price of the amount of labor for the assembly to end product.  For product one we have a total of three raw material "twenty-one" which cost ten dollars a piece and one raw material "twenty-four" which cost twenty dollars each.  We now have a total of fifty dollars for the price of the parts.  Next we calculate the labor that goes into transforming these parts into a viable end product.  We get a total of six hours of running man hours/unit and an hourly labor rate of $8.50, which gives us a total of fifty-one dollars.  This gives a minimal total cost of $101 to produce product one.  This number is useful in determining how much a unit actually cost to manufacture and what we must minimally sell the product for to make a profit.  We can than analyze if a product costs to much to make or the sum of the parts is more than the price of the end product.  Product eight had the lowest direct minimum cost ($89.50) and four had the highest minimal direct cost.
	From a purely economic stand point, it would be beneficial to use as much of raw material twenty-three ($5 unit) and as little of raw material twenty-two ($30 unit).  This does not consider that raw material twenty-two may actually be more valuable than raw material twenty-three.  Perhaps raw material twenty two may be gold or silver and raw material twenty-three may be sand or glass.
	I also converted all information in the sales history per month (figure four of the MANMAN packet).  The purpose of this step was so that I could sort and add the sales numbers to chronicle the past twenty four months.  Clearly product one was the best-selling apparatus, and product three, four and five where sales laggards.  
	Entering the information into spreadsheet form was also necessary to present the eight products in graphical form.  Of the following graph types that where at my disposal (line, bar, circle) to clearly illustrate the upward and downward trend of each of the eight product I chose the line graph method.  A circle graph is good percentage comparisons or comparison of market share.  Bar graphs can illustrate a snapshot in time but can distort trend data.
	At this point our class gathered into groups to discuss which product to discontinue.  Obviously product one was not going to be of the discontinued products, since it was our volume leader.  Based on the sales figure for the past twenty-four months my group decided to eliminate products three, four and five.  Also, products three, four and five had the highest minimum direct costs as well.  Since these products where expensive to manufacture and where our lowest selling products a group decision was made to discontinue these products.  
	The discontinued product was then rolled over into a new product, now referred to product nine.  Unfortunately, we where unable to decide by the information given if any of the discontinued products was a high margin product, low volume product (IE 50" big screen color Trinitron tube with oak cabinet and stereo sound).
	Moving right into our next step we began to analyze our bar charts to make our starting forecast.  We viewed sales from each product to see if they fall under one the following situations:
Base
(Base + Trend)
(Base + Trend) * Seasonality

When a product is base the sales alter little each sales period or change erratically with external market signals.  An example of a product that would fall under the base model would be sand bags.  Sand bags sell at the same level month after month.  If a retailer sells a hundred bags in March the will sell a hundred bags in October.  But, in a flood plain after terrantiel downpour, the sales of sandbags increase exponentially.  This is because many people purchase the sandbags to hold back the rising flood waters.  Another example of a product that would emulate the base model is insulin.  There is a limited number of people with insulin dependant diabetes.  The people with insulin dependant diabetes unfortunately die off, but are replaced with other people who fall ill to the disease.  There is very little movement up or down in the sale of insulin.  
	The base plus trend model illustrates that a product has a trend of upward or downward groth in sales.  Products at the begining or ending of their respective product cycles will display this type of performance.  Sales of a new product such as Microsoft Windows95(tm) disk operating system will fall into this category.  The sales of May are expected to be larger than April, the sales of April will be larger than March and so on.  While the sales may decline (or increase) during a particular time frame, a trend of upward or downward growth will be apparent.
	Lastly, the base plus trend times seasonality attempts to forecast the swings in demand that are caused by seasonal changes that can be expected to repeat themselves during a single or consecutive time period.  For example, florists experience a predictable increases in demand each year, both occur at similiar (or exact) times during the year; Mothers Day and St.  Valentines Day.  Florists must forecast demand for roses and other flowers so they can meet this predictable demand.  If I where to construct a ten year historical graph for a neighborhood florist, there would be clear increase in demand every February and May, in every one of those years.  A caveat to the previous example would be that in most lines a business forecasting is never this easy.  If it was there would not be a production management class or operations management science!
	Some other methods used to forecast demand are: delphi method, historical analogy, simple moving average, box Jenkins type, exponential smoothing and regression analysis.  Forecasting falls into four basic types: qualitative, time series analysis, casual relationships and simulation.  All of the proceeding have pluses, minuses and degrees of accuraccy.  I often depends on the precision of previous data.  Also, as is often stated in financial prospectuses "past performance does not guarantee future results".
	For product one I used base plus trend.  The sales started of at 1246 units and gradually increased to 2146 at the end of twenty four months.  There was a slight dip in sales between month nine-teen and month twenty three.  This drop can from internal or external variables.
	Product two was little more tricky.  The swing where eratic and showed no detectable trend.  I may have been able to use (Base + Trend) * Seasonality if there was not a decrease in sales from month eight and an increase in sales in month sixteen.  For this I had to employ the base or simle method.
	While I find it hard to comprehend how television sales can be seasonal, products three, five and six fall under (Base + Trend) * Seasonality models.  I was able to replicate the wave in demand with my forecast.  Perhaps consumers are buying portable televisions to use at the beach while on vacation, or people are replacing there old televisions to watch the Superbowl championship game or world series.  Or maybe even watch the Syracuse Orangemen in the NCAA college basketball championship!
	Conceivably, I was reading to much into product six when a decided on base plus trend model.  The way I saw it was that none of the upward or downward where that substantial when compared with entire data, and sales from month one (521 units) decreased by almost fifty percent to 242 units.
	I felt the same way about product eight that I felt about product two, this product demostrated eratic swings in no particular trend.  I forecasted demand using the base or simlple method for this product.
	From this point I was able to forecast demand.  For the safety stock decision I always tried to error on the side of caution.  On average I used a twenty five percent safety stock level.  However, when calculating the MRP or labor plans I tried
to have the minimal amount of surplus.  This often means that I only had safety stock on hand from period to period.


Conclusion

	From this project and from the class lectures I have received an understanding of how how much planning goes into even the most simplest of manufactured goods.  Production managers must employ at least one type of forecasting method in order to avoid the everyday stock outs, late deliveries and labor problems that arise.  Forecasts are vital to every business organization and for every significant management decision.  

Afterthought
	
	I feel that I could have further reduced costs by reducing some of the parts, sub assemblies and outsourcing some of the production.  Another situation that I felt was unrealistic was that there was only one source for each part and when that part was unvailable, there was a stock out.  Perhaps in future projects there can be allowance for this. 
                                                                                       
 
Floating Point Coprocessors

	The designer of any microprocessor would like to extend its 
instruction set almost infinitely but is limited by the quantity of silicon 
available (not to mention the problems of testability and complexity). 
Consequently, a real microprocessor represents a compromise between what 
is desirable and what is acceptable to the majority of the chip's users. For 
example, the 68020 microprocessor is not optimized for calculations that 
require a large volume of scientific (i.e. floating point) calculations. One 
method to significantly enhance the performance of such a microprocessor is 
to add a coprocessor. To increase the power of a microprocessor, it does not 
suffice to add a few more instructions to the instruction set, but it involves 
adding an auxiliary processor that works in parallel to the MPU (Micro 
Processing Unit). A system involving concurrently operating processors can 
be very complex, since there need to be dedicated communication paths 
between the processors, as well as software to divide the tasks among them. 
A practical multiprocessing system should be as simple as possible and 
require a minimum overhead in terms of both hardware and software. There 
are various techniques of arranging a coprocessor alongside a 
microprocessor. One technique is to provide the coprocessor with an 
instruction interpreter and program counter. Each instruction fetched from 
memory is examined by both the MPU and the coprocessor. If it is a MPU 
instruction, the MPU executes it; otherwise the coprocessor executes it. It 
can be seen that this solution is feasible, but by no means simple, as it would 
be difficult to keep the MPU and coprocessor in step. Another technique is 
to equip the microprocessor with a special bus to communicate with the 
external coprocessor. Whenever the microprocessor encounters an operation 
that requires the intervention of the coprocessor, the special bus provides a 
dedicated high-speed communication between the MPU and the coprocessor. 
Once again, this solution is not simple. There are more methods of 
connecting two (or more) concurrently operating processors, which will be 
covered in more detail during the specific discussions of the Intel and 
Motorola floating point coprocessors.

	Motorola Floating Point Coprocessor (FPC) 68882

	The designers of the 68000-family coprocessors decided to implement 
coprocessors that could work with existing and future generations of 
microprocessors with minimal hardware and software overhead. The actual 
approach taken by the Motorola engineers was to tightly couple the 
coprocessor to the host microprocessor and to treat the coprocessor as a 
memory-mapped peripheral lying inside the CPU address space. In effect, 
the MPU fetches instructions from memory, and, if an instruction is a 
coprocessor instruction, the MPU passes it to the coprocessor by means of 
the MPU's asynchronous data transfer bus. By adopting this approach, the 
coprocessor does not have to fetch or interpret instructions itself. Thus if the 
coprocessor requires data from memory, the MPU must fetch it. There are 
advantages and disadvantages to this design. Most notably, the coprocessor 
does not have to deal with, for example, bus errors, as all fetching is 
performed by the host MPU. On the other hand, the FPC can not act as a bus 
master (making it a non-DMA device), making memory accesses by the FPC 
slower than if it were directly connected to the address and data bus.
	In order for the coprocessor to work as a memory mapped device, the 
designers of the 68000 series of MPU's had to set aside certain bit patterns 
to represent opcodes for the FPC. In the case of the 68000's, the FPC is 
accessed through the opcode 1111(2). This number is the same as 'F' in 
hexadecimal notation, so this bit pattern is often referred to as the F-line.

	Interface

	The 68882 FPC employs an entirely conventional asynchronous bus 
interface like all 68000 class devices, and absolutely no new signals 
whatsoever are required to connect the unit to an MC 68020 MPU. The 
68882 can be configured to run under a variety of different circumstances, 
including various sized data buses and clock speeds. What follows is a 
diagram of connections necessary to connect the 68882 to a 68020 or 68030 
MPU using a 32-bit data path.

	As mentioned previously, all instructions for the FPC are of the F-line 
format, that is, they begin with the bit pattern 1111(2). A generic coprocessor 
instruction has the following format: the first four bits must be 1111. This 
identifies the instruction as being for the coprocessor. The next three bits 
identify the coprocessor type, followed by three bits representing the 
instruction type. The meaning of the remaining bits varies depending on the 
specific instruction.

	Coprocessor Operation

	When the MPU detects an F-line instruction, it writes the instruction 
into the coprocessors memory mapped command register in CPU space. 
Having sent a command to the coprocessor, the host processor reads the 
reply from the coprocessor's response register. The response could, for 
example, instruct the processor to fetch data from memory. Once the host 
processor has complied with the demands from the coprocessor, it is free to 
continue with instruction processing, that is, both the processor and 
coprocessor act concurrently. This is why system speed can be dramatically 
improved upon installation of a coprocessor.

	MC 68882 Specifics

	The MC 68882 floating point coprocessor is basically a very simple 
device, though it's data manual is nearly as thick as that of the MC 68000. 
This complexity is due to the IEEE floating point arithmetic standards rather 
than the nature of the FPC. The 68882 contains eight 80-bit floating point 
data registers, FP0 to FP7, one 32-bit control register, FPCR, and one 32-bit 
status register, FPSR. Because the FPC is memory mapped in CPU space, 
these registers are directly accessible to the programmer within the register 
space of the host MPU. In addition to the standard byte, word and longword 
operations, the FPC supports four new operand sizes: single precision real 
(.S), double precision real (.D), extended precision real (.X) and packed 
decimal string (.P). All on-chip calculations take place in extended precision 
format and all floating point registers hold extended precision values. The 
single real and double real formats are used to input and output operands. 
All three real floating point formats comply with the corresponding IEEE 
floating point number standards. The FPC has built in functions to convert 
between the various data formats added by the unit, for example a register 
move with specified operand type (.P, .B, etc).
	The 68882 FPC has a significant instruction set designed to satisfy 
many number-crunching situations. All instructions native to the FPC start 
with the bit pattern 1111(2) to show that the instruction deals with floating 
point numbers. Some instructions supported by the FPC include FCOSH, 
FETOX, FLOG2, FTENTOX, FADD, FMUL and FSQRT. There are many 
more instructions available, but this excerpt demonstrates the versatility of 
the 68882 unit.
	One of the registers within the FPC is the status register. It is very 
similar in function to the status register in a CPU; it is updated to show the 
outcome of the most recently executed instruction. Flags within the status 
register of the FPC include divide by zero, infinity, zero, overflow, 
underflow and not a number. Some of the conditions signaled by the status 
register of the FPC (for example divide by zero) require an exception routine 
to be executed, so that the user is informed of the situation. These exceptions 
are stored and executed within the host MPU, which means that the FPC can 
be used to control loops and tests within user programs - further extending 
the functionality of the coprocessor.

Intel Math Coprocessor 80387 DX

	In many respects, the Intel 80387 math coprocessor (MCP) is very 
similar to the MC 68882. Both designs were influenced by such factors as 
cost, usability and performance. There are, however, subtle differences in 
the designs of the two units.
	Firstly, I shall discuss the similarities between the designs followed by 
differences. Like the 68882, the 80387 requires no additional hardware to be 
connected to a 80386. It is a non-DMA device, having no direct access to the 
address bus of the motherboard. All memory and I/O is handled by the CPU, 
which upon detection of a MCP instruction passes it along to the MCP. If 
additional memory reads are necessary to load operands or data, the MCP 
instructs the CPU to perform these actions. This design, although reducing 
MCP performance when compared to a direct connection to the address bus, 
significantly decreases complexity of the MCP as no separate address 
decoding or error handling logic is necessary. The connection between the 
CPU and the MCP instruction is via a synchronous bus, while internal 
operation of the MCP can run asynchronously (higher clockspeed). 
Moreover, the three functional units of the MCP can work in parallel to 
increase system performance. The CPU can be transferring commands and 
data to the MCP bus control logic while the MCP floating unit is executing 
the current instruction. Similar to the 68882, the 80387 has a bit pattern 
(11011(2)) reserved to identify instructions intended for it. Also, the registers 
of the MCP are memory mapped into CPU address space, making the 
internal registers of the MCP available to programmers.
	Internally, the 80387 contains three distinct units: the bus 
control logic (BCL), the data interface and control unit and the actual 
floating point unit. The data interface and control unit directs the data to the 
instruction decoder. The instruction decoder decodes the ESC instructions 
sent to it by the CPU and generates controls that direct the data flow in the 
instruction buffer. It also triggers the microinstruction sequencer that 
controls execution of each instruction. If the ESC instruction is FINIT, 
FCLEX, FSTSW, FSTSW AX, or FSTCW, the control unit executes it 
independently of the FPU and the sequencer. The data interface and control 
unit is the unit that generates the BUSYÝ, PEREQ and ERRORÝ signals 
that synchronize Intel 387 DX MCP activities with the Intel 80386 DX CPU. 
It also supports the FPU in all operations that it cannot perform alone (e.g. 
exceptions handling, transcendental operations, etc.).
	The FPU executes all instructions that involve the register stack, 
including arithmetic, logical, transcendental, constant, and data transfer 
instructions. The data path in the FPU is 84 bits wide (68 significant bits, 15 
exponent bits, and a sign bit) which allows internal operand transfers to be 
performed at very high speeds.

	Interface

	The MCP is connected to the MPU via a synchronous connection, 
while the numeric core can operate at a different clock speed, making it 
asynchronous. The following diagram will clarify this.



	The following diagram shows the specific connections necessary 
between the 80386 MPU and the 80387 MCP.

		
	A typical coprocessor instruction must begin with the bit pattern 
11011(2) to identify the instruction for the coprocessor. The bus control logic 
of the MCP (BCL) communicates solely with the CPU using I/O bus cycles. 
The BCL appears to the CPU as a special peripheral device. It is special in 
one important respect: the CPU uses reserved I/O addresses to communicate 
with the BCL. The BCL does not communicate directly with memory. The 
CPU performs all memory access, transferring input operands from memory 
to the MCP and transferring outputs from the MCP to memory.

	Coprocessor Operation

When the CPU detects the arrival of a coprocessor instruction, it 
writes the instruction into the coprocessors memory mapped command 
register in CPU space. Having sent a command to the coprocessor, the host 
processor reads the reply from the coprocessor's signals. The response 
could, for example, instruct the processor to fetch data from memory. Once 
the host processor has complied with the demands from the coprocessor, it is 
free to continue with instruction processing, that is, both the processor and 
coprocessor act concurrently. This is why system speed can be dramatically 
improved upon installation of a coprocessor.

	80387 Specifics

Just like the MC 68882 floating point coprocessor, the Intel 80387 is 
basically a very simple device. Like any reasonable math coprocessor, it 
conforms to the IEEE standards of floating point number representations. 
The 80387 contains eight 82-bit floating point data registers (including a 2-
bit tag field), R0 to R7, one 16-bit control register, one 16-bit status register 
and a tag word (that contains the tag fields for the eight data registers). The 
MCP also indirectly uses the 48-bit instruction and data pointer registers of 
the 80386 host processor, even though these are external to the unit. Because 
the FPC is memory mapped in CPU space, these registers are directly 
accessible to the programmer within the register space of the host MPU. In 
addition to the standard word, short and long (16, 32 and 64-bit) integer 
operations, the MCP supports four new operand sizes: single precision real, 
double precision real, extended precision real and packed binary coded 
decimal strings. All on-chip calculations take place in extended precision 
format and all floating point registers hold extended precision values. The 
single real and double real formats are used to input and output operands. 
All three real floating point formats comply with the corresponding IEEE 
floating point number standards. The MCP has built in functions to convert 
between the various data formats added by the unit.
	The 80387 has a significant instruction set designed to satisfy many 
number-crunching situations. All instructions native to the MCP start with 
the bit pattern 11011(2) to show that the instruction should be directed to the 
coprocessor. Some (of the over 70) instructions supported by the MCP are 
FCOMP, FDIV, FSQRT, FSINCOS, FINIT. There are many more 
instructions available, but this excerpt demonstrates the versatility of the 
80387 unit, which is very similar to that of the 68882 unit.
	One of the registers within the MCP is the status register. Just like for 
the 68882, the status register shows the outcome of the most recently 
executed instruction. Flags within the status register of the FPC include 
divide by zero, infinity, zero, overflow, underflow and invalid operation. 
Some of the conditions signaled by the status register of the FPC (for 
example divide by zero) require an exception routine to be executed by the 
host MPU, so that the user is informed of the situation. These exceptions are 
stored and executed within the host MPU, which means that the MCP can 
again be used to control loops and tests within user programs - further 
extending the functionality of the coprocessor.
The Intel 80387 DX MCP register set can be accessed either as a 
stack, with instructions operating on the top one or two stack elements, or as 
a fixed register set, with instructions operating on explicitly designated 
registers. The TOP field in the status word identifies the current top-of-stack 
register. A ``push'' operation decrements TOP by one and loads a value into 
the new TOP register. A ``pop'' operation stores the value from the current 
top register and then increments TOP by one. Like the 80386 DX 
microprocessor stacks in memory, the MCP register stack grows ``down'' 
toward lower-addressed registers. Instructions may address the data registers 
either implicitly or explicitly. The explicit register addressing is also relative 
to TOP. 
A notable feature of the 80387 is the addition of a tag field of 2 bits to 
each of the eight floating point registers. The tag word marks the content of 
each numeric data register, as Figure 2.1 shows. Each two-bit tag represents 
one of the eight numeric registers. The principal function of the tag word is 
to optimize the MCP's performance and stack handling by making it possible 
to distinguish between empty and nonempty register locations. It also 
enables exception handlers to check the contents of a stack location without 
the need to perform complex decoding of the actual data.


Evaluation of the two Coprocessor

	I started this paper thinking that the Motorola math coprocessor had to 
be better in design, implementation and features than its Intel counterpart. 
Throughout my research I came to realize that my opinions were based on 
nothing but myths. In many respects the two coprocessors are very similar to 
each other, while in other respects the coprocessors differ radically in design 
and implementation. I will sum up the points I consider most important.

1. Intel uses a synchronous bus between the CPU and the MCP, while 
the actual internal floating unit can run asynchronously to this. 
This increases complexity of the design as synchronization logic 
must exist between the two processors, but like this the floating 
point unit can run at a higher clock speed than the CPU upon 
installation of a dedicated clock generator.
2. The (logical, not physical) addition of tag fields to the data 
registers in the 80387 to signal certain conditions of the data 
registers makes certain operations that support tags much faster, as 
certain information does not need to be decoded as it is "cached" in 
the tag fields.
3. The 80387 can use its registers either in stack mode or absolute 
addressing mode. Though some operations require stack 
addressing, this feature adds a little more flexibility to the MCP 
(even though the stack operations might be a legacy from the 8087 
or 80287).

In most other fields, the coprocessors are equals. They have the same 
number of data registers, both add their own instruction set and registers to 
programmers in a transparent fashion and both support the same IEEE 
numeric representation standards. Probably both coprocessors have similar 
processing power at equal clockspeed as well. Even though the Motorola 
coprocessor seems to be superior by name, I have to admit that the 80387 
gets my vote for more flexibility and thoughtful optimizations (tags). 

Computers in Education

The typical school has 1 computer per 20 students, a ratio that computer educators feel is still not high enough to affect classroom learning as much as books and classroom conversation. 

Some critics see computer education as merely the latest in a series of unsuccessful attempts to revolutionise education through the use of audio- and visually-oriented non print media. For example, motion pictures, broadcast television, filmstrips, audio recorders, and videotapes were all initially heralded for their instructional potential, but each of these ultimately became minor classroom tools alongside conventional methods.

Communications Satellite

A communications satellite is an artificial SATELLITE placed into orbit around the Earth to facilitate communications on Earth. Most long-distance radio communication across land is sent via MICROWAVE relay towers. In effect, a satellite serves as a tall microwave tower to permit direct transmission between stations, but it can interconnect any number of stations that are included within the antenna beams of the satellite rather than simply the two ends of the microwave link. 

Computer Crime

Computer crime is defined as any crime involving a computer accomplished through the use or knowledge of computer technology. Computers are objects of crime when they or their contents are damaged, as when terrorists attack computer centres with explosives or gasoline, or when a "computer virus" a program capable of altering or erasing computer memory is introduced into a computer system. 

Personal Computer
A personal computer is a computer that is based on a  microprocessor, a small semiconductor chip that performs the operations of a c.p.u.  
Personal computers are single-user machines, whereas larger computers generally have multiple users.  Personal computers have many uses such as: Word processing, communicating to other computers over a phone line using a modem,databases,leisure games are just some of the uses of a Personal Computer. 

Computers for Leisure Games

As they proliferated, video games gained colour and complexity and adopted the basic theme that most of them still exhibit: the violent annihilation of an enemy by means of one's skill at moving a lever or pushing a button.  

Many of the games played on home computers are more or less identical with those in video arcades.  Increasingly, however, computer games are becoming more sophisticated, more difficult, and no longer dependent on elapsed time a few computer games go on for many hours.  Graphics have improved to the point where they almost resemble movies rather than rough, jagged video screens of past games.  Some of the newest arcade games generate their graphics through C.D R.O.M.  Many include complicated sounds,  some even have music and real actors.  Given an imaginative programmer, a sophisticated video game has the potential for offering an almost limitless array of exotic worlds and fantastic situations.

In the early 90s parents and government were becoming increasingly aware of violence in video games so they introduced warnings on the box like in the movies.                                                  
 
The computer we are trying to buy has a:
Cyrix 166+ Motherboard and CPU
32 megs of RAM
 2.1 gig Hard Drive
 USRobotic x2 56k modem (the best normal modem you can buy)
 Logitech mouse, preferably the $80 Trackman Marble (best mouse you can buy)
 Sound Blaster 64 AWE sound card (best on the market)
 Creative Labs 12x Cd Drive
 3.5" floppy drive
 PCI 2 meg 64-bit graphics card
17" monitor (big one)

The first place I went to was InfoCastle Computers at www.infocastle.com (not local). They seem to have fair prices, but nothing to get excited about. Once you've seen some of the places out of Sacramento, you realize that buying local is good because:
	
A. Their prices are usually better
B. You don't have to pay the shipping
C. You can see what you're buying before you pay for it

Anyway, here are the InfoCastle prices:
RAM        4X32-16 MB 60 ns $ 100.00 x 2=$200
Hard Drive      Western Digital  2.1 Gb IDE Caviar   $ 250
CPU           CyrixP166+ (133 Mz clock)     $ 169.9
Modems     33.6 Apache Modem$ 109.95
Mice             Logitech Mouse$ 23.95
Sound card    Sound Conductor$ 39.00
CD-Rom       SONY 8x     $ 129.00
Floppy Disks     NEC     $ 29.00
PCI Video Card     2 Mb Trident    $ 59.00 (not 64-bit though)
Keyboard    $11
As this place didn't have cases, motherboards, or monitors we'll price them at $40, $150, and $300 respectively, because these are the average pricesfor these items.


Total price for the desired computer here was about $1530 plus shipping, which would end up at about $1600 total, but this machine wouldn't have as good of a CD drive, sound card, modem, or monitor (15 incher) as the preferred computer would, and costs $100 more... This isn't the one for us.



The next place visited was the ComputerSmith's Parts Place. They seem to have much better prices than the last place, InfoCastle, and their web page is nicer. Their URL is www.websmiths.com/csmiths/ .

Computersmith's 
Creative Labs 16 Sound Card    $52
Western Digital 2.5gb Hard Drive   $247 (bigger but cheaper!?)
18 x CD-ROM   $124 
Mini-Mid Tower Case 230 wt Power Supply    $42
AMD 5K86 P-166   CPU     $129 (it's not as good as the Cyrix, but it'll do)
Keytronic 104 Key   $25
16mb 4x32 RAM     $83 x 2 = $166
56K US Robotics Internal Modem    $195
Microsoft Intellimouse    $59 (no Logitech so Microsoft, oh yech)
17 inch SVGA Flat Screen  Monitor   $485   (nicer than the one on trhe prefered computer)
Pentium P-5 Intel Triton III 512K Motherboard    $118
Matrox Mystique 2mb  $109 (this is better than the one in the prefered computer!!!) 
3.5 Floppy Drive 1.44 meg    $25

Canon BJC-4200 InkJet Printer    $259 (I put this in for fun, to get an idea of how much a quality printer 	costs)

The total cost for the computer with a lower grade mouse, CPU, and sound card but higher quality video card, CD drive, monitor, and hard drive would be $1776. With the CD drive and all this is a great price for this machine but not what we want. What we want is the 
		
Preferred Computer
The best prices I found to build a Cyrix 6x86 166+ with a 2 meg video card, 32 megs of RAM, a Creative Labs 12x CD Drive. a Sound Blaster AWE 64, a Logitech Trackman Marble (best mouse on the market), a 56k x2 USR modem, a 1.44 meg and a 2.1 gig hard drive, and a 17" monitor is as follows:

Cyrix 6x86 166+ Motherboard and Chip w/1 meg S3 Trio 64V+ graphics card + medium tower case
	$289
32 megs of RAM
	$138
Creative Sound Blaster 64 and CD Drive
	$269
Logitech Trackman Marble
	$69
x2 Modem
	$179
1.44 Floppy Drive
	$27
2.1 Gig Hard Drive 
	$199
17" monitor
	$329

Total:  $1499 + tax 

This computer was put together by the good people at Ben and Son Computers. For all your computing needs, call (916)637-4515 and ask for Ben. You tell him what you want, how much money you have for it, and he'll make it happen speedy-like. 

I got these prices out of the April issue of California Computer News, which you can get at any local grocery or computer store, and best of all: it's free!!! But come to Ben for the best prices.


Word from Ben:
Buying computer parts is just like anything buying anyting else. You need to know where to look, what to look for, and how much a good price is. You DON'T have to settle on a terrible price just because you don't know what a good one is. I've done much research over 8 years and I know what to look for, and if you would like some advise on buying your machine, give me a call.  




NICATIONSBus NetworkBus Network, in computer science, a topology (configuration) for a local
area network in which all nodes are connected to a main communications line (bus). On a bus
network, each node monitors activity on the line. Messages are detected by all nodes but are
accepted only by the node(s) to which they are addressed. Because a bus network relies on a
common data "highway," a malfunctioning node simply ceases to communicate; it doesn't
disrupt operation as it might on a ring network, in which messages are passed from one node
to the next. To avoid collisions that occur when two or more nodes try to use the line at
the same time, bus networks commonly rely on collision detection or Token Passing to
regulate traffic.Star NetworkStar Network, in computer science, a local area network in
which each device (node) is connected to a central computer in a star-shaped configuration
(topology); commonly, a network consisting of a central computer (the hub) surrounded by
terminals. In a star network, messages pass directly from a node to the central computer,
which handles any further routing (as to another node) that might be necessary. A star
network is reliable in the sense that a node can fail without affecting any other node on
the network. Its weakness, however, is that failure of the central computer results in a
shutdown of the entire network. And because each node is individually wired to the hub,
cabling costs can be high.Ring networkRing Network, in computer science, a local area
network in which devices (nodes) are connected in a closed loop, or ring. Messages in a ring
network pass in one direction, from node to node. As a message travels around the ring, each
node examines the destination address attached to the message. If the address is the same as
the address assigned to the node, the node accepts the message; otherwise, it regenerates
the signal and passes the message along to the next node in the circle. Such regeneration
allows a ring network to cover larger distances than star and bus networks. It can also be
designed to bypass any malfunctioning or failed node. Because of the closed loop, however,
new nodes can be difficult to add. A ring network is diagrammed below.Asynchrous Transfer
ModeATM is a new networking technology standard for high-speed, high-capacity voice, data,
text andvideo transmission that will soon transform the way businesses and all types of
organizationscommunicate. It will enable the management of information, integration of
systems andcommunications between individuals in ways that, to some extent, haven't even
been conceived yet. ATM can transmit more than 10 million cells per second,resulting in
higher capacity, faster delivery and greater reliability.  ATM simplifies information
transfer and exchange by compartmentalizing information into uniformsegments called cells.
These cells allow any type of information--from voice to video--to betransmitted over almost
any type of digitized communications medium (fiber optics, copper wire,cable). This
simplification can eliminate the need for redundant local and wide area networks
anderadicate the bottlenecks that plague current networking systems. Eventually, global
standardizationwill enable information to move from country to country, at least as fast as
it now moves from officeto office, in many cases faster.Fiber Distributed Data InterfaceThe
Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) modules from Bay Networks are designed
forhigh-performance, high-availability connectivity in support of internetwork topologies
that include:     Campus or building backbone networks for lower speed LANs     
Interconnection of mainframes or minicomputers to peripherals      LAN interconnection for
workstations requiring high-performance networking FDDI is a 100-Mbps token-passing LAN that
uses highly reliable fiber-optic media and performsautomatic fault recovery through dual
counter-rotating rings. A primary ring supports normal datatransfer while a secondary ring
allows for automatic recovery. Bay Networks FDDI supportsstandards-based translation
bridging and multiprotocol routing. It is also fully compliant with ANSI,IEEE, and Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) FDDI specifications.Bay Networks FDDI interface features a
high-performance second-generation Motorola FDDI chipset in a design that provides
cost-effective high-speed communication over an FDDI network. TheFDDI chip set provides
expanded functionality such as transparent and translation bridging as wellas many advanced
performance features. Bay Networks FDDI is available in three versions -multimode,
single-mode, and hybrid. All versions support a Class A dual attachment or dual homingClass
B single attachment.Bay Networks FDDI provides the performance required for the most
demanding LAN backboneand high-speed interconnect applications. Forwarding performance over
FDDI exceeds 165,000packets per second (pps) in the high-end BLN and BCN. An innovative
High-Speed Filters optionfilters packets at wire speed, enabling microprocessor resources to
remain dedicated to packetforwarding.Data Compression In GraphicsMPEGMPEG is a group of
people that meet under ISO (the International Standards Organization) to generate standards
for digital video (sequences of images in time) and audio compression.  In particular, they
define a compressed bit stream, which implicitly defines a decompressor.  However, the
compression algorithms are up to the individual manufacturers, and that is where proprietary
advantage is obtained within the scope of a publicly available international standard.  MPEG
meets roughly four times a year for roughly a week each time.  In between meetings, a great
deal of work is done by the members, so it doesn't all happen at the meetings.  The work is
organized and planned at the meetings. So far (as of January 1996), MPEG have completed the
"Standard of MPEG phase called MPEG I. This defines a bit stream for compressed video and
audio optimized to fit into a bandwidth (data rate) of 1.5 Mbits/s. This rate is special
because it is the data rate of (uncompressed) audio CD's and DAT's. The standard is in three
parts, video, audio, and systems, where the last part gives the integration of the audio and
video streams with the proper timestamping to allow synchronization of the two. They have
also gotten well into MPEG phase II, whose task is to define a bitstream for video and audio
coded at around 3 to 10 Mbits/s.How MPEG I worksFirst off, it starts with a relatively low
resolution video sequence (possibly decimated from the original) of about 352 by 240 frames
by 30 frames/s, but original high (CD) quality audio.  The images are in color, but
converted to YUV space, and the two chrominance channels (U and V) are decimated further to
176 by 120 pixels.  It turn out that you can get away with a lot less resolution in those
channels and not notice it, at least in "natural" (not computer generated) images.  The
basic scheme is to predict motion from frame to frame in the temporal direction, and then to
use DCT's (discrete cosine transforms) to organize the redundancy in the spatial directions.
The DCT's are done on 8x8 blocks, and the motion prediction is done in the luminance (Y)
channel on 16x16 blocks.  In other words, given the 16x16 block in the current frame that
you are trying to code, you look for a close match to that block in a previous or future
frame (there are backward prediction modes where later frames are sent first to allow
interpolating between frames). The DCT coefficients (of either the actual data, or the
difference between this block and the close match) are "quantized", which means that you
divide them by some value to drop bits off the bottom end.  Hopefully, many of the
coefficients will then end up being zero.  The quantization can change for every
"macroblock" (a macroblock is 16x16 of Y and the corresponding 8x8's in both U and V).  The
results of all of this, which include the DCT coefficients, the motion vectors, and the
quantization parameters (and other stuff) is Huffman coded using fixed tables.  The DCT
coefficients have a special Huffman table that is "two-dimensional" in that one code
specifies a run-length of zeros and the non-zero value that ended the run.  Also, the motion
vectors and the DC DCT components are DPCM (subtracted from the last one) coded.


 
A report discussing the proposition that computer crime has increased dramatically over the last 10 years.

Introduction

Computer crime is generally defined as any crime accomplished through special knowledge of computer technology.  Increasing instances of white-collar crime involve computers as more businesses automate and the information held by the computers becomes an important asset. Computers can also become objects of crime when they or their contents are damaged, for example when vandals attack the computer itself, or when a "computer virus" (a program capable of altering or erasing computer memory) is introduced into a computer system.  

As subjects of crime, computers represent the electronic environment in which frauds are programmed and executed;  an example is the transfer of money balances in accounts to perpetrators' accounts for withdrawal. Computers are instruments of crime when they are used to plan or control such criminal acts.  Examples of these types of crimes are complex embezzlements that might occur over long periods of time, or when a computer operator uses a computer to steal or alter valuable information from an employer.

Variety and Extent

Since the first cases were reported in 1958, computers have been used for most kinds of crime, including fraud, theft, embezzlement, burglary, sabotage, espionage, murder, and forgery. One study of 1,500 computer crimes established that most of them were committed by trusted computer users within businesses i.e. persons with the requisite skills, knowledge, access, and resources.  Much of known computer crime has consisted of entering false data into computers. This method of computer crime is simpler and safer than the complex process of writing a program to change data already in the computer. 

Now that personal computers with the ability to communicate by telephone are prevalent in our society, increasing numbers of crimes have been perpetrated by computer hobbyists, known as "hackers," who display a high level of technical expertise.  These "hackers" are able to manipulate various communications systems so that their interference with other computer systems is hidden and their real identity is difficult to trace.  The crimes committed by most "hackers" consist mainly of simple but costly electronic 

trespassing, copyrighted-information piracy, and vandalism. There is also evidence that organised professional criminals have been attacking and using computer systems as they find their old activities and environments being automated.

Another area of grave concern to both the operators and users of computer systems is the increasing prevalence of  computer viruses. A computer virus is generally defined as any sort of destructive computer program, though the term is usually reserved for the most dangerous ones.  The ethos of a computer virus is an intent to cause damage, "akin to vandalism on a small scale, or terrorism on a grand scale."  There are many ways in which viruses can be spread.  A virus can be introduced to networked computers thereby infecting every computer on the network or by sharing disks between computers.  As more home users now have access to modems, bulletin board systems where users may download software have increasingly become the target of viruses.  Viruses cause damage by either attacking another file or by simply filling up the computer's memory or by using up the computer's processor power.  There are a number of different types of viruses, but one of the factors common to most of them is that they all copy themselves (or parts of themselves).  Viruses are, in essence, self-replicating. 

We will now consider a "pseudo-virus," called a worm.  People in the computer industry do not agree on the distinctions between worms and viruses.  Regardless, a worm is a program specifically designed to move through networks.  A worm may have constructive purposes, such as to find machines with free resources that could be more efficiently used, but usually a worm is used to disable or slow down computers. More specifically, worms are defined as, "computer virus programs ... [which] propagate on a computer network without the aid of an unwitting human accomplice. These programs move of their own volition based upon stored knowledge of the network structure."

Another type of virus is the "Trojan Horse."  These viruses hide inside another seemingly harmless program and  once the Trojan Horse program is used on the computer system, the virus spreads.  One of the most famous virus types of recent years is the Time Bomb, which is a delayed action virus of some type.  This type of virus has gained notoriety as a result of the Michelangelo virus. This virus was designed to erase the hard drives of people using IBM compatible computers on the artist's birthday.  Michelangelo  was so prevalent that it was even distributed accidentally by some software publishers when the software developers' computers became infected.



SYSOPs must also worry about being liable to their users as a result of viruses which cause a disruption in service. Viruses can cause a disruption in 
service or service can be suspended to prevent the spread of a virus.  If the SYSOP has guaranteed to provide continuous service then any disruption in service could result in a breach of contract and litigation could ensue.  However, contract provisions could provide for excuse or deferral of obligation in the event of disruption of service by a virus.

Legislation

The first federal computer crime law, entitled the Counterfeit Access Device and Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984, was passed in October of 1984.
The Act made it a felony to knowingly access a computer without authorisation, or in excess of  authorisation, in order to obtain classified United States defence or foreign relations information with the intent or reason to believe that such information would be used to harm the United States or to advantage a foreign nation.

The act also attempted to protect financial data.  Attempted access to obtain information from financial records of a financial institution or in a consumer file of a credit reporting agency was also outlawed.  Access to use, destroy, modify or disclose information found in a computer system, (as well as to prevent authorised use of any computer used for government business) was also made illegal. The 1984 Act had several shortcomings, and was revised in The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. 

Three new crimes were added to the 1986 Act.  These were a computer fraud offence, modelled after federal mail and wire fraud statutes, an offence for the alteration, damage or destruction of information contained in a "federal interest computer", an offence for trafficking in computer passwords under some circumstances.  
 
Even the knowing and intentional possession of a sufficient amount of counterfeit or unauthorised "access devices" is illegal.  This statute has been interpreted to cover computer passwords "which may be used to access computers to wrongfully obtain things of value, such as telephone and credit card services."

Remedies and Law Enforcement

Business crimes of all types are probably decreasing as a direct result of increasing automation.  When a business activity is carried out with computer and communications systems, data are better protected against  modification, 

destruction, disclosure, misappropriation, misrepresentation, and contamination.  Computers impose a discipline on information workers and facilitate use of almost perfect automated controls that were never possible when these had to be applied by the workers themselves under management edict. Computer hardware and software manufacturers are also designing computer systems and programs that are more resistant to tampering.

Recent U.S. legislation, including laws concerning privacy, credit card fraud and racketeering, provide criminal-justice agencies with tools to fight  business crime.  As of 1988, all but two states had specific computer-crime laws, and a federal computer-crime law (1986) deals with certain crimes involving computers in different states and in government activities.

Conclusion

There are no valid statistics about the extent of computer crime.  Victims often resist reporting suspected cases, because they can lose more from embarrassment, lost reputation, litigation, and other consequential losses than from the acts themselves.  Limited evidence indicates that the number of cases is rising each year because of the increasing number of computers in business applications where crime has traditionally occurred.  The largest recorded crimes involving insurance, banking, product inventories, and securities have resulted in losses of tens of millions to billions of dollars and all these crimes were facilitated by computers.

Bibliography

Bequai, August, Techno Crimes (1986).

Mungo, Paul, and Clough, Bryan, Approaching Zero: The Extraordinary Underworld of Hackers, Phreakers, Virus Writers, and Keyboard Criminals (1993).

Norman, Adrian R. D., Computer Insecurity (1983).

Parker, Donn B., Fighting Computer Crime (1983).

Dodd S. Griffith, The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986: A Measured
Response to a Growing Problem, 43 Vand. L. Rev. 453, 455 (1990).
 



 
Computer Crime
by: Manik Saini

Advances in telecommunications and in computer technology have brought us to the information revolution.  The rapid advancement of the telephone, cable, satellite and computer networks, combined with the help of technological breakthroughs in computer processing speed, and information storage, has lead us to the latest revolution, and also the newest style of crime, "computer crime".  The following information will provide you with evidence that without reasonable doubt, computer crime is on the increase in the following areas: hackers, hardware theft, software piracy and the information highway.  This information is gathered from expert sources such as researchers, journalists, and others involved in the field.

Computer crimes are often heard a lot about in the news.  When you ask someone why he/she robbed banks, they world replied, "Because that's where the money is."  Today's criminals have learned where the money is.  Instead of settling for a few thousand dollars in a bank robbery, those with enough computer knowledge can walk away from a computer crime with many millions.  The National Computer Crimes Squad estimates that between 85 and 97 percent of computer crimes are not even detected. Fewer than 10 percent of all computer crimes are reported this is mainly because organizations fear that their employees, clients, and stockholders will lose faith in them if they admit that their computers have been attacked. And few of the crimes that are reported are ever solved.

Hacking was once a term that was used to describe someone with a great deal of knowledge with computers.  Since then the definition has seriously changed.  In every neighborhood there are criminals, so you could say that hackers are the criminals of the computers around us.  There has been a great increase in the number of computer 
break-ins since the Internet became popular.  

How serious is hacking?  In 1989, the Computer Emergency Response Team, a organization that monitors computer security issues in North America said that they had 132 cases involving computer break-ins.  In 1994 alone they had some 2,341 cases, that's almost an 1800% increase in just 5 years.  An example is 31 year old computer expert Kevin Mitnick that was arrested by the FBI for stealing more then $1 million worth in data and about 20,000 credit card numbers through the Internet.  In Vancouver, the RCMP have arrested a teenager with breaking into a university computer network.  There have been many cases of computer hacking, another one took place here in Toronto, when Adam Shiffman was charged with nine counts of fraudulent use of computers and eleven counts of mischief to data, this all carries a maximum sentence of 10 years in jail. 

We see after reading the above information that hacking has been on the increase.  With hundreds of cases every year dealing with hacking this is surely a problem, and a problem that is increasing very quickly.

Ten years ago hardware theft was almost impossible, this was because of the size and weight of the computer components.  Also computer components were expensive so many companies would have security guards to protect them from theft.  Today this is no longer the case, computer hardware theft is on the increase.

Since the invention of the microchip, computers have become much smaller and easier to steal, and now even with portable and lap top computers that fit in you briefcase it's even easier.   While illegal high-tech information hacking gets all the attention, it's the computer hardware theft that has become the latest in corporate crime.  Access to valuable equipment skyrockets and black-market demand for parts increases.  In factories, components are stolen from assembly lines for underground resale to distributors. In offices, entire systems are snatched from desktops by individuals seeking to install a home PC.  In 1994, Santa Clara, Calif., recorded 51 burglaries.  That number doubled in just the first six months of 1995.  Gunmen robbed workers at Irvine, Calif., computer parts company, stealing $12 million worth of computer chips.  At a large advertising agency in London, thieves came in over a weekend and took 96 workstations, leaving the company to recover from an $800,000 loss.  A Chicago manufacturer had computer parts stolen from the back of a delivery van as he was waiting to enter the loading dock. It took less then two minutes for the doors to open, but that was enough time for thieves to get away with thousands of computer components. 

Hardware theft has sure become a problem in the last few years, with cases popping up each day we see that hardware theft is on the increase.  

As the network of computers gets bigger so will the number of software thief's.  Electronic software theft over the Internet and other online services and cost the US software companies about $2.2 billion a year. The Business Software Alliance shows that number of countries were surveyed in 1994, resulting in piracy estimated for 77 countries, totaling more than $15.2 billion in losses.  Dollar loss estimates due to software piracy in the 54 countries surveyed last year show an increase of $2.1 billion, from $12.8 billion in 1993 to $14.9 billion in 1994.  An additional 23 countries surveyed this year brings the 1994 worldwide total to $15.2 billion. 

As we can see that software piracy is on the increase with such big numbers.


Many say that the Internet is great, that is true, but there's also the bad side of the Internet that is hardly ever noticed.  The crime on the Internet is increasing dramatically.  Many say that copyright law, privacy law, broadcasting law and law against spreading hatred means nothing.  There's many different kinds of crime on the Internet, such as child pornography, credit card fraud, software piracy, invading privacy and spreading hatred. 

There have been many cases of child pornography on the Internet, this is mainly because people find it very easy to transfer images over the Internet without getting caught.  Child pornography on the Internet has more the doubled on the Internet since 1990, an example of this is Alan Norton of Calgary who was charged of being part of an international porn ring. 

Credit card fraud has caused many problems for people and for corporations that have credit information in their databases.  With banks going on-line in last few years, criminals have found ways of breaking into databases and stealing thousands of credit cards and information on their clients.  In the past few years thousands of clients have reported millions of transactions made on credit cards that they do not know of.

Invading privacy is a real problem with the Internet, this is one of the things that turns many away from the Internet.  Now with hacking sites on the Internet, it is easy to download Electronic Mail(e-mail) readers that allows you to hack servers and read incoming mail from others.  Many sites now have these e-mail readers and since then invading privacy has increased.

Spreading hatred has also become a problem on the Internet.  This information can be easily accessed by going to any search engine for example http://www.webcrawler.com  and searching for "KKK" and this will bring up thousands of sites that contain information on the "KKK".  As we can see with the freedom on the Internet, people can easily incite hatred over the Internet.

After reading that information we see that the Internet has crime going on of all kinds.

The above information provides you with enough proof that no doubt computer crime is on the increase in many areas such as hacking, hardware theft, software piracy and the Internet.  Hacking can be seen in everyday news and how big corporations are often victims to hackers.  Hardware theft has become more popular because of the value of the computer components.  Software piracy is a huge problem, as you can see about $15 billion are lost each year.  Finally the Internet is good and bad, but theirs a lot more bad then good, with credit card fraud and child pornography going on.  We see that computer crime is on the increase and something must be done to stop it.
 



 
Computer Crime

	Computer crimes need to be prevented and halted thought increased computer network security measures as well as tougher laws and enforcement of those laws in cyberspace:

	
	Computer crime is generally defined as any crime accomplished through special knowledge of computer technology.  All that is required is a personal computer, a modem, and a phone line.  Increasing instances of white-collar crime involve computers as more businesses automate and information becomes an important asset. Computers are objects of crime when they or their contents are damaged, as when terrorists attack computer centers with explosives or gasoline, or when a "computer virus"--a program capable of altering or erasing computer memory--is introduced into a computer system.  As subjects of crime, computers represent the electronic environment in which frauds are programmed and executed;  an example is the transfer of money balances in accounts to perpetrators' accounts for withdrawal. Computers are instruments of crime when used to plan or control such criminal acts as complex embezzlements that might occur over long periods of time, or when a computer operator uses a computer to steal valuable information from an employer.
	
	Computers have been used for most kinds of crime, including fraud, theft, larceny, embezzlement, burglary, sabotage, espionage, murder, and forgery, since the first cases were reported in 1958.  One study of 1,500 computer crimes established that most of them were committed by trusted computer users within businesses; persons with the requisite skills, knowledge, access, and resources.  Much of known computer crime has consisted of entering false data into computers, which is simpler and safer than the complex process of writing a program to change data already in the computer. With the advent of personal computers to manipulate information and access computers by telephone, increasing numbers of crimes--mostly simple but costly electronic trespassing, copyrighted-information piracy, and vandalism--have been perpetrated by computer hobbyists, known as "hackers," who display a high level of technical expertise.  For many years, the term hacker defined someone who was a wizard with computers and programing.  It was an honor to be considered a hacker.  But when a few hackers began to use their skills to break into private computer systems and steal money, or interfere with the system's operations, the word acquired its current negative meaning. Organized professional criminals have been attacking and using computer systems as they find their old activities and environments being automated.
	
	There are not a large number of valid statistics about the extent and results of computer crime.  Victims often resist reporting suspected cases, because they can lose more from embarrassment, lost reputation, litigation, and other consequential losses than from the acts themselves.  Limited evidence indicates that the number of cases is rising each year, because of the increasing number of computers in business applications where crime has traditionally occurred.  The largest recorded crimes involving insurance, banking, product inventories, and securities have resulted in losses of tens of millions to billions of dollars--all facilitated by computers.  Conservative estimates have quoted $3 billion to $100 billion as yearly losses due to computer hackers.  These losses are increasing on a basis equivalent to the number of computers logged on to networks, which is almost an exponential growth rate.  The seriousness of cybercrimes also increases as the dependancy on computers becomes greater and greater.  

	Crimes in cyberspace are becoming more and more popular for several reason.  The first being that computers are become more and more accessible; thus are just become another tool in the arsenal of tool to criminals.  The other reason that computer crimes are becoming more and more common are that they are sometimes very profitable.  The average computer crime nets a total of $650,000 (American, 1991 standards); more than seventy-two times that of the average bank robbery.  
	
	Today's Techno bandits generally fall one of three groups, listed in the order of the threat they pose:
	1.  Current or former computer operations employees.
	2.  Career criminals who use computers to ply their trade.
	3.  The hacker.
	
	Outsiders who break into computer systems are sometimes more of a threat, but employees and ex-employees are usually in a better position to steal.  Because we rely more and more on computers, we also depend on those who make them and run them.  The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that the fastest growing employment opportunities are in the field computers and data-processing.  Since money is a common motive for those who use their computing know-how to break the law, losses from computer theft are expected  to grow as the number of computer employees rises.
	
	The following are examples of how employees that work on computers can gain profit at the employers expense:
	
	In 1980, two enterprising ticket agents for TransWorld Airlines (TWA) discovered how to make their employer's computer work for them.  The scam went like this: When a passenger used cash to pay for a one-way ticket, Vince Giovengo sent in the credit change form, which should have been discarded.  He kept the receipt the should have been given to the costumer for paying cash.  Samuel Paladina, who helped board passengers, kept the part of the traveler's ticket that should have been returned to the costumer.  The two agents used computers to reassemble the ticket from the pieces they had.  They then marked the ticket void, and kept the cash the traveler had paid.  The swindle was finally discovered by another employee who questioned the large number of voided tickets, only after approximately $93,000 was taken.  
	
	The two TWA employees were tried in the United States and were convicted of federal wire fraud in the United States.  They each received six months in prison as a result of their crime.  The penalty they had to pay should have been much, much higher, in order to prevent computers from being used in crimes in the future.  This is true for not just the United States and Canada, but for every country in the world.  
	
	Another computer heist, one of the largest ever, involved several highly placed employees of the Volkswagen car company of West Germany.  In 1987 the company discovered that these "loyal" workers had managed to steal $260 million by re- programming the computers to disguise the company's foreign currency transactions.  The workers that committed the crime received 10 years in Germany's prison system; not nearly as harsh as if they had stolen the money through non- computerized means.  This sets an example that computer crimes are easy to execute, and are punished very lightly.  This will evoke a downward spiral; leading to more and more computer crimes.
	
	For career criminals, computers represent a new medium for their illegal actions.  Computers only enhance the speed and quality of the crimes.  Now the professional criminals can steal or commit almost any other crime they want, simply by the means of typing directions into the computer.  Computers are quickly being added to the list of the tools of crime.
			
	Hackers often act in groups.  The actions of several groups of hackers, most notable are the Masters of Deception (MOD) and the Legion of Doom, have been exposed in the media recently.  These groups and most malicious hackers are involved in computer crime for the profit available to them.  
	
	Individual hackers are often male teenagers.  They comprise the majority of the computer criminals, although they do pose a major threat to society's computer uses.
	
	Computer criminals have various reasons for doing what they do.  The main reason computer crimes are being committed on the large scale that they are is mainly for the profit.  As earlier stated, the average computer crime nets more than seventy-two times that of the average bank robbery.  This is seen for many skilled computer operators as a opportunity to make some quick profit.   Cybercrimes are usually only committed by people that would not commit any other type of crime.  This shows that the chances of getting caught and punished are perceived as very low, a view that must be changed.  
	
	Some hackers feel that it is their social responsibly to keep the cyberspace a free domain, with out authorities.  This is accomplished by sharing information, and removing the concept of property in cyberspace.  Therefore, they feel that it is proper to take information and share it.  In their minds, they have committed no crime, but from the victim's eyes, they deserve to be punished.
	
	Other hackers think that it is a challenge to read other's files and see how far they can penetrate into a system.  It is pure enjoyment for these hackers to explore a new computer network.  It becomes a challenge to gain access to strange, new networks.  They often argue that they are only curious and cause no harm by merely exploring, but that is not always the case. 	
	
	Where did my homework files go?  Who is making charges to my credit card?  Sounds like someone is out for revenge.  Computer have become a modern day tool for seeking revenge.  Here is an example: A computer system operator was fired from CompuServe (a major Internet provider) and by the next day his former manager's credit card numbers had been distributed to thousands of people via electronic bulletin boards.  The manager's telephone account had been charged with thousands of long-distance phone calls, and his driver's license had been issued with hundreds of unpaid tickets.  This shows the awesome power of a knowledgeable hacker.  
	
	Also, these hackers try to maintain free services.  Some of these free services include Internet access, and long distance telephone access. 
	
	Banks and brokerage houses are major targets when stealing money is the objective, because of their increased reliance on electronic funds transfer (EFT).  Using EFT, financial institutions and federal and provincial governments pass billions of dollars of funds and assets back and forth over the phone lines every day.  The money transferred from bank to bank or account to account, is used by sending telephone messages between computers.  In the old days, B. [efore] C. [omputers], transferring money usually involved armored cars and security guards.  Today, the computer operators simply type in the appropriate instructions and funds are zipped across telephone lines from bank A to bank B.  These codes can be intercepted by hackers and used to gain credit card numbers, ATM and personal identification numbers, as well as the actual money being transferred.  With the ATM and credit card numbers, they have access to all the money in the corresponding accounts.  
	
	The act of changing data going into a computer or during the output from the computer is called "data diddling".  One New Jersey bank suffered a $128,000 loss when the manager of computer operations made some changes in the account balances.  He transferred the money to accounts of three of his friends.
	
	"Salami slicing" is a form of data diddling that occurs when an employee steals small amounts of money from a large number of sources though the electronic changing of data (like slicing thin pieces from a roll of salami).  For example, in a bank, the interest paid into accounts may routinely be rounded to the nearest cent.  A dishonest computer programer may change the program so that all the fractions of the cents left over go into his account.  This type of theft is hard to detect because the books balance.  The sum of money can be extremely large, when taken from thousands of accounts over a period of time.  
	
	"Phone Phreaks" were the first hackers.  They are criminals that break into the telephone system though many various mean to gain free access to the telephone network.  Since telephone companies use large and powerful computers to route their calls, they are an oblivious target to hackers. 
	
	Stealing information in the form of software (computer programs) is also illegal.  Making copies of commercial software, for re-sale or to give to others is a crime.  These types of crime represent the largest growing area of computer crime.  In one case, a group of teenagers pretending to be a software firm, sold $350,000 dollars worth of stolen software to a Swiss electronics company.  
	
	
	While most hackers claim curiosity and a desire for profit as motives for cracking computer systems, a few "dark-side hackers" seem to intentionally harm others.  For these individuals, computers are convenient tools of wickedness.  One crazed hacker broke into the North American Air Defense computer system and the U.S. Armies MASNET computer network.  While browsing the files, officials say, he had the ability to launch missiles at the USSR.  This could have led the a nuclear war, and possibly the destruction of the world.  
	
	There are more than 1200 bugs out there, and the infections spread put the victim out of action until the healing process begins (if there is a healing process).  This may sound like a description of the common cold or flu virus, except that the virus does not attack people.  This bug is made by human hands and it attacks computers.  It is spread though shared software, almost as easily as a sneeze, and it can be every bit as weakening as the flu.  Around the world on March 6, 1992, computer users reported for work only to find that their computers didn't work.  The machines had "crashed" due to Michelangelo.  This was a computer virus that was set to destroy all infected computers because it was set to go off on the renaissance artist's 517th birthday.  Approximately 10,000 computers were hit world wide.  The virus disabled the computers causing millions of dollars worth of down-time and lost data.  
	
	Computer crimes are becoming more and more dangerous.  New laws and methods of enforcement need to be created; the evidence is above.  An effort is being made by governments, but it is not enough.  The problem is a international affair, and should be treated as such.  
	
	Current Canadian laws are some of the most lenient in industrialized counties.  They were also in place much later than other countries put their laws about computer crime into effect, when compared to the United States and Japan.  The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1985 included a number of specific computer crime- related offences.  Now, for the first time, Canadian law enforcement agencies can lay charges relating to cybercrime.  The following text is an excerpt from the Martin's Annual Canadian Criminal Code, 1995 edition:

     326. (1) Every one commits theft who fraudulently, maliciously, or without colour of right,
	(b) uses any telecommunication facility or obtains any telecommunication service.
	(2)In this section and section 327, "telecommunication" means any transmission, emission or reception of signs, signals, writing, images or sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, radio, visual, or any other electro-magnetic system.
342. 1 (1) Every one who, fraudulently and without colour of right,
	(a) obtains, directly or indirectly, any computer service,
	(b) by means if an electro-magnetic, acoustic, mechanical or other device, intercepts or causes to be intercepted, directly or indirectly, any function of a computer system, or
	(c) Uses or causes to be used, directly of indirectly, a computer system with intent to commit and offence under paragraph (a) or (b) or an offence under section 430 in relation to data or a computer system
is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or is guilty to an offence punishable on summary conviction.
430. (1.1) Every one commits mischief who willfully
	(a) destroys or alters data;
	(b) renders data meaningless, useless or ineffective;
	(c) obstructs, interrupts or interferes with any person in the lawful use of data; or
	(d) obstructs, interrupts of interferes with the lawful use of data or denies access to data to any person who is entitled to access
	thereto.


	These Canadian are already outdated, and they are only eleven years old.  They need to be amended to include stiffer penalties.  At the time of the creation of the laws in 1985, they were deemed adequate, because computers crimes were not looked upon as a serious issue with far-reaching effects.  In 1996, computer crime has become a damaging and dangerous part of life.  It is now necessary to revamp these laws to include young offenders.  

	The young people committing some of these crimes have very detailed knowledge of computer systems and computer programing.  If they can handle this type of knowledge, and commit these crimes, they should be able to foresee the consequences of their actions.  Most young hackers feel  that they are bright, and therefore should be able understand the results of their actions on other's computers and computer systems.  The laws should treat these young offenders like adults, because they realize what they are doing is wrong, and should suffer the consequences.  
	
	Some of the computer crimes listed in the criminal code  are only summary offences; thus are not considered very serious.  This spreads the message to hackers that the crimes are not serious, but they are.  Since the hackers don't view the crimes as serious, they are likely to commit more of them.  If the consequences of breaking any laws referring to computer crime were made tougher, hackers would realize what they are doing is wrong.  They will also see other hackers being charged with offences under the criminal code ans figure out that they may be next on the list to be punished for their actions.  
	
	Not only do these laws need to be made tougher, they need to be enforced consistently.  The Authorities must from all countries must have a conference to discuss the need for consistent enforcement of the law referring to computer crime.  This is because computer crimes are truly international.  A hacker in Canada may break into a bank in Switzerland.  Does the criminal get punished by the laws of the U.S. or by the laws of Switzerland?  This needs to be decided upon.  
	
	The authorities must have special operations to stop computer crimes, just as they do for drug trafficking.  Much time must be devoted to stopping these crimes, before it leads to disaster.  The problem is getting out of hand and the public must actively participate in cooperation with the authorities in order to bring the problem under control.
	
	Security is one matter that we can take into our own hands.  Until new laws are created and enforced, it is up to the general computer-using public to protect themselves.  The use of passwords, secure access multiports and common sense can prevent computer crimes making victims of us all.
	
	Passwords can add a remarkable amount of security to a computer system.  The cases where pass words have been cracked are rare.  Included with the password program must be a access restriction accessory.  This limits the number of guesses at a password to only a few tries, thus effectively eliminating 98% of intruders.  
	
	Secure access multiports (SAM's) are the best protection against computer crime making a victim out of a computer user.  When joining a network, the user calls in and enters password and access code.  The user is then disconnected from the network.  If the network recognizes the user as a valid one, it will call the user back and allow he/she to log on.  If the user was invalid, the network will not attempt to re-connect with the user (see figure 1).  This prevents unwanted persons from logging on to a network.
	
	Common sense is often the best defense against computer crime.  Simple things like checking and disinfecting for viruses on a regular basis, not sharing your password or giving out your credit card number on online services (ie: Internet).  Also, employers can restrict access employees have to computers at the place of employment.  This would dissipate most computer crimes executed by employees.
	
	If new laws and enforcement of those law are not soon established, along with heightened security measures, the world will have a major catastrophe as a result of computer activity.  The world is becoming increasingly dependant on computers, and the crimes committed will have greater and greater impact as the dependancy rises.  The possible end of the world was narrowly averted, but was caused by a computer crime.  The United States defense computer system was broken into, and the opportunity existed for the hacker to declare intercontinental nuclear war; thus leading to death of the human race.  Another event like this is likely to occur if laws, enforcement of the laws and security of computers are not beefed up.  The greatest creation of all time, the computer, should not lead the destruction of the race that created it.




	
 




  
	
 
Computer Crime In The 
               1990's
	We're being ushered into the digital frontier. It's a cyberland with incredible promise and untold dangers.  Are we prepared ? It's a battle between modern day computer cops and digital hackers.  Essentially just think what is controlled by computer systems, virtually everything.
	By programming a telephone voice mail to repeat the word yes over and over again a hacker has beaten the system. The hacker of the 1990's is increasingly becoming more organized very clear in what they're looking for and very, very sophisticated in their methods of attack.. As hackers have become more sophisticated and more destructive, governments, phone companies and businesses are struggling to defend themselves.
Phone Fraud	 
	In North America the telecommunications industry estimates long distance fraud costs five hundred million perhaps up to a billion every year, the exact the exact figures are hard to be sure of but in North America alone phone fraud committed by computer hackers costs three, four maybe even up to five billion dollars every year. Making an unwitting company pay for long distance calls is the most popular form of phone fraud today. The first step is to gain access to a private automated branch exchange known as a "PABX" or "PBX". One of these can be found in any company with twenty or more employees. A "PABX" is a computer that manages the phone system including it's voice mail. Once inside a "PABX" a hacker looks for a phone whose voice mail has not yet been programmed, then the hacker cracks it's access code and programs it's voice mail account to accept charges for long distance calls, until the authorities catch on, not for a few days, hackers can use voice mail accounts to make free and untraceable calls to all over the world. The hackers that commit this type of crime are becoming increasingly organized. Known as "call cell operators" they setup flyby night storefronts were people off the street can come in and make long distance calls at a large discount, for the  call cell operators of course the calls cost nothing, by hacking into a PABX system they can put all the charges  on the victimized companies tab. With a set of stolen voice mail access codes known as "good numbers" hackers can crack into any phone whenever a company disables the phone they're using. In some cases call cell operators have run up hundreds of thousands of dollars in long distance charges, driving businesses and companies straight into bankruptcy. Hacking into a PABX is not as complicated as some people seem to think. The typical scenario that we find is an individual who has a "demon dialer" hooked up to their personal home computer at home that doesn't necessarily need to be a high powered machine at all but simply through the connection of a modem into a telephone line system. Then this "demon dialer" is programmed to subsequently dial with the express purpose of looking for and recording dialtone. A demon dialer is a software program that automatically calls thousands of phone numbers to find ones that are connected to computers. A basic hacker tool that can be downloaded from the internet. They are extremely easy programs to use. The intention is to acquire dialtone, that enables the hacker to move freely through the telephone network. It's generally getting more sinister. We are now seeing a criminal element now involved in term of the crimes they commit, the drugs, money laundering etc. These people are very careful they want to hide their call patterns so they'll hire these people to get codes for them so they can dial from several different calling locations so they cannot be detected.
	The worlds telephone network is a vast maze, there are many places to hide but once a hacker is located the phone company and police can track their every move. The way they keep track is by means of a device called a "DNR" or a dial number recorder. This device monitors the dialing patterns of any suspected hacker. It lists all the numbers that have been dialed from their location, the duration of the telephone call and the time of disconnection. The process of catching a hacker begins at the phone company's central office were thousands of lines converge to a main frame computer, the technicians can locate the exact line that leads to a suspected hackers phone line by the touch of a button. With the "DNR" device the "computer police" retrieve the number and also why the call was made and if it was made for illegal intention they will take action and this person can be put in prison for up to five years and be fined for up to $ 7500.00.
	The telephone network is a massive electronic network that depends on thousands of computer run software programs and all this software in theory can be reprogrammed for criminal use. The telephone system is in other words a potentially vulnerable system, by cracking the right codes and inputting the correct passwords a hacker can sabotage a switching system for millions of phones, paralyzing a city with a few keystrokes.            
	Security experts say telephone terrorism poses a threat, society hasn't even begun to fathom ! You have people hacking into systems all the time. There were groups in the U.S.A in 1993 that shutdown three of the four telephone switch stations on the east coast, if they had shutdown the final switch station as well the whole east coast would have been without phones. Things of this nature can happen and have happened in the past. Back in the old days you had mechanical switches doing crossbars, things of that nature. Today all telephone switches are all computerized, they're everywhere. With a computer switch if you take the first word "computer" that's exactly what it is, a switch
                                         			
 being operated by a computer. The computer is connected to a modem, so are you and all the hackers therefore you too can run the switches. 
	Our generation is the first to travel within cyberspace, a virtual world that exists with all the computers that form the global net. For most people today cyberspace is still a bewildering and alien place. How computers work and how they affect our lives is still a mystery to all but the experts, but expertise doesn't necessarily guarantee morality. Originally the word hacker meant a computer enthusiasts but now that the internet has revealed it's potential for destruction and profit the hacker has become the outlaw of cyberspace. Not only do hackers commit crimes that cost millions of dollars, they also publicize their illegal techniques on the net where they innocent minds can find them and be seduced by the allure of power and money. This vast electronic neighborhood of bits and bytes has stretched the concepts of law and order. Like handbills stapled to telephone polls the internet appears to defy regulation. The subtleties and nuances of this relatively new form to the words "a gray area" and "right and wrong". Most self described hackers say they have been given a bad name and that they deserve more respect. For the most part they say hackers abide by the law, but when they do steal a password or break into a network they are motivated by a helping desire for knowledge, not for malicious intent. Teenagers are especially attracted  by the idea of getting something for nothing. 
	When system managers try to explain to hackers that it is wrong to break into computer systems there is no point because hackers with the aid of a computer possess tremendous power. They cannot be controlled and they have the ability to break into any computer system they feel like. But suppose one day a hacker decides to break into a system owned by a hospital and this computer is in charge of programming the therapy for a patient there if a hacker inputs the incorrect code the therapy can be interfered with and the patient may be seriously hurt. Even though  this wasn't done deliberately. These are the type of circumstances that give hackers a bad reputation. Today anyone with a computer and a modem can enter millions of computer systems around the world. On the net they say bits have no boundaries this means a hacker half way around the world can steal passwords and credit card numbers, break into computer systems and plant crippling viruses as easily as if they were just around the corner. The global network allows hackers to reach out and rob distant people with lightning speed.
	If cyberspace is a type of community, a giant neighborhood made up of networked computer users around the world, then it seems natural that many elements of traditional society can be found taking shape as bits and bytes. With electronic commerce comes electronic merchants, plugged-in educators provide networked education, and doctors meet with patients in offices on-line. IT should come as no surprise that there are also cybercriminals committing cybercrimes.
	As an unregulated hodgepodge of corporations, individuals, governments, educational institutions, and other organizations that have agreed in principle to use a standard set of communication protocols, the internet is wide open to exploitation. There are no sheriffs on the information highway waiting to zap potential offenders with a radar gun or search for weapons if someone looks suspicious. By almost all accounts, this lack of "law enforcement" leaves net users to regulate each other according to the reigningnorms  of the moment. Community standards in cyberspace appear to be vastly different from the standards found at the corner of Markham and Lawrence. Unfortunately, cyberspace is also a virtual tourist trap where faceless, nameless con artists can work the crowds.
	Mimicking real life, crimes and criminals come in all varieties on the internet. The FBI's National Computer Squad is dedicated to detecting and preventing all types of computer -related crimes. Some issues being carefully studied by everyone from the net veterans and law enforcement agencies to radical crimes include:
Computer Network Break-Ins
	Using software tools installed on a computer in a remote location, hackers can break into any computer systems to steal data, plant viruses or trojan horses, or work mischief of a less serious sort by changing user names or passwords. Network intrusions have been made illegal by the U.S. federal government, but detection and enforcement are  difficult. 
Industrial Espionage
	Corporations, like governments, love to spy on the enemy. Networked systems provide new opportunities for this , as hackers-for-hire retrieve information about product development and marketing strategies, rarely leaving behind any evidence of the theft. Not only is tracing the criminal labor-intensive, convictions are hard to obtain when laws are not written with electronic theft in mind.
Software Piracy
	According to estimates by U.S. Software Publisher's Association, as much as $7.5 billion of American software may be illegally copied and distributed worldwide. These copies work as well as the originals, and sell for significantly less money. Piracy is relatively easy, and only the largest rings of distributors are usually to serve hard jail time when prisons are overcrowded with people convicted of more serious crimes. 
Child Pornography
	This is one crime that is clearly illegal, both on and off the internet. Crackdowns may catch some offenders, but there are still ways to acquire images of children in varying stages of dress and performing a variety of sexual acts. Legally speaking, people who provide access to child porn face the same charges whether the images are digital or on a piece of paper. Trials of network users arrested in a recent FBI bust may challenge the validity of those laws as they apply to online services.
Mail Bombings 
	Software can be written that will instruct a computer to do almost anything, and terrorism has hit the internet in the form of mail bombings. By instructing a computer to repeatedly send mail (email) to a specified person's email address, the cybercriminal can overwhelm the recipient's personal account and potentially shut down entire systems. This may not be illegal , but it is certainly disruptive.
Password Sniffers
	Password sniffers are programs that monitor and record the name and password of network users as they log in, jeopardizing security at a site. Whoever installs the sniffer can then impersonate an authorized user and log in to access restricted documents. Laws are not yet up to adequately prosecute a person for impersonating another person on-line, but laws designed to prevent unauthorized access to information may be effective in apprehending hackers using sniffer programs. The Wall Street Journal suggest in recent reports that hackers may have sniffed out passwords used by members of America On-line, a service with more than 3.5 million subscribers. If the reports are accurate, even the president of the service found his account security jeopardized.
Spoofing
Spoofing is the act of disguising one computer to electronically "look" like another computer in order to gain access to a system that would normally be restricted. Legally, this can be handles in the same manner as password sniffers, but the law will have to change if spoofing is going to be addressed with more than a quick fix solution. Spoofing was used to access valuable documents stored on a computer belonging to security expert Tsutomu Shimomura (security expert of Nintendo U.S.A)
Credit Card Fraud
	The U.S secret service believes that half a billion dollars may be lost annually by customers who have credit card and calling card numbers stolen from on-line databases. Security measures are improving and traditional methods of law enforcement seem to be sufficient for prosecuting the thieves of such information. Bulletin boards and other on-line services are frequent targets for hackers who want to access large databases or credit card information. Such attacks usually result in the implementation of stronger security systems.
	Since there is no single widely-used definition of computer-related crime, computer network users and law enforcement officials most distinguish between illegal or deliberate network abuse versus behavior that is merely annoying. Legal systems everywhere are busily studying ways of dealing with crimes and criminals on the internet.  
 										
	    
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS
	PHONE FRAUD..........................................Pg1
	NETWORK BREAK-INS...........................Pg6
	INDUSTRIAL ESPIONAGE......................Pg7
SOFTWARE PIRACY................................Pg7
	CHILD PORNOGRAPHY..........................Pg7
	MAIL BOMBING.......................................Pg8
	PASSWORD SNIFFING............................Pg8
	SPOOFING.................................................Pg9
	CREDIT CARD FRAUD...........................Pg9




 A young man sits illuminated only by the light of a computer screen.  His 
fingers dance across the keyboard.  While it appears that he is only word processing or
playing a game, he may be committing a felony.
 In the state of Connecticut, computer crime is defined as:
53a-251.  Computer Crime
 (a) Defined.  A person commits computer crime when he violates any of the 
provisions of this section.
 (b)  Unauthorized access to a computer system.  (1) A person is guilty of the 
computer crime of unauthorized access to a computer system when, knowing that he is not
authorized to do so, he accesses or causes the be accessed any computer system without
authorization...
 (c)  Theft of computer services.  A person is guilty of the computer crime o f 
theft of computer services when he accesses or causes to be accessed or otherwise uses or
causes to be used a computer system with the intent to obtain unauthorized computer
services.
 (d)  Interruption of computer services.  A person is guilty of the computer 
crime of interruption of computer services when he, without authorization, intentionally or
recklessly disrupts or degrades or causes the disruption or degradation of computer services
or denies or causes the denial of computer services to an authorized user of a computer
system.
 (e)  Misuse of computer system information.  A person is guilty of the computer 
crime of misuse of computer system information when: (1) As a result of his accessing or
causing to be accessed a computer system, he intentionally makes or causes to be made an
unauthorized display, use, disclosure or copy, in any form, of data residing in,
communicated by or produced by a computer system.

 Penalties for committing computer crime range from a class B misdemeanor to a 
class B felony.  The severity of the penalty is determined based on the monetary value of
the damages inflicted.  (2)
 The law has not always had much success stopping computer crime.  In 1990 there 
was a nationwide crackdown on illicit computer hackers, with arrests, criminal
charges, one dramatic show-trial, several guilty pleas, and huge confiscations of data and
equipment all over the USA.
 The Hacker Crackdown of 1990 was larger, better organized, more deliberate, and 
more resolute than any previous efforts. The U.S. Secret Service, private telephone 
security, and state and local law enforcement groups across the country all joined 
forces in a determined attempt to break the back of America's electronic underground. It was
a fascinating effort, with very mixed results.
 In 1982, William Gibson coined the term "Cyberspace".  Cyberspace is defined as 
"the 'place' where a telephone conversation appears to occur.  Not inside your actual 
phone, the plastic device on your desk...  The place between the phones.  The indefinite
place out there." (1, p. 1)
 The words "community" and "communication" share the same root.  Wherever one 
allows many people to communicate, one creates a community.  "Cyberspace" is as much of a
community as any neighborhood or special interest group.  People will fight more to defend
the communities that they have built then they would fight to protect themselves. 
 This two-sided fight truly began when the AT&T telephone network crashed on January 15,
1990.
 The crash occurred due to a small bug in AT&T's own software.  It began with a 
single switching station in Manhattan, New York, but within ten minutes the domino 
effect had brought down over half of AT&T's network.  The rest was overloaded, trying to
compensate for the overflow.
 This crash represented a major corporate embarrassment.  Sixty thousand people 
lost their telephone service completely.  During the nine hours of effort that it took to
restore service, some seventy million telephone calls went uncompleted.
 Because of the date of the crash, Martin Luther King Day (the most politically 
touchy holiday), and the absence of a physical cause of the destruction, AT&T did not 
find it difficult to rouse suspicion that the network had not crashed by itself-  that it
had been crashed, intentionally.  By people the media has called hackers.
 Hackers define themselves as people who explore technology.  If that technology 
takes them outside of the boundaries of the law, they will do very little about it.  
True hackers follow a "hacker's ethic", and never damage systems or leave  electronic 
"footprints" where they have been.
 Crackers are hackers who use their skills to damage other people's systems or 
for personal gain.  These people, mistakenly referred to as hackers by the media, have been
sensationalized in recent years.
 Software pirates, or warez dealers, are people who traffic in pirated software 
(software that is illegally copied and distributed).  These people are usually looked 
down on by the more technically sophisticated hackers and crackers.
 Another group of law-breakers that merit mentioning are the phreakers.  
Telephone phreaks are people that experiment with the telephone network.  Their main 
goal is usually to receive free telephone service, through the use of such devices as 
homemade telephone boxes.  They are often much more extroverted than their computer 
equivalents.  Phreaks have been known to create world-wide conference calls that run for
hours (on someone else's bill, of course).  When someone has to drop out, they call up
another phreak to join in.
 Hackers come from a wide variety of odd subcultures, with a variety of 
languages, motives and values.  The most sensationalized of these is the "cyberpunk" 
group.  The cyberpunk FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions list) states:
2. What is cyberpunk, the subculture?

Spurred on by cyberpunk literature, in the mid-1980's certain groups
of people started referring to themselves as cyberpunk, because they
correctly noticed the seeds of the fictional "techno-system" in
Western society today, and because they identified with the
marginalized characters in cyberpunk stories. Within the last few
years, the mass media has caught on to this, spontaneously dubbing
certain people and groups "cyberpunk". Specific subgroups which are
identified with cyberpunk are:

Hackers, Crackers, and Phreaks: "Hackers" are the "wizards" of the
computer community; people with a deep understanding of how their
computers work, and can do things with them that seem
"magical". "Crackers" are the real-world analogues of the "console
cowboys" of cyberpunk fiction; they break in to other people's
computer systems, without their permission, for illicit gain or simply
for the pleasure of exercising their skill. "Phreaks" are those who do
a similar thing with the telephone system, coming up with ways to
circumvent phone companies' calling charges and doing clever things
with the phone network. All three groups are using emerging computer
and telecommunications technology to satisfy their individualist
goals.

Cypherpunks: These people think a good way to bollix "The System" is
through cryptography and cryptosystems. They believe widespread use of
extremely hard-to-break coding schemes will create "regions of privacy"
that "The System" cannot invade.  (3)

 This simply serves to show that computer hackers are not only teenage boys with 
social problems who sit at home with their computers; they can be anyone.
 The crash of AT&T's network and their desire to blame it on people other than 
themselves brought the political impetus for a new attack on the electronic underground. 
 This attack took the form of Operation Sundevil.  "Operation Sundevil" was a crackdown on
those traditional scourges of the digital underground: credit card theft and telephone code
abuse.
 The targets of these raids were computer bulletin board systems.  Boards can be 
powerful aids to organized fraud. Underground boards carry lively, extensive, detailed, and
often quite flagrant discussions of lawbreaking techniques and illegal activities. 
Discussing crime in the abstract, or discussing the particulars of criminal cases, is not
illegal, but there are stern state and federal laws against conspiring in groups in order to
commit crimes.  It was these laws that were used to seize 25 of the "worst" offenders,
chosen from a list of over 215 underground BBSs that the Secret Service had fingered for
"carding" traffic.
 The Secret Service was not interested in arresting criminals.  They sought to 
seize computer equipment, not computer criminals.  Only four people were arrested during the
course of Operation Sundevil;  one man in Chicago, one man in New York, a nineteen-year-old
female phreak in Pennsylvania, and a minor in California.
 This was a politically motivated attack designed to show the public that the 
government was capable of stopping this fraud, and to show the denizens of the 
electronic underground that the government could penetrate into the very heart of their
society and destroy routes of communication, as well as bring down the legendary BBS
operators.  This is not an uncommon message for law-enforcement officials to send to
criminals.  Only the territory was new.
 Another message of Sundevil was to the employees of the Secret Service 
themselves;  proof that such a large-scale operation could be planned and accomplished
successfully.
 The final purpose of Sundevil was as a message from the Secret Service to their 
long-time rivals the Federal Bureau of Investigation.  Congress had not clearly stated which
agency was responsible for computer crime.  Later, they gave the Secret Service jurisdiction
over any computers belonging to the government or responsible for the transfer of money. 
Although the secret service can't directly involve themselves in anything outside of this
jurisdiction, they are often called on by local police for advice.
 Hackers are unlike any other group of criminals, in that they are constantly in 
contact with one another.  There are two national conventions per year, and monthly 
meetings within each state.  This has forced people to pose the question of whether 
hacking is really a crime at all.
 After seeing such movies at "The Net" or "Hackers", people have begun to wonder 
how vulnerable they individually are to technological crime.  Cellular phone 
conversations can be easily overheard with modified scanners, as can conversations on 
cordless phones.
 Any valuable media involving numbers is particularly vulnerable.  A common 
practice among hackers is "trashing".  Not, as one might think, damaging public 
property, but actually going through a public area and methodically searching the trash for
any useful information.  Public areas that are especially vulnerable are ATM chambers and
areas where people posses credit cards printouts or telephone bills.
 This leads to another part of hacking that has very little to do with the 
technical details of computers or telephone systems.  It is referred to by those who 
practice it as "social engineering".  With the information found on someone's phone bill
(account or phonecard number), an enterprising phreak can call up and impersonate an
employee of the telephone company-  obtaining useable codes without any knowledge of the
system whatsoever.  Similar stunts are often performed with ATM cards and pin numbers.
 The resulting codes are either kept or used by whomever obtained them, traded or 
sold over Bulletin Board Systems or the Internet, or posted for anyone interested to 
find.
 With the increasing movement of money from the physical to the electronic, 
stricter measures are being taken against electronic fraud, although this can backfire. 
 In several instances, banks have covered up intrusions to prevent their customers from
losing their trust in the security of the system.  The truth has only come out long after
the danger was passed.
 Electronic security is becoming a way of life for many people.  As with the 
first cellular telephone movements, this one has begun with the legitimately wealthy and the
criminals.  The most common security package is PGP, or Pretty Good Privacy.  PGP uses RSA
public-key encryption algorithms to provide military-level encryption to anyone who seeks to
download the package from the Internet.
 The availability of this free package on the Internet caused an uproar and 
brought about the arrest of the author, Phil Zimmerman.  The United States government 
lists RSA encryption along with weapons of which the exportation is illegal.  The 
Zimmerman case has not yet been resolved.
 The United States government has begun to take a large interest in the Internet 
and private Bulletin Board Systems.  They have recently passed the Communications 
Decency Act, which made it illegal to transmit through the Internet or phone lines in 
electronic form any "obscene or inappropriate" pictures or information.  This Act 
effectively restricted the information on the Internet to that appropriate in PG-13 
movies.
 As of June 12, 1996, the censorship section of the Communications Decency Act 
was overturned by a three-judge panel of the federal court of appeals, who stated that it
violates Internet user's first amendment rights, and that it is the responsibility of the
parents to censor their children's access to information, not the government's.  The court
of appeals, in effect, granted the Internet the protections previously granted to
newspapers, one of the highest standards of freedom insured by our Constitution.  The
Clinton administration has vowed to appeal this decision through the Supreme Court.
 Technological crime is harder to prosecute than any other, because the police 
are rarely as technologically advanced as the people they are attempting to catch.  This
situation was illustrated by the recent capture of Kevin Mitnick.  Mitnick had eluded police
for years.  After he broke into security expert Tsumona's computer, Tsumona took over the
investigation and captured Mitnick in a matter of months.
 It will be fascinating to see, as technology continues to transform society, the 
way that technological criminals, usually highly intelligent and dangerous, will 
transform the boundaries of crime.  As interesting to see will be how the government 
will fight on this new battle ground against the new types of crime, while preserving 
the rights and freedom of the American people.











 
I
Ever since I  got my first computer.  I have enjoyed working on them.  I have learned a tremendous amount of trouble shooting.  With my recent computer I have come across computer crime.  I got interested in hacking, prhreaking, and salami slicing.  But before I go to far, I need to learn more about it like the consequences?  One question in mind is what crimes are their and what kind of things you can do with them?  I would like to find out why people do thesis things?  I would also like to learn the laws against all computer crime?  
II
Today's computer society has brought a new form of crime.  There are those "hackers" who break their way into computers to learn the system or get information.  I found out in the book Computer Crime written by Judson, Karen: That "Salami Slicers" steal small amounts of money from many bank customers this adding up to a great deal of money.  I also read about phone phreaks more known as "Phreakers."  They steal long distance phone services.  Phreakers commit many other crimes against phone companies.

In the book Computer Crime it states, most people commit thesis crimes, because they where carious and wanted to explore the system.  All they want to do is exploit systems not destroy it.  It is purely intellectual.  I know one reason is that is can be very rewarding.  Hackers are drawn to computers for the aninymity they allow.  They feel powerful and can do anything.  Hackers can be there own person out side the real world.

I found out Arizona was the first state to pass a law against computer crime, in 1979.  In 1980 the U.S. copyright act was amended to include soft ware.  I found out that in 1986 a 
computer farad abuse act was passed.  This act was made to cover over any crime or computer scheme that was missed with any former laws.  Violations to any of thesis laws are a maxim of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
III
With my computer I can do lots of thesis things but choose not to.  Because I know that if you know computers you can do much more like carious wise.  If you know computers you set for the future.  I'm not saying I don't have fun with my computer I like causing a little trouble every now and then.  Well I piety much covered the motives and intentions behind the most common computer crimes.  I explained the laws and punishments for committing thesis crimes.  I hope I cleared things up for you elutriate computer people, and gave you a more understanding of the things that can be done.  As you have red you can see that computers can and are more dangerous than guns.
 




 

    It's the weekend, you have nothing to do so you decide to play around
on your computer.  You turn it on and then start up, you start calling
people with your modem, connecting to another world, with people just like
you at a button press away.  This is all fine but what happens when you
start getting into other peoples computer files.  Then it becomes a crime,
but what is a computer crime really, obviously it involves the use of a
computer but what are these crimes.  Well they are: Hacking, Phreaking, &
Software Piracy.

     To begin I will start with Hacking, what is hacking. Hacking is
basically using your computer to "Hack" your way into another. They use
programs called scanners which randomly dials numbers any generating tones
or carriers are recorded.  These numbers are looked at by hackers and then
used again, when the hacker calls up the number and gets on he's presented
with a logon prompt, this is where the hacking really begins, the hacker
tries to bypass this anyway he knows how to and tries to gain access to the
system.  Why do they do it, well lets go to a book and see "Avid young
computer hackers in their preteens and teens are frequently involved in
computer crimes that take the form of trespassing, invasion of privacy, or
vandalism. Quite often they are mearly out for a fun and games evening, and
they get entangled in the illegal use of their machines without realizing
the full import of what they are doing", I have a hard time believing that
so lets see what a "hacker" has to say about what he does "Just as they
were enthraled with their pursuit of information, so are we.  The thrill of
the hack is not in breaking the law, it's in the pursuit and capture of
knowledge.", as you can see the "hacker" doesn't go out to do destroy
things although some do.  It's in the pursuit of knowledge. Of course this
is still against the law. But where did all of this start, MIT is where
hacking started the people there would learn and explore computer systems
all around the world. In the views of professional hacking is like drugs or
any other addictive substance, it's an addiction for the mind and once
started it's difficult to stop.  This could be true, as hackers know what
they are doing is wrong and they know odds are they will be caught.  But as
I mentioned some hackers are just above average criminals, using there
skills to break in banks and other places where they can get money, or
where they can destroy information.  What a hacker does at a bank is take a
few cents or even a few fractions of a cents from many different accounts
this may seem like nothing but when all compiled can be alot.  A stick up
robber averages about $8,000 each "job", and he has to put his life and
personal freedom on the line to do it while the computer hacker in the
comfort of his own living room averages $500,000 a "job".  As for people
destroying information, this is for taking some one down, destruction of
data could end a business which for some is very attractive.  It can cost a
company thousands of dollars to restore the damage done.

     Now that you have an understanding of what a "hacker" is, it time to
move on to someone closely associates with a hacker.  This is a Phreak, but
what is that.  For the answer we turn to the what is known as the
"Official" Phreakers Manual "Phreak [fr'eek] 1. The action of using
mischievous and mostly illegal ways in order to not pay for some sort of
telecommunications bill, order, transfer, or other service. It often
involves usage of highly illegal boxes and machines in order to defeat the
security that is set up to avoid this sort of happening. [fr'eaking] v. 2.
A person who uses the above methods of destruction and chaos in order to
make a better life for all. A true phreaker will not go against his fellows
or narc on people who have ragged on him or do anything termed to be
dishonourable to phreaks. [fr'eek] n. 3. A certain code or dialup useful in
the action of being a phreak. (Example: "I hacked a new metro phreak last
night.")" The latter 2 ideas of what a phreak is, is rather weird.  A
Phreak like the hacker likes to explore and experiment, however his choice
of exploring is not other computer but the phone system as a whole. Phreaks
explore the phone system finding many different ways to do things, most
often make free calls. Why do they do this, "  A hacker and phreaker will
have need to use telephone systems much more than an average individual,
therefore, methods which can be used to avoid toll charges are in order. ".
A phreak has two basic ways of making free calls, he can call up codes or
PBXs on his phone and then enter a code and make his call or he can use
Electronic Toll Fraud Devices.  Codes are rather easy to get the phreak
will scan for them, but unlike a hacker will only save the tone(s) number
instead of the carrier(s). Then he will attempt to hack the code to use it,
these codes range from numbers 0 - 9 and can be any length, although most
are not more than 10.  Electronic Toll Fraud Devices are known as Boxes in
the underground.  Most are the size of a pack of smokes, or than can be
smaller or bigger.  I will not go too deep.  They are electronic devices
than do various things, such as make outgoing calls free, make incoming
calls free, simulate coins dropping in a phone, etc.  People who "Phreak"
are caught alot these days thanks to the new technology.

     Software Piracy is the most common computer crime, it is the illegal
coping of software.  "People wouldn't think of shoplifting software from a
retail store, but don't think twice about going home and making several
illegal copies of the same software." and this is true because I myself am
guilty of this.  The major problem is not people going out and buying the
software then making copies for everyone, it's the Bulletin Boards that
cater to pirating software, that really cause the problem.  On anyone one
of these boards one can find an upwards of 300 - 1000+ of pirated software
open for anyone to take.  This is a problem and nothing can really be done
about it.  Few arrests are made in this area of computer crime.

    I will now devote a brief section to the above mentioned BBS' , most
are legal and do nothing wrong.  However there are many more that do accept
pirated software, pornographic pictures, animations , and texts. As well as
a trading area for phone codes, other BBS', Credit Card numbers, etc.  This
is where a majority of Hackers and Phreaks come, as well as those who
continue to pirate software come to meet and share stories.  In this is a
new world, where you can do anything, there are groups that get, crack, and
courier software all over the world some of them are called: INC:
International Network Of Crackers, THG: The Humble Guys, TDT: The Dream
Team.  As well a number of other groups have followed suit such as
Phalcon/SKISM (Smart Kids Into Sick Methods), NuKE, and YAM (Youngsters
Against McAfee) these are virus groups who write and courier their work
anywhere they can, they just send it somewhere, where anyone can take it
and use it in any manner they wish, such as getting even with someone. All
of these activities are illegal but nothing can be done, the people running
these boards know what they are doing.  As it stands right now, the BBS
world is in two parts Pirating and the Underground, which consists of
Hackers/Phreaks/Anarchists/Carders(Credit Card Fraud)/Virus programmers.
All have different boards and offer a variety of information on virtually
any subject.

     Well from all of this reading you just did you should have a fairly
good idea of what computer crime is.  I didn't mention it in the sections
but the police, phone companies are arresting and stopping alot of things
every day.  With the new technology today it is easier to catch these
criminals then it was before.  With the exception of the BBS' the police
have made some major blows busting a few BBS', arresting hackers and
phreaks. All of which were very looked up to for knowledge in their areas
of specialty.  If I had more time I could go into these arrests but I must
finish by saying that these are real crimes and the sentences are getting
harsher, with alot of the older people getting out the newer people are
getting arrested and being made examples of.  This will deter alot of
would-be computer criminal away.
 





 
In the world of computers, computer fraud and computer 
crime are very prevalent issues facing every computer user.  
This ranges from system administrators to personal computer 
users who do work in the office or at home.  Computers 
without any means of security are vulnerable to attacks from 
viruses, worms, and illegal computer hackers.  If the proper 
steps are not taken, safe computing may become a thing of 
the past.  Many security measures are being implemented to 
protect against illegalities.
Companies are becoming more aware and threatened by the 
fact that their computers are prone to attack.  Virus 
scanners are becoming necessities on all machines.  
Installing and monitoring these virus scanners takes many 
man hours and a lot of money for site licenses.  Many server 
programs are coming equipped with a program called "netlog."  
This is a program that monitors the computer use of the 
employees in a company on the network.  The program monitors 
memory and file usage.  A qualified system administrator 
should be able to tell by the amounts of memory being used 
and the file usage if something is going on that should not 
be.  If a virus is found, system administrators can pinpoint 
the user who put the virus into the network and investigate 
whether or not there was any malice intended.  
One computer application that is becoming more widely 
used and, therefore, more widely abused, is the use of 
electronic mail or email.  In the present day, illegal 
hackers can read email going through a server fairly easily.  
Email consists of not only personal transactions, but 
business and financial transactions.  There are not many 
encryption procedures out for email yet.  As Gates 
describes, soon email encryption will become a regular 
addition to email just as a hard disk drive has become a 
regular addition to a computer (Gates p.97-98).  
Encrypting email can be done with two prime numbers 
used as keys.  The public key will be listed on the Internet 
or in an email message.  The second key will be private, 
which only the user will have.  The sender will encrypt the 
message with the public key, send it to the recipient, who 
will then decipher it again with his or her private key.  
This method is not foolproof, but it is not easy to unlock 
either.  The numbers being used will probably be over 60 
digits in length (Gates p.98-99).
The Internet also poses more problems to users.  This 
problem faces the home user more than the business user.  
When a person logs onto the Internet, he or she may download 
a file corrupted with a virus.  When he or she executes that 
program, the virus is released into the system.  When a 
person uses the World Wide Web(WWW), he or she is 
downloading files into his or her Internet browser without 
even knowing it.  Whenever a web page is visited, an image 
of that page is downloaded and stored in the cache of the 
browser.  This image is used for faster retrieval of that 
specific web page.  Instead of having to constantly download 
a page, the browser automatically reverts to the cache to 
open the image of that page.  Most people do not know about 
this, but this is an example of how to get a virus in a 
machine without even knowing it.
Every time a person accesses the Internet, he or she is 
not only accessing the host computer, but the many computers 
that connect the host and the user.  When a person transmits 
credit card information, it goes over many computers before 
it reaches its destination.  An illegal hacker can set up 
one of the connecting computers to copy the credit card 
information as it passes through the computer.  This is how 
credit card fraud is committed with the help of the 
Internet.  What companies such as Maxis and Sierra are doing 
are making secure sites.  These sites have the capabilities 
to receive credit card information securely.  This means the 
consumer can purchase goods by credit card over the Internet 
without worrying that the credit card number will be seen by 
unauthorized people.
System administrators have three major weapons against 
computer crime.  The first defense against computer crime is 
system security.  This is the many layers systems have 
against attacks.  When data comes into a system, it is 
scanned for viruses and safety.  Whenever it passes one of 
these security layers, it is scanned again.  The second 
resistance against viruses and corruption is computer law.  
This defines what is illegal in the computer world.  In the 
early 1980's, prosecutors had problems trying suspect in 
computer crimes because there was no definition of illegal 
activity.  The third defense is the teaching of computer 
ethics.  This will hopefully defer people from becoming 
illegal hackers in the first place (Bitter p. 433).
There are other ways companies can protect against 
computer fraud than in the computer and system itself.  One 
way to curtail computer fraud is in the interview process 
and training procedures.  If it is made clear to the new 
employee that honesty is valued in the company, the employee 
might think twice about committing a crime against the 
company.  Background checks and fingerprinting are also good 
ways to protect against computer fraud.
Computer crime prevention has become a major issue in 
the computer world.  The lack of knowledge of these crimes 
and how they are committed is a factor as to why computer 
crime is so prevalent. What must be realized is that the 
"weakest link in any system is the human" (Hafner and 
Markoff p. 61).   With the knowledge and application of the 
preventative methods discussed, computer crime may actually 
become an issue of the past. 


Works Cited


Bitter, Gary G., ed.  The MacMillian Encyclopedia of 
Computers.  MacMillian Publishing Company:  New York, 
1992.

Gates, William.  The Road Ahead.  New York : Penguin Books, 
1995.

Hafner, Katie & John Markoff.  Cyberpunk.  New York : Simon 
and Schuster, 1991.

Romney, Marshall.  "Computer Fraud - What Can Be Done 
About It?"  CPA Journal Vol. 65 (May 1995):  p. 30-33.

 
 
Computer Crime:
The Crime of the Future
English II
6 April 1996
Computer Crimes
	Explosive growth in the computer industry over the last decade has made new
technologies cheaper and simpler for the average person to own.  As a result, computers
play an intricate part in our daily lives.  The areas in which computers affect life are
infinite, ranging from entertainment to finances.  If anything were to happen to these
precious devices, the world would be chaotic.
	There is a type of person that thrives on chaos, that is the malevolent hacker. 
Some hackers act on revenge or just impersonal mischievousness.  But whatever their
motives, their deeds can be destructive to a person's computer.  An attack by a hacker not
only affects the victim, but others as well.
	One case involving a notorious hacker named Kevin Mitnick did just that.  Mitnick
is a very intelligent man.  He is 31 and pending trial for computer fraud.  When he was a
teenager, he used his knowledge of computers to break into the North American Defense
Command computer.  Had he not been stopped, he could have caused some real national
defense problems for the United  States (Sussman 66).  
	Other "small time" hackers affect people just as much by stealing or giving away
copyrighted software, which causes the prices of software to increase, thus increasing the
price the public must pay for the programs.
	 Companies reason that if they have a program that can be copied onto a disc then
they will lose a certain amount of their profit.  People will copy it and give to friends or
pass it around on the Internet.  To compensate, they will raise the price of disc programs. 
CD Rom programs cost more to make but are about the same price as disc games. 
Companies don't loose money on them because it is difficult to copy a CD Rom and
impossible to transmit over the Internet (Facts on File #28599 1).
	 One company in particular, American On-line, has been hit hard by hackers.  The
feud started when a disgruntled ex-employee used his inside experience to help fellow
hackers disrupt services offered by AOL (Alan 37).  His advice became popular and he
spawned a program called AOHell.  This program, in turn, created many copycats.  They
all portray their creators as gangsters, and one of the creator's names is     "Da Chronic."
Many also feature short clips of rap music (Cook 36).
	 These programs make it easy for people with a little hacker knowledge to disrupt
AOL. These activities include gaining access to free accounts, gaining access to other
people's credit card numbers, and destroying chat rooms.  The following is an excerpt
from a letter from the creator of AOHell to a user:
	What is AOHell? AOHell is an AOL for Windows add-on, which allows you to do
many things.  AOHell allows you to download for free, talk using other people's screen
names, steal passwords and credit card information, and much more.  AOHell is basically
an anarchy program designed to help you, the user, and destroy AOL, the enemy:
	No matter what AOL says to you, nor what even Steve Case* himself may say
about AOHell, don't be too quick to judge.  America On-line may say anything to get you
to stop using AOHell.  They may say it's a virus, they may say it'll cancel your account,
hell, they've even tried to suggest it may steal your password and send it to the author. 
None of this is true however.  Free AOL does not interest me, as I have many ways to
accomplish that.  You should always keep that in mind when you hear such rumors.  It's
AOL and their sick pedophiles I'm against, not you, the user.  You are the ones who are
making it possible for me to achieve my goal, which is to make AOL a virtual Hell.  Now
stop reading, and go destroy a Mac room with the bot or something. :)  (Cook 36)
	The quote above was in defence of AOHell which has received a lot of negative
feedback.  The loopholes for hackers and freeloaders may be closing, however.  America
On-line is reluctant to discuss specifics of its counterattack for fear of giving miscreants
warning.  However, many software trading rooms are being shut down almost as soon as
they are formed. Others are often visited by 'narcs' posing as traders.  New accounts
started with phony credit cards are being cut off more promptly, and other card-
verification schemes are in place.
	AOL has now developed the ability to resurrect a screen name that had been
deleted by the hackers, and is rumored to have call-tracing technologies in the works
(Alan 37).
	Hacking is not just a problem in America.  All across the world hackers plague
anyone they can, and they're getting better at it.  In Europe they're known as "Phreakers"
(technologically sophisticated young computer hackers).  These self-proclaimed Phreakers
have made their presence felt all the way up the political ladder.  They managed to steal
personal expense accounts of the European Commission President Jacques.  They revealed
some embarrassing overspending (PC Weekly 12).
	Was this stealing justified?  Was it done to protect the public from wasting their
tax money?  The European judicial system did not think so.  The accused were sentenced
to six months in prison (PC Weekly 12).
	This punishment might seem harsh, but not to Bill Clinton.  He has appointed a
task force to try to enforce laws on the Internet.  The new laws would try to strengthen
copyright laws by monitoring information being transferred and if a violation occurred, a
$5,000 fine would be implemented (Facts On File #28599 1).
	Clinton thinks this will protect businesses as well as consumers by keeping
copyrighted material at a reasonable price.  The only exception would be that libraries
would have the right to copy "for purposes of preservation" (Phelps 75).
	Some people view hackers as the "Robin Hoods" of the Internet.  They wrestle
with the heavyweight businesses to try to gain leverage for individuals.  But in doing so
they make businesses increase prices to pay for security.  It is an ongoing cycle.  
	Many anti-hacking groups think they are gaining some ground on hackers by
making more sophisticated software.  But like a virus that becomes immune too quickly, 
the hackers find another way.  The loopholes of the hacker are infinite.  Just as one cannot
leave their shadow behind on a sunny day, the hacker will be around as long as there is
something to hack. 


Works Cited

Alan Robert, "AOL's Piracy Woes: Attack and Counterattack"                                                 
		Macworld 16 June 1995: 37-38
"Computers: On-line Copyright Protection Proposed"                                                                                                                                                      
	
	Facts on File World News Digest 14 September 1995      			28599
"Data Busters"
	PC Weekly 8 August 1995: 12-14
Phelps, Alan Abstract "On-line Slime"
	PC Novice 1995 74-75 Pro Quest, DiscII
Sussman, Vic: "Hacker Nabbed" 
	Us News & World Report 27 Febuary 1995 66-67
Cook, William "Aol's battle with AOHell"                                         	
	Internet Underground  22 April 1995: 36-37



ABSTRACT
 Computer crimes seem to be an increasing problem in today's society.  The main aspect
 concerning these offenses is information gained or lost.  As our government tries to take
 control of the information that travels through the digital world, and across networks such
 as the InterNet, they also seem to be taking away certain rights and privileges that come
 with these technological advancements.    These services open a whole new doorway to
 communications as we know it.  They offer freedom of expression, and at the same time,
 freedom of privacy in the highest possible form.  Can the government reduce computer
 crimes, and still allow people the right to freedom of expression and privacy?

INFORMATION CONTROL IN THE DIGITIZED WORLD

 In the past decade, computer technology has expanded at an incredibly fast rate, and the
 information stored on these computers has been increasing even faster.  The amount of
 money, military intelligence, and personal information stored on computers has increased
 far beyond expectations.  Governments, the military, and the economy could not operate
 without the use of computers.  Banks transfer trillions of dollars every day over
 inter-linking networks, and more than one billion pieces of electronic mail are passed
 through the world's networks daily.  It is the age of the computer network, the largest of
 which is known as the InterNet.  A complex web of communications inter-linking millions of
 computers together -- and this number is at least doubling every year. The computer was
 originally designed as a scientific and mathematical tool,  to aid in performing intense
 and precise calculations.  However, from the large, sixty square foot ENIAC (Electronical
 Numerical Integrator and Calculator) of 1946, to the three square foot IBM PC of today,
 their uses have mutated and expanded far beyond this boundary.  Their almost infinite
 capacity and lightning speed, which is increasing annually, and their low cost, which is
 decreasing annually, has allowed computers to stabilize at a more personal level, yet
 retain their position in mathematical and scientific research1 . They are now being used in
 almost every aspect of life, as we know it, today.  The greatest effect of computers on
 life at this present time seems to be the InterNet.    What we know now as the InterNet
 began in 1969 as a network then named ArpaNet.  ArpaNet, under control by the pentagon's
 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, was first introduced as an answer to a problem
 concerning the government question of how they would communicate during war.  They needed a
 network with no central authority, unlike those subsequent to this project.  A main
 computer controlling the network would definitely be an immediate target for enemies.  The
 first test node of ArpaNet was installed at UCLA in the Fall of 1969.  By December of the
 same year, three more nodes were added, and within two years, there was a total of fifteen
 nodes within the system.  However, by this time, something seemed to be changing concerning
 the information traveling across the nodes.  By 1971, government employees began to obtain
 their own personal mail addresses, and the main traffic over the net shifted from
 scientific information to personal mail and gossip.  Mailing lists were used to send mass
 quantities of mail to hundreds of people, and the first newsgroup was created for
 discussing views and opinions in the science fiction world.  The networks decentralized
 structure made the addition of more machines, and the use of different types of machines
 very simple.  As computer technology increased, interest in ArpaNet seemed only to expand. 
 In 1977, a new method of transmission was put into effect, called TCP/IP.  The transmission
 control protocol (TCP) would convert messages into smaller packets of information at their
 source, then reassemble them at their destination, while the InterNet protocol (IP) would
 control the addressing of these packets to assure their transmission to their correct
 destinations.  This newer method of transmission was much more efficient then the previous
 network control protocol (NCP), and became very popular.  Corporations such as IBM and DEC
 began to develop TCP/IP software for numerous different platforms, and the demand for such
 software grew rapidly.  This availability of software allowed more corporations and
 businesses to join the network very easily, and by 1985, ArpaNet was only a tiny portion of
 the newly created InterNet. Other smaller networks are also very widely used today, such as
 FidoNet.  These networks serve the same purpose as the InterNet, but are on a much smaller
 scale, as they have less efficient means of transferring message packets.  They are more
 localized, in the sense that the information travels much more slowly when further
 distances are involved.  However, the ease of access to these networks and various
 computers has allowed computer crimes to increase to a much higher scale. These computers
 and networks store and transfer one thing -- information.  The problem occurs when we want
 to determine the value of such information.  Information lacks physical properties, and
 this intangible aspect of data creates problems when developing laws to protect it.  The
 structure of our current legal system has, to this point, been based on ascertainable
 limits.  Physical properties have always been at its main core2 .  In the past, this
 information, or data, has been 'converted' into tangible form to accommodate our system.  A
 prime example is the patent, which is written out on paper.  Today, however, it is becoming
 much more difficult to 'convert' this data into a physical form, as the quantity is
 increasing so rapidly, and this quantity of information is being stored in a virtual,
 digitized space3 .   It is very important to realize and emphasize that computers and
 networks store and transfer only information, and that most all of this information can be
 altered, in some way, undetectably.  For example, when a file is stored in the popular DOS
 environment (and also in environments such as Windows, OS/2, and in similar ways, UNIX), it
 is also stored with the date, time, size, and four attributes -- read-only, system, hidden,
 and archive.  One may consider checking the date at which the document, or information
 stored on the computer, was saved to determine if it was modified.  However, this is also
 digital information, and easily changed to whatever date or time the operator prefers.  One
 may also consider the attributes stored with the file.  If a file is flagged as
 'read-only,' then perhaps it cannot be overwritten.  This is surely the case -- however,
 this attribute is easily turned off and on, as it is also information in a digitized sense,
 and therefore very easily changed.  This is the same case when a file is 'hidden'.  It may
 very well be hidden to the novice user, but it is easily seen to anyone who has even a
 slight knowledge of the commands of the system.  One may also consider moving this
 information to a floppy disk in order to preserve its originality; but we are once again
 giving it a physical aspect, which we earlier addressed as being a close to impossible task
 when involved with the amount of information involved in this area today.  Digital
 information is infinitely mutable, and the information that protects this information is
 infinitely mutable4 . In order to understand how to control this information, we must first
 understand what information and it's value -- especially that of a digital nature -- is. 
 One cannot specifically define information in a whole.  In today's society, 'knowledge is
 power' seems to be a common phrase, and a quite true one.  It would be even more true to
 say 'knowledge can be power.'  It's how we use this knowledge that determines it's power. 
 In the same sense, it is how we use and distribute this knowledge that determines it's
 value.  Information can be used in so many ways that it is virtually impossible to value
 it.  What information is of value to one person may be completely worthless to another. 
 The availability of this knowledge also determines it's worth.  If information is as free
 as air, it has virtually no worth5 .  Therefore, it is also a privacy issue.  We can now
 base the value of information on three things:  it's availability, it's use, and it's user.
     In order to protect information in our current government, we must first value it. 
 Those three aspects of information can be so differentiated, that this is close to
 impossible to do so.  In addition to this, how do we determine who "owns" the information? 
 Information itself is not a physical thing which only one person has in their possession at
 any time.  If information is given away, it is still held by the giver, as well as the
 taker.  It is impossible to determine exactly who has this information.  If someone steals
 information, we cannot take it away from them -- it is intangible in almost every aspect.
 We must also understand the way in which our government, and most governments, create laws
 and attempt to desist illegal actions.  As stated earlier, the American government, and
 many other governments, are based on a physical center, which I exemplified with the case
 of the US patent.  When our government creates laws, the subjects of the laws are given a
 definable, ascertainable limit.  When someone commits grand theft auto, breaking and
 entering, or murder, we understand what has occurred and have definite ways to prove what
 has occurred, where and when it has occurred, how it has occurred, and, if applicable, what
 has been harmed and what is its value.  However, when we look at computer crimes, such as
 unauthorized access, we cannot be as clear on these aspects, and we do not have definite
 ways to prove the crime, or who committed it, nor do we have a way in which to define the
 value of anything damaged, if it had even been damaged.  It is hard to convict a person
 when all they did was slow down a computer network for a few days, or look at a credit
 profile on John Doe. Problems also occur because people, including those in the legal
 profession as well as jurors, do not always understand technology.  They do not always
 understand how mutable digital information can be, and how easily accessible and
 distributed it can be.  When a jury does not understand, one cannot truly be declared
 guilty "beyond a reasonable doubt".  "Technically, I didn't commit a crime.  All I did was
 destroy data.  I didn't steal anything.6 "  How can this be argued?  Crimes committed in
 the computer world do not exactly adhere with current laws that address physical crimes. 
 We cannot adapt current laws to those involving information crimes, and trying to do that
 will cause too many problems and confusions because of the variety, extent, and value of
 information as a whole.  However, this is exactly what the government is trying to do.  It
 must also be considered that this information is not strictly a US problem, nor is it more
 geared towards the US. Although started by the United States government, the InterNet has
 grown world wide, reaching over seventy countries.  Since the InterNet has such a
 decentralized structure, one cannot say that the US is "in charge" of the network. The
 problem is, the US government does not see this themselves.  The United States government
 wants to censor the information traveling across the InterNet and other telecommunication
 services, but this cannot be the case any longer because of this situation.  We cannot
 expect other countries to adhere to the laws of the United States, just as most Americans
 would not expect to have to agree to laws set by other countries.  Therefore, it could be
 easily said that the government would be invading privacy if they were to attempt to censor
 the information which travels these networks.  Individual computers, are, of course, an
 individuals property, and it would, without a doubt, be an invasion of privacy if the
 government wanted to, at any given time, search your hard drive without just cause. I feel
 that the government wants too much power this time.  It would seem that they want to have
 access to and control all digital information in America for their own benefit.  The US
 government created an encryption device called the Clipper chip, which was to insure
 digital privacy among it's users.  However, our government seems to only define privacy to
 an extent.  They had also planned to keep, in their possession, a duplicate of each chip. 
 So much for total privacy.  The government seems to be on a quest for total control over
 it's citizens, and the citizens of the world.  This may seem extreme at the present time,
 but our current legal system does not allow for the undefinable limits that information
 control presents, especially on a world wide basis.  If the government tries to gain too
 much control, it could very well lead to it's failure. Control -- the control we need -- is
 not a legal problem at all.  It is a social, moral, and technological problem7 .   What is
 needed is a type of 'information ethics'.  A set of morals and customs must be slowly
 adapted, and not pounded into the digital world by the government.  Virtual laws must be
 formed by a virtual government.  Information cannot be controlled by our government in it's
 current form.  In order to control information, the government would have to induce a
 drastic change.  The first amendment, in reality, is the foundation of the rights of the
 citizens of this country.  This amendment, in it's most basic form, guarantees our right to
 inform and be informed.  The government can not and will not be able to control digital
 information as a whole, or govern the right to this information without sacrificing the
 keystone of our nation and of our rights as Americans.
1 We see about 50-70% more computing power per year, and hardware prices drop about 25-50%
per year.  Since 1978, raw computing power has increased by over 500 times. "80x86
Evolution,"  Byte, June 1994, pp. 19. 2  Curtis E.A. Karnow, Recombinant Culture: Crime In
The Digital Network.  (Speech, Defcon II, Los Vegas), 1994.


3 S. Zuboff, In the Age of the Smart Machine, New York; 1992.Michael Gemignani, Viruses And
Criminal Law.  Reprinted in Lance Hoffman, Rogue Programs: Viruses, Worms and Trojan Horses,
New York, 1990.4 Lauren Wiener, Digital Woes, 1993.5 John Perry Barlow, "The Economy of
Ideas", Wired, March 1994.6 Martin Sprouse, "Sabotage in the American Workplace: Anecdotes
of Dissatisfaction, Mischief, and Revenge", New York; 1992.  (Bank of America Employee who
planted a logic bomb in the company computer system).


7 Curtis E.A. Karnow, Recombinant Culture: Crime In The Digital Network.  (Speech, Defcon
II, Los Vegas), 1994.


------------------

Works Cited

Addison-Wesley, Bernard.  How the Internet Came to Be.  New York:     Vinton Cerf, 1993.

Communications Decency Act.  Enacted by the U.S. Congress on     February 1, 1996.

Computer Fraud and Abuse Statute. Section 1030: Fraud and related     activity in connection
with computers.

Denning, Dorothy.  "Concerning Hackers Who Break into Computer 	Systems".  Speech presented
at the 13th National Computer    Security Conference, Washington, DC, 1990.

Gates, Bill.  The Road Ahead.  New York: Penguin Books USA, inc,      1995.

The Gatsby.  "A Hackers Guide to the Internet".  Phrack.  Issue 33,   File 7; 15 September
1991.

Icove, David, Karl Seger, and William VonStorch.  Fighting  Computer Crime.  USA: O'Reilly
Books, 1996.

Time Life Books.  Revolution in Science.  Virginia:  Time Life   Books, inc., 1987.

Wallich, Paul.  "A Rouge's Routing."  Scientific American.  May  1995, pp. 31.





 
 Computer crimes are on the rise 1 in 10 Americans experience some form of  a malicious attack on their computer system.  If you pay attention to the rest of this speech you will understand how a Hackers mind works and how to defend yourself from them.  In this speech I will tell you why and how people break into computers, what sorts of trouble they cause, and what kind of punishment lie ahead for them if caught.

	Hackers and Crackers break into computer systems for any of a wide variety of reasons.  Many groups break into computers for capital gain while still others do it as a means to pass time at work or at school.  For most it's a thrill to figure out how to break into a computer.  Most people never have any intention of causing harm.  I believe that for the vast majority of people it's merely the thrill of the "hunt" at pushes them to such great lengths.  Many employees that work in large corporations feel that they don't get paid as much as they should.  Therefore if they have high security clearance they are able to capitalize from that by selling the data they have access to on the black-market. Whether it be Ford Motor companies plan for the 1999 F-150 or spec sheets for the military's new bomber it happens everyday. Too by left is a drawing that  illustrates the method that most Hackers use to take over your computer.  Ever since the dial-up connection was invented anyone with a modem had the ability to wreck any one of thousands of computers.

	 One of the most talked about forms of computer crime is computer viruses.  A computer virus is a small but highly destructive program written by an unscrupulous computer Hacker.  Back in 1984 a 17 year old computer Hacker single handedly brought down four hundred thousand computers in a matter of hours.   Too my left is a graph depicting the # of computer crimes comited from 1988 till now.  Some Hackers create a program called a worm.  A worm is a piece of malicious software and is part of the virus family.  People write worms to transfer money from bank accounts into their own personal checking account.  Another way that Hackers cause trouble is by altering the telephone switching networks at MCI, AT&T,  and Sprint.  By doing this they are able to listen to any conversation they choose.  Often-times they will listen in on the Police and FBI communicating with each-other.  This allows them to move to a new location before they are found.  Some Hackers use their knowledge of the telephone system to turn their enemies home telephone into a virtual pay-phone that asks for quarters whenever you take the phone off the hook.

	A person to commits a computer crime in caught will very likely face a substantial punishment.  Often these types of criminals are never caught unless they really screw up.  The most wanted Hacker Kevin Mitinick was tracked down and arrested after he broke into a computer that belonged to a Japanese security professional.  After this man noticed that someone had gotten into his computer he dedicated the rest of his life to tracking down  this one man.  Kevin was able to say one step ahead of police for some time but the fatal mistake that he made was leaving a voice-mail message on a computer bragging about the fact that he thought he was unstoppable. When he was arrested he faced a 250,000 dollar fine, 900 hours community service,  and a 10 year jail sentence.  Many schools and small businesses still don't have a clue about how to deal with computer crimes and the like whenever they happen to strike.

	 In conclusion hopefully you now know a little more about computer crimes and the people who commit them.  Although most computer crimes are never accounted for the ones that are, are almost always prosecuted to the fullest extent under the law.
 




 
THESIS: Laws must be passed to address the increase in the number and types of computer
crimes.

Over the last twenty years, a technological revolution has occurred as computers are now an
essential element of today's society. Large computers are used to track reservations for the airline
industry, process billions of dollars for banks, manufacture products for industry, and conduct
major transactions for businesses because more and more people now have computers at home
and at the office. 

People commit computer crimes because of society's declining ethical standards more than any
economic need. According to experts, gender is the only bias. The profile of today's
non-professional thieves crosses all races, age groups and economic strata. Computer criminals
tend to be relatively honest and in a position of trust: few would do anything to harm another
human, and most do not consider their crime to be truly dishonest. Most are males: women have
tended to be accomplices, though of late they are becoming more aggressive. Computer Criminals
tend to usually be "between the ages of 14-30, they are usually bright, eager, highly motivated,
adventuresome, and willing to accept technical challenges."(Shannon, 16:2) 

"It is tempting to liken computer criminals to other criminals, ascribing characteristics somehow
different from 

'normal' individuals, but that is not the case."(Sharp, 18:3) It is believed that the computer criminal
"often marches to the same drum as the potential victim but follows and unanticipated
path."(Blumenthal, 1:2) There is no actual profile of a computer criminal because they range from
young teens to elders, from black to white, from short to tall. 

Definitions of computer crime has changed over the years as the users and misusers of computers
have expanded into new areas. "When computers were first introduced into businesses, computer
crime was defined simply as a form of white-collar crime committed inside a computer
system."(2600:Summer 92,p.13) 

Some new terms have been added to the computer criminal vocabulary. "Trojan Horse is a hidden
code put into a computer program. Logic bombs are implanted so that the perpetrator doesn't
have to physically present himself or herself." (Phrack 12,p.43) Another form of a hidden code is
"salamis." It came from the big salami loaves sold in delis years ago. Often people would take
small portions of bites that were taken out of them and then they were secretly returned to the
shelves in the hopes that no one would notice them missing.(Phrack 12,p.44) 

Congress has been reacting to the outbreak of computer crimes. "The U.S. House of Judiciary
Committee approved a bipartisan computer crime bill that was expanded to make it a federal
crime to hack into credit and other data bases protected by federal privacy statutes."(Markoff, B
13:1) This bill is generally creating several categories of federal misdemeanor felonies for
unauthorized access to computers to obtain money, goods or services or classified information.
This also applies to computers used by the federal government or used in interstate of foreign
commerce which would cover any system accessed by interstate telecommunication systems. 

"Computer crime often requires more sophistications than people realize it."(Sullivan, 40:4) Many
U.S. businesses have ended up in bankruptcy court unaware that they have been victimized by
disgruntled employees. American businesses wishes that the computer security nightmare would
vanish like a fairy tale. Information processing has grown into a gigantic industry. "It accounted for
$33 billion in services in 1983, and in 1988 it was accounted to be $88 billion." (Blumenthal, B
1:2) 

All this information is vulnerable to greedy employees, nosy-teenagers and general carelessness,
yet no one knows whether the sea of computer crimes is "only as big as the Gulf of Mexico or as
huge as the North Atlantic." (Blumenthal,B 1:2) Vulnerability is likely to increase in the future. And
by the turn of the century, "nearly all of the software to run computers will be bought from vendors
rather than developed in houses, standardized software will make theft easier." (Carley, A 1:1) 

A two-year secret service investigation code-named Operation Sun-Devil, targeted companies all
over the United States and led to numerous seizures. Critics of Operation Sun-Devil claim that the
Secret Service and the FBI, which have almost a similar operation, have conducted unreasonable
search and seizures, they disrupted the lives and livelihoods of many people, and generally
conducted themselves in an unconstitutional manner. "My whole life changed because of that
operation. They charged me and I had to take them to court. I have to thank 2600 and Emmanuel
Goldstein for publishing my story. I owe a lot to the fellow hackers and fellow hackers and the
Electronic Frontier Foundation for coming up with the blunt of the legal fees so we could fight for
our rights." (Interview with Steve Jackson, fellow hacker, who was charged in operation Sun
Devil) The case of Steve Jackson Games vs. Secret Service has yet to come to a verdict yet but
should very soon. The secret service seized all of Steve Jackson's computer materials which he
made a living on. They charged that he made games that published information on how to commit
computer crimes. He was being charged with running a underground hack system. "I told them it
was only a game and that I was angry and that was the way that I tell a story. I never thought
Hacker [Steve Jackson's game] would cause such a problem. My biggest problem was that they
seized the BBS (Bulletin Board System) and because of that I had to make drastic cuts, so we laid
of eight people out of 18. If the Secret Service had just come with a subpoena we could have
showed or copied every file in the building for them."(Steve Jackson Interview) 

Computer professionals are grappling not only with issues of free speech and civil liberties, but
also with how to educate the public and the media to the difference between on-line computer
experimenters. They also point out that, while the computer networks and the results are a new
kind of crime, they are protected by the same laws and freedom of any real world domain. 

"A 14-year old boy connects his home computer to a television line, and taps into the computer at
his neighborhood bank and regularly transfers money into his personnel account."(2600:Spring
93,p.19) On paper and on screens a popular new mythology is growing quickly in which
computer criminals are the 'Butch Cassidys' of the electronic age. "These true tales of computer
capers are far from being futuristic fantasies."(2600:Spring 93:p.19) They are inspired by scores of
real life cases. Computer crimes are not just crimes against the computer, but it is also against the
theft of money, information, software, benefits and welfare and many more. 

"With the average damage from a computer crime amounting to about $.5 million, sophisticated
computer crimes can rock the industry."(Phrack 25,p.6) Computer crimes can take on many
forms. Swindling or stealing of money is one of the most common computer crime. An example of
this kind of crime is the Well Fargo Bank that discovered an employee was using the banks
computer to embezzle $21.3 million, it is the largest U.S. electronic bank fraud on record. (Phrack
23,p.46) 

Credit Card scams are also a type of computer crime. This is one that fears many people and for
good reasons. A fellow computer hacker that goes by the handle of Raven is someone who uses
his computer to access credit data bases. In a talk that I had with him he tried to explain what he
did and how he did it. He is a very intelligent person because he gained illegal access to a credit
data base and obtained the credit history of local residents. He then allegedly uses the residents
names and credit information to apply for 24 Mastercards and Visa cards. He used the cards to
issue himself at least 40,000 in cash from a number of automatic teller machines. He was caught
once but was only withdrawing $200 and in was a minor larceny and they couldn't prove that he
was the one who did the other ones so he was put on probation. "I was 17 and I needed money
and the people in the underground taught me many things. I would not go back and not do what I
did but I would try not to get caught next time. I am the leader of HTH (High Tech Hoods) and
we are currently devising other ways to make money. If it weren't for my computer my life would
be nothing like it is today."(Interview w/Raven) 

"Finally, one of the thefts involving the computer is the theft of computer time. Most of us don't
realize this as a crime, but the congress consider this as a crime."(Ball,V85) Everyday people are
urged to use the computer but sometimes the use becomes excessive or improper or both. For
example, at most colleges computer time is thought of as free-good students and faculty often
computerizes mailing lists for their churches or fraternity organizations which might be written off as
good public relations. But, use of the computers for private consulting projects without payment of
the university is clearly improper. 

In business it is the similar. Management often looks the other way when employees play
computer games or generate a Snoopy calendar. But, if this becomes excessive the employees is
stealing work time. And computers can only process only so many tasks at once. Although
considered less severe than other computer crimes such activities can represent a major business
loss. 

"While most attention is currently being given to the criminal aspects of computer abuses, it is likely
that civil action will have an equally important effect on long term security problems."(Alexander,
V119) The issue of computer crimes draw attention to the civil or liability aspects in computing
environments. In the future there may tend to be more individual and class action suits.


CONCLUSION 

Computer crimes are fast and growing because the evolution of technology is fast, but the
evolution of law is slow. While a variety of states have passed legislation relating to computer
crime, the situation is a national problem that requires a national solution. Controls can be instituted
within industries to prevent such crimes. Protection measures such as hardware identification,
access controls software and disconnecting critical bank applications should be devised.
However, computers don't commit crimes; people do. The perpetrator's best advantage is
ignorance on the part of those protecting the system. Proper internal controls reduce the
opportunity for fraud.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alexander, Charles, "Crackdown on Computer Capers," 

Time, Feb. 8, 1982, V119.

Ball, Leslie D., "Computer Crime," Technology Review, 

April 1982, V85.

Blumenthal,R. "Going Undercover in the Computer Underworld". New York Times, Jan. 26,
1993, B, 1:2.

Carley, W. "As Computers Flip, People Lose Grip in Saga of Sabatoge at Printing Firm". Wall
Street Journal, Aug. 27, 1992, A, 1:1.

Carley, W. "In-House Hackers: Rigging Computers for Fraud or Malice Is Often an Inside Job".
Wall Street Journal, Aug 27, 1992, A, 7:5.

Markoff, J. "Hackers Indicted on Spy Charges". New York Times, Dec. 8, 1992, B, 13:1.

Finn, Nancy and Peter, "Don't Rely on the Law to Stop Computer Crime," Computer World,
Dec. 19, 1984, V18.

Phrack Magazine issues 1-46. Compiled by Knight Lightning and Phiber Optik.

Shannon, L R. "THe Happy Hacker". New York Times, Mar. 21, 1993, 7, 16:2.

Sharp, B. "The Hacker Crackdown". New York Times, Dec. 20, 1992, 7, 18:3.

Sullivan, D. "U.S. Charges Young Hackers". New York Times, Nov. 15, 1992, 1, 40:4.

2600: The Hacker Quarterly. Issues Summer 92-Spring 93. Compiled by Emmanuel G 



 
omputers are used to track reservations for the airline industry, process billions of dollars for banks, manufacture products for industry, and conduct major transactions for businesses because more and more people now have computers at home and at the office.
        People commit computer crimes because of society's declining ethical standards more than any economic need.  According to experts, gender is the only bias.  The profile of today's non-professional thieves crosses all races, age groups and economic strata.  Computer criminals tend to be relatively honest and in a position of trust:  few would do anything to harm another human, and most do not consider their crime to be truly dishonest.  Most are males: women have tended to be accomplices, though of late they are becoming more aggressive.  Computer Criminals tend to usually be "between the ages of 14-30, they are usually bright, eager, highly motivated, adventuresome, and willing to accept technical challenges."(Shannon, 16:2)  
"It is tempting to liken computer criminals to other criminals, ascribing characteristics somehow different from 
'normal' individuals, but that is not the case."(Sharp, 18:3) It is believed that the computer criminal "often marches to the same drum as the potential victim but follows and unanticipated path."(Blumenthal, 1:2)  There is no actual profile of a computer criminal because they range from young teens to elders, from black to white, from short to tall.  
        Definitions of computer crime has changed over the years as the users and misusers of computers have expanded into new areas.  "When computers were first introduced into businesses, computer crime was defined simply as a form of white-collar crime committed inside a computer system."(2600:Summer 92,p.13)
        Some new terms have been added to the computer criminal vocabulary.  "Trojan Horse is a hidden code put into a computer program.  Logic bombs are implanted so that the perpetrator doesn't have to physically present himself or herself." (Phrack 12,p.43)   Another form of a hidden code is "salamis."  It came from the big salami loaves sold in delis years ago.  Often people would take small portions of bites that were taken out of them and then they were secretly returned to the shelves in the hopes that no one would notice them missing.(Phrack 12,p.44)  
        Congress has been reacting to the outbreak of computer crimes.  "The U.S. House of Judiciary Committee approved a bipartisan computer crime bill that was expanded to make it a federal crime to hack into credit and other data bases protected by federal privacy statutes."(Markoff, B 13:1)   This bill is generally creating several categories of federal misdemeanor felonies for unauthorized access to computers to obtain money, goods or services or classified information.  This also applies to computers used by the federal government or used in interstate of foreign commerce which would cover any system accessed by interstate telecommunication systems.
        "Computer crime often requires more sophistications than people realize it."(Sullivan, 40:4)   Many U.S. businesses have ended up in bankruptcy court unaware that they have been victimized by disgruntled employees.  American businesses wishes that the computer security nightmare would vanish like a fairy tale.  Information processing has grown into a gigantic industry.  "It accounted for $33 billion in services in 1983, and in 1988 it was accounted to be $88 billion." (Blumenthal, B 1:2) 
        All this information is vulnerable to greedy employees, nosy-teenagers and general carelessness, yet no one knows whether the sea of computer crimes is "only as big as the Gulf of Mexico or as huge as the North Atlantic." (Blumenthal,B 1:2)  Vulnerability is likely to increase in the future.  And by the turn of the century, "nearly all of the software to run computers will be bought from vendors rather than developed in houses, standardized software will make theft easier." (Carley, A 1:1)
        A two-year secret service investigation code-named Operation Sun-Devil, targeted companies all over the United States and led to numerous seizures.  Critics of Operation Sun-Devil claim that the Secret Service and the FBI, which have almost a similar operation, have conducted unreasonable search and seizures, they disrupted the lives and livelihoods of many people, and generally conducted themselves in an unconstitutional manner.  "My whole life changed because of that operation.  They charged me and I had to take them to court.  I have to thank 2600 and Emmanuel Goldstein for publishing my story. I owe a lot to the fellow hackers and fellow hackers and the Electronic Frontier Foundation for coming up with the blunt of the legal fees so we could fight for our rights." (Interview with Steve Jackson, fellow hacker, who was charged in operation Sun Devil)  The case of Steve Jackson Games vs. Secret Service has yet to come to a verdict yet but should very soon.  The secret service seized all of Steve Jackson's  computer materials which he made a living on.  They charged that he made games that published information on how to commit computer crimes.  He was being charged with running a underground hack system. "I told them it was only a game and that I was angry and that was the way that I tell a story.  I never thought Hacker [Steve Jackson's game] would cause such a problem.  My biggest problem was that they seized the BBS (Bulletin Board System) and because of that I had to make drastic cuts, so we laid of eight people out of 18.  If the Secret Service had just come with a subpoena we could have showed or copied every file in the building for them."(Steve Jackson Interview)   
        Computer professionals are grappling not only with issues of free speech and civil liberties, but also with how to educate the public and the media to the difference between on-line computer experimenters.  They also point out that, while the computer networks and the results are a new kind of crime, they are protected by the same laws and freedom of any real world domain.
        "A 14-year old boy connects his home computer to a television line, and taps into the computer at his neighborhood bank and regularly transfers money into his personnel account."(2600:Spring 93,p.19)   On paper and on screens a popular new mythology is growing quickly in which computer criminals are the 'Butch Cassidys' of the electronic age.  "These true tales of computer capers are far from being futuristic fantasies."(2600:Spring 93:p.19)  They are inspired by scores of real life cases.  Computer crimes are not just crimes against the computer, but it is also against the theft of money, information, software, benefits and welfare and many more.
        "With the average damage from a computer crime amounting to about $.5 million, sophisticated computer crimes can rock the industry."(Phrack 25,p.6)   Computer crimes can take on many forms.  Swindling or stealing of money is one of the most common computer crime.  An example of this kind of crime is the Well Fargo Bank that discovered an employee was using the banks computer to embezzle $21.3 million, it is the largest U.S. electronic bank fraud on record. (Phrack 23,p.46)
        Credit Card scams are also a type of computer crime.  This is one that fears many people and for good reasons.  A fellow computer hacker that goes by the handle of Raven is someone who uses his computer to access credit data bases.  In a talk that I had with him he tried to explain what he did and how he did it.  He is a very intelligent person because he gained illegal access to a credit data base and obtained the credit history of local residents.  He then allegedly uses the residents names and credit information to apply for 24 Mastercards and Visa cards.  He used the cards to issue himself at least 40,000 in cash from a number of automatic teller machines.  He was caught once but was only withdrawing $200 and in was a minor larceny and they couldn't prove that he was the one who did the other ones so he was put on probation.  "I was 17 and I needed money and the people in the underground taught me many things.  I would not go back and not do what I did but I would try not to get caught next time.  I am the leader of HTH (High Tech Hoods) and we are currently devising other ways to make money.  If it weren't for my computer my life would be nothing like it is today."(Interview w/Raven) 
        "Finally, one of the thefts involving the computer is the theft of computer time.  Most of us don't realize this as a crime, but the congress consider this as a crime."(Ball,V85)  Everyday people are urged to use the computer but sometimes the use becomes excessive or improper or both.  For example, at most colleges computer time is thought of as free-good students and faculty often computerizes mailing lists for their churches or fraternity organizations which might be written off as good public relations.  But, use of the computers for private consulting projects without payment of the university is clearly improper.
        In business it is the similar.  Management often looks the other way when employees play computer games or generate a Snoopy calendar.  But, if this becomes excessive the employees is stealing work time.  And computers can only process only so many tasks at once.  Although considered less severe than other computer crimes such activities can represent a major business loss.
        "While most attention is currently being given to the criminal aspects of computer abuses, it is likely that civil action will have an equally important effect on long term security problems."(Alexander, V119)   The issue of computer crimes draw attention to the civil or liability aspects in computing environments.  In the future there may tend to be more individual and class action suits.










CONCLUSION
        Computer crimes are fast and growing because the evolution of technology is fast, but the evolution of law is slow.  While a variety of states have passed legislation relating to computer crime, the situation is a national problem that requires a national solution.  Controls can be instituted within industries to prevent such crimes.         Protection measures such as hardware identification, access controls software and disconnecting critical bank applications should be devised.  However, computers don't commit crimes; people do.  The perpetrator's best advantage is ignorance on the part of those protecting the system.  Proper internal controls reduce the opportunity for fraud.













        

BIBLIOGRAPHY


Alexander, Charles, "Crackdown on Computer Capers,"
        Time, Feb. 8, 1982, V119.

Ball, Leslie D., "Computer Crime," Technology Review,
        April 1982, V85.

Blumenthal,R. "Going Undercover in the Computer Underworld".    New York Times, Jan. 26, 1993, B, 1:2.

Carley, W. "As Computers Flip, People Lose Grip in Saga of      Sabatoge at Printing Firm". Wall Street Journal, Aug.   27, 1992, A, 1:1.

Carley, W. "In-House Hackers: Rigging Computers for Fraud or    Malice Is Often an Inside Job". Wall Street Journal,    Aug 27, 1992, A, 7:5.

Markoff, J. "Hackers Indicted on Spy Charges". New York         Times, Dec. 8, 1992, B, 13:1.

Finn, Nancy and Peter, "Don't Rely on the Law to Stop   Computer Crime," Computer World, Dec. 19, 1984, V18.

Phrack Magazine issues 1-46. Compiled by Knight Lightning       and Phiber Optik.

Shannon, L R. "THe Happy Hacker". New York Times, Mar. 21,      1993, 7, 16:2.

Sharp, B. "The Hacker Crackdown". New York Times, Dec. 20,      1992, 7, 18:3.

Sullivan, D. "U.S. Charges Young Hackers". New York Times,      Nov. 15, 1992, 1, 40:4.

2600: The Hacker Quarterly. Issues Summer 92-Spring 93.         Compiled by Emmanuel Goldstein.



 
Business strive for high production at low cost.  This would result in the highest profit for a company.  To many businesses, this is only a mirage.  This is because the 'low cost' of the business usually results in a 'high cost' for the employees.  This high cost is  lower quality workplace items, lower salaries, less benefits, etc.  These costs create an upset workplace environment.  Companies understand that the more efficient their workers are, the more productive their business will become.  Although this will take lots of money at first, the result will be extreme success.
There exist many different things in the workplace that add to stress and injuries.  They range from lifting heavy boxes to typing too much on the keyboard.  This paper will be focusing on the principals of ergonomics in the computer workstation.  According to the Board of Certification for Professional Ergonomists (BCPE), the definition of ergonomics "is a body of knowledge about human abilities, human limitations and human characteristics that are relevant to design.  Ergonomic design is the application of this body of knowledge to the design of tools, machines, systems, tasks, jobs, and environments for safe, comfortable and effective human use."(BCPE, 1993)  In the average computer workstation, employees are prone to over a dozen hazards.  There exist two factors that can prevent this: forming good work habits and ergonomically designed computer workstations.  We will discuss these
preventions throughout the paper.
First, a few terms may need defining.  Repetitive Strain Injuries (RSI) takes place from the repeated physical movements of certain body parts which results in damage to tendons, nerves, muscles, and other soft body tissues.  If these injuries are not taken care of immediately, permanent damage could be done.  A few common results of RSI's that were not taken care of right away are injuries like Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, Tendentious, Tenosynovitis, DeQuervain's Syndrome, Thoracic Outlet Syndrome etc.  All of these are able to be prevented by the use of good working habits and ergonomic engineering.i
Usually, ergonomically designing a computer workstation would cost about $1000.  This expense could be eliminated by the formation of good work habits.  This is essential for the safety of computer terminal employees.  There exist a number of precautions that can be taken into consideration when dealing with a computer workstation.  We shall discuss six of them.
First, the whole body must be relaxed.  The correct posture is shown in Figure 1. Notice that the arms and thighs are parallel to the floor and the feet are flat on the floor.  Also notice that the wrists are not bent in any way.  This is one of the most damaged parts of the body when speaking of (RSI).

    Figure 1

The wrists, when typing, should not be rested on anything when typing.  This would cause someone to stretch their fingers to hit keys.  They should also be straight: not bent up, down, or to the side.  The correct position is portrayed in figure 2, incorrect in figure 3.  Studies show that these steps are easier to perform while the keyboard is not tilted toward the user.  When it is tilted, it is natural to rest your wrists on the table.  This puts the keyboard at a lower level, creating a more natural position.
Another practice that should be taken into consideration is how hard you press on the keys.  The user is not supposed to hit the keys.  This may cause damage to the tendons and nerves in the fingers.  Instead, use a soft touch, not only will your fingers thank you for it, the keyboard will too!
Keeping in mind not to stretch your fingers when typing, use two hands to perform double-key operations.  For example, you need to capitalize the first letter in every sentence, therefore, you would hold down the shift and press the first letter.
	Figure 2						Figure 3


This is a double key operation.  Instead of stretching two fingers on one hand to do this operation, use both hands.
No matter what kind of a pace you are on when doing work, take breaks every ten minutes or so in addition to your hourly breaks.  These breaks need only be a few moments at a time.  If breaks are not taken at this pace, you may be subjecting yourself to injuries in the back, neck, wrists and fingers.  Also, when using the mouse, do not grip it tightly.  Most mice that are used in offices today are not designed with human factors in mind.  Some mice, like the Microsoft mouse, are designed to fit the contour of your hand.  Although this may seem nice, it does not mean that one will be able to use it for hours on end and not feel any discomfort in the hand.  Other mice, that will be mentioned later, are designed for comfortable use for extended periods of time.
Try to keep your arms and hands warm.  Cold muscles are more apt
to strain and injury than warm ones.  Wearing a sweater or a long-sleeved shirt can be of great importance especially when working in air-conditioned offices.
And finally, do not use the computer more than necessary.  Your body can handle only so much strain on the neck, shoulders, wrists and fingers.  Even with the greatest state-of-the-art ergonomically designed computer workstation, people put themselves at risk.
Some people tend to use their break times at work playing video games.  This is a good way to ease the mind of everyday pressure (to some extent).  This is also a good example of using the computer 'more than necessary'.  If a person needs to use a computer for video games, take a break every ten minutes or so, as mentioned above.ii
All of these strategies mentioned above are things that can be done to reduce injuries when using a computer for an extended period of time.  They do not include any type of ergonomically designed hardware.  If employees form these habits, there would be less need to purchase any ergonomic equipment for the office.  But, making new habits is  not the easiest thing to do for most people.  Next, we will take a look at how a computer workstation should be set up.  The following data was retrieved by an on-line quiz from the University of Virginia.
The first question about computer workstations poses a question about the seat being too high.  This would cause strain on the legs of the operator causing them to "go to sleep".  Basically, the blood flow to the leg and feet will be cut off.
The next fact presented to us is that the top of the Video Terminal Display (VDT) should be no higher than eye level.  This is one of the most controversial topics because it deals with the neck and shoulders.  Some people state that it should be below, but not at eye level because our natural tendency is to look down.
Thirdly, the best viewing distance from the VDT is about 24 inches from the screen.  This deals with eye strain.  Some people worry about radiation that may be emitted from the VDT.  Radiation is not a big problem with newer monitors.  Even old ones have a protective coating around the screen.  This allows very few particles to go through the screen.  Even if they do manage to get that far from the screen, the radiation goes inches before withering away.  The eye strain is the important factor here.  Look away at an object far away from you if eye strain continues to be a problem.
The next question deals with the tilt of the screen.  If the monitor should be at or below eye level, it would be easier to read with a 10 to 20 degree back tilt.  Many VDT's have a tilt on the bottom, if not, a book could propped under the monitor to tilt it back a bit.
Another question asked is about the height of the keyboard from the floor.  It should be elbow height.  As mentioned before, the fore-arms and thighs should be parallel to the floor.  This is possible only if the keyboard is elbow height from the floor.
How should the lighting be in offices when using a computer?  It should be a bit dimmer than normal office lighting.  This is so because if the office lighting is brighter, there will be a lot of glare on the screen.  It also has to do with eye strain.
Noise in the work area causes fatigue.  This may be true, to add to this statement, it also causes the computer operator to lose concentration on their work.  Not only does noise affect our concentration and causes fatigue, it obviously can damage one's hearing.
Using this questionnaire, I conducted a survey among students at Canisius College in Buffalo, NY.  The purpose of the survey was to test the knowledge of the student body as to their knowledge of VDT's and their safety precautions.  In order to accomplish this in a professional manner, a random sample of students was acquired.  In order to obtain a random sample, certain criteria must be met, too numerous to mention in this essay.  Needless to say, not all of the criteria were met for the sample to be random.  The sample size of the survey was approximately 100 students.  The results were not surprising.  There was one problem with the questionnaire : many students did not know what VDT meant1.
According the survey, 100% of the people was familiar with what
ergonomics is, knew how to reduce tension, what movement in your peripheral vision does, and what you should do if you should wear bifocal lenses.  This question posed a problem because of the way in which the answer was worded.  The correct answer is very specific, and sticks out over the other possible answers.  The rest of the questions were well worded and not too obvious.

Besides the first and last question, there were a few others that were all answered correctly.  These were questions eleven and twelve.  The probable cause for this is that the questions were easy.  The answers were more obvious than the others.  If you compare these questions to the ones that were more difficult (seven and thirteen) the percent correct differ.  Questions seven and thirteen deal with very specific measurements that are all closely related.  These questions are not 'common knowledge' questions.  I am assuming that people were taking educated guesses when encountering these questions.  This could be the reason for the large percent of error in these parts of the survey.
Now that we have discovered the good habits to form when working at computer workstations and took a look at what a selected college student population knew about VDT's, we will now take a look at ergonomic engineering and the reason for its emergence.
There are a number of devices ranging from keyboards and mice to chairs and even foot stands.  In this paper we will just review a few of these ergonomically designed items and why ergonomics is an issue to computer users.
First, we will discuss the purpose of ergonomically designed items.  There are a number of reasons for the emergence of ergonomics.  One reason for this is insurance purposes.  Many companies have disability and other types of insurance to cover injuries that occur while working.  This would not be needed as much if there were ergonomically designed computer workstations.  It would save the company insurance hassle and money in the long run.  Another purpose for the emergence of ergonomically designed workstations is that the injuries due to the overuse of the computers are long lasting.  These ailments do not just go away in time.  And one can not put a price on injuries like this.  This is why ergonomics is so important. 
Secondly, we will look at an item that effects the common computer
user the most: the keyboard.  With computers getting faster and faster every day, it is about time that people looked at the hazards they pose instead of perfecting them.  Keyboards pose the largest threat to the computer user, not only because it is the most used input device, but also because of its design.  It is a flat, straight input device that can cause strain and injury to the user if not used properly.  Ergonomic engineers realized this hazard and designed a number of different alternatives.  All of the ergonomically designed keyboards attempt to reduce injuries by studying the natural position of the fingers, hands and wrists.  By using this knowledge, keyboards and mice are designed.  There is no ideal position for the hand as of yet.  Hence, there exists different types of keyboards and mice.  Figures 4 - 5 show different styles of keyboards and mice.
Figure 4 - http://www.earthlink.net/~dbialick/kinesis


Figure 5


Notice the unique structure of the keyboard.  It does not even look like one.  This may take time to get used to, but it will payoff in the end.
Not only is there hardware for the reduction of RSI, but there exists software to help you reduce the RSI.  Micronite softwareiii
designed a program called ARMS (Against Repetitive Strain Injury) Which reminds you when it is time to take a break.  Also, it walks you through a series of videos which portray ways to massage different parts of your hand, neck, and shoulders.
With all of this hardware and software available for business and personal use, who would not be interested?  Well many people think that it will not happen to them until it does.  People should not wait that long.  If you use a computer for more than four hours a day, you are prone to RSI.  If your company does not have ergonomically engineered hardware, software or furniture, then do something about it.  It's your health.
1 A copy of the survey is attached to the end of this paper.  The correct answer is bolded.
i URL address : http://webreference.com/rsi.html#whatis
ii URL address : http://www.engr.unl.edu/ee/eeshop/rsi.html
iii URL address : http://www.micronite.com/

Glossary

CGI
"Common Gateway Interface". A standard protocol which allows HTML based forms to send field contents to a program on the Internet for processing. It also allows the receiving program to respond by sending an HTML response document.

Email
"Electronic Mail". An electronic document similar to a piece of mail in that it is sent from one person to another using addresses, and contains information. Email commonly contains information such as: sender name and computer address, list of recipient names and computer addresses, message subject, date and time composed, and message content. Sometimes, an Email message can have attached computer files such as pictures, programs, and data files.

Firewall
A program or device which serves as an intelligent and secure router of network data packets. These mechanisms are configured to restrict the flow of packets in different directions (i.e. to and from the Internet) based on the system addresses (a.k.a. IP addresses) of the connected computers.

FTP
"File Transfer Protocol". A program or feature popularly used over the Internet to transfer files between computers.

Hacker
A person who deliberately breaks into computer systems for entertainment, gain, or spite. The most sophisticated hackers spend all of their time breaking into computers. The risk that these people pose is that they often steal or damage software systems and information.

Home Page
A Web Page which is at the root of all Web Pages for a particular Web Site. A Home Page should portray the image that the company wants to project. Usually, these pages resemble marketing slicks, but with an interactive slant. This front page of a Web Site then provides hypertext links to the rest of the Web Site's content and possibly to Home Pages for other related Web Sites.

HTML
"HyperText Markup Language". A standardized programming language used to create hypertext documents. Used to create all Web Pages on the Internet. Also allows definition of data forms which communicate with CGI compatible programs on the Internet.


HTTP
"HyperText Transfer Protocol". A communications protocol used by Internet Web Service software to send Web Pages to Web Browser software over the Internet.

HyperText
A type of text document which contains embedded "hotspots" which point to other sections of text or other documents. Any piece of text or graphic can be defined as a hotspot which points elsewhere.

Internet
(a.k.a. "The Information Superhighway"). A world-wide interconnection between thousands of computer networks on many different platforms, with over 10 million end users (and growing).  The telecommunications backbone of the Internet is based on a network of U.S. government owned, national T3 lines. A growing number of Internet Providers are adding their own backbones.

Internet Providers
A community of competing businesses which provide "on-ramps to the Internet". The largest of these companies connect directly into the Internet backbone, or provide their own national or international backbones. Examples of true Internet Providers: Netcom, UUNet, CERFNet, SprintNet, and Spry. Examples of partial Internet Providers & partial Information Service Providers: CompuServe, Prodigy, and America On-Line.

IRC
"Internet Relay Chat". A program or feature popularly used on the Internet by individuals to chat with others, by typing and watching text-based dialog. Many topic specific IRC channels have been created on the Internet by users. These channels form a sort of forum for conference room discussion.

Newsgroups
A collection of forums which gather Email from Internet users about a specific subject. The collected Email entries (known as news articles) can then be perused by all Internet users. Some are simply for recreational discussions, while others may allow people to form self-supporting user groups.

PGP
"Pretty Good Privacy" encryption. A protocol for using private and public key encryption to secure Email and other Internet transactions.

TCP/IP
"Transfer Control Protocol / Internet Protocol". The network communication protocol used by all Internet computers. Similar in function to NetBIOS, SNA, or Novell Netware's IPX/SPX.

Telnet
A program or feature popularly used on the Internet by  individuals to log into, and take control of other computers on the Internet.

VRML
"Virtual Reality Markup Language" A new emerging language becoming supported by the World Wide Web, for programming virtual reality content on the Internet.

Web Browser
A type of program used by individuals which reads HTML files on the Internet and presents them to the user in a friendly way and interactive way. Many such programs exist for many platforms. For UNIX several GUI browsers are popular. For those UNIX based terminals or DOS based PCs, Lynx provides a text interface to browse Web Pages. All Web Browsers allow the user to interactively jump from place to place by selecting hotspots (highlighted text or graphics). Some browsers allow the user to print page contents.

Web Page or Web Document
A single viewable unit of Web information. Often be comprised of an HTML file with several referenced graphics files.  Generally, each Web Page has hypertext links to other Web Pages.

Web Site
A collection of Web Pages built for or by a single company or individual. Usually provides one theme of content. A Web Site is not to be confused with a single physical location where a Web Server exists. It is a Cyber-Location.

Web Server
A combination of computer hardware, telecomm. lines, and HTTP server software.

World Wide Web, WWW, or The Web
An intricate and vast web of information, tied together by hypertext links between multimedia documents residing on thousands of Internet computers around the globe.

