Bleeding Ireland and Black America

	Fall Road is deserted. Only a few dirt-caked, barefoot, Irishmen can be seen
shivering in the adjacent park. We walk past the Catholic neighborhoods knowing, at any
moment, buildings might explode and automatic weapon fire could lacerate the air on
every side of us. Belfast is charming, apart from the harsh reality of guerrilla warfare and
terrorism being common occurrences. For the first time, throughout my three month tour
of seventeen different European countries, I feel truly threatened. The tension carries itself
into a nearby pub where an old man asks "Are you jus daft? Or do ya have relatives here?"
His words hinted at my grandfather's blunt, yet kindly, expression concerning his
birthplace in N. Ireland, "If you haven't been there yet, don't go there."
	 I can remember the lyrics of a Naughty by Nature song blaring over my car radio,
"If you have never been to the ghetto, don't ever come to the ghetto," as I put in a tape.
My thought stream continues as it takes me to another place where guerrilla warfare and
terrorism are a part of daily life. 
	The gunshots and unruly pitbull barking registers over the calm of the wet
playground. Trash strings the streets and every dwelling has an eight foot, black, metal
fence circuitously about it. Two white faces gape over the hood of a parked Cadillac.
Besides the police parked down the block, they are probably the only Caucasians in a five
mile square radius. Two companies of drug dealers fire at will scrambling for control of a
superior capital making outpost. Even at nine o'clock in the morning the combat tract
roars on.
 	I was one of those faces peering over the car hood with horror and revolution in
my eyes. N. Richmond is a product of the same type of oppression and violence that hacks
deep into the people of N. Ireland. In the logical evolution of an oppressed people a civil
rights movement was essential. "It was necessary to bravely confront our most explosive
issues as a people: Racial[religious, gender, class...] hierarchy and the maldistribution of
wealth and power." 1If only for a brief moment we achieved this, at least it happened. We
must study the past in order to get to the future. If you don't know where you came from,
how can you possibly figure out where you are going and that is why many people stay
rooted in the same place.  
	For centuries, England has kept Ireland under its colonial thumb, starving its
people and manipulating them as slave labor. England stole much of Ireland's homeland
and gave it to the Protestants allies from Scotland. Earlier this century, England divided
Ireland into two, claiming the six northernmost counties as its own. The large number of
Protestants, who remain loyal to the Crown of England, have created a system of
oppression similar to the Jim Crow laws of  the US. Oppression and second-class
citizenship have limited the Catholics of  N. Irelands opportunities and taken many lives. A
Civil Rights movement was the only logical step. But first, we must discuss what lead up
to this logical step-the history.
	In January 1919, the Anglo-Irish War began with the first shots being fired at
Solobeghead. Over the next year, the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC-British Loyalists)
became the target of a Sinn Fein (The beginning roots of the IRA) terror campaign By
mid-1919, the IRB (Irish Republican Brotherhood-Part of Sinn Fein) had infiltrated the
leadership of the Volunteers (Irish Militia) and were directing its pace on the violence. In
an effort to assert control of the group, Volunteers declared the Army of the Irish
Republic. 
	Britain responded with violence. Special forces were sent over to impose curfews
and martial law on the Irish. These forces became known as the Black and Tans after a
popular Limerick hunt group, and because of their dark green and khaki uniforms.
Another force of veterans from the Great War, called the Auxiliaries, joined them. Thus
began a pattern of assassination and reprisal. The IRA employed guerrilla tactics, using
duck and cover strategies to attack British troops. Their knowledge of the countryside
made up for their lack of arms. On 21 November 1920 IRA squad assassinated 14 British
officers, effectively destroying the British Secret Service in Ireland. In reprisal, the Black
and Tans fired on a crowd watching a football match at Croke Park. Twelve people were
killed, including one of the team players. The day became known as Bloody Sunday. 
	After several months of mass bloodshed, a compromise was met and a 'Treaty of
Allegiance to England' was signed by Ireland. This split the IRA into pro-Treaty or
anti-Treaty forces. Treaty loyal troops became the Free State Army, while the anti-Treaty
forces became known as the Irregulars. On 6 July 1922, Opponents of the Treaty rallied to
the cause. Fighting brakes out in Dublin-the ten-month civil war had begun. The first
phase was bloody and brief. The Civil war ends with many of the irregulars still controlling
the South. Logically, when the country was split  the south was free and the six northern
most counties were taken by England and the Northern Protestants. 
	The Catholic minority of the north suffered greatly during the next twenty years of
oppression. The IRA was still at work, only it moved more cautiously due to its growing
Communist/Marxist nature and some ideological dissension between its members.2 Data
exhibits, just as the inner cities of the US, that the rates of poverty, unemployment, serious
crime, single-female headed families and welfare dependency in N. Irelands Catholic
slums, rose drastically during this time. There was an increase in drugs, alcoholism (in
Ireland?!), guns, bombings (from both sides)3 which all created a virtual hell as ravaging as
any N. Richmond/E. Oakland-Hunterspoint/if not worse in its own way. 
	Structural discrimination in employment has remained a feature of British
government rule in the Six Counties. Discrimination has, in fact, been synonymous with
British rule. Unionist loyalty (Northern Protestant)-the rockbed of the British presence - is
in part, conditional on the maintenance of the economic privilege, often marginal, which
employment discrimination has conferred on unionists.4 In one aspect, unemployment, the
situation of Catholics has actually deteriorated. Unemployment in the Six Counties in April
1989 officially stood at 107,623, representing 15.6% of the workforce. Almost half of that
figure is Catholic while they only represent less than 20% of the population.5 
	Discontent with the apartheid system began to emerge in the late `60s and led to
the formation of the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (The CRA which was
secretly back by the IRA). Its moderate demands were aimed at trying to reform and
democratize the state. The issue of partition was not part of its agenda. Unionists,
however, interpreted any form of political dissent, however moderate, as a threat to their
privileged position and the union with Britain.6 
	Peaceful civil rights supporters were, due to Protestant paranoia, viciously
attacked by the RUC and B-Specials (Both 'English Suppresser Groups 'which came out
of  RIC and the Black and Tans). The violent reaction of the state shocked the world as
television cameras relayed scenes of unprovoked attacks on civil rights marches and
demonstrations. The British government was not prepared to allow its financial interests to
be compromised by widespread political unrest. At 5 p.m. on August 14th, 1969,
substantial numbers of British soldiers moved into Belfast and Derry. The British army
was injected into the situation under the pagoda cover of being a peace-keeping force
deployed "to keep the warring factions apart". The 'religious war' myth was regenerated
as justification for the occupation. 
	In reality, it had been introduced as a life-support unit to sustain a state which was
under threat of collapse. The bad dream of partition was about to be come the 'nationalist
nightmare'. Within a relatively short period, the British army's real job became apparent.
With the unionist government acting like they still were in control, the actual power
behind the throne was the British government's agent, the British army.
	Some two decades ago, people in the Six Counties were marching for civil rights,
Justice, equality and self-respect. The moderate and just demands of the Civil Rights
movement were: One man, one vote (sic); An end to the gerrymandered local government
boundaries; An end to discrimination in the allocation of housing; An end to discrimination
in employment; and The repeal of the Special Powers Act (SPA). 
	Pursuit of those demands and the North Protestant regime's reaction to it brought
the state to a point of collapse. In one year the civil rights movement had done more to
end injustice than fifty years of anti-partion policies had begun to do.7 But, it wasn't
enough and people began to riots; tearing apart the major cities of N. Ireland. Only the
life-support system was provided by the British army warded off the collapse, and in the
process of attempting to sustain the state they have exacerbated the situation. The protests
got rid of  the SPA but three equally, if not more, repressive laws have replaced it. Since
its birth, the Six-county state has been continuously governed by totalitarian apartheid
legislation which  continually  causes descent among the factions. 
	The provisions and effect of these and other pieces of repressive legislation has
meant that: Anyone can be stopped by British forces anywhere, at any time. They must
give their name, address, where they are coming from, where they are going to. Anyone
can be arrested anywhere, at any time. A detainee can be held for up to seven days for
interrogation. More than 60,000 arrests have thus taken place. No further legal action was
taken against the overwhelming majority of those arrested. Powers of arrest, therefore, are
used largely for purposes of gathering information and intimidation. Some 7,000 people
have been charged with politically motivated offenses. A substantial percentage were
charged solely on the basis of statements of admission extracted through torture and
maltreatment. More than 2,000 people were interned without charge or trial between 1971
and 1975. Extensive powers to search have led to the searching of hundreds of thousands
of premises.8 Residences, schools, industrial premises, sports grounds and farmland have
been seized for use as military installations due to the British government over extending
its powers.
	 Rubber and plastic bullets have been used as a means of intimidating and deterring
demonstrations. Since 1973, more than 50 thousand of these lethal projectiles have been
fired at the civilian population. Seventeen people, eight of them young children, have been
killed, most in circumstances which amount to murder. Hundreds have been seriously
injured. Injuries include serious mental and physical disablement. Over 300, mainly
unarmed, nationalists have been killed by members of the various security agencies, the
British army and the RUC. British forces have been given virtual immunity from
conviction. In 20 years, only one British soldier has been convicted for murder while on
duty. Despite receiving a life sentence, the soldier was released after serving only two
years and three months, and was immediately reinstated in the army.9 
	As well as the unjust trauma and suffering on the streets, nationalist opponents of
British rule in Ireland were selected for very special treatment inside British prisons. The
struggle for decent conditions, dignity and recognition as political prisoners has been
constant throughout the past 20 years and continues today. Of all the prison campaigns,
the most publicized, because of the numbers involved and because of the toll of lives
extracted, was the `blanket protest' which consummated during the hunger-strikes of 1980
and 1981. Deprived of political status in 1975, republican prisoners refused to wear prison
uniforms and clad themselves in blankets. Within a short period, the punitive actions of the
regime forced them to live in their cells surrounded by their own excrement. Beatings and
degradation were used, in an attempt to break the prisoners' will. For four years, the
prisoners persevered in the most awful conditions. 
	On October 27th 1980, a hunger-strike began which was to last 53 Days. It
extracted sufficient concessions from the British government to make a settlement
possible. Having secured the end of the hunger-strike, the British said they would give
in-they lied. A second hunger-strike was initiated on March 1st 1981. It lasted 217 days,
ending on October 3rd where the prisoners were given 'international political status' and
entitled to more rights, which Britain ignores to this day.
	Civil Rights in Ireland did not accomplish its goals. Since the British government
undemocratically and violently created the State of Northern Ireland in 1920, Catholics
have been discriminated against in almost every way, particularly in employment. All their
many protests failed because the effectiveness of protests depended on the good faith of
the British government. That good faith was not there then, it is still not there today. The
marching and fasting didn't work and as of last year-  it is back to IRA bombs in London.
As W.E.B DuBois put it: 

"The Irish resist, as they have for hundreds of years, various and
exasperating forms of British [colonial] oppression. Their resistance is
called crime and under ordinary conditions would be crime; in retaliation 
not only the 'guilty' but the innocent among them are murdered and robbed
and public property is burned by English 'guardians of  the Peace'!"10

	No one else should be able to understand the history of Ireland better than a black
man in the US. It works like this: You kick a man in the head and you have him arrested
for assault. You kill a  man and hang the corpse for murder. From 1776-1964, 188 years,
blacks endured theses conditions all over the United States. It still happens today when the 
'guardians of peace', the police, abuse their powers and racially biased legislation is
passed. Since Irish and African Americans have so much in common, why haven't they
been the best of friends? Commonality often leads to conflict. No people in the world have
in the past gone with blither spirits to "kill niggers" from Kingston to Delhi and from
Kumassi to Fiji.11  
	Noel Ignatiev's "How the Irish Became White" explains the history of how the
Irish immigrant rose from racially oppressed to racial oppressor. The oppressed
themselves, have continually been used to further domination over others that are 
oppressed, in the interest of the universal oppressor. This is the only book I know of, to
focus not on how the Irish were assimilated but how they assimilated as "whites." Utilizing
newspaper chronicles, memoirs, biographies, and official accounts, Ignatiev traces the
history of Irish and African-American relations, revealing how the Irish in America used
unions, the Catholic Church and the Democratic party to help gain and secure their newly
found place in the 'White Republic' and continued to oppress blacks. On their arrival in
America, the Irish were thrown together with black people on jobs and in neighborhoods,
with predictable results. The Census of 1850 was the first to include a class called
"mulattoes"; it enumerated 406,000 nationwide.12 
	The interaction between Irish and Afro-Americans was not limited to sexual
affairs: in New Orleans Irish moved into the black district, and frequented "Black
Rookeries"; the Twelfth Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia was presided over after 1837
by an Afro-American minister and baptismal records for the next twenty years suggest that
one-third of the members were Irish.13 But things rapidly changed and "instead of the Irish
love of liberty warming America," the winds of republican slavery blew back to Ireland.
The Irish had faded from Green to white, bleached by, as Daniel O'Connell (head of IRA
in 1920's and known throughout Ireland as 'the Liberator') put it, something in the
"atmosphere" of "America". Cornel West puts this "atmosphere" into a clear statement:

"Without the presence of  black people in America, European-Americans
would not be "white"-they would only be Irish, Italians, Poles, Welsh, and
others engaged in class, ethnic, and gender struggles over resources and
identity...White poverty could be ignored and whites' paranoia of each
other could be overlooked primarily owing to the distinctive American
feature: the basic racial divide of black and white people."14
	
	This "racial divide" is what caused the evolution of  the black Civil Rights
movement. The Civil Rights Movement was the first mass movement to evolve in the 60's.
But it was not the first time that African Americans had waged struggle against racial
oppression. It was the first time that a mass movement emerged under a non-violent
ideology. Slave revolts occurred on plantations and even aboard the ships that brought
them here from Africa. The Civil War happened to take over the South, not to free the
slaves. The northern government didn't really care about the slave so after the After the
Civil War, African Americans lived in a system of neo-apartheid in the South. Whites had
developed a system of oppression with total white economic control, exclusion on black
people from the political system, racial segregation and the general notion that blacks were
inferior to whites. Separate drinking fountains for whites and blacks. "Colored balconies"
in movie theaters. Seats in the back of the bus. It may be difficult to believe these were
examples of conditions in America less than 40 years ago. The struggle to change these
conditions, and to win equal protection under the law for citizens of all races, formed the
backdrop of  the civil rights movement. What follows is a brief, far from comprehensive
timeline of the black civil rights movement in the US. 
	In 1954 the momentous Brown vs. Board of Education U.S. Supreme Court,
banned segregation in public schools. The NAACP put this up in court and beat the white
supremacist laws down. Then in 1955 the murder of a black youth named Emmett Till, for
allegedly whistling at a white woman, triggered black an, for the first time, placed white
supremacy in the South in check. Also n 1955 the bus boycott is launched in Montgomery,
Alabama after Rosa Parks is arrested on December 1 for refusing to give up her seat to a
white person on the bus. She was not the first to do this, but was the first to have received
publicity for it because she was the secretary for the local NAACP. In 1956 on December
21 after more than a year of boycotting the buses and a legal fight, the Montgomery buses
are desegregate. In 1957, At a previously all-white Central High, Little Rock, Arkansas,
1,000 paratroopers are called by President Eisenhower to restore order and escort "The
Little Rock Nine" to attend school. 
	In 1960, the sit-in protest movement begins in February at a Woolworth's lunch
counter in Greensboro, North Carolina and spreads across the nation. The Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) is formed at a meeting organized by Rosa
Parks. The SNCC would become a major force throughout the 1960's. Later, leaders like
Stokely Carmichael, would lead blacks into the Black Power Movement which was
spawned from Malcom X and the urban ghettos. Then, in 1961 the 'freedom rides' begin
from Washington, DC, where groups of black and white people ride buses through the
South to challenge segregation. Two people are killed, many injured in riots in response to
the freedom rides as James Meredith is enrolled as the first black at University of
Mississippi. 
	In 1963, police arrest Martin Luther King and many others demonstrating in
Birmingham, Alabama, then Bull Connor (police chief) orders fire hoses and police dogs
turned on the nonviolent marchers. That same year Medgar Evers, NAACP leader, is
murdered June 12 as he enters his home in Jackson, Mississippi. 250,000 people attend the
March on Washington, DC urging support for pending civil-rights legislation. The event
was highlighted by King's "I have a dream" speech. On September 15th four girls killed in
bombing of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama. In1964, SNNC
and much of the youth of America are unable to agree on which ideology to follow: direct
action or revolutionary politics. Three civil-rights workers are murdered that year leading
to a more violent opposition by protesters. On July 2, president Johnson signs the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. 
	Malcolm X is murdered Feb. 21, 1965. On August 6. President Johnson signs the
Voting Rights Act of 1965. The act, which King and SNCC, registered qualified voters
and suspended devices such as literacy tests that aimed to prevent African Americans from
voting. During August 11-16 the Watts riots leave 34 dead in Los Angeles. Then in 1968
The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. is assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee, unleashing
violence in more than 100 cities. In order to diversify university enrollment priorities are
given to underrepresented minorities.
	In more resent years, the U.S. Supreme Court outlaws racial quotas in a suit
brought by Allan Bakke, a white man who had been turned down by the medical school at
University of California, Davis.1989 Douglas Wilder of Virginia becomes the nation's first
African American to be elected state governor. Four years ago, in 1992, the first racially
based riots in years erupt in Los Angeles and other cities after a jury acquits LA police
officers in the videotape beating of Rodney King, a black man.
	The Civil Rights Movement made some changes except they all seem to fall short
when we look at their results today. The movement was happening in the midst of war
over ideology (capitalist vs. socialist) and people felt the need to stick with their country
even if it didn't them serve them and exploited them. The US government continual
undermined the movement while it pretended to be helping it. Many of the people involved
put their faith in the system and never thought of a revolution to change the system. From
the Montgomery bus boycott to the sit-ins to the violent rebellions, black people are still
not equal to whites.

"Black infants die in America at twice the rate of white infants. (Despite
the increased numbers of the middle class blacks, the rates are diverging,
with black rates actually rising.) One out of every two black children lives
below the poverty line (as compared with one out of every seven white
children). Nearly four times as many black families exist below the poverty
line as white families. More than 50 percent of African American families
have incomes below $25,000 dollars. Among black  youth under age
twenty, death by murder occurs nearly ten times as often  as among whites.
Over 60 percent of birth to black mothers occur out of  wedlock , more
than  four time the rate of white mothers. The net worth of the typical
white household is ten times that of the typical  black household. In many
states, five to ten times as many blacks as whites age eighteen to thirty are
in prison."15

	Although the US civil rights movement sparked advantageous legislation to be
passed, data exhibits that the inner-city, of our country are more hazardous and deplorable
residences then ever. The rates of poverty, unemployment, serious crime, single-female
headed families, welfare dependency and non-marriage child birth have continued to rise
until reaching the combat zones of today. These bullet hole and blood spattered places are
growing and are now four to five times bigger than their original sizes in almost all major
cities of the United States.16 	
	Death has become an accepted, even expected result of life in the ghetto. In North
Richmond and other places like it, children live a life of want, of deeply segregated and ill
equipped schools, of gang violence and limited hope. Young men, some as young as 11
and 12, accept with shrugging shoulders that reaching adulthood is not a guarantee.
Violent expiration is the swift undercurrent of poverty and hopelessness: it has become an
inartistic trait absorbed seamlessly into the weave of culture.17 
	Killing or being killed are the ultimate signs of status. Those who kill command the
most respect. Those who die are revered and memorialized beyond anything they could
hope for in life, which isn't much, considering only a small group of people will treasure
their short lives; they truly become 'just another statistic'. In the slum a pager beacons the
message of death: three numbers- 187 those three numbers are self explanatory, their
appearance chilling. They represent the penal code designation for murder as well as who
is  marked for assassination on the street. It is written on the walls. It gives the music its
beat. In the ghetto; death is life.
	Poverty, oppression, and colonization all produce violence and oppression.
According to Munoz the only difference between external and internal colonization is the
legal status of the colony. A colony can be considered "internal" if the colonized people
has the same formal legal status as any other group of citizens, and external if it is placed
in a separate legal category.18 According to this definition, African Americans are an
internally colonized people while Northern Ireland is an external colony. Both are
oppressed people living under exploited conditions maintained by maintained by
discriminatory legislation, exclusion from the political system, segregation and violence.
Neither has control over the institutions which affect their lives. The result is a community
that find itself unhappy, powerless and it people are regarded as second class citizens.
	From Ireland to America the movements failed to resolve most of the problems
they faced. The question is, why? Both movements had the same goal of freedom and
equality. Both movements used nonviolent as well as violence to achieve their goals. The
nonviolence worked better then the violence in both countries, but the results still fell
short of what the people need. Both protesters had  internal ideological differences which
weakened their sprit and results. Both groups were 'lead to the far left' and back again
with a group of former participants fighting it all the time. Their communist ideas where
not supported by the rest of the populous and this stifled their results. The people of the
western world have a very negative view of socialism and without the populations support
the movement would die. Both organizations gave up on communism and went back to
just plain violence and rioting. All their many protests failed because the effectiveness of
protests depended on the good faith of the government. That good faith was not there
then, it is still not there today. Laws might of been past to stop the unrest, but laws do not
always mean change in a colonial system. 
	To contrast the two movements, besides the obvious religion vs. race, external vs.
internal colonization and Britain vs. the United States. The outside views of the
movements were probably the main difference that had any affects on the movements. The
IRA has always been seen as a terrorist organization rather than a revolutionary one while
the most radical Civil Rights organizations in America were always seen as just radical
groups. Another important difference to note is the Irish have had very little help from the
outside while the American movement had many financial supporters. The cultural
differences of both of the oppressing countries also affected the treatment of the people
that were incarcerated during the movements. The British government was more open in
its outright assassination of movement leader than the US was. The FBI and its CIONTEL
program was much more secretive in its sabotage of Civil Right s organizations than the
British Army. Both Civil Rights Movements showed that social change could be made by
a mass of unskilled, resource-less, people. Even if the changes were small, at least it
allowed associations to see that a transformation could be accomplished. 
	You will not find a 'solution' in the past; maybe the beginning of a path, but
everyone must be willing to walk down it . Only the people of today can change things for
the better. History simply shows us how the problem(s) came into being and how the
people became what they are. Other disciplines such as psychology, sociology, economics,
and even plain common sense may help but in the end human beings in society, as in their
private lives, have to work thing out for themselves. We all  have a measure choice when
it comes to altering their own personal lives.
	If blame is to be appointed for today's situation in Ireland as well as America, it
should be laid not on the heads of men of today but of history. If a personal villain is
sought then perhaps it should be placed on the successive governments of Britain and
America who, racked by past events, aborted their responsibilities in Northern Ireland and
the ghettos of America. We are all prisoners of history and the views we have learned
from it.
	History is a difficult prison to escape from and the history of America and Ireland
are as difficult as any. The Civil Rights Movements were a brief moment of looking past
prison walls and coming to the realization of change. But it didn't last long. As the 'black
rage' and 'white backlash' increased in  




 
Tony Franklin
ENC 1101
D.J. Henry
2/3/97

Blind Conformity

	In today's world it is often difficult to adjust to one type of lifestyle or another. 
The constant bombardment of outside opinions hamper our ability, as humans, to choose
and be comfortable with a certain way of living.  Our way of living may consist of a look,
a way of thinking, a religion, or any facet of our personalities that may not conform with
whatever is the norm or the accepted at a given time.  When this is the case, we sometimes
feel forced to change, thus we are susceptible to blind conformity.  The word conformity
comes from the Latin words con, which means with or together, and forma, which means
to shape or mold.  Therefore, blind conformity is actually a molding of ourselves together
with what is said to be normal in society instead of using our differences to enhance
ourselves as humans.  Known for having strong opinions, Malcolm X seems to be an
unlikely victim of blind conformity.  However, as shown in his essay, My First Conk,
Malcolm X, in fact, was victimized by this malignant disease.  Straightening black hair,
though, is just one impulse that is bought on by blind conformity.  Changing one's self to
look or behave like another because it is more desired by the public is due to a
disregarding of one's self-claimed morals and values, an over emphasis of the media and
outside opinions, and an insecurity which most of us unfortunately have.
In  My First Conk, Malcolm X assured that black people were being brainwashed
to believe that they actually were inferior to white people, thus they conked their hair. 
They were, essentially, giving up what they were fighting for as far as civil rights- the right
to be who they were and also be accepted by society.  Therefore, the conking of their hair
was a hypocrisy and a contradiction of all their morals and values.  Blind conformity
caused them to disregard their strongest beliefs which should be the most powerful driving
forces in all of our lives.  If we can not depend on our own morals and values, our
engines, to dictate our lives, we are simply empty vehicles being pushed down life's roads.
Especially in today's society, there is a dire over emphasis of the media. 
Television and other types of media display certain lifestyles and ideas and then the public
automatically conforms.  Having the media, which is something so optional, control us is a
reprehensible sacrilege.  It is imperative that we learn to either admire or dislike an idea
without feeling the need to immerse ourselves so fully into it. The media was a prime
culprit in so much black people conking their hair in Malcolm X's day.  Seeing mostly
white people as celebrities, and the few blacks who were celebrities trying to look as if
they were white, made black people feel obligated to change.  It made them terribly
insecure.
Insecurity chokes any self-esteem that a person has that might otherwise make
them feel less obligated to conform.  For example, a teenager who feels he or she is ugly is
much more likely to take drastic measures to change themself, such as straightening or
dyeing their hair, than one who feels he or she is pretty.  Accordingly, it is extremely
important for us to be taught from an early age to be proud of who we are.  Who is to say
that soft hair is prettier than coarse hair?  Who is to say that skinny is prettier than fat? 
Who is to say that white is better than black or black is better than white?  Defeating
insecurity is knowing that there is no better one in these situations, but that they are simply
differences.
Blind conformity is such a strong force among humans that they will even undergo
extreme pain to fulfill it.  Black people, including Malcolm X, actually burned holes in
their heads in order to conform.  Countless people today are even conforming not to
conform by painfully probing metal rods through unlikely parts of their bodies.  What is
this force that is driving us to hurt ourselves?  It would be extremely beneficial if we sit
back and ask ourselves if it is really worth it.   
	  
Book Review

Black In Blue
A Study of the Negro Policeman
by Nicholas Alex
Appleton-Century-Crofts
Copyright 1969
210 pages


Intro. Criminal Justice
December 2, 1996


              Nicholas Alex, assistant professor of sociology at The City University of New York, holds a Ph.D. from the New School for Social Research and a B.S. from the Wharton School.  He was formerly a research assistant with the Russell Sage Foundation, an instructor at Adelphi University, and has had working experience in his academic specialty-the sociology of professions and occupations-while an industrial engineer in the aircraft industry, later as business manager of the Walden School.  This is his first book.
   	In this book  Alex made an effort to examine the peculiar problems of Negro policemen who live in an age which has not yet resolved to problem of inequality in an assertedly democratic society.  He drawn heavily on the reflections of forty-one Negro policemen who made plain to me the difficulties involved in being black in blue.   Alex was concerned with the ways in which the men were recruited into the police,  the nature of their relations in regard to their immediate clientele, their counterparts, and the rest of society.   In the broadest terms, the book examines the special problems that Negro policemen face in their efforts to reconcile their race with their work in the present framework of American values and beliefs.  
     	The research for the study was based on intensive interviews collected over a period of eleven months, from December 1964 to October 1965.  During that time the author talked with Negro police engaged in different types of police specialties, and men of different rank and backgrounds. Alex was interested in preserving their anonymity, and substituted code numbers for names.  The language in which their thoughts were expressed is unchanged.  
     	Most of the interviews were obtained either at the policeman's home or the authors.  Some were held in parks, playgrounds, and luncheonettes.  All of the interviews were open-ended.  All the policemen refused to have there conversations taped.  "I know too well what tapes can do to you," said one.  "I can refute what you write down on that pad, but I can't if it's taped.  We use tapes too, you know."  The author was dealing with a highly expressive and literate group of men who thought of the study as a way in which they could make themselves heard.  
     	This book is organized very well. It consist of eight chapters, and each chapter is broken into subdivisions.  The first chapter talks about the policemen in the community.  Within this chapter mainly describes the police as and occupation, and states how the policemen's job is uncertain.  The second chapter deals with the recruitment of Negroes for police work.  It talks about the need for Negro policemen, and the reasons for entering the police work.  The author states in this chapter that most Negro policemen applied for police work only as one possibility among other similar civil service jobs.  The next chapter describes the police image and the difference between good cops and bad cops.  The author describes a good cop as someone who knows his job, has a well-integrated personality, and someone who tries to understand the particular problems in the community that he works.  He describes a bad cop as the guy who puts on a uniform and becomes 10 feet tall.  In my community there is a cop that relates to that statement.  The only reason he is tough is because he has a badge on his shirt.  I would like to meet him in a dark alley when no one else is around, and without him wearing his badge.  Then we can see who is the tough guy.  
     	The next chapter is a very interesting one.  It deals with the Negro policemen and his white counter part.  It talks about how the Negro policemen feel they are viewed by white policemen.  They feel that the white cops look at them as an oddity.  It also talks about how the Negro police men feel about the white cops.  The Negro policemen interviewed feel that most whites are narrow minded, bigoted and opinionated , middle class in their thinking.   The fifth chapter is about the Negro               policemen and the white community.  One policemen interview said, "From a personal point of view I don't feel as comfortable as I would in a Negro neighborhood."
     	The sixth chapter deals with the Negro community.  It talks about the different social classes within the community.  It also talks about the Negro policeman and the  civil rights movement.  The last chapter deals with the police uniform and how it is a symbol of the authority, power, and legal status of the police.  It also talks about how it can be considered a target for the department.  The most interesting subject targeted in this chapter is how the Negro policeman out of uniform faces all the humiliations of being a Negro, especially when he leaves the ghetto.
    	This book consist of a great deal of information.  The author could have presented the data in a different manner.  He did not present both sides of the issue.  He only took forty-one Negro police officers and based his information on that.  The author  should at least included a chapter on how white police officers feel about Negro policemen.  Also in chapter six he only discusses how the Negro policemen think the white community feels about them.  He should have interview residents in the white community and ask how they feel about Negroes patrolling their town.  Alex presented findings in and interesting manor.  He includes mostly all of the questions he asked, and then paraphrased different answers from different policemen.  The audience most likely to read this book is the black community.
     	I believe that this book is written in a one sided manor  As I previously wrote the author only interviewed black policemen. He should have at least found out how the  whites feel about the Negro policemen.  The information in this book is very outdated.  I would like to see the author or one of his colleagues write a similar book dealing with today's society.  I believe it would be very interesting.        
 
"Clay Beats Liston: February 25, 1964"


     From the accounts of various Kentucky newspapers, I was able to learn a few facts about Cassius Clay, later known as Muhammad Ali, as well as the attitudes of his fellow Kentuckians.  The first thing I noticed in all the newspapers that I viewed was that almost all the articles written about the fight were written by writers from either the Associated Press (AP) or United Press International (UPI).  This displayed three things about the Kentucky press, first the belief that Clay's fight was not important enough to cover themselves, secondly that the newspapers probably did not make enough money to send their own reporters down to Miami Beach, and finally the localization of the newspapers' audiences.  Another aspect of the fight is the effect it had on Kentucky society, especially the sports scene.

     I primarily noticed that almost all the papers used reports from the Associated Press and the United Press International, even the (Louisville) Courier-Journal, one of Clay's hometown newspapers, used reports from the Associated Press.  The only articles that were not written by a member of the Associated Press were the very rare editorials written about the fight.  The use of reports from the AP and the UPI shows that most newspapers did not think the fight was very newsworthy.  Only one newspaper published an article that was not written by a member of the Associated Press or the United Press International, however that one article was an editorial about Cassius Clay's new found wealth and not the actual fight. The lack of coverage also proves that even though blacks were supposed to be equal to whites, that in reality achievements by blacks and whites were treated differently.  None of the newspapers that I read displayed a large picture or headline proclaiming that Cassius Clay was the new heavyweight champion of the world.  Most newspapers had an average sized headline stating that Clay was the new champion, but none had an article about him on the front page.  This further illustrates that achievements by blacks were believed to be less important than the achievements of whites.  I saw almost the same amount of articles on high school basketball, as I did on the fight.  Although I am not surprised by the fact that high school basketball received almost a page of coverage, I am alarmed by the fact that this one page of coverage on basketball was the same amount of coverage for the boxing match.

     The stories by Associated Press and United Press International illustrate two more facts about Kentucky during the 1960's, primarily that most of Kentucky's newspapers were too poor to send their own reporters to Miami Beach, and furthermore that the audience was very localized to events either in their own city or the state of Kentucky.  Although I am not surprised that newspapers such as the Paducah Sun-Democrat or Bowling Green's Park City Daily News did not send reporters to Miami, I was surprised that newspapers like Louisville's Courier-Journal and the Lexington Herald, which have a much larger circulation, did not send even one reporter from their staff to cover the fight.  The absence of reporters from the (Louisville) Courier-Journal and the Lexington Herald proves that even the newspapers from the major cities in Kentucky had a very localized audience.  The localization of news often prevented readers from learning about the world that surrounds them, especially from affairs of other towns.  For example, if the Lexington Herald only wrote reports about the events effecting the city and a few major events that would effect the entire state, it would be possible that something occurred in Paducah that might not be reported in Lexington for several days, even months.  The localization in rural areas such as Paducah and Bowling Green is not surprising, but when urban places like Louisville and Lexington localize their news many important events in other areas of the state could not be reported for an extended period of time.  

     The most important effect of Cassius Clay defeating Sonny Liston is the placement of Kentucky, and specifically Louisville on the map of boxing.  For many years there were numerous boxing gyms in and around Louisville that produced great amateur fighters.  Unfortunately, they were ignored by the national media until Cassius Clay, who was a product of such gyms, defeated Sonny Liston for the heavyweight championship.  When Clay won the gold medal in the 178-pounds division in the 1960 Rome Olympics Louisville's gyms gained some recognition for producing Clay, however they were not fully recognized until 1964 when Clay beat Liston.  Clay's victory made the gyms in Louisville more popular as more and more youths flocked to the gyms in the hopes of one day becoming heavyweight champion of the world.  Although none of these kids would ever win the heavyweight championship, their efforts in the ring made Louisville one of the centers of amateur boxing.

     Overall from my research I learned about the different attitudes of people in the 1960's versus the 1990's.  I also realized that Kentucky newspapers almost always localize their news and hardly publish national or international news articles that do not come from the Associated Press or some other news agency.  I now understand why Kentucky is so far behind the other states, it is because Kentuckians are only exposed to news that affects them and nobody else.  Most Kentuckians could not care about what is occurring in Bosnia, nor do the newspapers report what is occurring there, which isolates Kentucky from the rest of the world. 

Bibliography

     (1)  Courier-Journal, [Louisville], Feb. 26, 1964, p. 3.

     (2)  Lexington Herald, Feb. 26, 1964, p. 9.
     
     (3)  Paducah Sun-Democrat, Feb. 26, 1964, p. 10-B.

     (4)  Park City Daily News, [Bowling Green] Feb. 26, 1964, p. 9, 20.
 

n an ideal world, all men would be caring , respectful, and protective.  This
is not an ideal world; every woman has a responsibility to herself and to
understand the risks and to protect herself fagainst them (Date Rape: The Danger
is Not From  a Stranger 13).  One of the biggest risks from a male to a female is
date rape.  Date rape is the crime in which the victim, most of them women, is
forced in to having sexual intercourse by someone they are familiar with (1).  1 in
4 women will be raped in their life time.  This is a very scary, yet true statistic. 
Women need to understand what is going on with the situation of date rape, and be
looked on less as the problem, so more women will come out and report the
incident.  It is not in any way the woman's fault for being the victim of date rape,
but it is the fault of the rapist, and the rapist should pay the consequences.
The question might come up...why would a man force a woman to have sex, or
why would a woman doubt that it happened, or that she was forced?  Well, there
are many reasons.  A lot of these reasons having to do with how American kids are
raised.  Boys are brought up thinking they are strong and aggressive, while on the
other hand, girls are brought up being passive and "what you say goes" (Shuker-
Haines and Stark 23) .  This shouldn't  be going on in our society...not with the
advancements we have made in our country.
		It is sometimes said that the woman who was the victim of rape shared fault
for the rape for wearing a skirt too short, or maybe if she stops over at his house. 
It shouldn't matter what women wear, or where they are.  If a woman says no to
sexual activity, then everything should stop.  There are also ways that men "mis-
interperate" things women say.  For instance, when women say "no", they mean
"not yet...keep trying", or men think it is okay to be rough, as long as there is no
injury, or if the women agrees to kidding, necking, etc...then she wants intercourse. 
Some men also look at women as "fair game" if the woman is not a virgin.  There
seems to also be confusion whether rape was commited in instances like when a
sexually active couple had been drinking and the woman says no to having sex, but
is too drunk to do anything so sex occurs.  Or perhaps earlier in the date she said
okay, and then change her mind, or maybe the woman said no, and the man
persuaded her to.  Are these instances rape?  More women then men say yes. 
There are no laws to destinquish these situations (Date Rape: The Danger in Not
From the Stranger 6).  There shouldn't have to be laws to say when it is rape.  If a
woman says "no", she means "no".  No one should ever force shomeone else to
have sex against their will.  That's rape.  And rape is the fault of the rapist, not the
victim (qtd. in Shucker-Haines and Stark 22).
		It is hard enough for  a woman to come out and admit her story of being
raped, but it is harder when she tells her story and it isn't even given two glances. 
In San Jose, California, a girl was raped by her boyfriend and when sh came out
and talked about it, the school ignored the issue (Herald 2).  The school stated that
they should stay out of it because it was too hard to prove, and that it was only her
word against his (2).  The crime of rape should not be over- looked in such a way.
Rape is looked as a crime of assult.  Like other assults rape causes physical and
mental injuries.  It especially causes a long and painful emotional aftermath for the
victim.  The rapist who caused all of this for his victim has a chance of serving jail
terms, perhpas lasting for years, but so many times rapists walk because "there
wasn't proof".  In these situations like that judges look at what kind of people the
man and the woman are, and what their relationship is.  That's called sterotyping. 
We are taught not to sterotype (Date Rape: The Danger is Not From the Stranger
3). 
In some cases, women take a stand,  and when the case is being looked at, and
possibly proved, women will come back to the police and ask to drop the charges
saying things like "I was wrong...we were making love" (Hennessy 3).  Women
need to be strong as well as be educated with what date rape is.  They can't back
down on their gaurd.  Rapists need to pay for how they abuse women, both
externally as well as internally.  A 1988 study showed that more than half the
female teens surveyed thought there were times when it would be acceptable for a
man to force sex (Date Rape: The Danger is Not From the Stranger 10).  This is
terrible!  It is not a woman's fault that she was forced into sex!  In the 1993-94 law
enforcement records, 35% of the women who reported thier rapes dropped or
diverted the charges for "various reasons" (4).  Women need to face the situation
head on and be independent...realizing what happened to her is not okay...and
things need to be done. 


 
  	DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

	Found at the scene of the crime two dead bodies stabbed brutally, and left to die at their house.  This was the story that shocked the country in 1991.  This was the start of the O.J. Simpson domestic abuse case that is still going on today.  Unfortunately events like this happen many times over everyday in many setting all over the United states;  however the victims of the other cases don't get nearly as much publicity.  

Some facts about domestic abuse

	An average of nine out of 10 women have to be turned away from shelters on.
	The reason so few cases get assigned initially is the police usually don't have enough officers to meet the demand
 	At the Portland Women's Crisis Line, where calls have doubled since the killings of Nicole Simpson and Ronald Goldman, they welcome the increased attention.
	
 	From July 19,through March 31, 1993 a total of 3,665 domestic violence cases were reviewed in Portland Oregon. Of those, only 281 cases resulted in some action taken against the accused abuser.  Some of this is because there is not enough police, but it is mostly because the abused person is scared.  

 for the last six months of 1993 and the first three months of 1994 Portland averaged about 1,000 calls each month or 12,000 calls a year.
	In January 1992, 30 criminal domestic violence complaints were issued. For January 1994, the number was more than 100.
	Nationally, estimates range from 2 to 4 million women assaults each year.
 		  Some studies show that 20 to 30 percent of all women who seek help at hospital emergency rooms are there because of domestic violence.
  

     Kyra Woods never made it to the emergency room. Whoever killed her saw to that. She suffered 13 stab wounds to the back five of them so violent the knife came out the other side of her body.
     Wood's mother, Mable, and two aunts wept quietly in a back row of the courtroom as the prosecution argued against bail for Woods' former boyfriend Jackson. Rod Underhill, the prosecutor, painted a picture of domestic violence. He told of a dramatic moment after the killing, when Woods' 4-year-old son, holding a teddy bear, re- enacted the attack.  "He put his hands around the neck of the bear and shook it," Underhill said. "He began to pound it with a closed fist and slug it."
     Mable Woods said that her daughter never told her much about any abuse. Neighbors, however, told police of hearing the couple fight violently. According to police reports, one neighbor said, "They fought so hard the pictures on the wall shook back and forth."
	Jackson has pleaded innocent. His attorney, Angel Lopez, points out that no murder weapon has been found. He said the account from the 4-year-old boy could not be matched with any others, and he pointed out inconsistencies in the boy's statements. Bail was denied.
	Jackson was accused of killing his former girlfriend, Kyra Woods, by stabbing her 13 times. His bail hearing normally would have merited little public attention. What brought out the cameras and reporter was the Simpson case.
          
	Children are often the unseen victims of domestic abuse.  they see one of their parents being harmed and this leads to high stress.  Boys tend to be much more hostile when raised in a broken home.  They are also ten times more likely to be abusive when they grow up.  Girls raised in an abusive family tend to be very shy and afraid of boys.  When they grow up they are 50 times more likely to marry an abusive husband. 
    
	The effect of domestic abuse on society is negative, but unfortunately it does not get much publicity unless it involves a figure that is well known such as O.J. Simpson.  Another sad thing is that people often shrug off domestic abuse calling it a personal matter because they don't want to get involved or they are afraid of what people will think about them
  Survivors have found the emotional strength to break from their abusers through different means: a hot-line number remembered from a restroom wall, a wallet card of crisis numbers from a pediatrician who would not overlook a mother's black eye. A grown child begging her mother to flee--and a shelter with an open bed.
 	The women, some with their identities changed to protect their privacy, talked about shame, guilt, fear of triggering even greater violence, low self-worth, isolation, embarrassment, numbing depression, concern for children, foiled escapes, a unrealistic sense of reality, a walking-on-eggshells existence and, perhaps above all, an illogical hope that something would change.
     "the abuser can make everything sound so good," says Florence A. Reid, 45, now living in transitional housing through Bradley- Angle House after 10 years in a violent marriage and another 13 year relationship, in an abusive relationship both with men who were full of promises after the pummelings.
     Even now, 25 years later, after dozens of broken ribs, a broken jaw, pushes downstairs, and out a car, and thrice-weekly bouts with her husband sometimes drunk, sometimes sober--kicking with his work boots as she lay on the floor; even now, Reid has pipe dreams of living happily with this teen-age love, of sitting on a front porch and talking about the old days.
     "Wouldn't that be nice?" asks Reid. "Just live a normal life with the father of my children."   
     "The first time I tried leaving my husband was 1972. I took the kids to a friend's house," she remembers. "He found me and brought a gun with him. Of course, I just went back."
     In 1992, after dozens of tries, Ruth left for the last time, with the help of a daughter, and ended up at West Women's & Children's Shelter.
     Ruth, who now works part-time at a bank, sighs. "I don't know. For years, my excuse was the kids. And of course, I realize that was probably the worst thing I did for them. And I always thought, `Things will get better if I do this.'"
     Other women clung to similar fantasies, sure the goodness and charm would return--if they could love him better, do everything right.                 
When someone abuses another person they often have a certain attitude such as thinking that it is the abused persons fault and that they brought it upon themselves.  extensive studies have shown this.  The abuser often blames the person who was abused for their troubles.  Abusers often have a hard time communicating. 
Unfortunately the abuser is rarely gets action taken against them.   But when they do it is often very serious.  The least that could happen is that the abuser gets a restraining order.  In more serious cases there can be a number of penalties ranging from short prison term to a life sentence.
This is the information that I found when I looked up domestic abuse.  As you can see some of these facts are rather grim but people are becoming more open to ideas and people are reporting more than ever.  I hope that this stops being the most un reported crime in the United States so that we can get the problem under control.  


            The Homepage of the Committee Against Family Violence
	  NO EXCUSE FOR ABUSE webpage
	 Bibliography:  Breiner, S., Slaughter of the Innocents (1990); deMause, L., The History of Childhood (1988);  Kempe, H., and Helfer, R., The Battered Child, 4th ed.  (1987);  Kempe, Ruth S.  and C.  Henry, Sexual Abuse of Children and Adolescents (1984);  Moorehead, C., ed., Betrayal (1990);  Wexler, R., Wounded Innocents (1990).
 Domestic Abuse
                     Metro Nashville Police Department
Evaluation of the "Surviving Together" Support Group
                   for Women and Children (Women's Group)
                      For Health and Community Services
                                  July 1995
                             By Christine Szikla
EASTWOOD, S. "Parenting After The Violence" in Parent Help Program: News &
Information Number 8, November 1992, The Australian Council for Educational
Research Limited, Hawthorn: Victoria. (p.4)

WARD, J. How to Research Community Issues: The Grounded Community
Development Research Method. Partnership Press in Association with Deakin
University, Melbourne: 1993. 



 
Ebonics in Schools

     Many black individuals have played their part in America's history.  Has the Oakland School gone too far by wanting to teach a black slang language in school.  In this paper, you will see the peoples, teachers, and the student's opinion as well as the Senate.
     A lot of people are speaking out on the subject, especially actors.  Arsenio Hall replied to reporters "When I heard somebody from Oakland say the word genetic, on TV, I ran into the kitchen so I didn't have to be mad at anybody."  James McDaniel of ABC's  NYPD Blue  and S. Epatha Merkerson of NBC's Law and Order described the Oakland School Board's decision on Ebonics as a distinct genetically based language (Shister, p.1).  Civil Rights leader Jesse Jackson defended Oakland's school over a controversial plan to recognize black English in the classroom (N.A., p.1).
     On December 18, 1996 the Oakland School Board approved a policy affirming Standard American English language development for all students.  This policy covers the effectiveness of the strategies that must be utilized to ensure that every child will achieve English language Proficiency (Hawkins, p.1).  This policy is based on the work of a broad-based Task-Force, convened six months ago to review the district-wide achievement data and to make recommendations regarding the effective practices that will enhance the opportunity for all students to successfully achieve the standards of all students.  The data shows the low levels of the student performance and lack of students in the Advanced Placement Education Program.  These recommendations focus on the unique language stature of the African American Students (Shister, p.2).  
     One of the programs recommended is the Standard English Proficiency Program, which is a state of California model program.  Which promotes English-language development for African-American students.  The S.E.P. (Standard English Proficiency) training enables teachers and administrators to respect and acknowledge the history culture, and language that the African American student brings to school (Cambell, p.2).  Recently a "Superliteracy" component was added to ensure the development of high levels of reading, writing, and speaking skills.  The policy further requires strengthening pre-school education and parent and community parcipitation in the education process of the District (Hawkins, p.1).
     In the following, there are findings on African Americans in school:  53% of the total Oakland School's enrollment were black, 71% of the students enrolled in the Special Education were black, 37% of the students enrolled in Gate classes were black, and the average Grade Point Average of black's in school was 1.80, which is the lowest in the District (Hawkins, p.2).  Also, 64% of the students held back were African American, 71% of the African American Males attended school on a regular basis, 19% of Senior African Americans did not graduate, and 80% of all students suspended were black (Shister, p.2).
     While Ebonics rages as a hot topic in the spotlight of American media, so called Black English has played a quiet role in an Atlanta area school district for more than a decade.  About 600 students in the Dekalb School District just east of Atlanta is taking a course known as "bi-dialectal communication."  In Dekalb County Ebonics is not considered a language, but a dialect.  Specifically, it's appropriate for the classroom.  The course focuses on more than just the non-standard English of Ebonics.  The students learn they must project, enunciate and gesture properly to communicate.  This is the 11th year of the federally funded bi-dialectal program.  Administrators cite rising test scores in language arts and reading as evidence that it works.  Parents also seem to approve.  One parent said if they had something like that when she was growing up, she would've made it farther (Cambell, p.2).  On the Internet, Ebonics isn't necessarily a black vs. white thing.  It's more a matter of justice vs. joke.  Should Ebonics be considered a second language requiring special treatment by school teachers, or is it merely a different form of English, to be corrected but not accommodated.  The debate has played out on the editorial pages, TV shows and talk radio across America, but for several reasons, it's a subject perfectly suited for the Internet.  For 1 thing, the Net's anonymity can cloak your racial background or identity, loosening tight stereotypes.  For another, you can find a virtual community that matches your take in the issue.  On the World Wide Web, you can read tightly reasoned analyses of black history and listen to people making cruel fun of the whole issue through such rewritten works.  Some sites offer to translate e-mail messages into Ebonics.  But the liveliest Internet offerings have to do with the back-and-forth discussions, whether via news groups or web chat pages.  Sheila Green has cited studies supporting the validity of the schoolboard's approach in several newsgroup posts.  The Ebonics debate has served to highlight a growing number of online services focusing on black cultural prospective (Boyle, p.1).
     Oakland's School Superintendent Carolyn Getridge, School Board President Jean Quan, and board member Toni Cook are going to testify before the Senate.  They will speak about the district's recent decision to recognize Ebonics in the classroom.  Other witnesses scheduled to testify at the hearing include Robert Williams, originator of the term Ebonics and Amos Brown of the Civil Rights Commission of the National Baptist Convention (N.A., p.1).  The national debate on Ebonics reached Capitol Hill January 23, 1996 as a Senate subcommittee took up the provocative question of whether using African American dialect can help black children learn Standard English, and whether it deserves Federal support.  The hearing began on a combative note.  Senator Lauch Faircloth denounced Ebonics as absurd and said that the Oakland school board's decision to have teachers recognize it in classes struck him.  But Oakland school officials, joined by Rep. Maxine Waters adamantly defended the Ebonics policy and insisted that it had been misinterpreted as an attempt to lead students away from Standard English.  School officials said they simply want Oakland teachers to devote more time to students who rely on black English and help them better understand the difference between their language patterns and standard English.  Many other schools are trying to teach Ebonics such as San Diego and Los Angeles, who are considering on creating plans to teach it (Shanchez, p.1).
     The controversy is still going on in Capitol Hill and has not been resolved yet.  The solution may come soon.  Or it may be a long time from now.  Either way some people will be upset with the final decision.


 
 
INTRODUCTION
This is an English exam paper prepared for the EVU2-EDB course at  Niuernermik 
Ilinniarfik, Nuuk.
The main topic of this paper is the USA, and I have chosen to concentrate on a 
fairly new issue, the language know as Ebonics.
There have always been changes in the English language. This is how the 
language came about and evolved from standard British English to American 
English. 
During the last few years, as the world has become more sensitive to the rights of 
minorities, women, animals, etc. a new form of changes has taken place. These 
changes have become known as Political Correctness. 
Ebonics is the political correct version of Afro-American English. I intend to show 
that - and comment on how - racialism and competition affects a society and how 
this, in the case of  Ebonics, is actually happening in today's America.
Nuuk February 1997 Ral Fleischer


THE QUESTIONS ASKED
I will attempt to answer the following questions about Ebonics;
n what is Ebonics?
n what are the underlying reasons behind Ebonics?
n who is prospering from Ebonics?
What is Ebonics?
Most people outside of America have at most but a vague idea of what Ebonics is 
all about. Apart from being a buzzword in American media since December 1996 
what are the fundamental concepts behind this expression? Where, how and when 
did it start, and who started it?
What are the underlying reasons behind Ebonics?
To fully understand Ebonics, some historical background is needed. One has to 
have some knowledge on how the English language has developed in America.
Furthermore one has to be aware how the American society is loaded down with 
the influence of stereotypical thinking, racialism and competition.
In his autobiography, the famous black spokesman, Minister Malcolm X, portrays 
the undisguised hostility that exists between white and black people in America. He 
illustrates this conflict with the following words:
"...You cannot find one black man, I do not care who he is, who has not 
been personally damaged in some way by the devilish acts of the ... white 
man!.  
      The greatest miracle ... in America is that the black  ... has not grown 
violent  ... they would have been justified by all moral criteria, and even by 
the democratic tradition"
(The Autobiography of Malcolm X, page 371 & 349)
Is Ebonics simply the democratic consequence, a black non-violent upraise 
against the "devilish acts of the white man" as as foreseen by Malcolm X?
Who is prospering from Ebonics?
What advantages is meant to be attained - and for whom - with Ebonics?


DESCRIPTION OF THE MATERIAL
Although the introduction of Ebonics has excited more debate than almost any 
other philosophical issue in recent years, only a very small amount of written 
material - apart from newspaper articles - about this subject has reached 
Greenland so far. This, because Ebonics is a rather new and first and foremost an 
all American phenomenon.
Newspaper Articles
The majority of the material collected for this paper consists consequently of 
various newspaper articles. I was able to follow the discussion about Ebonics in the 
American newspaper 'the Washington Post' via the Internet and have as a result 
chosen the following articles as the basis of my inquiry into the matter of Ebonics:
n Ebonics: A Way to Close the Learning Gap?
n Among Linguists, Black English Gets Respect
n Ebonics Debate Comes to Capitol Hill
Magazine Articles
All of the above listed articles are from the Washington Post. I also managed  to 
find a few articles in 'Time Magazine' and 'Newsweek' from which I chose:
n Hooked on Ebonics
The contents of these articles have given me an impression of how the American 
public "officially" interpret the concept of Ebonics.


Internet Web-sites
Furthermore two Internet web-sites (computerised electronic billboards) have been 
of incredible help, the first by providing me with the original 'Declaration of Ebonics', 
the other by broadening my understanding of the fundamental concepts of Ebonics 
together with giving the viewpoint on the subject by a common American.
These two Internet web-sites are:
n Oakland Unified School District Web Page
n EBONICS Pseudo-Intellectualism for the masses
Interview
An interview was performed via the Internet Chess-server "Caissa.com" in the form 
of a correspondence with my good friend edfdo from New York. A discussion about 
chess-ratings ended up becoming a cursory go trough on various different 
subjects, in which edfdo revealed his very own personal reaction towards Ebonics. 
Books
Finally the following books have been of use:
n Two Nations, Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal
n The Autobiography of Malcolm X
n Race, Culture and Intelligence
The first two by giving an insight into the divided 'soul and heart' of the American 
society, and by presenting to me some of the historical background that preceded 
Ebonics and allowed it to come into existence. The latter by further deepening my 
understanding of the essential idea behind racialism and competition among races.


DISCUSSION
What is Ebonics?
Technically speaking, Ebonics is the vernacular style of The English language 
spoken by Afro-Americans. The word Ebonics, origins from the words "Ebony" and 
"Phonics", the name referring to the colour black and to the representation of 
sounds with symbols.
The word Ebonics was invented in 1973  as to describe an Afro-American speech 
pattern with roots in West Africa, but it was not until 18 December 1997 - when the 
Californian Oakland School Board released its declaration on language 
development policy - Ebonics suddenly came into instant fame. An excerpt of the 
revised declaration is enclosed in appendix 1.
In a formal statement, the Oakland School Board recognises Ebonics as the 
primary language of many of its students and announces their intention of teaching 
their students in this primary language, in order to help the student to master 
standard English.
The statement included this controversial sentence "...African Language Systems 
are genetically based and not a dialect of English", a remark that immediately 
raised a public outcry: The old confrontation of comparing race and intelligence 
flared up in the American media once again.
The Oakland School Board accuse opponents of the Ebonics movement of 
ignorant misrepresentation and corruption of concepts. But the uproar has since 
prompted the Oakland school officials to retreat from parts of their resolution, even 
as they argue that their intentions have been misinterpreted, and that their goal 
with the Ebonics declaration is solely to promote standard English.  



Yo Bro', 'name's edfdo!
With various newspaper articles as the only source of information, different people 
reading about Ebonics could end up with some very different opinions on what the 
main concept really is about. In order to clarify things, nothing is better than to 
discuss your opinion on the subject with another person.
The following excerpt from "edfdo on Ebonics, an Internet Interview with edfdo from 
New York" provides us with a good firsthand impression of Ebonics:
"...lotsa talk 'n stuff about chess deleted.
Ral: It created a big fuss (at least in the washington post, i'm reading it via 
the net) but it seems like it [the idea] already is worn out? 

edfdo: Probably. A lot of people were upset that school would be teaching 
"bad" English. Not a lot of info about the decision was publicized. people 
reacted emotionally, on both sides of the issue. It seems to have died down 
a bit. 

Ral: I thought [that] the main issue was about a DIFFERENT English, that 
people didn't liked to accept the idea of a bi-lingual society? How do YOU 
feel about it?

edfdo: It's not a different language, though, just a slang or dialect of English. 
The problem isn't people using both languages; it's people only knowing 
"ebonics" and being unable to read/speak "normal" English. Ebonics isn't 
like Spanish or French-a true second language. 

Ral: I only know ebonics from movies and the post, is it so different from 
normal english, that ebonic-speaking people don't really understand it? 

edfdo: Ebonics speakers understand normal English, and they use it's 
vocabulary. They just put sentences together diofferently (in some cases) 
and use slang words. They would say "He be fraid" for example, instead of 
"He is afraid." 

Ral: So the main issue is/was really "bad" english. How many schools have 
actually introduced ebonics, is it only that single one in california? 

edfdo: Well, "bad" is judgmental. It's certainly nonstandard. As far as I 
know, it was only proposed by the school board in Oakland CA. It is, 
though, studiesd by professional linguists because it has interesting 
patterns. "
(edfdo on Ebonics, an Internet Interview with edfdo from New York; Tournament #D38)


According to edfdo, Ebonics is nothing but the politically correct term for a slang 
dialect of standard English, a dialect being characteristic of not conjugating the 
verb "to be".


A dialect or a language?
Much of the present discussion is concentrated on whether to view Ebonics as a 
dialect of standard English or as different language, a question long debated 
between linguists.
According to many Afro-American liberals Ebonics is solely the official name for the 
"African Language Systems" or "Pan African Communications Behaviours". 
A distinct language with its own grammatical rules, and with a speech pattern to a 
degree, influenced by African roots.
Opponents on the other hand, often people with a different ideological opinion, 
believe that Ebonics is not a language  . Although standard English speakers 
unfamiliar with ebonics may have trouble understanding some Ebonic words or 
phrases, the similarity far outweighs the differences.
Recently linguistic researchers have shown Ebonics to be very similar to Old 
English, Irish and Welsh dialects, and have chosen to classify Ebonics as a Social 
Dialect. A dialect of a language, spoken by minorities, often discriminated cultural 
or social groups.

Some quite contrasting views on the concept of Ebonics, often dividing along 
ideological lines, which provides us with a most disturbing message; The opinion 
lies in the skin colour of the beholder.


What are the underlying reasons behind Ebonics?
In a racially complex and volatile society like The United States of America, 
opportunities for different groups to impose their own kind of justice, to send a 
message, happen all the time. Yet the Oakland School board resolution, sparked 
an unfamiliar discussion about race.
Ever since the abolition of slavery, separatist Caucasian-American society have 
discriminated a large number of its Afro-American population, forced them into 
living in poverty, in a separate culture, both social and language wise.
Given the current distribution of wealth in the American society, and the fact that 
the foundation of this wealth is mainly due to the work of black slaves - who are 
the ancestors to the remaining Afro-American population in America - today's 
American society is fundamentally unfair.
There is a similar inequality in the distribution of the "intellectual wealth". In a 1963 
study, Caucasian-American scientists measured a difference in average IQ of 21,1 
points, between Afro-American and Caucasian-American children. 
It is no wonder that many Afro-American citizens feel themselves vulnerable to 
humiliation and seek ways to distinguish themselves from their oppressors, the 
Caucasian Americans.
The Caucasian-Americans means' to distinguish themselves from the descendants 
of the slaves - today's' Afro-Americans - can be summed up in a single word. That 
word of course, is "nigger" . Its persistence reminds the Afro-Americans that they 
are still perceived as a degraded species of humanity, a level to which Caucasian-
Americans can never descend. 


Some view Ebonics as black liberals' attempt to counterattack the language based 
discrimination of Afro-Americans.  One person puts it this way:
"The cancer of Afro-centrism has once again reached a new low ...in Oakland 
California ...instead of educating its children has....voted to institutionalise the 
legitimacy of gutter language and slang.
...The underlying ...motivations are ... largely based upon the typical paranoid 
delusions which self-proclaimed black community leaders have claimed before. 
Specifically it appears to come from a resentment towards Asian immigrants in 
California who learn English from federally funded programs"
(Ebonics Pseudo-Intellectualism for the masses, 1997)

The issue about federal funds, is by many seen as one of the primary reason 
behind the Oakland School Boards decision. Even some of the Oakland school 
officials says they wanted to use the Ebonics resolution as a license to seek and 
receive federal and state funds for bilingual education .

One could say that the Afro-American liberal leaders have learned to fight back. 
Mimicking the economical oppression of former days, they are now turning the 
weapons back on their oppressors, using the most sacred American dollar in a 
democratic upraise against the reigning competitors, the Caucasian-Americans.



Who is prospering from Ebonics?
Racial issues are finally making it to the top of the American consciousness. 
Attention have been focused where it has not been and where in this case it badly 
needs to be.
Different groups with different ideologies get a chance to discuss their opinions, 
and the American society will definitely prosper from this exchange of views.
Both Afro-American liberal groups as well as Caucasian-American racialist groups 
feel that they gain benefit from this discussion. The liberals because they believe 
that the claim of a separate and equal Afro-American culture with its own original 
language is being taken serious at last. The racialists because they like to show 
that Afro-Americans are dumb and unable to learn proper English.

But the really important question in this case is this: Will the students end up more 
proficient in English?
The children in Oakland Unified School District are challenged indeed. As of in the 
summer of 1996 ;
n 71 % of the students enrolled in Special Education were Afro-American.
n 19 % of the 12th grade Afro-American students did not graduate
n 80% of all suspended students were Afro-American 

The evidence about the effectiveness of Ebonics - taking care to respect the 
different use of the English language among certain groups of Afro-Americans, 
usually the poor and uneducated, is still limited  .  


Why don't I like the word genetically based?
I sense a inner aversion when I read the sentence "genetically-based language",  
hatred and stupidity have long enough ruled this world. As an individual brought up 
in a culture different from that of my racial heritage, I have come to realise that 
ones' language proficiency is, apparently NOT linked to racial ancestry.
The Ebonics movement is worthwhile in many ways, and I must say that I fully 
back up the meant intention behind the movement. But the one-track minded focus 
on genetically-based language is creating a reverse effect of ridicule that does not 
serve the original purpose of Ebonics.
Most of the arguments against Ebonics boil down to the main belief that the English 
language is being totally ruined by people with linguistically inadequate abilities. 
This fear of a repulsive "Bad English" cover up - in my opinion - an unspoken 
repressed racialism that is threatening the American valuable freedom of speech. 
Not in such a way that some people are afraid of what they say, but how they say 
it, or rather that they are afraid of being insensitive to others' opinions.
An old saying reads "One should prefer a good enemy to a bad friend". Although it 
is my deepest hope that the aim for a just and equal society can be reached with 
the mentioned approach of repressing "bad" feelings, I sincerely doubt this can be 
accomplished.
As I see it, that kind of "reverse discrimination" is a key element of the Ebonics 
movement, strengthening the anti-achievement, anti-self mentality in poor Afro-
American communities, consequently encouraging people to accept themselves as 
members of oppressed and aggrieved groups, rather than as individuals who have 
the power to improve their own lives.


CONCLUSION
As it turns out, Ebonics is nothing but an old problem, given a new name. 
We all like to believe that we have the freedom to choose what to think. But the 
very system behind language occurrences like Ebonics seems to be a kind of 
naturally working social regularity in any given society at any given time. A social 
regularity that we just recently have become aware of. The occurrence of 
separatism in societies seems inevitable.
What caused Ebonics seems to be the fact that a large number of the Afro-
American population, by being kept isolated and discriminated, have been forced 
into living in a separate language culture, a culture elsewhere since long time 
extinct.
The underlying idea behind Ebonics, that Afro-American citizens in all ways need 
to distinguish themselves from their oppressors - the Caucasian-Americans - has 
evolved from a larger movement to distinguish ethic and moral diseases, Political 
Correctness. And the resemblance in character of the Political Correct and the 
Ebonics movements is revealing. Both movements are based on a genuine desire 
to induce an awareness of respect, to make a more dignified world. 
There is a need for movements and organisations who is willing to fight for respect 
and justice among races and societies. Sadly, the Afro-American movement's 
odious means to obtain recognition and respect seem to have undermined its 
goals. The wanted respect is not gained by marking children speaking a dialect as 
bilingual.
I have, in my discussion of this topic, felt it necessary to disclose my honest point 
of view in this matter. And YES, I have cherished my 'demagogue' role. If I have 
revealed any meaningful truth that will help to destroy the ignorance that is causing 
the lamentable situations haunting this earthly world, then all the credit is due to my 
friend, Jesus. Only the mistakes have been mine. 


LIST OF LITERATURE
Fleischer, Ral; edfdo on Ebonics, an Internet Interview with edfdo from New York; 
Correspondence Interview via the Internet,  Nuuk/New York, 6-10 march 1997

Hacker, Andrew; Two Nations Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal; 
Ballantine Books, New York; 1992

Leeland, John et al.; Hooked on Ebonics; Newsweek, page 50-51, 13 January 1997

Oakland Unified School District Board of education; SYNOPSIS OF THE ADOPTED 
POLICY ON STANDARD AMERICAN ENGLISH LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT; link 
from http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/3070/ebonics.html; 08 January 1997

Richardson, Ken et al.; Race, Culture and Intelligence; Penguin Books, 
Harmondsworth; 1972

Sanchez, Rene; Ebonics: A way to Close the Learning Gap?; The Washington Post, 
page A01, 06 January 1997
	                      Ebonics Debate Comes to Capitol Hill; The Washington Post, 
page A15, 24 January 1997

Shkirenko, Alexander; Ebonics Pseudo-Intellectualism for the masses; 
http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/3070/ebonics.html; 08 January 1997

Weiss, Rick; Among linguists, Black English Gets Respect; The Washington Post, 
page A10, 06 January 1997

X, Malcolm; The Autobiography of Malcolm X; Penguin Books, Harmondsworth; 196


APPENDIX : Excerpt from the original 'Declaration of Ebonics': 

OAKLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
SYNOPSIS OF THE ADOPTED POLICY ON STANDARD AMERICAN ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT
On December 18, 1996 the Oakland Unified School District Board of Education approved a policy affirming Standard 
American English language development for all students. This policy mandates that effective instructional strategies must 
be utilized in order to ensure that every child has the opportunity to achieve English language proficiency. Language 
development for African American students, who comprise 53% of the students in the Oakland schools, will be enhanced 
with the recognition and understanding of the language structures unique to African American students. This language 
has been studied for several decades and is variously referred to as Ebonics (literally "Black sounds"), or "Pan-African 
Communication Behaviors," or "African Language Systems."
This policy is based on the work of a broad-based Task Force, convened six months ago to review the district-wide 
achievement data (see Appendix 1) and to make recommendations regarding effective practices that would enhance the 
opportunity for all students to successfully achieve the standards of the core curriculum (see Appendix 2). The data show 
low levels of student performance, disproportionately high representation in special education, and under-representation 
in Advanced Placement courses and in the Gifted and Talented Education Program. The recommendations (see 
Appendix 3), based on academic research, focus on te unique language stature of African American pupils, the direct 
connection of English language proficiency to student achievement, and the education of parents and the community to 
support academic achievement (see bibliography in Appendix 4).
One of the programs recommended is the Standard English Proficiency Program (S.E.P.), a State of California model 
program, which promotes English-language development for African-American students. The S.E.P. training enables 
teachers and administrators to respect and acknowledge the history, culture, and language that the African American 
student brings to school. Recently a "Superliteracy" component was added to ensure the development of high levels of 
reading, writing, and speaking skills. The policy further requires strengthening pre-school education and parent and 
community participation in the educational processes of the District.
The recommendations of the Task Force establish English language proficiency as the foundation for competency in all 
academic areas. Passage of this policy is a clear demonstration that te Oakland Unified School District is committed to 
take significant actions to turn around the educational attainment of its African-American students.
The Board of Education adopted a policy on teaching English, not Ebonics. Unfortunately, because of misconceptions in 
the resulting press stories, the actions of the Board of Education have been publically misunderstood. 
Misconceptions include:
Oakland School District has decided to teach Ebonics in place of English.
The District is trying to classify Ebonics (i.e. "Black English,") speaking students as Bilingual. 
OUSD is only attempting to pilfer federal and state funds.
OUSD is trying to create a system of perverse incentives that reward failure and lower standards.
Oakland is condoning the use of Slang.
Oakland has gone too far.
Ebonics further segregates an already racially divided school district.
There is no statistical evidence to support this approach or that this approach will improve student achievement.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
1). The Oakland Unified School District is not replacing the teaching of Standard American English with any other 
language. The District is not teaching Ebonics. The District emphasizes teaching Standard American English and has set 
a high standard of excellence for all its students.
2). Oakland Unified School District is providing its teachers and parents with the tools to address the diverse languages 
the children bring into the classroom.
3). The District's objective is to build on the language skills that African-American students bring to the classroom without 
devaluing students and their diversity. We have directly connected English language proficiency to student achievement.
4). The term "genetically-based" is synonymous with genesis. In the clause, "African Language Systems are genetically 
based and not a dialect of English," the term "genetically based" is used according to the standard dictionary definition of 
"has origins in." It is not used to refer to human biology.
  Hooked on Ebonics, p. 50
  Ebonics: A Way to Close the Learning Gap?, p. A01
  Among Linguists, Black English Gets Respect, p. A10
  Race, Culture and Intelligence, p. 104
  Two Nations, Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal, p.42
  Ebonics: A Way to Close the Learning Gap?, p. A01
  Synopsis of the adopted policy on standard American English Language development, appendix 1
  Ebonics: A Way to Close the Learning Gap?, p. A01
 
 


Reader Response
Ellison's "Battle Royal"

	In Battle Royal, Ellison shows us various things to bring our attention to the pain
the minority group suffered.  In doing this Ellison shows us relationships between the
torment they felt to our feelings for them.  When the boys enter the boxing ring, they are
shown off like animals.  The woman dancing represents the sick pleasure derived from the
boys' torture.  Ellison shows us a picture of the human mind, in seeing something to lust
after then watching young men being beaten nearly to death as a form of entertainment. 
He does this to show us a view of human nature.
	In oppression to the torment the boys developed a sort of counter attack.  The
boys were so eager for the the fake money that they suffered electric shocks to grab it.  I
think this sort of surprised the audience, beings that the boys never gave up the fight.  It
was as thought giving up would have meant giving up much more than money or a boxing
match.  It would have been a loss of dignity and pride, none of them wanted to lose that. 
Also, by the time the boys were given the chance to chase the money, they were numb
from pain.  I don't think the new torture methods were really affecting the boys.  Their
bodies became somewhat immune to the blows after awhile.  
	 My battle royal was a little bit different from the boys in the story.  I did not really
suffer from outside torment.  The battle I faced was mostly inside myself.  People didn't
have to say anything and I would be judging myself and putting myself down.  Like the
boys in the boxing ring fighting one another, I would have to fight with my own feelings to
overcome things.  Each time I made a decision I had to be critical about what was good
and bad for myself.  Even if I didn't do anything wrong I blamed myself for things that
would go wrong.  
	My battle with low self esteem was an ongoing problem.  It pretty much got to the
point where I didn't even realize I was doing it to myself anymore.  The words I said,
although not all true, I believed completely.  I had put myself down so much, that
complements were never taken seriously.  I tried to break my habit of putting myself down
by setting goals for myself.  This helped a little but I honestly don't think I wanted help
back then.  
	Finally it got to the point where I knew I had to do something.  This was the time
when I felt most powerless.  I didn't think I had any control over how I felt.  Half the time
I couldn't decipher whether I was happy or sad.  I began to scare myself because of it.  I
would think, does this make me happy.  I couldn't even think of an answer, it was the
strangest feeling I have ever had.  Not knowing if you are happy or sad, seems odd I
know.  
	
	One day I came to the realization that either I had to fight what was going on
inside me or it was going to get me.  I started out by setting goals for myself.  Fairly small
things, but very important goals to me.  I feel it is best to set attainable goals for yourself,
but also challenge yourself to do better.  Once I began to think about how good life was,
and all it has to offer, things started to change.  I know that this is just a start and the main
problem lies ahead.  
	Today, I am a lot better than I used to be.  I have goals for myself and there are
many things I want to do and have a right to do before I leave this Earth.  I guess to a
point I became immune to the feelings I would let run through my mind.  I became
immune to all the pain those feelings caused..  This time around I am trying to face the
feelings instead of ignore them.  This is helpful in that I know the problem right when it
arises, and I can deal with it before something else happens.  If I ever get into a situation
now where I feel powerless, I either leave the situation or turn to a friend for help.  
	As in the story, I am also rewarded if I don't give up.  I am able to enjoy life and
be happy, instead of walk around depressed a lot of the time.  The first time I realized I
had to do something was my speech.  That was my turn to tell myself that I had to get
over the low self esteem and overcome it.  My prize for this was happiness, I really had
nothing to lose.  This was my honest attempt at winning the battle with my feelings.  Each
day I know I am getting better.  Now, if I get the feeling I push them out of my mind. 
Don't have time to deal with sad feelings anymore.  
	The message I used to live by was to run and hide from my feelings.  This could
possibly be the worst thing to do.  It scared me to face them, so I wouldn't.  My whole life
was an act, putting on a happy face when I really felt down.  Telling everyone I was fine,
when in reality I was far from it.  It became much easier to tell people what they wanted to
hear rather than face what was going on inside me.  Then came a day when I couldn't hide
from others and myself any longer.  It just didn't work anymore, the feelings became
stronger and there was nothing I could do, but face them.  
	Everybody has to deal with something in their life.  My battle was dealing with the
pain I brought onto myself.  Although there was never any physical abuse that went on,
the emotional is hard to deal with as well.  My battle becomes easier with each day, and I
can safely say now that I am better.  Makes me happy just thinking like this, knowing I got
over it.  It took me this long to realize you don't need someone else to make you happy,
we all possess the same qualities in order to do that within ourselves. 




 
Excellence is Your Best Weapon for Fighting Racism

The Bible says that "the poor will always be with us." An similar statement is that racism will always be with us. So, the question is, "What should we do about it?" There are many ways to fight racism: you might march, protest, complain, or beg the government for help. Some of these methods have worked well in the past. However, I think the best and most effective weapon today for fighting racism is excellence. Excellence will bring down more racial barriers than all the marching and shouting in the world.

To develop the weapon of excellence, we must take advantage of all the educational opportunities that are available to us. Even though the doors of opportunity are not always opened equally to everyone, there are still ways to be what you want to be, go where you want to go, and have what you want to have. And it does not matter where you live, how poor you are. You still have the ability to succeed. As long as you have your health and can think, success is possible.

Accepting the fact that the doors of opportunity are not opened equally to everyone, one thing that is equal for everyone is time.  There is the same number of hours in the day for all of us. How you use these hours is your choice. You can use them on the playground or you can use them to play the books. Playing on the playground might give you some hours of immediate enjoyment, but playing the books will give you long-term gratification.

African Americans and other minorities can no longer use the excuses of being poor or living in a bad neighborhood or small town to keep us from achieving excellence through education. In some cases, the poorer you are the more educational opportunities that are available to you. Poverty should not be an excuse for not working up to your potential. No matter how poor you think you are, there is always someone who is poorer.

Please do not be embarrassed by or ashamed of the size your home town. Many individuals from small towns have become very successful and risen to the top of their professions. If President Clinton can change his address from Hope, Arkansas to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, D.C., then you know it is possible to fulfill your aspirations, whatever they might be. President Clinton's rise to the top of his profession suggests to me that whether you are a big time runner from New York City, or a guy who runs around the block in Fall City, Washington, the formula for success in life is still the same. That formula is hard work, dedication, determination, and a small amount of recreation. Like any good recipe, some ingredients are more important than others. If you are making a cake, you use a lot more sugar than salt. And if you want to have a life of cake, hard work should be your sugar and recreation your salt.

For those African Americans and other minorities who are attending mainly white schools, you should use the scientific approach to problem solving. When scientists and engineers solve problems, they always state what is given and what is assumed. It can be given that a particular professor or teacher is racist, or you can assume that he or she is a racist. Either way, you must find a solution to the problem. I am not advocating in the classroom, but you should choose the right weapon for the right occasion. In this case, making an "A" in the course is the best weapon.

If you think racism is bad now, just imagine how things were 30 years ago. Every time I hear someone mention how bad racism is today, I am reminded of a movie I once saw, when a young black teenage boy and his grandfather were going to town one morning in a small southern town. As the boy and his grandfather drove through a stoplight, a policeman saw them run the light and pulled them over. The policeman walked up to the car and asked: "Boy, why did you run that red light?" The grandfather's reply was, "Captain, I saw the white folks going on the green light so I thought the red light was for us." At least we have progressed to the point that we can now go on the yellow light.

Let me restate, you should not let racism or any other kind of "isms" keep you from being successful. Often you will hear some minority students at mainly white schools make the statement, "If this place were not so racist I would do better in school." Our nation is way off of being successful, because all racism will never be removed from our schools or society. The likelihood of this happening is about the same as finding elephants roosting in trees. You should remember that when you are educating the field to success, you will hit a few rocks. Some of the rocks will be black, some will be white, and others will be all colors in between. Regardless of whether the rocks are black or white, if you want to cut a good harvest, you had better keep plowing. It is the seed you scatter that decides what your harvest is going to look like. You cannot plant corn and expect to harvest tomatoes.

Let's face it everyone, many of you have not worked up to your full potential. If the police were to arrest some of you today based on the effort you put into your school work, they would have to release you due to a lack of evidence. Academically, if you are going in the wrong direction, for whatever reasons, I want you to know that it is not illegal to make a U-turn. As you view your horizon, in your vision lie the problems of today and the successes of tomorrow. What do you see?
