791
The hero that never was In Faust, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe builds a dramatic poem around the strengths and weaknesses of a man who under a personalized definition of a hero fails miserably. A hero is someone that humanity models themselves and their actions after, someone who can be revered by the masses as an individual of great morality and strength, a man or woman that never sacrifices his beliefs under adversity. Therefore, through his immoral actions and his unwillingness to respect others rights and privileges, Faust is determined to be a man of un heroic proportions. It is seen early in the poem, that Faust has very strong beliefs and a tight moral code that is deeply rooted in his quest for knowledge. Sitting in his den, Faust describes his areas of instruction, "I have, alas, studied philosophy, jurisprudence and medicine, too, and, worst of all, theology with keen endeavor, through and through..." It is obvious that through his studies he has valued deep and critical thinking, however with the help of Mephisto, he would disregard his values and pursue the pleasures of the flesh. Faust's impending downward spiral reveals the greed that both Mephisto and Faust share. Mephisto's greed is evident in the hope that he will overcome Faust's morality and thus be victorious in his wager with God; also because he is the devil and that is what he does. For Faust, greed emerges because of his desire to attain physical pleasures and therefore become whole in mind, body and spirit. Faust's goal to become the Überminche is an understandable desire, however, the means at which he strives for those ends are irresponsible and unjust. It is through this greed that Faust with the help of Mephisto exploit others in the pursuit of Faust's earthly desires. Enter innocent Gretchen, a poor lower class young woman who experiences the impossible, love. Under Mephisto's magical potion, Faust becomes intoxicated with passion and controlled by his hormones. It is under this spell that he approaches the "beautiful" Gretchen, however, the feeling of passion is not mutual between the two. Faust realizes then, that his simple looks and personality will not attract Gretchen, rather Faust must deceive and manipulate this woman in order to possess her. Thus, Faust turns to Mephisto for help in his quest for Gretchen, "Get me that girl, and don't ask why?"(257) Mephisto replies with a quote that establishes the nature at which Faust will pursue Gretchen with, "We'd waste our time storming and running; we have to have recourse to cunning."(261) It is from this point in the story that Faust declines into a state of immorality and irresponsibility; a level he will remain at for the majority of the story. Faust's immorality emerges from the idealization that despite harming others, there are not any consequences to his actions. The harm in combining Faust and Mephisto is that their actions become dangerous and deadly. Faust becomes an unstoppable, Napoleonic figure, when his irresponsibility is mixed with Mephisto's lethal power. Gretchen is Faust's first victim, before her death she was responsible for three deaths; ultimately she is imprisoned because of Faust's influence upon her. Faust's desire for progress and reformation in society led to the deaths of his second set of victims, an elderly couple. Thus, Mephisto burns them out, a result that Faust had not asked for specifically, but an action which served the purpose and was almost as detrimental as what Faust had intended for them, to move them out of their home. This action against the elderly is analogous to any other parts of the story in which Faust commits an illegal or immoral act to heighten himself in his own eyes. It is obvious then that Faust is a criminal, a man who abuses the rights of others to gain spiritual and financial freedom for himself. A criminal is a personn that should neither be rewarded or idealized for his actions against society. The only endeavor that Faust does in order to save himself, is to feel apologetic and remorseful for his immoral and self-serving actions, and is therefore allowed into heaven, an ending to the story which is unreal and unbelievable. Heaven should be a place where men and women who are virtuous and contain traits such as honesty, morality and decency should reside to. Rather, Goethe poetically sends a man whose indirectly murdered, is dishonest and greedy to such a wondrous and magical location only because he admits that what he did was wrong. Attaining passage into heaven is the only accomplishment that Faust makes in order to attain a heroes status. Even this final accomplishment is questionable, because God would not allow a man so unworthy to accompany people who have such a high moral standard and irrefutable grace. Faust then, neither falls under the classical definition of a hero except that he was, "...favored by the gods" and he does not fit into my personal definition of a hero. For Faust is not someone whose actions should be followed, he sacrificed his beliefs under adversity and most importantly; he destroyed anyone's life if it conflicted to any aspect of his plan for superiority. Faust then, may be considered the greatest un hero to have ever attain passage into heaven.

fear and loathing in las vegas 
Finding the American Dream in Sin City:
What I got out of Fear and Loathing
Where do I start ? This book left me with so many questions and so many things
to think about. Was this journey real? Was Hunter S. Thompson drawing off real life
experinces to create this strange and insightful journey? If this was stricly a fictional story
this is obivoiusly written by a man who had alot of experince with drugs and there effects.
I don not want to focus on the drugs because I think there is more to this book and if you
just focus and the outlandish number of drugs ingested by Raoul Duke and his attorney
you will miss it. The book bills itself as "A savage journey to the heart of the American
Dream." That is exactly what it is. We see america through a man who seems to have
seen what America could have been only to see it come crashing down to the harsh
realties of what it is. He was not alone in this feeling he makes it clear when he remarks
that Nixons term marked the popularuty of downers. The whole country was in a down
mood it seemed that everything had failed and the people that were left after the smoke of
the sixties cleared felt dislousined and out of place like Raoul Duke. The only feeling he
had left to cling on from this time was the drugs and even the highs didn't seem the same.
Take for example when he was describing being in San Francisco during the Acid Wave
how carefree and innoceent his high nights seemed compare this with the constant
parnonia that plagued him throughout his five day romp through Vegas. His highs along
with america had lost a sense of innocence All that was left was a feeling of fear and
loathing.
I also belive that the choice of Las Vegas as the hunting ground for the Amercian
Dream was extremely important. I think that for many Vegas especially circa 1971
embobied all that was right and very wrong with American Culture. The tacky glitz of the
strip, out of work entertainers pefroming for middle americans in the twilight of their life
gambling away penisons and savings and two bit gamblers hoping that they to could
strike it rich and become geniune rags to riches story. Vegas with its lure of the instant
Horatio Alger story seems to me to repersent the Amercian Dream over last half century
and I think Hunter S. Thompson saw this too. Then there was the Mint 400 and the drug
confrence both I think were used as vehicles to see American culture from opposite
spectrums. There was the racers and fans for the Mint 400 a rough and tumble bunch
some would call them rednecks, bikers or rebels. These were the people who seemed to
be living the American Dream on their own terms. On the opposite there was people
attending the drug convention a cross section of middle american law enforcement
people. To these people a free trip to vegas was the vaction they and the misses had been
waiting for. They seemed so out of place in the glitzy lights and fancy casinos but in a
sense I feel they fit right in. They were the target market for vegas. Rich people and hip
young Americans don't travel hundreds of miles to see Tom Jones do medleys and eat bad
buffet food. To me the convention attendees, Mint 400 fans, casino vistors and Raoul
Duke all resprsented diffrent aspects of one idea, The American Dream. Rauol and his
attorney had at one time found there American Dream and had lost it along with
thousands of others who thought the sixties really would mean a change for the better.
The Mint folks had found theirs and as mindless and backwoodish as it might seem to
many it fit them and I don't think they gave a damn what anyone thought. The convention
people they represented the masses grinding it out everyday 9 to 5 living the so called
"Honest American Way" oblivous to the way thing we
re beyond their own front lawns. 553
Jorge Luis Borges possesses writing styles unlike others of his time. Through his series of works, he has acquired the title of "the greatest living writer in the Spanish language." The particular example of work that I read, titled "Ficciones," was a definite portrayal of his culture. The book was not merely a list of facts from his birth country; instead the real cultural knowledge came from his writing style. The book consisted of two parts; each part was broken up into stories. Each one, despite being fiction, is a painting of his experiences, and the cultures of Buenos Aires. Among his themes are myths passed down through the families in his country. I thought that the stories that were contained in this collection were very educational. When finally taking a minute to analyze, and find deeper meaning to the tales, I discovered that they all posses what he has known in his life. He is easily distinguishable in his works. Now that I have thoroughly made it clear of his uniqueness, it will be easier for me to explain my next opinion. I thought that the writing style of Jorge Luis Borges was extremely exciting. He possesses the ability to capture his readers by fully utilizing the writing style known as irony. I found that irony is a large part of his works. He makes sure that the climax of the particular piece is not revealed until the conclusion of the story. A strong example of this was in a piece entitled "The Garden of Forking Paths." Borges put it in such formats, that the beginning of the story was missing so that it wasn't until the conclusion that the story fits together, but is totally not what is expected. The entire fictional tale was about a crime that was committed. The pre-crime, crime, and results of the action were all known. However, the motif of the crime is not revealed until the last paragraph. Jorge was able to portray this irony by initially stating that "The first two pages are missing" in reference to the story that he was about to tell. I especially found this a unique and effective method of creating an initial mystification. This set the stage for an ironic ending. Another unique trait of Borges' is his unmatched ability to capture his reader's attention by the use of description. His sentences are full of words that build a wall of pictures in the mind of the reader. An example of this ability is in the story entitled "The Form of the Sword." The quote stirred my imagination, which made a great mental image. "After supper we went out to look at the sky. It had cleared, but behind the ridge of the mountains, the south, fissured and shot through with lightning flashes, was brewing up another storm." I focussed mainly on Borges' writing style when giving my opinion of the book. I chose to closely examine and comment on this aspect because of its uniqueness and its tie with his cultural experiences. Through Jorge's thorough description in his sentences, and his ability to utilize irony, he has accomplished greatness in his writing.
693
"CHRIST" IN LORD OF THE FLIES Many critics have compared the character of Simon in the book Lord of the Flies to a Christ figure. After reading this book I also found out that Simon and Christ had a lot in common. The first time we, readers start considering Simon a special person, different from the others is when we see him the only one to helping the littluns to gather fruits they were unable to reach. "Simon found for them the fruit they could not reach, pulled off the choicest from up in the foliage, passed them back down to the endless, outstretched hands." (p.51) So we know about Jesus -- carrying about starving and suffering. After Christ was baptized he walked away to the desert and stayed there for forty days, meditating and praying. So did Simon. He felt better walking in the jungle alone, thinking, probably, dreaming, enjoying the power and the beauty of the nature. In that desert Christ also talked to God and I think it was the God's appeal to Simon when the large ray of light fell down from the sky. "Beyond the screen of leaves the sunlight pelted down and the butterflies danced in the middle their unending dance."(p.120) Simon did not fear it and he faced it. As Christ facing God, Simon knelt. Physical help to people was not the main task of Christ -- he taught, gave sermons, appealed to clear their souls and thoughts - to get rid of internal evil. As well Simon was the only one who supposed that the beast they were so afraid of was, probably, inside them. "What I mean is . . . maybe it's only us." (p.80) God chose Christ from all others to fulfill the most important task because Jesus was sinless and saint. Simon was the only one on that island with clear soul and the good inside him without any ambitions of power and suppression. So it was his destiny and privedge to confront the "beast" first and to talk to it The Lord of the Flies told Simon that the evil was inside the boys and for that reason - invinsible. It was trying to tempt Simon saying that he was initially good but everyone was going to have fun on the island so Simon has to quit being perfect and become like the rest of the boys. "You're not wanted. Understand? We are going to have fun on this island."(p.131). It reminds the temptation of Christ by devil while he was alone in the desert praying and thinking. That conversation with the Lord of the Flies happened not a long time before Simon's death. His soul, probably, felt it and Simon felt bad. He fainted and when he woke up he was very weak exhausted, thirsty and hot. The night before Christ was arrested he also felt badly and could not sleep. Finally there was a lot in common in the deaths of Christ and Simon. They both were killed by the members of their communities. Simon was not recognized by them and was murdered, so was Christ (figuratively). "He came unto his own, and his own received him not."(John, chapter 1-11) They both sinless and good were sacrificed for the sins and evil of the others. After the Simon's death as well as after the Christ's one suddenly there was a shower and storm. "Then the clouds opened and let down the rain like a waterfall" (p.139). Afterwards the Christ's dead body disappeared. The Simon's did too --was washed out to sea. And was not his death the sin offering -- soon after it all other boys became rescued. So cannot we conclude that Simon in the book Lord of the Flies was Jesus Christ of that story, of their world. Simon came there with the same mission Christ did -- to save the man, bringing to him "the Word"-- and lose his life for the sake of it.

645
Since the beginning of time, man has been on a quest to find his inner self. This topic has been the theme of many books and researches. This is no exception, in the 1959 book, Siddhartha by Hermann Hesse. In this particular story the main character, Siddhartha, is trying to find his ‘inner self’. He tries to accomplish this in many ways, one being self denial or destruction. This is also the case in the 1996 book, Fight Club by Chuck Palahniuk, in which the main theme promoted is that destruction leads to purity. These two works, written almost 40 years apart, which at first glance seem to be complete opposites, are actually spawns from the archetypal theme of man’s quest from self knowledge. Many issues in each of these stories give reason to believe that the authors had the same idea in mind. It could also be said that the author of Fight Club may have read Siddhartha. This is so because of the fact that many quotes in Fight Club relate to Hinduism, which is the religion of the heron in Siddhartha. For example, at a point in Fight Club, a character questions his safety. The reply from the character, Tyler Durden, is, “You’re as safe as a Hindu cow”, is a metaphor that since the cow is very respected in the Hindu religion and is not harmed. This may be mere coincidence, but other information gives reason to believe otherwise. Other than just saying that there is a connection with something that is said in the two books, there is also connections with the themes and styles of each book. In Siddhartha the charters often speak in ways the you may have to think about to understand the full meaning. This is also true in the case of Fight Club. At one point in Siddhartha, the character Govinda [Siddhartha’s friend] says, “He who in contemplation, with purified mind, immerses himself in Atman, Inexpressible in words is his heart’s bliss.” These quotes convey the idea of the actually enlightenment. In Fight Club, it is common to see quotes like, “You are not a beautiful and unique snow flake” which tells Tyler Durden’s followers that what they may think they are is completely false. This type of put down is a major ingredient in the stew of mayhem which leads to enlightenment. When you compare the actual meanings of Fight Club and Siddhartha, you will find that they are very much alike. Fight Club is a release for people. It helps you know yourself, know what you can do, and know your limits. In the book, it would often be used by people with terminal illnesses in place of a support group. The ultimate goal of what the people where trying to accomplish in Fight Club was to gain complete self fulfillment by doing something that ordinarily would not be considered helpful, but painful. In Siddharha, the main character is also trying to find fulfillment to break the cycle of life in which we are trapped. An idea that is shared in the two works is that time is an illusion. The main character in Fight Club, who is referred to as Jack, has insomnia. He pleases him self by buying things, but later on finds out that, “It is only until you’ve lost everything, are you free to do anything” which is also a theory that Siddhartha has. This is expresses in the line from Siddhartha that states, “May I never be complete, may I never be content.” These quotes show that this theory of finding ones ‘self’ is a universal idea shared by everyone. May it be the style of writing, the well thought out phrases, or the over all theme of these books, it can be easily shown that these works are very similar. Many other people have written books based on the principals that, “In death we become heroes” and “Disaster is part of evolution”, showing that only by destruction and pain, will one find and experience his self. This archetypal theme has been discussed for as long time has existed and will continue to be spawned into many other works of literature, each having common traits and sharing the common idea of finding a meaning in life.

644
Medical operations are carried out everyday, but for some, an operation can change a person's life. One experiment was done on a mentally retarded person to try to raise his intelligence. The experiment worked, but after months, the patient regressed dramatically. In the book, Flowers for Algernon, by Daniel Keyes, this intelligence operation was preformed, and the patient was Charlie Gordon. After the operation, Charlie was very bright, but experienced psychological traumas, loneliness, disillusionment, and social inadequacies. Charlie's psychological traumas or emotional upset was caused by his memory recalls. After his operation, he remembered every aspect of his childhood, whether it was good or bad. "...He's normal! He's normal! He'll grow up like other people. Better than others..." Charlie had dreams of how his mother was ashamed of him. His mother always thought her son was normal and would grow up and be somebody. "...He's like a baby. He can't play Monopoly or checkers or anything. I won't play with him anymore..." Charlie's sister also ignored him. To her, Charlie was dumb and could not do anything. Charlie had dreams of his sister yelling at him and making fun of him. He also had memories of the night his parents took him to the Warren Home. He was terrified and his dad would never answer his questions. Charlie remembered his childhood and through his memories, he felt guilty for hurting his family. After the operation, Charlie also suffered from disillusionment. In the bakery he used to have friends. Friends that would talk to him and care about him. "...Why? Because all of the sudden your a bigshot. You think you are better than the rest of us..." Charlie then realized that he had no friends but merely knew people that made fun of him. The bakery employees just liked him because they could blame their mistakes on Charlie. Then, they could not do this after the operation, so they all turned against Charlie. "...I had to find out just how much they knew. I found out. Nothing..." "Both frauds" Charlie also found out about Nemur and Strauss. He realized they were not professionals, but two men that were taking a shot in the dark. Charlie felt like an expendable lab specimen. Thus, Charlie had lost his friends and knew now he was just a like a lab rat. Charlie had lacked faith in his fellow man. "...Thoughts of suicide to stop it all while I am still in control..." Everyday Charlie lost a piece of himself. He was starting to regress and thought about suicide to end his up and down life. He became irritable and edgy around people at the university. He would become mad at people very quickly and then yell at them. His self-centered and arrogant personality was a symptom of his regression. People stayed away from him because he was becoming a madman and was unpredictable. Because of this, Charlie became lonely in his last weeks before he regressed totally. "...Intelligence without the ability to give and receive affection can lead to a mental breakdown..." Charlie experienced social inadequacies while he was intelligent. "...You know as well as I do, you don't need to work here anymore..." Charlie lost his job because he was to smart to work in a bakery. He could not socially interact with people he worked with and the people he met. Also, Charlie could not perform with Alice or Fay. "...I saw him watching me with his eyes wide open. I couldn't do it..." He experienced illusions when he tried to make love with Alice. The "Charlie" inside of himself emerged and started to regain control of his mind. All in all, Charlie suffered from the pain of not knowing how to deal with his peers and decisions. Therefore, after the operation, Charlie became a smart man but he had to pay the price for it. He had psychological traumas, suffered from loneliness and illusions, and did not know how to act with his peers. Charlie regressed and finally went to the Warren Home, but he at least experienced the world through normal eyes. On the other hand, Charlie might of been better off without the experiment. He would still have friends and a job, but most important of all, he would have a life.

 
Frankenstein Essay
Frankenstein, by Mary Shelley is a complex novel that was written during the age of Romanticism. It contains many typical themes of a common Romantic novel such as dark laboratories, the moon, and a monster; however, Frankenstein is anything but a common novel. Many lessons are embedded into this novel, including how society acts towards the different. The monster fell victim to the system commonly used to characterize a person by only his or her outer appearance. Whether people like it or not, society always summarizes a person's characteristics by his or her physical appearance. Society has set an unbreakable code individuals must follow to be accepted. Those who don't follow the "standard" are hated by the crowd and banned for the reason of being different. When the monster ventured into a town"...[monster] had hardly placed [his] foot within the door ...children shrieked, and ...women fainted" (101). From that moment on he realized that people did not like his appearance and hated him because of it. If villagers didn't run away at the sight of him, then they might have even enjoyed his personality. The monster tried to accomplish this when he encountered the De Lacey family. The monster hoped to gain friendship from the old man and eventually his children. He knew that it could have been possible because the old man was blind, he could not see the monster's repulsive characteristics. But fate was against him and the "wretched" had barely conversed with the old man before his children returned from their journey and saw a monstrous creature at the foot of their father attempting to do harm to the helpless elder. "Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore [the creature] from his father..." (129). Felix's action caused great inner pain to the monster. He knew that his dream of living with them "happily ever after" would not happen. After that bitter moment the monster believed that "...the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union [with the monster]" (138) and with the De Lacey encounter still fresh in his mind along with his first encounter of humans, he declared war on the human race. The wicked being's source of hatred toward humans originates from his first experiences with humans. In a way the monster started out with a child-like innocence that was eventually shattered by being constantly rejected by society time after time. His first encounter with humans was when he opened his yellow eyes for the first time and witnessed Victor Frankenstein, his creator, "...rush out of the [laboratory]..." (56). Would this have had happened if society did not consider physical appearance to be important? No. If physical appearance were not important then the creature would have had a chance of being accepted into the community with love and care. But society does believe that physical appearance is important and it does influence the way people act towards each other. Frankenstein should have made him less offending if even he, the creator, could not stand his disgusting appearance. There was a moment however when Frankenstein "...was moved..." (139) by the creature. He "...felt what the duties of a creator..." (97) were and decided that he had to make another creature, a companion for the original. But haunting images of his creation (from the monster's first moment of life) gave him an instinctive feeling that the monster would do menacing acts with his companion, wreaking twice the havoc! Reoccurring images of painful events originating from a first encounter could fill a person with hate and destruction. We as a society are the ones responsible for the transformation of the once child-like creature into the monster we all know. The public needs to know that our society has flaws and they must be removed before our primal instincts continue to isolate and hurt the people who are different. With such a large amount of technology among us, some people may wonder why such an advanced civilization still clings on to such primitive ways of categorizing people.
 

Ford: exporting to the Middle East
We work hard to deliver the kinds of products that our costume’s wants and needs". The famous say for Orlando Anderson, the head manager of the exporting section of GM. Being one of the big companies world wide, it assures that it is exporting the satisfaction to its customers all over the world with a quality driving experience.
When the target was the Middle East, GM studied the different kind environments and way of living in each and every country there so it can deliver the right project to the customer. Let’s take Egypt for example, the cities are "loaded" with citizens over there "Cairo for example, has 1,000,000 citizen living there". One can imagine how crawdy it is, and how many hours one could stuck in a traffic jam or having hard time finding a place to park a car. Being one of the low-income countries, people in Egypt cannot effort expensive cars, big cars, paying gas or paying for the parts of the cars that needs to get fixed or replaced if anything bad happened to it.
The perfect solution that GM found to solve all these problems Egyptians are facing is:Light- and medium duty cars and trucks with Isuzu and Chevrolet and Bedford brand name and mini-busses and micro-buses built on Isuzu chases badge "GME", and Opel cars.All of these cars upon are small size, economic and with cheap price and available parts. That’s all what one would think of as a car to get in a country like Egypt.
GM is one of the pioneers with delivering the satisfaction. Lately, GM’ve got increases in it’s exporting income between %7.5 and %9 for this year, which mean that they are improving their markets all over the globe and that all their marketing plans are successful. And that’s what they, GM managers of exporting, described in what they called it "the GM cancer taking over the world"
Book Report                                     Name-Lucia   Date-May 17,2000

Name of Book-Goblin’s Don’t Play Video Games

Main Characters-Melony, Lisa, Howie, Eddie and Mr. Goble

Number of Pages-82

Where you found it in the Library-Fiction J.

What is the story about-The story starts with Melony buying a new video game. The video is the game of zapping goblins. Lisa calls her but she never comes to play because she’s so wrapped up in her new video game trying to get to the next level. Then she saw a person moving into the old house on her street. But then Melony and her friends realized that the haunted house in her video game looked exactly like the haunted house on her street. Then they saw mover’s moving lots of computer equipment into the house. Then they saw the door of the house squeak open and standing there was a little stooped man that wore gray clothes and  had a gray mustache, even his skin was gray. The next day they met under the big oak tree at school. Lisa was complaining that she had the worst dream of her life, she dreamed that she was being chased by a gray monster through Bailey Cemetery. Howie was complaining that he never got any sleep because someone was playing an organ after midnight. They were worried the next day because Melony wasn’t at school yet and she was never late for school, but then they saw her walking slowly down the sidewalk toward the playground with her hand held video game. She was concentrating so much on her game that she bumped right into
Lisa. Your going to bump into a tree Lisa warned. That day at school the four friends were surprised that the little gray man was our new computer teacher. Melony was playing her video game in computer class. Mr.Goble caught her and took it away. Mr. Goble was trying to play the game and by the end of the class he was on the eighth level. 
After computer class something strange happened, the lights went out and the kids were in total darkness and then they heard a loud laughter echo through the hallway. When they went to their classroom Mrs. Jeeper’s their teacher was writing multiplication problems on the board, but when she was writing her chalk snapped in half. Then they heard a loud BANG!!! At the back of the classroom the bookshelf had fallen apart. Then they heard a big knock at the door. The next day after school they met by the big oak tree because Lisa had to tell them something important, but Eddie was so hungry that he had to eat but Lisa had to tell them this. There were about 10 men and women fixing the outside of the house, now it actually looks like a mansion, Eddie said to his friends. They read the instructions, it said if you wanted to get rid of the Master Goblin and followers they’d have to get to the tenth level. The next day they walked into the classroom and to their amazement they found the books were lined up neatly. Not even a speck of dust was on the ground.
	The next day Melony had something to show her friends, she had herbal food. Lisa asked Melony why they needed herbal food. Melony told her that goblins can not stand messes. They went into the school really early and started spreading the herbal food all over the floor. When Mrs. Jeepers arrived she asked the children why they were there,   they were looking for Mr. Goble , as he had gotten a job somewhere else said Mrs. Jeepers. So they went into the computer room and saw the big mess, then Howie threw a handful of cheese popcorn at Lisa and said goblins don’t play video game after all!!!

 
Great Expectations

In life, symbolism is present all around us. Whether it is in the clothes we wear, the things we do, or what we buy, everything has a meaning. Symbolism is also present in literature and it is shown in Charles Dickens Great Expectations. The symbols of isolation, manipulation, the tragic hero, and wanting to be someone else are seen throughout the book through the characters of Estella, Magwitch, Miss Havisham, and Pip. 
The character of Estella represents the symbols of isolation and manipulation. By acting as an adult when she was still young, she separated herself from Pip and others. This was due in large part to the way Miss Havisham, her stepmother, raised her. She had no emotion, as Miss Havisham used her for revenge on men. On his first visit to the Satis House, Pip overheard Miss Havisham tell Estella "Well? You can break his heart." [65]. By doing what Miss Havisham tells her to, she shows she is just as heartless as her stepmother. She also represents manipulation in how she played with Pip's feelings, who has strong feelings for her eventhough he also cannot stand her. She tells Pip "Come here! You may kiss me if you like." [102]. Although the kiss may have meant a lot to Pip, it did not mean anything to Estella as she was just playing with Pip's emotions.
 The character of Magwitch represents the symbols of isolation and the tragic hero. In this case, he was physically isolated from society because he was a convict and was looked upon with disgust. When Magwitch confesses and apologizes to Joe for stealing the food, Joe replies "poor miserable fellow creatur." [43]. Magwitch also illustrates the symbol of the tragic hero. Throughout most of the book, Magwitch is looked down upon by Pip.  Magwitch talks about his gratitude for Pip when he helped him as a convict many years ago. "You acted noble, my boy," said he. [356]. "Noble Pip! And I have never forgot it!" [356]. He shows why he is a hero when he explains to Pip that he was the benefactor and the one responsible for making him a gentleman and helping him achieve his great expectations. "Yes, Pip, dear boy, I've made a gentleman on you! It's me wot done it!" [359-360]. After his death, however, Pip feels guilt and sadness when he learns what Magwitch spent most of his life trying do. As a result, he shows the
 readers why he was the tragic hero.
 One character who represents the symbols of isolation and manipulation is Miss Havisham. For most of her life, she has refused to let go of her past as she continues to wear her wedding dress and keep her wedding cake. Her decaying dress and cake are symbols of how her life rotted away. It also depicted the state of the Satis House, where she was isolated from the rest of society. The house is used as a metaphor to show how they decayed and crumbled as time passed on. Miss Havisham also illustrates the symbol of manipulation. She had raised Estella as a heartless stepdaughter whose main purpose was to seek revenge on men. This central motivation of revenge resulted from the fact that she was a rejected lover. Her plan is shown when she tells Estella to go play with Pip. "Well? You can break his heart." [65]. As a result, she made Estella into a human monster with no emotion. Near the end, Miss Havisham dies a hopeless neurotic.
The one character who shows the symbol of how people always want to be someone else but than decide they are better off with whom they are is Pip, the story's protagonist. As a boy, Pip wishes to be a gentleman. With unknown help from Magwitch the convict, Pip's dreams come true. After attaining his fortune and his expectations, Pip is miserable. "As I had grown accustomed to my expectations, I had intensibly begun to notice their effect upon myself and those around me." [305]. He noticed the negative effects as he was in debt because of his lavish spending and he also realized how much he neglected Joe and Biddy, his two best friends as a kid. In the end, Pip changes as he becomes a loyal friend to Magwitch in his time of need, tries to repair his relationship with Joe and Biddy, and goes from almost total destruction to moderate business success. He also shows how people gain from giving. The only good fortune from the money he received from his private benefactor, Magwitch, was giving it to Herbert.
As shown from the examples above, symbolism plays an important part in Charles Dickens Great Expectations. Many symbols such as isolation, manipulation, the tragic hero, and wanting to be someone else are present throughout the novel and are brought to life by the characters. People in today's society must realize that a lot of what we do symbolizes something about us and helps explain who we are as people.                                                                                                                          
 

 
	Charles Dickens¹s Great expectations is a story about a boy, Philip Pirrip, who comes to a point in his life where his life changes drastically from the way it was when he was growing up.  Whenever this change occurs, he does his best not to let people know about his past life where he was just a ³common² boy.  Throughout the novel, Dickens points out how people sometimes lead two lives that they want to keep separate.
	The change in Pip¹s life is characterized in several ways.  First of all, there is a physical change, when he moves to London.  That just accentuates the difference between the two ³lives.²  Before, he lived in a small town that was near some marshes, both of which reflect the ³common² side of his life.  London is seen by Pip as a great and wonderful city which symbolizes his expectations of what is to come in his future.  Another change in his life is that he is treated better by others.  Mr. Trabb, the tailor, takes exception to Pip after he hears that he has come into a fortune.  He measures Pip very quickly, and gets angry at his son for not showing the same respect of Pip¹s wealth.  Then, when he next sees Pumblechook, he repeatedly asks Pip if he may shake his hand, as if it is some great honor.  Before the news, he hardly treated Pip any differently than any other common boy.  Pip also looks to the way his new acquaintances are treated, most notably Mr. Jaggers.  He is treated with a great deal of resp
ect by everyone, and even invokes fear in some.  Pip had never seen this level of respect for someone that was his direct acquaintance before, except for Miss Havisham, who he knew had great wealth.
	This dual lifestyle is paralleled in Mr. Wemmick, the clerk for Mr. Jaggers.  Mr. Wemmick, when at work, only thinks about his work, and doesn¹t let his personal life affect how he goes about his business.  The flip side of the coin is also true, as when he goes home, he forgets about anything that happened at work, and concentrates on making his deaf father happy.  The scene when he takes Pip to work shows the change that he goes through on his way to work:  ³By degrees, Wemmick got dryer and harder as we went along, and his mouth tightened into a post-office again.²  Just like Pip, he changes how he acts according to which role he is playing.
	Whenever the two lives come together, it is hard for Pip to determine what to do about it.  He seems not to want his two lives to mix, but is helpless to prevent it.  Whenever Joe says he is coming to London, Pip doesn¹t like he idea, but he ends up coming anyway.  Also, when he finds that Orlick is working for Miss Havisham, he is apparently shocked.  He remembers him working for Joe, and doesn¹t think it¹s right that he¹s now working as Miss Havisham¹s watchman.
	In society today, people often lead these dual lives.  I have known many people who, when at school, take it very seriously and work hard at it, but when the weekend comes, they take their partying just as seriously.  Another way that people lead separate lives is when they hide who they really are and pretend they are someone else.  Mostly this happens because that person is afraid that they will not ³fit in² with the rest of the crowd.  Ok, I'll come clean.  At one time I was one of these people that tried to fit in.  I later realized that I was just denying who I really am.  I have a feeling that, by the end of the novel, Pip will have a better standing of who he really is. 


473
There are a lot of similarities in two Shakespeare stories HAMLET and KING LEAR. I guess its because of the style in which Shakes peare wrote. William Shakespeare wrote three kinds of stories: comedy, tragedy and history. Both of these books are tragedies and they are very similar tragedies. In both of these stories there is a feud going on within the family. And in both the feud is between the children and their parents or relatives. Hamlet is looking for the revenge on his uncle for killing Hamlets father and hes upset with his mother marrying the murderer. Here Lears evil daughters try to completely destroy their father. Lear calls his daughters and asks them who loves the most. Regan and Goneril lie just to get Lears land and power. Cordelia honestly answers Lear and for that is given away to France, because Lear has gone out of his mind. After Lear gives out almost all his land he realizes his wrongdoing and tries to restore his power. But now its too late, because his daughters already took away all the land. He sees how evil his daughters really are and they dont love him at all, so he curses them. Now Lear appears to be crazy from his actions, but in reality he exactly knows what is going on. Hamlet saw the ghost of his father and it told Hamlet that his uncle killed him to become the king. This shows that the person will even commit murder to get control of the country, just like we see in KING LEAR. After the ghost appeared to Hamlet, he started to act like he was crazy. But just like Lear, in reality he wasnt crazy, he was thinking of how to get back at his uncle. The endings of both stories are very similar. Besides the fact that all the main characters in both stories die, its how they die thats interesting. Because Goneril wants to get Edmund, she poisons her sister Regan. Hamlets uncle wants to poison Hamlet, but by mistake he poisoned his wife, Hamlets mother. Hamlet by mistake kills his uncle servant Polonius. Because of the death of her father Ophelia (Polonius daughter) goes insane and later kills herself. Because Gonerils plan didn t work, she kills herself. At the end there is a duel between Edgar and Edmund, where Edgar kills his bastard brother. At the end of HAMLET there is a duel between Hamlet and Polonius son, where Hamlet wins but in process gets cut by a poisonous sword; He dies. And finally during the duel Hamlet also kills his uncle getting his revenge, but loosing his life. After Polonia is found dead, Lear totally goes insane and thinking that his daughter is still alive he dies. And at the very end Kent says, My master is dead I have no reason to live, and kills himself. Just like at the end of HAMLET, Hamlets servant and friend also says the same and also kills himself. In conclusion: both of these plays are tragedies, a very close connections throughout the play, and a very similar endings.

1513
Utilitarianism "Quadruped. Graminivorous. Forty teeth, namely twenty-four grinders, four eye-teeth, and twelve incisive. Sheds coat in spring......" A perfect example of a product of utilitarian education, Bitzer defines a horse off the top of his head in a split second. Utilitarianism is the assumption that human beings act in a way that highlights their own self interest. It is based on factuality and leaves little room for imagination. Dickens provides three vivid examples of this utilitarian logic in Hard Times. The first; Mr. Thomas Gradgrind, one of the main characters in the book, was the principal of a school in Coketown. He was a firm believer in utilitarianism and instilled this philosophy into the students at the school from a very young age, as well as his own children. Mr. Josiah Bounderby was also a practitioner of utilitarianism, but was more interested in the profit that stemmed from it. At the other end of the perspective, a group of circus members, who are the total opposite of utilitarians, are added by Dickens to provide a sharp contrast from the ideas of Mr. Bounderby and Mr. Gradgrind. Thomas Gradgrind Sr., a father of five children, has lived his life by the book and never strayed from his philosophy that life is nothing more than facts and statistics. He has successfully incorporated this belief into the school system of Coketown, and has tried his best to do so with his own children. The educators see children as easy targets just waiting to be filled with information. They did not consider, however, the children’s need for fiction, poetry, and other fine arts that are used to expand children’s minds, all of which are essential today in order to produce well-rounded human beings through the educational process. One has to wonder how different the story would be if Gradgrind did not run the school. How can you give a utilitarian man such as Gradgrind such power over a town? I do like how Dickens structures the book to make one ask obvious questions such as these. Dickens does not tell us much about the success of the other students of the school besides Bitzer, who is fairly successful on paper, but does not have the capacity as a person to deal with life’s everyday struggles. Gradgrinds two oldest children, Tom and Louisa, are examples of how this utilitarian method failed miserably. These children were never given the opportunity to think for themselves, experience fun things in life, or even use their imaginations. True, they are smart people in the factual sense but do not have the street smarts to survive. Tom is a young man who, so fed up with his father’s strictness and repetition, revolts against him and leaves home to work in Mr. Bounderby’s bank. Tom, now out from under his fathers wing, he begins to drink and gamble heavily. Eventually, to get out of a deep gambling debt, he robs a bank and is forced to flee the area. When Bitzer realizes that Tom has robbed the bank and catches him, Mr. Gradgrind begs him to let Tom go, reminding him of all of the hard work that was put on him while at the school. Ironically Bitzer, using the tools of factuality that he had learned in Gradgrinds school, replies that the school was paid for, but it is now over and he owes nothing more. I think this is extremely funny how, at a time of need, Gradgrind’s educational theory has backfired in his face. I think Dickens put this irony in as a comical device but also to show how ineffective the utilitarian method of teaching is. Louisa, unlike Tom, does get along with her father. She even agrees to marry Mr. Bounderby, even though she does not love him, in order to please her father. She stays in the marriage with Bounderby, and goes about life normally and factually, until she is faced with a dilemma and panics. Mr. James Harthouse, a young, good looking guy, is attracted to Louisa and deceivingly draws her attraction to him. She does not know what to do since she has never had feelings of her own before. Her father never gave her the opportunity to think for herself, or even love someone. This is why Louisa goes frantic and ends up crying in her fathers lap. She has always been told what to do and what is ‘right’, and now even her father is stumped. For the first time in the whole novel, Mr. Gradgrind strays from the utilitarian philosophy and shows compassion for his daughter and her feelings. One must think that he is beginning to doubt his philosophy after seeing it backfire in his face more than once. Josiah Bounderby is another prime example of utilitarianism. He is one of the wealthiest people in Coketown; owning a bank and a factory, but is not really a likable person. His utilitarian philosophy is similar to Gradgrinds in the sense that factuality is the single most important virtue that one could posses. Mr. Bounderby maintained throughout the story his utilitarian views, which basically stated that nothing else is important besides profit. Being the owner of both a factory and a bank, Bounderby employs many workers, yet seems to offer them no respect at all. He refers to the factory workers as "Hands," because that is all they are to him. Bounderby often states that workers are all looking for "venison, turtle soup, and a golden spoon," while all they really want is decent working conditions and fair wage for their work. He is not concerned about his employees as human beings, but how much their hands can produce during the workday, resulting with money in his pocket. When one of his workers, Stephen Blackpool came to Bounderby’s house asking for advice about his bad marriage, he was treated as inferior just because of his social status. Dickens portrayed the scene as one in which Blackpool was on a level five steps below Bounderby and his associates because he was a lowly worker who was obviously much less educated than them. It almost seemed like they would not even take him seriously because he was such. Blackpool was told that he could not divorce his wife because it would be against the laws of England. Later in the book, Bounderby divorces his wife. This shows that wealth played a large role in determining the social classes that people were in and the privileges they had. This was definitely unfair but the social classes were structured in a way which allowed those who had money to look down upon those who were less fortunate. Generally, those who were not well-educated did not have any money, while the well-educated ones such as Bounderby and Gradgrind were wealthy. The people who knew the factual information, (utilitarians) were successful, while those who did not were reduced to working in the factories of the utilitarians. Dickens paints a vivid picture of this inequality between social classes and shows he does not care much for it. It is fairly easy to see that Dickens holds a contempt for Bounderby and the utilitarian philosophy he carries. The book details the philosophy, then shows how miserably it failed. How much different would their lives be if the town was not run by utilitarians. Dickens cleverly added in circus people as a contrast to the utilitarian approach to life. The circus people could be called the total opposite of utilitarianism. If one element of the book stands out in my mind, it would be this one. The circus people are simple, open-minded human beings whose goal in life is to make people laugh. Dickens portrays them as a step up from the "Hands" but still close to the bottom in the social structure. These people are hated by Gradgrind, Bounderby and other utilitarians because they represent everything that is shunned in utilitarianism such as love, imagination, and humor. Sissy Jupe, the daughter of a circus man, was taken in by the Gradgrinds to live in their home. She is representative of the circus people with her innocence and free-will, qualities which are lacking in the lives of the people around her. Just by her presence, her goodness rubs off on the people around her, although it is too late for most of them. Even after numerous attempts to force utilitarianism into her by Mr. Gradgrind and his school, she is still the fun-loving girl that she always was because she grew up living with "normal" people who thought for themselves and loved each other. She influenced these qualities on the youngest Gradgrind daughter Jane, who led a much more enjoyable and fulfilling life than her older sister Louisa because of those influences. Jane is not spoken of much until the end of the book but I like the way Dickens showed the effects of the utilitarian lifestyle as opposed to the non-utilitarian lifestyle. The utilitarians ultimately ended with a great downfall because their narrow-minds could not endure the pressures that life can impose on oneself. The people that did not fall victim to the utilitarian trap were able to live their lives happily and freely, able to love, laugh, and use their imagination; which is the way life ought to be lived. Dickens obviously had a definitive opinion of the way life should be lived and did an excellent job of depicting it. His method was somewhat indirect in the sense that he worked backwards to get his point across, but turned out to be very effective as the story progressed. Most of the story revolved around utilitarianism and the study of cold hard facts, but when the character flaws began to surface as a result of this philosophy, Dickens is quick to emphasize them. One actually sees the main character of the book and firm supporter of utilitarianism, Mr. Thomas Gradgrind, experience the faults of his practice and begin to stray from it. Now, after watching his life fall apart, maybe he wishes he were in the circus.

Hawthorne To Faulkner: The Evolution Of The Short Story
Nathaniel Hawthorne and William Faulkner’s short stories “Young Goodman Brown” and “A Rose for Emily” use a moral to endorse particular ideals or values. Through their characters examination and evaluation of one another, the author’s lesson is brought forth. The authors’ style of preaching morals is reminiscent of the fables of Aesop and the religious parables of the Old and New Testament. The reader is faced with a life lesson after reading Hawthorne’s “Young Goodman Brown:” you cannot judge other people. A similar moral is presented in Faulkner’s “A Rose for Emily.” The use of morals combined with elements of Romantic era writing show the stories of Hawthorne and Faulkner to be descendants both of fables and of Romance literature.
Nathaniel Hawthorne’s “Young Goodman Brown” tells the story of a young man who decides to league himself with the devil. Goodman Brown is a citizen of a typical town with its share of good people and not-so good people. Goodman Brown believed that he knew the inhabitants of the town fairly well. He knew Goody Cloyse, for example, to be “a very pious and exemplary dame, who had taught him his catechism in youth, and was still his moral and spiritual advisor, jointly with the minister and Deacon Gookin” (598). He knew Deacon Gookin was a strict man of the Church and was always “bound to some ordination or ecclesiastical council” (599). However, in his travels through the woods with the old man, Goodman Brown notices Goody Cloyse progressing down the path.
“‘A marvel, truly that Goody Cloyse should be so far in the wilderness at nightfall,’ he [Goodman Brown] said” (598).
Just as he begins to have doubts about the woman’s pureness of heart, he comes across Deacon Gookin in the woods as well. As they are supposedly fine, upstanding citizens of the village, Goodman Brown has to wonder why they are traveling through the woods on the same path that he is taking with the devil. Afterwards, he is astonished to see not only these two upstanding citizens at Satan’s ceremony, but almost everyone else in the town as well. It is through his assumption that his fellow townspeople were good that Goodman Brown learns the story’s most important lesson: namely that you should not judge people at face value; anyone can put on airs, and his encountering of the devil’s ceremony emphasizes this fact.
Faulkner’s “A Rose for Emily” has a similar moral, only in this story, it is the townspeople who learn the lesson. Emily is a woman who goes against all norms of her society: she takes a lover, a Northerner no less, she does not marry him, and she even commits murder. As she goes through these events in her life, the townspeople make certain assumptions about what she is doing. They assume that she has married Homer Barron, they assume that the arsenic she purchased is so that she can kill herself, and they constantly assume that she is “Poor Emily,” a woman who is ruled by her father and unable to make decisions for herself.
“So the next day we all said, ‘She will kill herself;’ and we said it would be the best thing. When she had first begun to be seen with Homer Barron, we had said, ‘She will persuade him yet…’” (461).
The townspeople continually judge Emily and make assumptions about her life without a basis in fact. Faulkner himself acknowledged the connection between his title character and her environment, that is, her town and the townspeople around her, in an interview in 1959.
“…and that was simply another manifestation of man’s injustice to man, of the poor tragic human being struggling with its own heart, with others, with its environment, for the simple things which all human beings want…” (1416)
He continues with a description of Emily and how she does not meet the expectations of her society.
“She had been trained that you do not take a lover. You marry, you don’t take a lover. She had broken all the laws of her tradition, her background…” (1417)
The townspeople in the story learn that all that they assumed to be true about Emily was not true, thus instilling the moral that judging people without truly knowing them can only lead to misunderstandings.
Both “Young Goodman Brown” and “A Rose for Emily” use morals to teach readers how to improve the way that they perceive the people in their lives. It is this style of teaching a lesson that is a direct descendant from the grandfather of all short stories: namely the fable. The fable used highly simplified characters, even animals in some instances, to illustrate certain lessons to be learned about life. Animals were used frequently as they could easily depict certain basic emotions or characteristics which people could relate to, such as a fox for cunning, a dog for loyalty, or a pig for gluttony. The lessons taught could be as ordinary as “Whomever laughs last, laughs best” or as timeless as “Do unto others as you would have done unto you.” In a similar manner, religious parables, most notably those of the Old and New Testaments of the Bible, taught these basic life lessons as a means for people to learn the teachings of religious leaders in an easy and straightforward manner. The characters in these parables were people to which common folk could relate. Parables such as “The Good Samaritan,” for example, told of a man who is beaten and left for dead by robbers. He is passed by two other men, one of them being a religious leader, and is not helped by either of them. The third person to pass is a Samaritan, a person who does not follow the Jewish religion, and he is the one who helps the injured man. The simple moral of this parable is to help those in need whoever they may be; a good life lesson for anyone, be they religious or not. Hawthorne particularly, and to a lesser extent Faulkner, use the device of the moral in their stories so that they may teach a valuable ideal to their readers. The evolution of the short story can be seen not only in the use of morals in the works of Hawthorne and Faulkner, but in their use of elements of Romantic literature such as preoccupation with ages past, use of the supernatural, and their psychological studies of their characters. Hawthorne wrote during the Romantic era and as such his work “is closer to the prose romance than to the novel” (1602). Faulkner follows in the Romantic footsteps of Hawthorne in his “A Rose for Emily.” Faulkner, although he is a modernist writer, incorporated many Romantic literary techniques in his “A Rose for Emily.” The style in which he is writing would be classified as a sort of neo-romantic style due to his use of elements of the supernatural, a preoccupation with the past, and his complex psychological studies of his primary characters. Faulkner himself commented that he wanted to write a “ghost story,” a definite throwback to the preoccupation with the supernatural that was prevalent in Romantic era literature.
Additional evidence of an evolution between the two literary periods and the two authors can be found in the differences between Hawthorne’s language and Faulkner’s language. The language of Hawthorne’s day 150 years ago may be quite different from our modern language, however, Hawthorne had the additional burden of writing his story in the language of the 1690s, the time setting for “Young Goodman Brown.” Hawthorne did so by using vernacular such as “durst” and “pray tarry.” Faulkner, on the other hand, keeps with the fairly modern language of his day, although he adds a bit of Southern slang to his writing in keeping with the setting of the story.
“The construction company came with niggers and mules and machinery, and a foreman named Homer Barron, a Yankee¾” (460)
Faulkner differs from Hawthorne in that he addresses controversial issues that in Hawthorne’s time would hardly have been considered appropriate material to discuss, much less include in a short story. In “A Rose for Emily,” Faulkner makes subtle references to Homer Barron’s possible homosexuality.
“…Homer himself had remarked¾he liked men, and it was known that he drank with younger men in the Elks’ Club¾that he was not a marrying man” (461).
Later in the story, Faulkner makes reference to Emily’s possible necrophilia, although no direct statement is ever made. Homosexuality and necrophilia would in no way be topics to be discussed in Hawthorne’s time. As a modern writer, Faulkner had a considerable amount of freedom in what he wrote, and this freedom is reflected in his work. The short story began as fables and parables that evolved into more complex psychological studies of virtues, ideals, and values. Nathaniel Hawthorne’s “Young Goodman Brown” emphasizes these morals as he examines the inner workings of his main character’s thoughts as he encounters the devil and the townspeople. Faulkner also uses these techniques in his modern style of writing, however he tailors them to fit the more controversial issue of his generation while still maintaining a hold on the past generation he is examining. Over time, values and ideals stay the same, but the manner in which the technique is used evolves with current affairs and modern vocabulary.
Works Cited
Charters, Ann. The Story and Its Writer: An Introduction to Short Fiction. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
 
Hawthorne
Breaking out of Prison
Hawthorne’s view on life is wrong. He says that in the depths of human nature there is an inner world in which every human being is alone. Hawthorne’s background and they way he lived his life gave him this dark view on life. His father and grandfather did things that he did not like and Hawthorne tried to redeem the bad things they did and when he couldn’t he went into seclusion and explored his own heart. Every person is not the same as Hawthorne; I believe that with certain people their heart could be their prison but not the average person. People are not caged by their heart, their heart shows what kind of person they are. It is similar to Emerson’s “golden possibility,” Hawthorne did not meet his golden possibility and this is why he looks on things so darkly. He doesn’t try to look at the good things in life, he tries to see what is wrong with people and explain why. He only looked at himself though and he did not have much to be happy for and this is why he felt like he was in a prison. Most people if they look inside themselves they are happy and do not dwell on such things like Hawthorne does. A person’s cage is not their heart, their heart is something that lets them be free and go on about a normal day with a happy countenance on their face.
Your own heart could be your worst prison but every human being is not in that prison like Hawthorne was. Hawthorne is right that your heart is the worst prison a person could be in but everyone is that same situation. Hawthorne shouldn’t generalize so much, he was only looking at himself and not the world around him. He was too self-centered in his writings and quotes, he should have looked at other people and saw how they lived. Then he would see a world of bright colors and fun filled life, he could have lived life to the maximum but he chose to look at the dark side of things and keep living inside his prison instead of changing his life.
Hawthorne was correct in his view of his own life but incorrect is his assumptions of other people’s lives. He chose to live inside that prison instead of breaking out and living life to the maximum. I think that if you are in a prison it is possible to break out, you can always find a way to change things from the normal routine, all a person has to do is try.
 
347
In D.H. Lawrence’s “The Horse Dealer’s Daughter,” Mabel “did not share the same life as her brothers ”(195). Mabel Pervin was not close to her brothers, because there were personal and physical separations. Mabel was a plain, uninteresting woman. She seldom showed emotion on her face. In fact her face usually remained impassive and unchanged. Her brothers could be described as three handsome and well-spoken men. Mabel was independent, having taken care of the house for ten years without a servant. Even though they depended upon her, they seemed to have control over her. The Pervin brothers “did not care about anything” (195). They were poised and felt secure about themselves. Her brothers felt superior to her. “They had talked at her and round her for so many years, that she hardly heard them at all” (196). She would either give a neutral response to her brothers, or remain quiet when they talked to her. Instead of giving her encouragement, they teased her. This treatment could have led to her insecurity. They would tease her about becoming a maid or about her “bulldog” face. Her brothers were full of energy and very talkative. Mabel also seemed to be alone in the world. Unlike her brothers who had many companions, she had had no friends of her own sex. Sometimes it seemed that Mabel wanted to escape her life. One place Mabel felt secure and immune from the world was at her mother’s grave. “There she always felt secure, as if no one could see her” (200). Mabel was extremely devoted to her deceased parents, especially her mother. She was mindless and persistent. At the graveside, she had many different feelings. She seemed to be coming nearer to her own glorification. Also she would become remote and intent. She seemed to feel contact with the world that mother had lived. Her brothers, however, were the opposite of her. The memory of their parents faded away in their minds. They never spoke or showed emotion dealing with their parents. They had left the past behind them and waited for the future would bring. Mabel’s devotion led to an immense personal separation between the Pervin brothers and Mable. Mainly, because Mabel wanted to live her life just like her mother did, and her brothers had moved on with theirs.

										
Aunt Moody and the life she led						
Anne Moody was born in Mississippi on September 15, 1940, in Wilkinson County, Mississippi. Coming of age in Mississippi focuses primarily on the experiences of racism and daily struggles from a child’s perspective to the hardships of being black during these times of racial inequality and despair. Aunt Moody’s life of struggle is definitely an inspiration to everybody seeking a change in their society because she was an active NAACP and CORE member and activist fighting against injustice. Her purpose in writing this book was to help people understand her life and the continuous discrimination and hardships that blacks had to face during these horrible times of racism.

	Some are born with it and others have to earn it the hard way. This was exactly the way Anne Moody saw it. Even though she had to start working at an early age due to the fact that her father deserted her family and left them to support themselves by doing whatever they have to do to survive. Coming of age in Mississippi is filled with examples of the hatred that existed between blacks and whites in the 1960's and 70's not written by an individual simply analyzing the situation but by an individual exposed to racism first hand throughout her whole life and having to live with the fact that if you are black, you are less than white. Well, Anne Moody was always a rebel and did not agree with the thoughts that her mother had about the world, which are some reasons why she got involved in activities and movements trying to support and help the common black man.

	The book Coming of Age in Mississippi is not in any way based on statistical data but just on the experiences and views of the oppressed. Statistical data in this case does not really matter nor does it influence the cause in any way because the hatred toward another being or racism cannot be classified into a category as statistic data but rather a feeling or brainwashing which is exactly why this book was so great in explaining and showing the amounts of hate and rejection that blacks faced during these times. 

	Aunt Moody depends primarily on the facts and experiences that are going on around her and that have been influencing her ever since she had to work for white people to support her family. As a child she developed questions that have to do with race such as to why white people are all in good financial standing and why Anne and her family have to live in famine. Her mother was no help toward this subject whatsoever because she was aware of the cause and that it is the way it is. Anne challenged that point of view because of her mother’s ignorance and disbelief that change is inevitable but that it can be achieved if organization and the powerful will are present.
 
	This story is written in first person point of view as the author is telling the story about her life. Anne Moody clearly paints a picture of racial inequality in the South of the 1950's and 60's because she experienced it first hand. There is a huge difference in hearing about a problem and experiencing the problem first hand like Anne Moody did. Her choice of mythology is absolutely fabulous. As a matter of fact, had she used a different choice of writing, I would probably have not been as interested as I was. She tries to relate to the reader by painting pictures of the cruel injustice in the readers head and she achieves nothing but attention. The cruel and unjust life that Anne Moody leads during these times is somewhat similar to what every one of us goes trough on a daily basis. Such as fight for survival, the constant struggle to be better than the other, the racial discrimination that we still face today, etc. 

	It’s amazing how the reader can gather so much valuable information about injustice, the racial discrimination and the movements and resistance of blacks during these times of struggle by just Anne writing about her life and her experiences. Anne Moody had an exiting life and whatever she was doing; she was always in the middle of it. That is why the methodology that she is using is so extremely effective because racism cannot be analyzed it can only be experienced.

	I do not think that Anne Moody is missing anything in particular in this book. It is very organized and flows very smooth. The way of writing clearly gets the message across and all my questions have been nicely and in a timely manner been answered as I proceeded to read the book. The only thing that I personally would have wanted to see more of is less family issues and more of the issues at hand which is racism. But then I thought about this and came to the conclusion that it is all tied together. For example, the unjust treatments, the lack of opportunity, the segregations such as the one that occurred in the movie theater and other actions and causes that make me realize and come to the conclusion, that it is all in fact tied together and that without the actual family evaluation and background, this book would not hit the spot as much as it did with it. 

	Anne Moody has somewhat of a weird way of defining the problems in the book. As I was reading the book it seemed to me as if she was not even trying to state the problems but rather identify the situation to the reader and so that the reader can make up his/her own mind about the situation. She does not get into the details of the problems until later in the book after she has joined the activist groups where she clearly identifies the problems, the causes and the effects. Anne Moody’s sympathies and antagonism are aimed at both individual groups. They are aimed at blacks and also on whites. She is furious about the white supremacy and the way that the blacks are mistreated yet she is also disappointed and shows a certain form of hostility towards blacks because of their lack of interest and perhaps their fears of change. She is somewhat of an individualistic rebel that does classify herself with neither whites nor blacks due to her mixed feelings about northern whites and doubts about the direction of black liberation.

	The body of the book and the language of the book are not particularly written in any form that would identify them with a particular school of thought. The reason for this is that Anne Moody never thought of herself as a writer, but rather as a civil rights movement activist. The language of this book is not considered highly intellectual but is written for the main and if not sole purpose of showing the new generation how it was and what they could do to overcome this great discriminative society. 

	This book deals with one of the biggest issues of the century. It deals with primarily racism during the time of Anne Moody and the troubles and racist behavior that she was exposed to. I can relate this book to numerous experiences even in today’s world where supposedly racism has been overcome. It has not been extinguished, it has only been watered down so it is politically correct but the views and hate are unfortunately still the same.

	This book relates to some of my past experiences in the United States about a certain time when I was pulled over in Sacramento for falling into a category of Russian’s that have been anonymously tipped to the police. Automatically after they have noticed that I have a little bit of accent, they proceeded to act it out as if I was the criminal himself, this is very similar to the writings of Anne Moody where she writes that all blacks are automatically segregated into a category where they are only able to do the things that were supposedly “destined” to do, such as slave labor, etc. The book Coming of Age in Mississippi deals a great deal with everything that one goes trough on a daily basis. Hate, mistrust, obligations to certain people, discrimination are just some of the things that Anne writes about that occurred during her time and that are also occurring in today’s world.

	The story ends with Anne Moody being exhausted to death from rallying, protesting, marching, organizing that she was unsure of what she had accomplished. She had led a life before that where she ignored the fact that blacks were oppressed even though the thought always simmered in the back of her mind. She had lost everything including her materialistic objects and possessions and almost her health because of this fight for civil rights. The ending was really sad because people have sacrificed a lot for this cause like for example Mrs. Chinn and C.O, Moody and they have not even scratched the problem. The solution that Moody comes to is that she is aware of the fact that the white man controls everything and after her sitting on that bus heading for Washington and looking at little Gene, remembering how she was once just like him. She fought and fought and had not achieved anything and it bothered her because she was a person that accomplishes and survives and with Anne Moody being as smart, motivated, and with her fighter spirit soaring, this was a big task that she could not overcome and it bothered her, thinking if maybe she should give up the fight against the white man for the civil rights. 
I agree with Moody where she to a certain degree loses her interest in everything and is trembling with fear deep down inside, not knowing what to do or where to go. She had dedicated her life to the cause of fighting and achieving human civil rights and she was exhausted. Moody says in her other book and this quote really got me thinking about racism even more is “…that we made a few visible little gains; yet at the root, things always remained the same; and that the movement was not in control of its destiny, nor did we have any means of gaining control of it. We were like an angry dog on a leash that had turned on its master. It could bark and howl and snap, and sometimes even bite, but the master was always in control.” 


I Stand Here Ironing 
The short story by Tillie Olsen, I Stand Here Ironing, is an example of a mother daughter struggle. From what I understand, the young mother initially has a rough life, and can barely keep track of herself and her daugher, Emily. Because the mother must work to support them, she always put Emily into other people’s care, and even had to send her away for several different periods. This caused the distance between the mother and Emily to become greater, even to the point that Emily does not like physical affection such as hugs from her mother. The mother loves her daughter greatly, but she does not have the means of providing for her child as she would like to. As there are other children and husbands added to the family, Emily seems to move farther from them all.
As Emily grows older, the mother is regretful of the way Emily has grown up. The mother says, “We were poor and could not afford for her the soil of easy growth” (pg 29). The mother criticizes and blames herself for this, causing tension in their already stressful relationship. The mother is obviously suffering from guilt and wretched memories of Emily suffering. Emily, too, is suffering. We see her stiffness towards all that care for her, her quietness in her daily duities, and her feelings of worthlessness towards herself. She feels that she is extremely ugly and stupid, and constantly compares herself to her adorable younger sister, Susan, who has the perfect “Shirley Temple” image.
This is why, in the beginning of the story, someone who cares about Emily, is asking her mother how he/she can help Emily. And, as the mother stands there ironing, she contemplates her daughter and the troubles that they have. The constant motion of the ironing is like a sedative to the mother, as it calms her greatly. Because ironing is such a monotonous job, the mother has time to think her disturbing thoughts. Thus, the theme of coming to terms with and overcoming the past hardships emerges.
Personally, I have a hard time relating to the whole story. I can understand, but I can’t really internalize them. I suppose that it just is an example of a basic dysfunctional mother-daughter relationship. The story does a good job of showing a mother’s anguish over her daughter, and a depressed teenager who is struggling to overcome her unhappy childhood.
 
