A Analysis Of Jack London Novels
A literary Analysis of Jack London three most recognized works, Sea Wolf; The Call of the Wild; and White Fang. Jack London lived a full life, even though he died at the young age of forty. In his life time he experienced many things, and I believe that these experiences were the catalyst of his novels. Jack London was an oyster pirate, a government patrolman in San Francisco Bay, a sailor and an agrarian reformer, a seal hunter in the North Pacific and a gold prospector in the frozen Klondike, a war correspondent and a prizefighting reporter, a socialist soapbox orator who later became a lecturer at universities, a family man and landowner, and of course a true American writer. A critic by the name of Alfred Kazin once said "that the greatest story London ever wrote was the one he lived."
London had a hard life as a child and as a young man, in spite of this London grew to become one of Americas most popular and highly paid authors ever. He was not a baby boomer. This was not just an American thing, London was known around the world for his great adventure stories, that could be enjoyed by all ages. Londons life was diversified and so were his writings. Today, London is mostly known for his "dog stories", The Call of the Wild and White Fang. In addition to those great works London wrote many other stories and novels, all of which were published in the seventeen years that he wrote professionally. Londons writings vary in quality as well as in subject, his from the cheapest and worst kind of pieces to the beautiful works like The Call of the Wild and Sea Wolf. In this literary analysis the focus will be on Londons more well known and enjoyed works. Londons life defiantly coincides with his writing. Professor Earle Labor attributes London's success as a writer to three different factors: poverty- how London rose from the bottom all the way to the top, wanderlust- the fact that he spent a good portion of his life on the road gave him ample material to write about, and last but not least was, "the omnivorous appetite for reading that gave him his philosophical substance and sense of artistic form."
London was a complex individual whose character was made up of apparent contradictions. He was a declared socialist, but above all, a devout individualist. He believed in the politics and economics of socialism and decried the iniquities Of capitalism, but at the same time set out to succeed within that system. And he did, earning more money than any other writer before him. He appeared to be a well rounded man in all things, but he was plagued by ill health, and he consistently hurt his physical state by exerting himself to the utmost. He helped create a London myth by refraining from denying untrue stories of his superhuman exploits, but yet he strongly believed in being honest to everyone. He was a lover of humanity who wanted and fought for equality and justice for all, at the same time stressed the supremacy of the Anglo-Saxon race. This mixture in London prefigured the twentieth century with its dramatic inconsistencies, its political and social revolutions, and its great upheavals in world culture. For London broadcast his message of raw life with all its inherent flaws, ecstasies, and miseries at a time when the world was still digesting "Victorian pap", the sentimental stories of drawing room propriety that demanded a rigorous screening of anything unseemly. Jack London cracked the hypothetical bed of that literary world.
"The Call of the Wild and White Fang are two of London's best and most popular works" says Paul Horowitz . In both of these stories he stressed the fact that human and dog relationships. He probably started the common phrase "mans best friend". The Call of the Wild met with instantaneous success upon its publication and soon won for its author international fame. Today both works are in constant demand throughout the world by people of all ages. London set out to write a companion piece to an earlier story, Bitard. Bitard had represented the personification of absolute evil in a dog and with the goal of redeeming the species. This story wasn't complete so London began The Call of the Wild. He later said that the writing it' got away from me ... before I could call a halt." In the end, a masterpiece was created. The inspired quality of its language, which reads like a in depth poem, and its pulsing drive give the work a such a great twist.
On the surface, it is the adventure story of a dog, Buck, who is forcibly taken from an easy life in sunny California to the frozen North. He is put to work pulling sleds, Buck fights with self determination and finally " Buck took up the duties of leadership"( p. 40). He over comes the lead dog named Spitz in order to become the lead dog, but once Buck earns this position he leads a good sled team that is not ready for the new owners. The new team is sold to some new people who are not ready for the hardships of the Klondike, and they eventually starve to death. All of the dogs on the team die, except for Buck. Buck was rescued by a well known gold prospector by the name of John Thornton. Buck falls in love with John and will not leave his side. The one time Buck hears " The sounding of the call" (p. 63) and he leaves the camp of John Thornton to be with the wolves. When Buck returns to camp he finds John Thornton dead because of Indians. Eventually, he responds to a higher call and escapes to the wild and leads the wolf pack. The story, though, has meaning on psychological levels. Primarily, it is a metaphors about a human relating the journey of the hero as he passes through the trials of initiation and the stages of transformation into a higher nature, until finally there is greatness in both the dog as a whole and in his creation.
Following the success of The Call of the Wild, London decided to write a complementary work-the story of a dog taken out of the wild to become part of civilization. Thus, White Fang was created. White Fang is about wolf who's mother goes into a tribe of Indians because food is scarce. The cub ( White Fang) is taken in by a tribe but at the same time rejected by his mother. This is the first step in his hard upbringing. He is not friend to all of the other Indian dogs and even the Indians. He leaves camp with his master. He is sold to a new owner. This new owner is mean to the dog and does not let him live a desired life. This new owner makes white fang a fighting dog. The wolf is the champ of the region until he fights a small bull dog. "White Fang tore wildly around, trying to shake off the bulldog's body" (p. 167)He almost dies but the fight is broken up and white fang is rescued by a good man by the name of Weedon Scott. White Fang loves his new master and this is the first time he has experienced love for anything. Scott eventually has to go home to California and is about to leave White Fang. "White Fang was howling as dogs howl when their masters lie dead" (p. 186) White Fang did not want this to happen so he ran as fast as possible to the ferry and just made it. Scott goes back to California and White Fang lives there happily ever after. White Fang, however, lacked the depth of the former book, and, though well written and a wonderful novel in itself, was unable to have more than one level to its subject. It remains more a fable built upon ideas rather than an overwhelming vision of life as a whole. White Fang, representing the tried-and-true dog who was rescued by the love of civilized man, serves better as the complement or opposite to Bitard, the abysmal brute and outcast of civilization.
A major theme in both The Call of the Wild and White Fang- that appears throughout the author's writings is that of wild, essential natures pitted against civilization or cultivation. It is through this struggle that some find strengths they had not realized they possessed, others fall to forces greater than they; still others are unable to face the struggle at all. Buck, in The Call of the Wild, responds to his essential nature calling to him through all the acquired layers of civilized habit. For Buck, hesitation of crossing the thin line between the two sides is unnecessary because he turns away from civilization and determines to live in his primordial beast state. White Fang, on the other hand, is required to learn the habits of a civilized life, which means giving up his primordial nature to the laws of civilization. London faced this struggle himself in everything he did: "Life is strife, and I am prepared for that strife. If I had not been an animal with a logical nature, I would have stagnated or perished by the wayside." Probably the most well known body of London's work is his saga of the Klondike: of the white men who were there before the gold rush, of the chechaquos (the tenderfeet) who arrived at the time of the gold rush, and of the native Indian tribes who had been there since time immemorial and who would remain there long after the white men. They are the stories that brought attention to Jack London throughout the entire world. London spent less than a year in the North; in fact, he spent no more than two seasons in the specific region known as the Klondike. However, he has written, "It was in the Klondike I found myself. There nobody talks. Everybody thinks. You get your true perspective. I got mine." Many of these tales he heard from the old-timers who would open up to him in the bars at Dawson and other cities. The tales have their origins in fact, about facts that were already exaggerated by those North landers who were known for "their inability to tell the precise truth," but the finished product was always uniquely London.
While others have written tales of that area, no one but Jack London has written of it with such force and eloquence. If there is one element that London mastered best here, it is the sense of atmosphere. A vivid picture is presented of the North land, of the "white silence" where "all movement ceases, the sky clears, the heavens are as brass; the slightest whisper seems sacrilege, and man becomes timid, affrighted at the sound of his own voice." But not only that, London conjures up the sense of a brooding that envelopes the character, plot, and setting. One doesn't just read it; one breathes it, feels. it-lives it! Many consider The Sea-Wolf to be among the best sea stories ever written, for it is a moving and epic tale, much of which is London at his best. Not only did it achieve great literary success, but it also was effectively realized in several cinematic versions. The story ranks in the great tradition of one of London's literary influences, Herman Melville. Drawing upon his experiences seal hunting in the North Pacific, he created a story with a lot of realism. He put himself and his contradictory nature into the two opposing characters, Wolf Larsen, the ruthless and rugged individualist, the superman, and Humphrey van Weyden, the highly cultivated and virtuous gentleman. It is in the slash of these two forces that London gives vent to his innermost struggles: idealism versus materialism, conscience versus instinct. The novel's drama proceeds to a resolution of this elemental conflict through van Weyden's struggle to( fulfillment and mastery of life's forces and Larsen's ultimate deterioration. Ironically, the majority of the critics and the public misunderstood the work, thinking it a glorification of the superhuman and individualism, and London later wrote, ". . . I attacked Nietzsche and his super-man idea ... no one discovered that it was an attack upon the super-man philosophy. " Although London failed in reaching his purpose of striking gold in the Klondike during the gold rush of 1897-98, he certainly did strike a vein that not only enriched him during his lifetime but continues to enrich the world today. In the twentieth century, London's writings have had fluctuating fortunes: in the years following London's death in 1916, his popularity diminished some what, though his titles continued to sell. However, by 1936, London was dismissed critically and academically. One critic stated that "it is almost certain that his vogue is passing." Finally, beginning in the 1960's, there was a new reassessment and revival of London's works, as several studies, biographies, and reprints of many of his stories were published. It is true that London's writings have many shortcomings, and the weaknesses are not hidden. Some of his characters seem one-dimensional, especially the women; many of the men seem unbelievably heroic. His image of love and sex was romantic and sentimental. A master of the episode--the basis for his short stories-London could rarely integrate his longer works successfully. He felt that a higher purpose of his writing was as a vehicle for the expression of his political and social ideas; yet, in most cases, where the message predominated over the art, it tended to spoil the effect of his literary work. Incredible as it may seem, London felt that he lacked imagination, and one of his major fears was that he would run out of ideas. He found his plots and ideas by reading newspapers, by talking to people who related incidents in their lives, and by modifying plots taken from the huge storehouse of books he had read. Later in life, he actually bought story ideas from a fellow socialist, Sinclair Lewis, then a young reporter fresh out of college. London even managed to "borrow" from his greatest literary influence, Rudyard Kipling. Early in his career, London admitted: "There is no end of Kipling in my work, I have even quoted him. I would never possibly have written anywhere near the way I did had Kipling never been." He was even called the "Kipling of the North," but London outdid his master by the sheer mythic power and vision of his tales. And the works of London endure, some having become popular classics. His literary accomplishments outshine his faults and the criticisms leveled at his work. As the eminent London scholar Professor Labor states: ". . . even his worst work is readable. If he is sometimes clumsy, he is seldom dull. He is capable of moments of lyric intensity. He possesses, moreover, an exceptional feeling for iron. " Above everything else, London captured a universal force in his writing-a sense of life's ultimate mystery- which holds the reader spellbound. Because these stories are reprinted from many different sources-some from the anthologies compiled by London, there are inconsistencies and occasional archaisms in spelling, terminology, and punctuation. Ironically, London wished to be remembered for his works of philosophical, sociological, and political importance, which he considered superior to his works of literary merit or "for children". This opinion was shared by a few early critics, one of whom went so far as to say that London would "take his place in the encyclopedias as a philosopher and a propagandist rather than as a literary artist." Yet it has been his literary achievements that have exerted influence, largely unacknowledged, on the generations of writers who succeeded him. This influence can be seen in the works of Robert Service, Ring Lardner, Hemingway, Steinbeek, Kerouac, and Mailer. Today, Jack London is celebrated for his great contribution to literature, and rightly so. It is believed that London was the best American writer on his given topic (the struggle through life). London had a charm that brought the reader to enjoy the region of focus. He intertwined the story of the uncharted Klondike with the story of life and how he lived it. Weather through the story of a dog or a man London knew what life was all about even though he lived a relatively short life. One of his great theories was "Eat or be Eaten", or "Do or Die." London also believed in the statement from Darwin called survival of the fittest as is seen in Sea Wolf.
I will leave you with this thought from the master Jack London himself, "It is so much easier to live placidly and complacently. Of course, to live placidly and complacently is to not live at all . . ."
Bibliography
1. London, Jack: The Call of the Wild, White Fang, and other stories. edited by Andrew Sinclair, New York N.Y. : Penguin Books, 1981
2. London, Jack: The Call of the Wild, White Fang, Sea Wolf, and forty short stories. edited by Paul J. Horowitz, New York N.Y.: Portland House, 1998
3. Stone, Irving: Sailor on horseback, Gardencity, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1977 4. Walker, Dale: Jack London and Conan Doyle: a literary kinship, Bloomingdale In.: Gaslight Publications, 1989
 

 
        There is something about Charles Dickens' imaginative power that defies explanation in purely biographical terms. Nevertheless, his biography shows the source of that power and is the best place to begin to define it.
	The second child of John and Elizabeth Dickens, Charles was born on February 7, 1812, near Portsmouth on England's south coast. At that time John Dickens was stationed in Portsmouth as a clerk in the Navy Pay Office. The family was of lower-middle-class origins, John having come from servants and Elizabeth from minor bureaucrats. Dickens' father was vivacious and generous but had an unfortunate tendency to live beyond his means. his mother was affectionate and rather inept in practical matters. Dickens later used his father as the basis for Mr. Micawber and portrayed is mother as Mrs. Nickleby in A Tale of Two Cities.
        After a transfer to London in 1814, the family moved to Chatham, near Rochester, three years later. Dickens was about five at the time, and for the next five years his life was pleasant. Taught to read by his mother, he devoured his fathers' small collection of classics, which included Shakespeare, Cervantes, Defoe, Smollet, Fielding, and Goldsmith. These left a permanent mark on his imagination; their effect on his art was quite important. dickens also went to some performances of Shakespeare and formed a lifelong attachment to the theater. He attended school during this period and showed himself to be a rather solitary, observant, good-natured child with some talent for comic routines, which his father encouraged. In retrospect Dickens looked upon these years as a kind of golden age. His first novel, The Pickwick Papers, is in part an attempt to recreate their idyllic nature: it rejoices in innocence and the youthful spirit, and its happiest scenes take place in that precise geographical area.
	In the light of the family's move back to London, where financial difficulties overtook the Dickens's, the time in Chatham must have seemed glorious indeed. The family moved into the shabby suburb of Camden Town, and Dickens was taken out of school and set to menial jobs about the household. In time, to help augment the family income, Dickens was given a job in a blacking factory among rough companions. At the time his father was imprisoned for debt, but was released three months later by a small legacy. Dickens related to his friend, John Forster, long afterward, that he felt a deep sense of abandonment at this time; the major themes of his novels can be traced to this period. His sympathy for the victimized, his fascination with prisons and money, the desire to vindicate his heroes' status as gentlemen, and the idea of London as an awesome, lively, and rather threatening environment all reflect these experiences. No doubt this temporary collapse of his parents' ability to protect him made a vivid expression
 on him. Out on his own for a time at twelve years of age, Dickens acquired a lasting self-reliance, a driving ambition, and a boundless energy that went into everything he did.
	At thirteen Dickens went back to school for two years and then took a job in a lawyers office. Dissatisfied with the work, he learned shorthand and became a freelance court reporter in 1828. The job was seasonal and allowed him to do a good deal of reading in the British Museum. At the age of twenty he became a full-fledged journalist, working for three papers in succession. In the next four or five years he acquired the reputation of being the fastest and most accurate parliamentary reporter in London. The value of this period was that Dickens gained a sound, firsthand knowledge of London and the provinces.
	Dickens was very active physically. He loved taking long walks, riding horses, making journeys, entertaining friends, dining well, playing practical jokes. He enjoyed games of charades with his family, was an excellent amateur magician, and practiced hypnotism. One tends to share Shaw's opinion that Dickens, in his social life, was always on stage. He was like an eternal Master of Ceremonies, for the most part: flamboyant, observant, quick, dynamic, full of zest. Yet he was also restless, subject to fits of depression, and hot tempered, so that at times he must have been nearly intolerable to live with, however agreeable he was as a companion. 
	In view of his very strenuous life it was not surprising that he died at fifty-eight from a stroke. At his death on June 9, 1870, Dickens was wealthy, immensely popular, and the best novelist the Victorian age produced. He was buried in the Poet's Corner of Westminster Abbey, and people mourned his death the world over.
 



 
        There is something about Charles Dickens' imaginative power that defies explanation in purely biographical terms. Nevertheless, his biography shows the source of that power and is the best place to begin to define it.
	The second child of John and Elizabeth Dickens, Charles was born on February 7, 1812, near Portsmouth on England's south coast. At that time John Dickens was stationed in Portsmouth as a clerk in the Navy Pay Office. The family was of lower-middle-class origins, John having come from servants and Elizabeth from minor bureaucrats. Dickens' father was vivacious and generous but had an unfortunate tendency to live beyond his means. his mother was affectionate and rather inept in practical matters. Dickens later used his father as the basis for Mr. Micawber and portrayed is mother as Mrs. Nickleby in A Tale of Two Cities.
        After a transfer to London in 1814, the family moved to Chatham, near Rochester, three years later. Dickens was about five at the time, and for the next five years his life was pleasant. Taught to read by his mother, he devoured his fathers' small collection of classics, which included Shakespeare, Cervantes, Defoe, Smollet, Fielding, and Goldsmith. These left a permanent mark on his imagination; their effect on his art was quite important. dickens also went to some performances of Shakespeare and formed a lifelong attachment to the theater. He attended school during this period and showed himself to be a rather solitary, observant, good-natured child with some talent for comic routines, which his father encouraged. In retrospect Dickens looked upon these years as a kind of golden age. His first novel, The Pickwick Papers, is in part an attempt to recreate their idyllic nature: it rejoices in innocence and the youthful spirit, and its happiest scenes take place in that precise geographical area.
	In the light of the family's move back to London, where financial difficulties overtook the Dickens's, the time in Chatham must have seemed glorious indeed. The family moved into the shabby suburb of Camden Town, and Dickens was taken out of school and set to menial jobs about the household. In time, to help augment the family income, Dickens was given a job in a blacking factory among rough companions. At the time his father was imprisoned for debt, but was released three months later by a small legacy. Dickens related to his friend, John Forster, long afterward, that he felt a deep sense of abandonment at this time; the major themes of his novels can be traced to this period. His sympathy for the victimized, his fascination with prisons and money, the desire to vindicate his heroes' status as gentlemen, and the idea of London as an awesome, lively, and rather threatening environment all reflect these experiences. No doubt this temporary collapse of his parents' ability to protect him made a vivid expression
 on him. Out on his own for a time at twelve years of age, Dickens acquired a lasting self-reliance, a driving ambition, and a boundless energy that went into everything he did.
	At thirteen Dickens went back to school for two years and then took a job in a lawyers office. Dissatisfied with the work, he learned shorthand and became a freelance court reporter in 1828. The job was seasonal and allowed him to do a good deal of reading in the British Museum. At the age of twenty he became a full-fledged journalist, working for three papers in succession. In the next four or five years he acquired the reputation of being the fastest and most accurate parliamentary reporter in London. The value of this period was that Dickens gained a sound, firsthand knowledge of London and the provinces.
	Dickens was very active physically. He loved taking long walks, riding horses, making journeys, entertaining friends, dining well, playing practical jokes. He enjoyed games of charades with his family, was an excellent amateur magician, and practiced hypnotism. One tends to share Shaw's opinion that Dickens, in his social life, was always on stage. He was like an eternal Master of Ceremonies, for the most part: flamboyant, observant, quick, dynamic, full of zest. Yet he was also restless, subject to fits of depression, and hot tempered, so that at times he must have been nearly intolerable to live with, however agreeable he was as a companion. 
	In view of his very strenuous life it was not surprising that he died at fifty-eight from a stroke. At his death on June 9, 1870, Dickens was wealthy, immensely popular, and the best novelist the Victorian age produced. He was buried in the Poet's Corner of Westminster Abbey, and people mourned his death the world over.
 


	A Christmas Carol, although occurring at a different time period than today, still holds values and lessons that are important in society today.  The main character, Ebeneezer Scrooge, starts off having no feelings for others or any Christmas spirit, but changes from his gloomy, dark appearance to a carefree, child-like persona at the end.  Dickens shows in A Christmas Carol that personal greed will lead to peril, while kindness and generosity lead to personal happiness.
	One of Dickens social concerns was the lack of sympathy or feelings that people have toward other people.  In the story,  Scrooge had no feelings toward his family or friends and held a strictly professional relationship with them, creating a hostile bond between them.  For example, Bob Cratchit's wife does not like the idea have toasting to Scrooge because of the way he treats his long time employee.  Also, Scrooge is looked down upon by the charity collectors because he simply states that they should die to accommodate the others who need it.  Secondly, society has a negative view on Scrooge because of his attitudes and shows no feelings or compassion for Scrooge in the future.  For example, the thieves are able to steal Scrooge's possessions because no body cares about Scrooge or his things.  Also, the businessmen that Scrooge does business with regularly show no feelings about his death and go to his funeral simply for food.  Dicken's shows a way to resolve the problem by simply treating others how you wa
nt them to treat you.   At the end Scrooge's attitude changes and changes in how society will treat him are shown to be inevitable.  
	Another social concern is the priority of family over money and personal gains.  Money proves to be the golden idol that is worshipped by the people in the Christmas Carol, but also proves to destroy lives.   For example, Scrooge gives up a chance at having a loving family when he chooses money over his girlfriend Belle, who turns out to have a happy family with another loving husband.  Also, Scrooge's old business partner, Marley, put his life to waste because of money and suffers pain in his afterlife which could have been easily avoided.  A Christmas Carol also shows that people can be happy without money, just as long as the love is genuine.  For example, Scrooge's nephew married happily not to a wealthy lady, but a middle class ordinary woman and are happy together.   Also Bob Cratchit's family, despite poverty and lack of food, still have a loving environment that keeps the family together and happy.  Dickens shows that simply sacrificing for friends and family can bring happiness and joy.  Scrooge doub
les Bob Cratchit's salary while showing his appreciation and visits his nephew resulting in a stronger bond that money can not buy..
	Another social concern that Dicken's portrays in A Christmas Carol is that people do not know the true meaning of Christmas;  Scrooge throughout the story is given opportunities to display Christmas acts but requires the assistance of the three spirits.  First, he was invited to dinner at his nephews, but he bluntly refused calling Christmas a humbug.  Family is the most important part of Christmas and should always take priority.  Scrooge already failed at an attempt at family and had a chance to make amends with his sister's son.  Secondly, Scrooge also refused to donate any money that he hoards to the needy when the charity collectors come to collect.  Even though Scrooge has more than enough to generously donate and spread around , he refuses to donate saying that he pays enough in taxes.  Christmas should be a time of generosity and a time to help those who are not as fortunate.  In the story Scrooge realizes his lack of compassion and donates generously and takes up his nephews offer.
	Dicken's A Christmas Carol shows universal themes that society should learn to live by everyday and not just holidays or special occasions.  Scrooge learns these lessons with the visit of three spirits and a journey into his painful past and future so he could see his attitude toward people and societies attitude towards him; this allows him to change and create a new path for himself other than the one set out.  A Christmas Carol makes readers aware of their personal attitudes and presents a way to change for the better.


 
A Doll House
Translation Trouble
In the play "A Doll House" the main character, Nora, is in a situation where she is caused to act, emotionally and physically, as a doll to please her husband. Nora has to be very sneaky and conniving in order to be perfect and talked down to by her husband. The translation of this play from Norwegian was a little difficult. The title can either be translated as "A Doll House" or as "A Doll's House". Many people believe either title fits the theme of the play.
I believe that the title "A Doll's House" may fit because it is Nora being a doll in order to please her husband Torvald. Torvald sees her as his toy, not as a human equal to himself. Torvald gives his wife pet names such as "spend thrift" and "squander bird". This shows just how controlling he really is. Nora just plays along, keeping secrets from Torvald in order to please him at any expense. This was a very common situation during the era whom this play was produced. Nora is smart and capable of a lot more but she lets herself be held back in order to be the perfect wife for Torvald.
The title "A Doll House" would not fit the play because this states that everyone in the house is a doll. However, Nora is the only character truly pretending to be what they are not. This title would work if everyone was trying to give off an image that wasn't true, such as Nora did. If Nora is a doll then all the other characters would be the humans playing with her, causing her to do extra ordinary tasks such as forgery and lying. The best title is definitely "A Doll's House" because Nora is the only character acting in a different manner in order to please her power hungry husband, Torvald. Even if she was conniving it was all in good intentions. It takes a very loving wife to go out of her way in order to make sure that her husband isn't burdened down with the expenses of a trip that saved his life. However, Torvald doesn't really see his Nora as his wife emotionally but as his little sex pet. This is what Nora finally realizes at the end of the play when Torvald is only worried about himself and what everyone else thinks about him. Nora realizes that she has been Torvald's doll and will no longer be and she leaves him. Just the act of a woman thinking for herself, let alone leaving her husband over it. This was extremely rare during the era in which this play was produced.
The title "A Doll's House" really does best express the true meaning of this play. The meaning of course is that a woman's life should never be made up by what her husband says. Nora of course fitting to Torvald's liking in order to please him no matter what it took. She then sees just what kind of a husband Torvald really is causing her to leave him. A very revolutionary play.
 

A Lesson Before Dying
In A Lesson Before Dying, Mr.
Grant Wiggins' life crises were the center of the story.
Although he was supposed to make Jefferson into a man, he
himself became more of one as a result. Not to say that
Jefferson was not in any way transformed from the "hog" he
was into an actual man, but I believe this story was really
written about Mr. Wiggins. Mr. Wiggins improved as a
person greatly in this book, and that helped his relationships
with other people for the most part. At the start of the book,
he more or less hated Jefferson, but after a while he became
his friend and probably the only person Jefferson felt he
could trust. The turning point in their relationship was the one
visit in which Jefferson told Mr. Wiggins that he wanted a
gallon of ice cream, and that he never had enough ice cream
in his whole life. At that point Jefferson confided something
in Mr. Wiggins, something that I didn't see Jefferson doing
often at all in this book. "I saw a slight smile come to his
face, and it was not a bitter smile. Not bitter at all"; this is the
first instance in which Jefferson breaks his somber barrier
and shows emotions. At that point he became a man, not a
hog. As far as the story tells, he never showed any sort of
emotion before the shooting or after up until that point. A
hog can't show emotions, but a man can. There is the
epiphany of the story, where Mr. Wiggins realizes that the
purpose of life is to help make the world a better place, and
at that time he no longer minds visiting Jefferson and begins
becoming his friend. Mr. Wiggins' relationship with his Aunt
declined in this story, although it was never very strong. His
Aunt treated him like he should be a hog and always obey,
yet she wanted him to make a hog into a man. His Aunt was
not a very nice person, she would only show kindness
towards people who shared many of her views, and
therefore was probably a very hard person to get along with.
The way Mr. Wiggins regarded his relationships most likely
would have been different were he white. Mr. Wiggins feels,
and rightly so, that several white men try to mock or make a
fool of him throughout the story. This was a time of racial
discrimination with much bigotry, so if the story took place in
the present, it would be much different. In fact, there
probably would have not even been a book because in the
modern day, and honest and just jury would have found him
innocent due to the lack of evidence. It wasn't really clear
what sort of situation Mr. Wiggins was in regarding money,
but he could not have been too well off because he needed
to borrow money to purchase a radio for Jefferson, and he
commented about the Rainbow Cafe: "When I was broke, I
could always get a meal and pay later, and the same went
for the bar." I suppose he had enough money to get by, but
not much extra. As the book progresses he probably had
less money to work with due to the money he was spending
to buy the radio, comic books, and other items for Jefferson.
Mr. Wiggins seemed to be well respected by the
community, and he felt superior to other African Americans
because he was far more educated than they were. That
makes Mr. Wiggins guilty of not practicing what he
preaches, although Jefferson probably made it clearer to him
that the less intelligent are still humans with feelings. At the
start of the book, Mr. Wiggins did not understand this. He
went to visit Jefferson because Miss Emma and his Aunt
more or less forced him to do it. He really had no motivation
except that he would be shunned by his Aunt if he did not
comply. The whole process of Mr. Wiggins' development
and the plot of this story both spawn from the crimes of two
characters with no other relevance to the story. After the
police found Jefferson at the liquor store with the dead
bodies all around, he was of course taken to trial and the
times being what they were, he was convicted with very little
doubt that he would be found innocent. Miss Emma, his
godmother was afraid that he would die a hog and have
lived a meaningless life. She wanted him "Not to crawl to the
white man, but to get up and walk to him at the end." At first
Mr. Wiggins was not very concerned about Jefferson, he
just wanted to pass the time he had to spend with him, but
then after a while he began to think of what it would feel like
to be a dead man, and what he could do to make the time
Jefferson had left to be the best they could for him. This was
the greatest achievement Mr. Wiggins accomplished in the
entire book. He managed to be able to have pity upon
Jefferson without empathy. After the point in which he
discussed the ice cream and the radio with Jefferson, and
Jefferson admitted for the first time that he was more than a
hog, Mr. Wiggins truly cared. Mr. Wiggins developed
greatly during the course of this story, along with other
characters featured in the story. Vivian met new people and
increased the quality of her relationship with Mr. Wiggins,
Miss Emma finally got to see someone stand for her, Tante
Lou learned that she had a decent nephew after all, and
Jefferson got off of his four legs and stood. The End!
 

A Raisin In the Sun Staci King Lorraine Hansberry A-2 PCP Penguin Books 10-29-99 1988 Rpt. 2 
 A Raisin In the Sun is a drama play that takes place “sometime between World War II and the present.” The family lived in Chicago’s Southside. The town was very “dusky” and as each day passed the nights got colder. The Younger family lived in a small old apartment with only two small rooms. The little one had to sleep on the couch every night. The house needed a great amount of fixing up; everyone was ready to move out. Ruth Younger is about thirty years old. She is married to Walter Lee Young and they have a son named Travis. “ Ruth is a pretty girl, even exceptionally so, but now it is apparent that life has been little that she expected, and disappointment has already begun to hang in her face. In a few years, before thirty-five even, she will be known among her people as a ‘settled woman.’” Ruth tries to do everything she can to make her family happy. She just wants the best for them. Walter Lee Younger is a “lean, intense young man in his middle thirties, inclined to quick nervous movements and erratic speech habits and always in his voice there is a quality of indictment.” He works as a chauffeur, but his dream is to one day open up a liquor store. Walter has a very bad temper and tends to say things he doesn’t mean. Walter and his wife have been getting into many fights. He has a really bad temper. Many times when Walter gets upset he goes out and gets drunk. Walter likes to spoil his son Travis. Beneatha Younger is Walter’s smart, younger sister. She is about twenty years old and “ as slim and intense as her brother. She is not as pretty as her sister-in-law, but her lean intellectual face has a handsomeness of its own.” She also gets her bad temper from Walter. Beneatha wants to become a doctor when she gets older. She says everything that is on her mind and it never seems like she is happy. Beneatha finds most everything people say to be offensive to her some how. Lena Younger, known as Mama, is in her early sixties. “ She is one of those women of a certain grace and beauty who wear it so unobtrusively that it takes a while to notice. She has wit and faith of a kind that keeps her eyes lit and full of interest and expectancy. Mama is, in a word, a beautiful woman. Her speech is as careless as her carriage is precise-she is inclined to slur everything-but her voice is perhaps not so much quiet as simply soft.” She is full-bodied and strong. Her husband died a short while ago. Mama works very hard to try and help her family have the best. She especially wants Travis to have the best. Travis Willard Younger is a “sturdy, handsome little boy of ten or eleven.” He is very well mannered and tries to have fun just like every other kid does. Willy Harris and Bobo are the two men who are going to help Walter invest in starting a liquor store. Early one Friday morning, Ruth, who was in a bad mood, woke up Travis so he could get ready for school. Then she woke up Walter so he wouldn’t be late for work. Ruth and Walter got into an argument because Walter wanted to invest in a liquor store. Ruth knew they didn’t have the money to do it. Walter started going off on how colored women never support their husbands and their dreams. When Beneatha got up they stopped arguing. Walter went from arguing with Ruth to bothering Beneatha about becoming a doctor. All furious because he was getting no where, Walter slammed the door when he left. Mama got up to see what all the commotion had been. As Ruth told her what happened, Mama went around picking up after everyone like she always did. Ruth asked Mama about the check. It seemed to be the only thing everyone had been thinking about lately. She told Mama about Walter’s idea of investing in a liquor store. Mama replied, “We’re not business people and I don’t want selling liquor to people on my ledger this late in life.” Mama noticed Ruth wasn’t looking very good. Ruth said she was just tired. Ruth asked what Mama planned on doing with a ten thousand-dollar check. Mama said she wanted to put some money away for Beneatha to go to college and she thought about buying a nice house with a backyard and everything. As Mama and Ruth’s conversation continued, Beneatha came out of the bathroom. Beneatha got upset when Mama and Ruth were teasing her so she said how she didn’t believe in God. Mama was very upset by this statement. Mama slapped Beneatha in the face and demanded she say, “In my mother’s house there is still God.” Mama walked off and Beneatha got up and left. While Mama was watering her plants she asked Ruth to sing a song, but got no response. “She turned around at last to see Ruth had slipped quietly to the floor, in a state of semiconciousness.” Bright and early Saturday morning, everyone was up and cleaning the house, except for Travis whom was staring out the window. Travis was worried about his mother and wondered where she went. Mama told him she just went to run an errand. After he talked to Willy Harris on the phone, Walter left to go see Willy in person. Travis went outside to play. Beneatha asked Mama where Ruth really went. Mama told her Ruth went to the doctor. Ruth came home and told Mama and Beneatha she was two months pregnant. Ruth hollered for Travis to come inside. When Travis got inside he started telling all about he blood and guts form the rat he had been chasing. Ruth quickly grabbed him and covered his mouth. “Beneatha came quickly and took Travis. She pushed him gently out the door, while he strained to see what was wrong with his mother.” The doorbell rang. It was the moment they had all been waiting for. The postman had arrived with the “big” check. Travis rushed downstairs and came back up with an envelope. After opening it up and examining it carefully, Mama told Ruth to put the check away. “Mama didn’t look at Ruth when she said it. Her eyes seemed to be seeing something somewhere very far off.” Mama asked Ruth if she went to see the woman doctor today, but before she could her answer, Walter walked in. The first thing he did was ask about the check. As Walter started talking about the liquor store, Mama told him he should talk to his wife. Walter refused so Mama yelled at him and said, “There ain’t going to be no investing in no liquor stores.” As Walter attempted to leave Ruth tried to go with him, but he didn’t want her company. All upset, Ruth went to the bedroom. Mama and Walter got into a huge fight. Mama ended up telling him Ruth was pregnant and that she thought Ruth might be thinking about getting rid of the child. Walter didn’t believe his wife would do a thing like that. Mama said, “When the world gets ugly enough-a woman will do anything for her family. The part that’s already living.” Ruth opened the bedroom door and stood there. She had been listening to the entire conversation. Ruth said she would have an abortion and that she had even gave the doctor a five-dollar down payment. “There was total silence as Walter stared at his wife and as Mama stared at Walter.” Absolutely speechless, Walter picked up his keys and his coat then walked out. Mama got her hat and left seconds after Walter. Later that day Beneatha came out in her new dress from Asagai. Her and Ruth were dancing to music when Walter came home drunk. With the alcohol affecting him quite a bit, Walter pretended he was a great leader, while running around the room and talking in a language of his own. Beneatha left and went on a date. Walter started to talk in a violent manner. Ruth tried to get him to talk to her, but Walter just wouldn’t do it. She finally gave up and headed toward bed. As Ruth walked off, Walter began to talk to her seriously. Ruth turned around to go talk to him. When Mama finally came home, Walter asked where she had been. Mama ignored him and began making conversation with Ruth. After Walter asked for about the tenth time, Mama said she had gone to town to tend to business. Walter began to think she had done something crazy with the money. Ruth was angry when Travis came home late so she told him to go straight to bed, but Mama stopped him. She asked Travis if he knew what she had done with the money. He said he wasn’t sure so Mama told him she went out and bought a nice house for him to live in. Ruth was excited to hear this wonderful news. Ruth took Travis out of Mama’s arms and sent him off to bed. Walter wouldn’t look or talk to anyone about the news. Mama told them all about the new house in Claybourne Park and how they would be the only colored people living there. Ruth went to tell Travis all about the new house. Mama tried to explain to Walter why she did what she did. “Bitterly, to hurt her as deeply as he knew possible, Walter said, ‘So you butchered up a dream of mine-you- who always talking ‘bout your children’s dreams…’” Mama tried to respond, but before she could get a chance, Walter was already out the door. “Mama sat alone, thinking heavily.” Friday night, a few weeks later Walter’s boss called and said that if Walter didn’t come to work the next day then he would be fired. It turned out Walter hadn’t been at work for the past three days. When Mama asked where he had been, he said he had just been driving or walking for hours. Then he would stop somewhere and watch everything. After that he would go to the Green Hat and get drunk while listening to the music. “Mama felt responsible for Walter being this way.” She handed him an envelope and told him to put three thousand dollars in a savings account for Beneatha to go to school and that he could spend the rest of the money however he pleased. Mama got up and left as Walter just sat there and stared at the envelope. While finishing packing, the doorbell rang. It was a white man from Clayborune Park. The man wanted to talk to Mama, but since she wasn’t home he talked to Walter. He introduced himself as Karl Linder, then went about trying to convince them not to move by saying they were not wanted there, and that people who live at Claybourne Park were willing to buy the house back from them for more then what the Mama had originally paid. Angered by what Mr. Linder was saying, Walter threw the man out. Mama came home. They told her how a man had come to welcome her to Claybourne Park and how they couldn’t wait for the Youngers to move in. Mama knew what the man had really come for. The doorbell rang. It was one of Walter’s friends, Bobo, who was also investing in the liquor store. Bobo told Walter how Willy took off with all the money that was to be invested in the store. Bobo apologized for everything then left. Then Walter told Mama he never put the three thousand dollars in the bank for Beneatha. Out of complete anger, Mama went over to Walter and slapped him across the face several times. Walter came out of his room frantically looking for something. Beneatha tried to make Walter angry, but he just ignored her. He finally found a small piece of white paper he had been looking for then quickly left, slamming the door behind him. When Walter came back he told everyone he had called Mr. Linder and asked him to come over so he could accept the man’s offer to buy the house back. When Mr. Linder showed up Walter did exactly the opposite. The man left rather disappointed. The movers showed up and packed everything downstairs. Mama stood alone in the living room, examining the place carefully. She took one last final look, grabbed her plant, and went out the door for the last time. The conflict was between colored people and white people. This conflict came about when the Younger family decided they were going to move into the Claybourne Park area. Only white people lived in that area. A man from the “welcoming committee” even came over and tried to convince the Younger’s not move by offering to buy the house back from then for more then what Mama had originally paid for it. Other colored people who had lived in the Claybourne area were bombed or other harmful things happened to them. The theme of the play was never give up. One should always follow his or her heart and try to fulfill their dreams. Walter wanted the best for his family and tried to do everything possible to make a better life for his son. He would have given his life for Travis to have a better one. Mama also felt the same way as Walter. She gave up a large sum of money to help her children and grandson have better lives. Each character in this book had a dream he or she wanted to fulfill. By hard work, effort, support, and faith each person could make their dream become reality. Since the Youngers did not give up, in the end, they got the new home they wanted and greatly deserved. The reading level of this play was average. The author explained things in a great amount of detail. After reading over half of the book, it is still in only the second day of the story. I found the book to be really sad. The way the family was treated, I found to be unfair. The book’s value was educational and had a good message. I really enjoyed reading this book. Although the book was very well written, I don’t think it needed to be so detailed. Overall I really enjoyed this book, and I would recommend it to all my friends.
 

A Tale of Two Cities
A Tale of Two Cities has long been one of Charles Dickens' most favored books. This book opens in the year 1775 by contrasting two cities: Paris, France and London, England. Throughout this story various characters are "recalled to life", meaning that they have had a new chance at life. Dr. Manette is clearly mad after being in prison for eighteen years. When Lucie, the Dr.'s daughter, and Mr. Lorry eventually nurse the doctor back to a healthy state and out of his insane state they had "recalled him to life." Dr. Manette was nursed from an insane state with no real life to a sane one with a very functional life. In doing this Lucie and Mr. Lorry, in a way, gave Dr. Manette's life back to him or "recalled him to life." Another instance in which someone is "recalled to life" involves Charles Darnay. Charles Darnay is on trial for treason in England(Book 2, Ch.2-4). C.J Stryver and Sydney Carton are representing Darnay in this trial. Sydney Carton saves Darnay from death in this trial with his miraculous wits. Through this Darnay is given another chance at life ,and therefore was "recalled to life." The last and most significant instance of someone being "recalled to life" is found in the last chapters of this book. Sydney Carton has recently switched places with his look alike, Darnay, and is awaiting the guillotine. While Sydney awaits his death he thinks, "It is a far, far better thing that I do, then I have ever done, it is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known." Through these words Sydney recognizes that by sacrificing his life for Darnay, a loved one of Lucie, he will be doing the best thing that he has ever done and can do. Sydney is finally satisfied with himself, he is no longer a drunken fool, but a hero that now can live or die with himself. By dying, and saving Darnay for Lucie, Sydney Carton is "recalled to life." Throughout this book "recalled to life" has been the most important theme. Almost all of the main characters in this novel were "recalled to life." This theme was the most important because it allowed us, the readers, to see the characters trates being used by them and to understand how much a character would do for another. When Carton represented Darnay on trial and saved his life we saw how smart Carton was. In the last instance of "recalled to life" we saw how much Carton really felt for Lucie when he saved Lucie's husbands life in return for his own. The theme "recalled to life" is seen throughout this novel and should be recognized as one of the most important.

A Wack On The Side Of The Head
Acute Ambiguity
Roger von Oech, the author of A Whack on the Side of the Head, makes an unusual offer that thinking at random will increase the efficiency at which ideas become more abundant. This particular concept is certainly an original way to come up with new, fresh problem solving techniques. Ambiguity in the world can help new ideas flow for anyone when looked at in a creative way.
Chapter seven begins by explaining an example that would make the case against using ambiguity. In fact, the title of chapter seven is “Avoid Ambiguity”. While it is true that vague statements leave questions unanswered, the traditional idea behind gathering information is to find specific details and clear communicated information. Ambiguous communication can be dangerous in some situations where the consequences of not understanding the complete picture can cause harm. Therefore, communication of specific information is needed in some situations, however, the author then goes on to explain how the ambiguous statement or event can lead to more accurate and applicable solutions.
In the event that a problem would arise in a company or social gathering that would call for a creative solution, random thinking techniques would be incredibly applicable. The author gives great examples of creative solutions and brainstorming techniques from the simple event such as a fundraiser all the way to complicated matters such as national defense strategies (von Oech, 1990). Many situations can be complimented by this type of thinking process. However, finding places to begin within a random pattern can be challenging. Based on the random, ambiguous thinking technique, my wife and I used this method for a creative solution to figuring out how to decorate our nursery. We followed the different steps that the author suggests in order to come up with creative ideas. First, we asked ourselves the question, “What do we want out of the nursery?” Then, we opened the dictionary and picked a random definition to begin our thinking process. Next, we applied the random definition to the original question and came up with a nursery theme that the whole family can be proud of!
Another original concept that this book brought to the attention of the reader is that of foolishness. There are definitely benefits to conformity such as civilized societies and workplaces, however, the author states that very few original ideas come about in a setting of conformity. This creative and even uncomfortable technique can be very effective.
In a world of conformity like our United States military, the lack of originality becomes overly abundant. The ideas that flow in a non-traditional setting produce beautiful art, timeless music, and priceless entertainment. It never hurts to ask the opinion of the least likely candidate for the answer because it is difficult to determine what the opinion will be. This concept was eluded to on an episode of Star Trek. In this situation, the Enterprise landed on a planet that had a genetically superior race of humans. This race had no deformities, health problems, or imperfections. The planet was in danger of a chemical that would wipe out the entire existence of the humans on this perfect planet. The irony was that the solution to this planet’s problem came from a device that helped a blind man on the Enterprise see. If the people of the Enterprise were perfect like the people on the planet, the idea for solving this problem would have never been found. Roger von Oech’s book was a true source of idea stimulation. Creativity is such an important part of life both personal and professional, however, it is often overlooked or even stifled by the way in which we ask ourselves to solve problems. Many of concepts in this work can feel risky or even uncomfortable to perform, yet that is the part of each person that can bring out the best ideas. Reference
Von Oech, Roger. (1990). A Whack on the Side of the Head. New York, NY: Warner Books, Inc.
 

Adventures of Huckleberry Finn 
The conflict between society and the individual is a very important
theme portrayed throughout Mark Twain's The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn. Many people see Huckleberry Finn as a mischievous boy who is a bad
influence to others. Huck is not raised in agreement with the accepted ways
of civilization. He practically raises himself, relying on instinct to guide him
through life. As seen several times in the novel, Huck chooses to follow his
innate sense of right, yet he does not realize that his own instincts are more
right than those of society. Society refuses to accept Huck as he is and isn't going to change its
opinions about him until he is reformed and civilized. The Widow Douglas
and Miss Watson try to "sivilize" Huck by making him stop all of his habits,
such as smoking. They try to reverse all of his teachings from the first twelve
years of his life and force him to become their stereotypical good boy. However, from the very beginning of the novel, Huck clearly states that he
does not want to conform to society. "The Widow Douglas she took me for
her son, and allowed she would sivilize me...I got into my old rags and my
sugar hogshead again, and was free and satisfied." (page 1) Huck says this
shortly after he begins living with the Widow Douglas because it is rough for
him to be confined to a house and the strict rules of the Widow Douglas. Huck’s father, a dirty and dishonest drunk, was also a problem. He
was so angry that his son could read, that he severely beat him and then
forced him to stay in a secluded cabin. Huck then devises a plan to escape
and heads down river were he teams up with Jim, a runaway slave. The theme becomes even more evident once Huck and Jim set out
down the Mississippi. As they run from civilization and are on the river, they
ponder the social injustices forced upon them when they are on land. The
river never cares how saintly they are, how rich they are, or what society
thinks of them. The river allows Huck the one thing that Huck wants to be,
and that is Huck. Huck enjoys his adventures on the raft. He prefers the
freedom of the wilderness to the restriction of society. Also, Huck's acceptance of Jim is a total defiance of society. Society
automatically sees a black person, and even further, slaves, as inferior. They
never think of slaves as human beings, only as property. A slave, such as
Jim, could be the nicest, most caring person you have ever met, but since he
is a slave he is presumed incapable of such things. Ironically, Huck believes
he is committing a sin by going against society and protecting Jim. In Chapter sixteen, we see, perhaps, the most inhumane action of
society. Huck meets some men looking for runaway slaves, and so he comes
up with a story about his father being on the raft with small pox. The men
fear catching this disease and instead of rescuing him, they give Huck money
and advise him not to let it be known of his father's sickness when seeking
help. These men are not hesitant to hunt slaves, yet they refuse to help a sick
man. This is contrasted to Huck's guilt felt for protecting Jim when he
actually did a morally just action. Huck's acceptance for his love for Jim is shown in Chapter thirty-one. Huck writes a letter to Miss Watson to return Jim, yet he ends up ripping the
letter and wishes to free Jim. "'All right, then, I'll go to hell'-and he tore it
up." (page 214) Here, we see that Huck concludes that he is evil, and that
society has been right all along. The ending is perhaps most disappointing because it seems as though
through all the situations that Huck is growing up and accepting his innate
ideas of right, when in fact he hasn't grown at all. In the last chapter after
everything has been cleared up and set straight, Aunt Sally wishes to adopt
Huck and unfortunately, Huck is against that idea. "But I reckon I got to
light out for the territory ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally she's going to
adopt me and sivilize me, and I can't stand it. I been there before." (page
294) In Mark Twain's novel The Adventures of Huckleberry, Huck finds
himself living in a society that doesn't fit him. Huck is considered an
uneducated backwards boy, constantly under pressure to conform to the
"humanized" surroundings of society. Everywhere he looks there are people
who value things that he sees as meaningless. Huck feels trapped and begins
his journey, with Jim, down the river in an effort to find someone or some
place that will bring him happiness. Huck and Jim's adventures give us a
chance to examine the society they live in. The conflict between society and
the individual is one of the most important themes of this novel. Throughout
the story we learn that Huck functions as a more noble person when he is not
confined by the hypocrisies of civilization.
 

718
Airframe 56 passengers are injured. Three are dead. People are shocked, terrified, confused. What happened on TPA flight 545? Why did it happen? Could it have been prevented? A very popular late night news show has the power to totally destroy an innocent airplane manufacturer. A race between a high executive working for Norton, and a news reporter from Newsline to outwit one another has begun. [this is where you would insert your own review here if needed. mine was on if this book should be made into a move or not.] This could be a great book for a movie. It has good characters, a dramatic plot, and it is fast paced. However, good books are often known to be awful movies. But I think that if it was done right it would be good. It has a dramatic, gripping scene at the beginning of the book that “hooks” you. It is when the aircraft starts diving and climbing at incredibly steep angles. People and luggage are flying everywhere for quite a long period of time. The movie would have a great opening that would get the audience “hooked” and concerned about what caused the fatal oscillations. And about a third of the way through the book, before you are done worrying about what went wrong with the flight, the main character Casey Singleton has her life threatened. At this point you know this character well, and you like who they are. You begin to worry about the character and read to see what happens to her. There are also a few good chase scenes that keep you reading, and I think would work well if this book was made into a movie. One is in the airplane hangar. She climbs up some scaffolding and comes to a dead end so she plays Tarzan and swings down on a power cable. There is another good part that still stands out in my mind. It was when she was in the airplane, in total darkness, and she is being followed. The unknown stalker pushes her out of the airplane, only for her to land in the safety netting. I think this scene would also work out well if acted out in a movie. Not only could a movie be made easily from this book just because of its fast moving plot, action sequences, and concern for the characters, it is a very informational piece of literature. That information could be incorporated into the movie. Michael Chrichton had to have done extensive research to make this book so realistic. It helped me understand how much stress airplane manufacturers are put under just to make sure their planes are safe. Also it was informing on how airplanes worked and how precise these flying pieces of metal were. It also showed how the media can influence such a vast amount of people in one news broadcast. And the broadcast doesn’t even have to be informational or based on hard facts, all it had to do was scare the public, which was not hard to do. This book also is one that makes you think. If made into a movie it would be like a mystery show. You have to help the main character figure it out. It is not one of those books where you are frustrated because you know what the character should do, in this case you are frustrated because you don’t know what they should do next. The book will lift your hopes up and then slam you onto the floor. You think Casey has it figured out but she doesn’t. There are so many details and fine print. You have to read between the lines, pay attention to detail and think ahead. Even though, you still may not figure it out until the very end. This book has the qualities to be made into a movie. A movie that could be watched more than once. The book has suspense, thrill, a fast moving plot, it is very informational. This book has it all. Even a happy ending. If there is a good movie to be made out there, it is Michael Chrichton’s Airframe. I personally know of two other books of his that were successfully made into films. Jurassic Park and Sphere are two that come to mind. This book has potential as well.

All Quiet on the Western Front
All Quiet on the Western Front is by Erich Maria Remarque. This book was an extraordinary war story. Remarque uses excellent words and phrases to describe crucial details of the book. Remarque had first hand experience because he was a German in World War I. So he expresses his opinions through Paul the main character of the book. One of the strongest themes in this book is that war makes man inhuman. From the author's point of view soldiers was often compared to various non¬living objects that were inhuman. The soldiers are compared to coins of different provinces that are melted down and now they bear the same stamp(236). Remarque thinks that the soldiers mind state has been changed from when they were school boys the stamp being the mark of a soldier changing them forever. Also soldiers are compared with "automatons" or more commonly referred to as robots(105). Remarque uses this analogy to give the impression that the soldiers are enduring the same feeling over and over again as if they were inhuman. In this classic war story Remarque also describes the soldiers as inhuman wild beast in addition to the non¬living objects. Paul states that when soldiers reach the zone where the front begins they are transformed into "instant inhuman animals"(56). Remarque is saying that the zone is like a magical line; once they cross it there not the same person as they were on the other side of the line. He says "We have become wild beasts. We do not fight we defend ourselves against annihilation"(103). Here Remarque states that the German soldiers are only defending what they have not attempting to take what they don't. Paul says that they become something like men again after they get the food we need(106). Remarque is implying that the drive for food changes them into terrifying wild beasts but when they get the food they change back into humans again.
 

Allegory of the Cave
A report I had to do on Plato's Allegory of the Cave. Plato
was born 427 B.C. and died 347 B.C. He was a pupil
under Socrates. During his studies, Plato wrote the
Dialogues, which are a collection of Socrates' teachings.
One of the parables included in the Dialogues is "The
Allegory of the Cave". "The Allegory..." symbolizes man's
struggle to reach understanding and enlightenment. First of
all, Plato believed that one can only learn through dialectic
reasoning and open-mindedness. Humans had to travel from
the visible realm of image-making and objects of sense to
the intelligible or invisible realm of reasoning and
understanding. "The Allegory of the Cave" symbolizes this
trek and how it would look to those still in a lower realm.
Plato is saying that humans are all prisoners and that the
tangible world is our cave. The things which we perceive as
real are actually just shadows on a wall. Just as the escaped
prisoner ascends into the light of the sun, we amass
knowledge and ascend into the light of true reality: ideas in
the mind. Yet, if someone goes into the light of the sun and
beholds true reality and then proceeds to tell the other
captives of the truth, they laugh at and ridicule the
enlightened one, for the only reality they have ever known is
a fuzzy shadow on a wall. They could not possibly
comprehend another dimension without beholdin! g it
themselves, therefore, they label the enlightened man mad.
For instance, the exact thing happened to Charles Darwin.
In 1837, Darwin was traveling aboard the H.M.S. Beagle in
the Eastern Pacific and dropped anchor on the Galapagos
Islands. Darwin found a wide array of animals. These
differences in animals sparked Darwin on research, which
lasted well up to his death, culminating in the publishing of
The Origin of Species in 1858. He stated that had not just
appeared out of thin air, but had evolved from other species
through natural selection. This sparked a firestorm of
criticism, for most people accepted the theory of the
Creation. In this way Darwin and his scientific followers
parallel the escaped prisoner. They walked into the light and
saw true reality. Yet when he told the imprisoned public
what he saw, he was scoffed at and labeled mad, for all the
prisoners know and perceive are just shadows on a wall
which are just gross distortions of reality. Darwin walked the
path to understanding just like the escaped prisoner in "The
Allegory of the Cave." Plato's parable greatly symbolizes
man's struggle to reach the light and the suffering of those left
behind who are forced to sit in the dark and stare at
shadows on a wall.

Angela’s Ashes Portrays Low Income Working Class Families 
 
While reading Angela’s Ashes in my junior year of high school I thought about how life must have been for other families with low incomes during the Great Depression. Although Angela’s Ashes takes place mainly in Ireland during the Potato Famine, I believe that what the McCourt family went through was very similar to the struggles that the working class experienced in the United States in the 1930’s. The book outlines the life of Frank McCourt being Catholic and Irish in Limerick, Ireland. Throughout Angela’s Ashes the daily struggles for food, shelter, medical care and Frank McCourt describes education while he looks back on life. One small paragraph in the book stands out as very moving. In this paragraph McCourt explains his view of his childhood. He says, “When I look back on my childhood I wonder how I managed to survive at all. It was, of course, a miserable childhood: the happy childhood is hardly worth your while. Worse than the ordinary miserable childhood is the miserable Irish childhood, and worse yet is the miserable Irish Catholic childhood." This paragraph not only gives his perception of growing up poor, Catholic and Irish, but also gives a little background on his general view of life from a child’s eyes.
In this paper I will not only explain the significance of this book on the current media trend, but also compare and contrast McCourts life with the lives of many working class Americans during the same time period. There are many parts of the book, which I feel could be very significant in relating the main points of working class life.
I am planning on tying in articles about the Great Depression and the Potato Famine as well as giving the startling similarities. In one instance McCourt writes, “No, no matter what she can’t bear the thought of putting us in an orphanage. That might be all right if you had the like of Boys’ Town in America with a nice priest like Spencer Tracy but you could never trust the Christian Brothers out in Glin who get their exercise beating boys and starving the life out of them. Mam says there’s nothing left but the Dispensary and the public assistance, the relief and she’s ashamed of her life to go and ask for it. It means you’re at the end of your rope and maybe one level above tinkers, knackers and street beggars in general.” Frank McCourt came to the United States when he was nineteen years old and proceeded to get a college education and become an English teacher. He later wrote Angela’s Ashes and won the Pulitzer Prize for this amazing book. The book was also turned into a movie, which I feel gives an even more accurate picture of growing up as poor and working class.
 

575
Animal Farm: The Comparison of Napoleon and Keno The two books, Animal Farm, and The Pearl, consist of many different things. One book tells how an entire farm of animals can talk and think like human beings. It also tells you how they become the equivalent of the russian government by trying to take over the farm. The other story ,however, is about a poor man and his family trying to make ends meat with a small fishing job which pays off for him eventually when he finds a giant pearl. What do these two books have in common with each other? Power, wealth, and greed. In the book Animal Farm, we find the main character, Napoleon, as a young boar with ambition and a chance to win the struggle of leadership of his pears and enemies. In the story a leader or leaders must be found to represent the animals. Because the pigs are believed to be the most intelligent of the animals they are chosen to lead. As the book goes on you start to notice a change in Napoleon's behavior. He starts to betray his fellow animals and allie with the humans. Being that the others look up to him so much, they do not really notice this. Because he is in such a hunger for power and wealth he doesn't want to share it. This is why he has his own partner, Snowball, banned from the farm. This not only gave him more power but it also ensured him the support of the other animals. They believed that he was trying to save them from being exposed by a spy (Snowball) when the real spy was in fact Napoleon . In the story The Pearl, a man and his family who were extremely poor are barely surviving with what they have. Keno, the man, had a job as a fisherman. He used his most prized possession which was his boat. At the job one day he finds a giant pearl which to him is worth a lot of money. Things start to look up for Keno and his family. This pearl becomes a part of Keno and he will protect it at any cost. As the story goes on Keno begins to change. He starts to revolve his whole life around this pearl. He begins to change from a poor but proud family man into a greed and power driven psycho with a pearl. The question that still stands is "What do theses two characters have in common?" Well some way or another, each character becomes greedy and power hungry. Napoleon seeks the power and wealth of ruling the farm and the humans. Keno becomes wealthy and completely pulls a 180 transforming form a nice guy to a greedy money hungry pig. "PIG" That is the whole point behind Animal Farm. Pigs were chosen to lead the animals and it is believed by many the Russian rulers are all pigs. You can find many comparisons between two different characters. Sometimes it can be positive and sometimes it can be negative. Either way the comparison will not be out in the open. You have to think hard and dig deep to find it. Also, greed and power often corrupt people in the end. If i ever become rich and powerful I would either give some of it away or have someone else look over it for me.

Another Antigone
A Humorous Distillation of Antigone by Maurice Sagoff This poem is quite successful in getting the plot across to the reader. Unfortunatly, that is all he can get across because of his beleif that, "inside every fat book is a skinny book trying to get out." Sargoff cannot have character descriptions, themes, or any real detail in his "skinny book" because of his beleifs. Sargoff leaves off why Polynices should not be burried and why his brother, who is not even menchoned, can be burried. This is important to building the feelings of contempt towards Creon and an understanding of what Antigone is doing. Also, because this is a "Humorous Distillation," the tone of the play is lost. Instead of being a dramatic play about obeying a higher law, it is a comical, rhyming poem about what happened. This may cause it to lose the impact it had. Sargoff reduces important and pivotal points in the story to a sentence such as, "Creon wilts, and tries to bang a U-ee." This sentence does not tell of Creon's attempt to repent for what he! has done by burrying Polynices and then going to free Antigone. Even if Sargoff gets all of the plot across, that is not enough to tell the whole story. Aristotelian Unities Yes, Antigone does follow the Aristotelian Unities. The play occurs in the same place and roughly the same time. Things that happened before the play or outside of the place, was told by a messenger or a character themself. The action was all centered around Antigone's actions. Her actions were the sole cause of everything that happened. Greek Tragedy Antigone does follow the Greek definition of tragedy. Tragedy is a story or play that has a signifigant conflict of morals, with a noble protagonist displaying a tragic flaw that is their strength but leads to their downfall. The exposition of the story is when Antigone is talking with her sister and we learn of what has happened. The turning point of this play is when Creon tries to mend his wrongs by burying Polynices and freeing Antigone. Antigone herself is the tragic hero because she dies for what she believes morally right. Antigone's tragic flaw is that she has only sees her point of view which leads to her death. The denouement of this story is everybody dying and then Creon realizing what he has caused. The song of the story is attenden to throuhg the chorus' comentating on what is happening or through direct dialog. The thought of this play is wether it is right to follow heavenly laws or ones made by man. Antigone is the tool through which Sophocles tells th! at one should obey the law of the gods and human laws. The complication of the story is done through Creon misunderstanding what is happening. Creon thinks at one point that the guard has been bribed when actually he is telling the truth. Creon's recognition is when he finaly sees what has been happening and that Antigone is innocent and that Polynices should be buried.


Another Hamlet
The real question is Hamlet crazy or is he just acting it. In my opinion there are many things throughout the play that make me tend to believe that he is crazy. When Hamlet enters Opheliu's room and she has the question if he is truly mad or if he is just acting. Hamlet is proven o be crazy in this play and statements and actions he days and does are the thing that prove this. There are many things that make me tend to beleive that Hamlet is crazy. There are also many things that he does that does not want to make you think that he is crazy but for others to think this of him it just make me want to beleive even more that he is crazy. One of the things that shows that he is crazy is that he contemplates suicide or as Hamlet says "self slaughter", this is definately a true act of pure craziness. Hamlet also wants to believe that he see's this ghost of his father that is odd because when he is in the room with his mother he starts to talk to the ghost and the mother does not see it. Also when he walked into Ophelius's room he just stood there staring at her for a long time and no normal person does this. This is just another example of one of the examples that proves that Hamlet is crazy. Hamlet also has a lot of evil in him like when he killed Polomius for no reason when he was behind the curtains in his moms room. Also when he see's his Uncle Claudius praying he is deciding whether or not it is a good idea to kill him. These are just other examples how I think that he is crazy. Another importnt thing to show that he is crazy is that he has no fear like when he started to follow his father apparation even when Horatio said don't go because it could be dangerous. He also does things that are very odd and random like when Ophelius and him were wathcing the play he just put his head in her lap and started mumbling about nothing. Hamlets image has also got very scrubby by the way he dresses and the way he looks. Ophelius said that when she saw him she was scared. These are all examples about why I think that Hamlet is crazy and this is why Ophelius thinks that he is crazy when He came into his room. Hamlet claims to his fathers ghost and to Horation that he is only acting crazy. Anyone that acts to be crazy really is crazy. So this does not make me change my mind that Hamlet is crazy. There are many instinces that make you want to believe that he is acting crazy but if you really think about it he really is crazy. In this play Hamlet has problems and by all the actions that he does only poves this theory.

Another Huckleberry Finn
Superstition in Huck Finn In the novel The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain, there is a lot of superstition. Some examples of superstition in the novel are Huck killing a spider which is bad luck, the hair-ball used to tell fortunes, and the rattle-snake skin Huck touches that brings Huck and Jim good and bad luck. Superstition plays an important role in the novel Huck Finn. In Chapter one Huck sees a spider crawling up his shoulder, so he flipped it off and it went into the flame of the candle. Before he could get it out, it was already shriveled up. Huck didn't need anyone to tell him that it was an bad sign and would give him bad luck. Huck got scared and shook his clothes off, and turned in his tracks three times. He then tied a lock of his hair with a thread to keep the witches away. "You do that when you've lost a horseshoe that you've found, instead of nailing it up over the door, but I hadn't ever heard anybody say it was any way to keep of bad luck when you'd killed a spider."(Twain 5). In chapter four Huck sees Pap's footprints in the snow. So Huck goes to Jim to ask him why Pap is here. Jim gets a hair-ball that is the size of a fist that he took from an ox's stomach. Jim asks the hair-ball; Why is Pap here? But the hair-ball won't answer. Jim says it needs money, so Huck gives Jim a counterfeit quarter. Jim puts the quarter under the hair-ball. The hair-ball talks to Jim and Jim tells Huck that it says. "Yo'ole father doan' know yit what he's a-gwyne to do. Sometimes he spec he'll go 'way, en den ag'in he spec he'll stay. De bes' way is tores' easy en let de ole man take his own way. Dey's two angles hoverin' roun' 'bout him. One uv'em is white en shiny, en t'other one is black. De white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sil in en gust it all up. A body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch him at de las'. But you is all right. You gwyne to have considable trouble in yo' life, en considable joy. Sometimes you gwyne to git hurt, en sometimes you gwyne to git sick; but every time you's gwyne to git well ag'in. Dey's two gals flyin' 'bout yo' in yo' life. One uv 'em's light en t'other one is dark. One is rich en t'other is po'. You's gwyne to marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by. You wants to keep 'way fum de water as much as you kin, en don't run no resk, 'kase it's down in de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung." (Twain 19). Huck goes home and goes up to his room that night and Pap is there. In Chapter ten, Huck and Jim run into good luck and bad luck. The good luck was Huck and Jim finds eight dollars in the pocket of an overcoat. After dinner on Friday, they are lying in the grass, then Huck ran out of tobacco, so he went to the craven to get some, and finds a rattlesnake. Huck kills it and curled it up and put it on the foot of Jim's blanket. Night came and Jim flung himself on the blanket and the snake's mate was there, and it bit Jim on the heel. Jim tells Huck to chop off the snake's head, then skin the body of the snake and roast a peice of it. He took the rattles off and tied them to Jim wrist. Jim said it would help him. Huck says "I made up my mind I wouldn't ever take a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that I see what had come of it." (Twain 52). As one can see Superstition plays an important role in the novel Huck Finn. Huck killing the spider which is bad luck, the hair-ball that tells fortunes, and the rattle-snake skin that Huck touched are examples that brought bad luck to Huck and Jim in the novel The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.

Another The Crucible
In the play "The Crucible" by Arthur Miller, Miller displays how easily people can be fooled by the innocence of youth. He also exposes the gullibility of common people, even people such as Danforth and Hathorne, who play the role of the "wise" judges. A single girl, Abigail, causes the downfall of the whole society. Abigail scares the younger part of the society into submission. The people who must decide the fate of the rest of the society, see only her innocence and truthfulness. Abigail seeks the affection of John Proctor, a farmer who is respected and feared by most of the townspeople. Proctor makes a foolish mistake when he has an affair with Abigail. Later on he regrets having this affair, and he wants Abigail to forget that it ever happened. Abigail does not want to let him go, she wants him to decide between his wife, Elizabeth Proctor or her, Abigail. Abigail is deprived of attention and she seeks it from the community. Abigail's parents were killed when she was younger, and her uncle, Reverend Parris, does not pay very much attention to her. She attempts to give people the impression that she is a very tough person. John Proctor and Elizabeth Proctor know what she is really like and wants to have nothing to do with her. In Act One she says, "I saw Indians smash my dear parents' heads on the pillow next to mine, and I have seen some reddish work done at night, and I can make you wish you had never seen the sun go down." From this we get the impression that she might be a little bit mentally disturbed. The way that she acts in front of John Proctor reveals that she is not as sure of herself as she would like us to believe. Mary Warren decides to confess to the fact that they are all lying, and that she never saw any spirits. In front Abigail, however, she breaks down and returns to her side. When Judge Danforth calls for Abigail to be summoned to court he is told that she has stolen her uncle's money and left the town. Despite this fact Judge Danforth does not think ill of it. Judge Danforth feels so secure in his position that he will not accept the fact that he can be wrong. During the trial Danforth is completely sure that he

As the roads became larger and because they provided much more direct and accessible routes to cities, people had more options about where to live. The construction of Levittowns across the country exemplified another regularization phenomenon partially resulting from the interstate system. William Levitt, the mastermind behind the plan, bought thousands of acres of land outside cities such as New York and Philadelphia. On these vast stretches of property, Levitt organized the construction of entire towns. Construction of the roads induced the construction of suburbs and “suburbia,” such as Levittown, (originally called “Island Trees”) which drastically influenced the culture and social expectancies of the 1950s. 
Construction started in the late 1940s with the passage of the GI Bill to aid the soldiers returning from home. The increase of men coming home led to a serious housing shortage and the GI Bill provided money for housing as well as education. The need was so great Cape Cod and Ranch homes on Levitt's plots went up in a single day. Contractors merely reconstructed the prefabricated houses. With the help of Levitt, the baby boomers formed communities of these Cape Cod and Ranch houses winding along on roads with a village green that served as the central part of town. All of the homes looked similar, but it did not matter to the residents, satisfied and content to just have a house.
William Levitt promoted his construction well and people bought the homes before he built them. Homes within a community represented the ideal set up for the returning veterans and their families. These people wanted an appropriate place to start their new post-war life. By the 1950s and the end of the Korean War, a strong nationalistic and patriotic fever swept the country. It all culminated in a desire for the “blessings” of life - a happy family, a pleasant house, a job, and the materialistic benefits that came along. As the first planned community in the United States, Levittown provided all these things and helped to define the middle class American life. It was the stereotypical 1950s community with mowed, green grass and happy nuclear families. Levittown, Long Island represented the quintessential auto age suburb, what with the largest entirely white community in the United States. Most of its 70,000 residents held federally guaranteed mortgages.
But similar to the contradictions presented by other architectural developments along the road, Levittown was not all that it seemed. The outskirts of cities had become, “interminable wastelands dotted with millions of monotonous little houses on monotonous little lots and crisscrossed by highways lined with billboards, jazzed-up diners, used-car lots, drive-in movies, beflagged gas stations, and garish motels.” (God's Own Junkyard... Peter Blake, p. 24) In her song “Little Boxes,” folk singer Malvina Reynolds described the little box houses of Levittown and its residents as "all just the same." She described how everyone living in the houses all lived the same monotonous life and how everything always ended up the same, just like the houses. In Levittown, all the homes did look the same. Even all of the gardens were manicured similarly. Residents only hung laundry out to dry on specified hangers and only on certain days. If someone disregarded their grass for too long, Levitt would send people in to cut the grass and send the bill later. A facade of independence and liberation from the ways of the earlier era persisted, but Levittowns appeared just as rigid and standardized as most other elements of the 1950s. Incorporation of Levittown was a direct result of the Interstate Highway System.
The highways, for the sake of productivity and efficiency, generally skirted the cities, and which created a discrepancy between what remained inside versus outside the newly created border. Introduction of the interstate augmented industrial as well as suburban development. Yet, by this point in the 1950s, people associated the city with crowds and poverty, and so outside of the interstate boundary became the more attractive place to live. Again, political and social expectations fueled the move towards conformity (regarding residency) and distinct political boundaries formed. The interstates provided more access to cities from points outside, thus opening the door for the rise of “suburbia,” or the lifestyle of outlying towns. William Levitt capitalized on this concept and built the planned communities just off the interstate access roads.
I think the spread of suburbia brought more good than bad. It brought a feeling of community, a feeling of belonging, and the great feeling of being a part of something “new.” Today there are still subdivisions where the houses are built the same, the families are the same, and the jobs are the same. Levittown was merely the beginning.
 

Beauty and the Beauty in the Beast

Once upon a time…
The classic opener for any fairy tale, which is no different in the case of Beauty and the Beast. Fairy tales were meant to teach our children life lessons that society, at the time, deems important to learn. They teach us the difference between right and wrong, black and white, good and bad, light and dark, and beauty and ugly. There are many different variations and names to Beauty and the Beast. This famous fable has been passed down and integrated into our culture time and time again, each time adding different lessons that were thought to be important in that day and age. What has changed over the years? How have the fairy tales of Beauty and the Beast affected the children of yesterday, today and tomorrow? I hope to show how fairy tales, more importantly Beauty and the Beast, is helpful to children in many ways, but mostly by teaching them the way that they should act in society. There are three very important lessons that Beauty and the Beast teaches us. First, and probably, the biggest one, is that beauty is only skin deep. It is what is on the inside that counts. Second, which ties in with the first lesson is, don’t be too greedy because you will only be looking for the beauty on the out side. Finally, do unto others as you would have done to you, this will make you beautiful on the inside were it counts.
In this paper I am going to take a look at two versions of Beauty and the Beast. Although The Lady and the Lion and Beauty and the Beast are very different, the base story is there. True beauty is determined by what is on the inside and not on the outside. In addition vanity and riches will not make you happy. Finally, to be truly beautiful you must treat people how you would want to be treated.
Before I get into those versions of Beauty and the Beast, I want to talk about those who don’t think this fairy tale should be seen or heard by children. One version of this tale is by none other than Disney. Kathi Maio said, “Disney’s version features a beast who looks ugly and acts even uglier… What a heart-warming fable! Why it’s a regular training film for the battered women of tomorrow!” (194). At first I thought, wow she has issues, but when I looked deeper I found what she meant. Not to say that I agree with her by any means. It is a fairy tale for a reason! These things can never and will never happen. Fairy tales are how children learn basic fundamentals of society. Children don’t know how to read that deep into the movie and even if they do, as a parent, you should be there to show them the difference between right and wrong. In the Disney version there is singing. Every Disney movie has it. I think it is a good thing; it adds to the fact that this is just a fairy tale and that these things have not and will not ever happen (For those who take things too seriously *coughKathiMaiocough*). Madame Le Prince De Beaumont wrote one of the first versions of Beauty and the Beast in 1745. She was a teacher and her intent was to teach her students moral lessons. She felt so strongly in these lessons that she turned them into a fairy tale to help her students grasp them. The story starts off with a merchant who had three daughters and three sons. The two older girls were very arrogant because they were rich. The sisters would not marry because they wanted to be wed to someone who was very rich. Beauty was the youngest and she had many suitors, but she refused to marry because she felt she was too young and she wanted to stay with her father longer. The merchant loses his wealth and is forced to move to the country. The two older sisters were devastated and lost all of their suitors. Beauty on the other hand was so nice that her suitors still wanted to marry her. A while after their move to the country, the merchant got a note that said his stuff had arrived. This would make them rich again. “When the sisters got word of this they begged their father to bring them back dresses, furs, hats, and all sorts of trinkets” (217). Beauty asked for nothing but a rose. The father left and returned poorer than when he left and lost his daughter to the beast. Every night Beauty and the Beast would eat dinner and talk. Beauty became fond of the Beast. Her father grew ill and so she went and visited him. Her sisters were envious of her because they had both married men that were too vain and witty. Beauty on the other hand lived with a good person. She returned to the castle three days late because of her greedy sisters, and found the Beast dying because he thought that Beauty had left him. She had decided to marry him because she cared for him so much. When she told him this the dark castle turned bright. When Beauty looked back down at he Beast he was a prince. Her family was taken there too. The fairy that had turned the prince into the Beast turned the sisters into statues. The sisters were forced to stay that way until they learned their lesson about vanity and wit. Beauty and her Beast, now a prince live happily every after.
You can see that even though this was written in 1745, many of the lessons and morals are still useful in today’s society. First of all this shows that beauty is only skin deep. What is on the inside is what really counts. “You are very generous,” said Beauty. “I am well pleased with your kind heart; when I think of that, you no longer seem so ugly to me” (221). Beauty is falling in love with the person on the inside. She also said, “There are many men more monstrous than you, and I prefer your form to those men who hide a false, corrupt and ungrateful heart” (221). This really cuts to the quick. People that are bad are just plain ugly on the inside and in turn you don’t want to be around them. As a child I would really began looking at the insides of my friends to see if they are beauty or the beast.
In this version though, Beauty also has two sisters and they are constantly looking for wit and fortune and are very greedy. “The two eldest said they would never marry unless they could find a duke, or at least a count” (216). Now if that isn’t greedy, I don’t know what is. At the end of this they are both turned into statues and will remain that way until they learn their lesson. Greed will get you no where.
The Lady and the Lion, was written by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, it in 1812. The Grimm brothers had traveled around Germany and listened to the older women’s tales. This was very different from the French version of Beauty and the Beast, as you will see. The Father takes a long journey. “The eldest sister wanted pearls, the second diamonds, but the third said, ‘Dear father, I should like a singing, soaring lark’” (208). Beauty’s father tries to get her a lark from a tree. The Beast in this story happens to be a lion. Beauty must go live with the Beast. Once she got there, she learned that the lion turned into a man at night. They fall in love and get married. The lion was then turned into a dove and must fly for seven-years and Beauty followed her love everywhere because he drops feathers and blood. After the seven-years are up, he is turned into a lion and forced to battle a dragon. Beauty saves the lion only to lose him to an evil princess. Then she must trade the treasures that the sun and the moon gave her to rescue the Beast. Then they live happily ever after. The same message is coming out in this version of Beauty and the Beast. Beauty goes and lives with the Beast. “On her arrival she was so kindly received…. Shortly after they were married” (209). Finding out that beauty is only skin deep, she falls in love with that man and not the Beast on the out side. This something that children need to learn. I my opinion isn’t taught enough in today’s world. One of the other big points was that material items will not make you as happy as love. In the story the evil princess wanted the dress given to Beauty by the sun, and the golden chickens, given to beauty by the moon, so bad that she was willing to do anything. When the evil princess asked whom she could buy these wonderful gifts from, Beauty, simply said, “Not with gold or goods, but with flesh and blood” (211). The princess was so greedy that she was willing to give up her husband for material things, which lead to the prince leaving the evil princess and following his true love to safety. So in the end, the princess lost her soon to be husband and all she had to show for it was a dress and some chickens. I don’t know about you but I know I wouldn’t be happy with that.
The most important thing I learned from both of these versions, don’t piss off the fairy!! In both versions there is a fairy or a wizard involved and the man is always turned into the beast because he did something wrong. In the Beauty and the Beast, the fairy says, “come and receive the reward…. You shall become a great queen…. As for your sisters I know your hearts and the malice they contain. You will become two statues….you shall stand before the gate of your sisters castle, for I can see no greater punishment than for you to witness her happiness” (224). The point behind all of the magic is, do unto others as you would have done to you. The two sisters received what they had done to others, back to them. This motto is something that I have tried to live by my whole life. No, not just because of the fear that fairies will come after me and turn me into a beast or a statue. (Which if you think about it would be very scary, seeing a something with wings and a wand flying at you.) I just feel that if you want to be treated well, you should treat others well. This was most likely imbedded into me through fairy tales just like Beauty and the Beast.
As you can see from only two very short versions of this fairy tale that the values in it are virtues that we should all have. This fairy tale has been passed down for many generations and with each year it grows and adapts to society, but the bases for this story stay true. You can’t judge a book by its cover. The truth is it is what is on the inside that counts, which leads to the next lesson; that being greedy will not make you happy. For everything you get that you think will make you happy, you will only find that you are unhappier than before. This flows nicely into the golden rule. Do unto others as you would have done to you, and this will bring you true happiness. I believe that this is a great fairy tale and the values it teaches are even better. My children will know the story of Beauty and the Beast well.