1107
The Metamorphosis I have chosen The Metamorphosis as my subject for this paper; I will take a close look at how the death of Gregor Samsa opens the doors to understanding the story. I will give examples of irony through Gregor’s metamorphosis and how this irony brings together the conclusion of the story. Through his death we see the truth behind his parents, which in it’s self is ironic. It is difficult to pinpoint one specific thing to write about in the story; there are just so many things that can be brought to light. If I happen to lose sight of my topic bear with me, there is just so much to be discussed in the novella. In the opening lines of the story we are drawn into climax of the story. We are introduced to the main character, Gregor Samsa, and he has been transformed from a human to a bug. Gregor gives a long description of his looks and how he is trying to maneuver around. One peculiar thing is he does not panic, ironically he is more concerned with getting to work and hiding himself from his family. He is a hard working man that supports his parents and sister. The notion that he takes care of them seems to slip by the reader in the beginning of the story and does come up again until the end of the story. It is only then that everyone must go out a do something to support the family We finally see at end of the story how useful Gregor was to his family. By using the word useful I mean how many things he could be used for in advantage toward them. Gregor trapped himself in this world of sales because of his parents. He states “I’d be sacked on the spot. Anyhow, that might be quite a good thing for me, who can tell? If I didn’t to hold my hand because of my parents I’d have given notice long time ago, I’d have gone to the chief and told him exactly what I think of him.” They live in an upper class flat and they have hired help to wait on them, and Gregor is the one who supports it all. His father lost his business and his mother and sister do not work. The metamorphosis of Gregor is a dark blessing to him. It releases him from all of the pressures of daily life, his family, and at times he seems to enjoy being a bug. At one point he tells us how much he enjoys crawling up and down the walls and ceiling. Throughout the story there is a metamorphosis that is taking place in his home. He has traded places with the family and is now living the life they had previously embelished in. His father begins to work along with his sister and his mother must now work and do the cooking and cleaning. Gregor on the other hand does nothing but daydream, crawl, and nap through his days. One ironic statement from his sister “He must go, if this were Gregor he would have realized long ago human beings can’t live with such a creature, he’d have gone away one his own accord. This creature persecutes us, drives away our lodgers, obviously wants the whole apartment to himself, and would have us all sleep in the gutter.” How selfish of her, had he not taken care of them and he was not the only one working to make sure they were not sleeping in the gutter? As for him wanting the whole apartment, he lived in his tiny room until his death. I think he ventured out twice only to be scurried back in by threat. These people had paid as little attention to him as possible before and after the metamorphosis. In the last few pages we read of Gregor's death. The chairwomen spots the corpse and they come running as she yells to them. Grete does seem to be he most upset, but the fact that she is staring down at him could be disbelief. Disbelief that it is all over with just as she wanted. The parents do not seem affected at all, his father crosses himself and says “well, now thanks be to God.” I though to myself as I was reading that it was ironic that he was giving up a prayer of thanks at his son’s death. His mother questions the chairwomen “Dead?” she asks, almost as if she wants to make sure. She then walks away and turns to Grete to tell her to join them with a “tremendous smile.” They really do not have any remorse about the situation at all; they are truly more concerned with themselves. Gregor is dead now and each can return to life. As if he were such a burden to them, they acted as if he were dead from the first morning the metamorphosis took place until the morning he took his last breath. It is almost evil the way they handled his death. “They decided to take the day resting and going for a stroll, for they had deserved such a respite from work.”Such sarcastic undertones lie in that sentence, for they had not done anything to deserve a day off of work. Finally in the last paragraph of the novella we see truly how rotten Mr. and Mrs. Samsa really are. They are riding along divising a mentally scheme of what to do next in life. Now that the burden of Gregor was gone they would have to find someone else to mooch off of. They look at their daughter as their newest and last asset. “pretty girl with a good figure.” They are unconsciously agreeing with each other, for nothing of this was being discussed out loud. The story excitedly states “soon it would be time to find a good husband for her. And it was like conformation of their new dreams and excellent intentions.” Sick. My conclusion to this paper is short and sweet. Gregor escaped his hell and for awhile bore his parents into theirs. Mr. and Mrs. Samsa were rotten people down to the core. By the end of the story they are trying to erase any trace of him from their lives, he is simply not worth any thing to them now. The metamorphosis is a story of irony from start to finish. It begins with the climax, which is ironic, for most stories could not hold the reader’s attention if they had done that. That is the beginning of an awkward and odd novella that is darkly humorous and remotely sad
1745
Jack London fought his way up out of the factories and waterfront dives of West Oakland to become the highest paid, most popular novelist and short story writer of his day. He wrote passionately and prolifically about the great questions of life and death, the struggle to survive with dignity and integrity, and he wove these elemental ideas into stories of high adventure based on his own firsthand experiences at sea, or in Alaska, or in the fields and factories of California. As a result, his writing appealed not to the few, but to millions of people all around the world. Along with his books and stories, however, Jack London was widely known for his personal exploits. He was a celebrity, a colorful and controversial personality who was often in the news. Generally fun-loving and playful, he could also be combative, and was quick to side with the underdog against injustice or oppression of any kind. He was a fiery and eloquent public speaker, and much sought after as a lecturer on socialism and other economic and political topics. Despite his avowed socialism, most people considered him a living symbol of rugged individualism, a man whose fabulous success was due not to special favor of any kind, but to a combination of unusual mental ability and immense vitality. Strikingly handsome, full of laughter, restless and courageous to a fault, always eager for adventure on land or sea, he was one of the most attractive and romantic figures of his time. Jack London ascribed his literary success largely to hard work - to "dig," as he put it. He tried never to miss his early morning 1,000-word writing stint, and between 1900 and 1916 he completed over fifty books, including both fiction and non-fiction, hundreds of short stories, and numerous articles on a wide range of topics. Several of the books and many of the short stories are classics of their kind, well thought of in critical terms and still popular around the world. Today, almost countless editions of London's writings are available and some of them have been translated into as many as seventy different languages. In addition to his daily writing stint and his commitments as a lecturer, London also carried on voluminous correspondence (he received some 10,000 letters per year), read proofs of his work as it went to press, negotiated with his various agents and publishers, and conducted other business such as overseeing construction of his custom-built sailing ship, the Snark (1906 - 1907), construction of Wolf House (1910 - 1913), and the operation of his beloved Beauty Ranch, which became a primary preoccupation after about 1911. Along with all this, he had to continually generate new ideas for books and stories and do the research so necessary to his writing. Somehow, he managed to do all these things and still find time to go swimming, horseback riding, or sailing on San Francisco Bay. He also spent 27 months cruising the South Pacific in the Snark, put in two tours of duty as an overseas war correspondent, traveled widely for pleasure, entertained a continual stream of guests whenever he was at home in Glen Ellen, and did his fair share of barroom socializing and debating. In order to fit all this living into the narrow confines of one lifetime, he often tried to make do with no more than four or five hours of sleep at night. London was first attracted to the Sonoma Valley by its magnificent natural landscape, a unique combination of high hills, fields and streams, and a beautiful mixed forest of oaks, madrones, California buckeyes, Douglas Fir, and redwood trees. "When I first came here, tired of cities and people, I settled down on a little farm ... 130 acres of the most beautiful, primitive land to be found in California." He didn't care that the farm was badly run-down. Instead, he reveled in its deep canyons and forests, its year-round springs and streams. "All I wanted," he said later, "was a quiet place in the country to write and loaf in and get out of Nature that something which we all need, only the most of us don't know it." Soon, however, he was busy buying farm equipment and livestock for his "mountain ranch." He also began work on a new barn and started planning a fine new house. "This is to be no summer-residence proposition," he wrote to his publisher in June 1905, "but a home all the year round. I am anchoring good and solid, and anchoring for keeps ..." Born January 12, 1876, he was only 29, but he was already internationally famous for Call of the Wild (1903), The Sea Wolf (1904), and other literary and journalistic accomplishments. He was divorced from Bessie (Maddern), his first wife and the mother of his two daughters, Joan and Little Bess, and he had married Charmian (Kittredge). Living and owning land near Glen Ellen was a way of escaping from Oakland - from the city way of life he called the "man-trap." But excited as he was about his plans for the ranch, London was still too restless, too eager for foreign travel and adventure, to settle down and spend all his time there. While his barn and other ranch improvements were still under construction he decided to build a ship and go sailing around the world - exploring, writing, adventuring - enjoying the "big moments of living" that he craved and that would give him still more material to write about. The great voyage was to last seven years and take Jack and Charmian around the world. In fact it lasted 27 months and took them "only" as far as the South Pacific and Australia. Discouraged by a variety of health problems, and heartbroken about having to abandon the trip and sell the Snark, London returned to Glen Ellen and to his plans for the ranch. In 1909, '10 and '11 he bought more land, and in 1911 moved from Glen Ellen to a small ranch house in the middle of his holdings. He rode horseback throughout the countryside, exploring every canyon, glen and hill top. And he threw himself into farming - scientific agriculture - as one of the few justifiable, basic, and idealistic ways of making a living. A significant portion of his later writing - Burning Daylight (1910), Valley of the Moon (1913), Little Lady of the Big House (1916) - had to do with the simple pleasures of country life, the satisfaction of making a living directly and honestly from the land and thereby remaining close to the realities of the natural world. Jack and Charmian London's dream house began to take definite shape early in 1911 as Albert Farr, a well-known San Francisco architect, put their ideas on paper in the form of drawings and sketches, and then supervised the early stages of construction. It was to be a grand house - one that would remain standing for a thousand years. By August 1913, London had spent approximately $80,000 (in pre-World War I dollars), and the project was nearly complete. On August 22 final cleanup got underway and plans were laid for moving the Londons' specially designed, custom-built furniture and other personal belongings into the mansion. That night - at 2 a. m. - word came that the house was burning. By the time the Londons arrived on the scene the house was ablaze in every corner, the roof had collapsed, and even a stack of lumber some distance away was burning. Nothing could be done. London looked on philosophically, but inside he was seriously wounded, for the loss was a crushing financial blow and the wreck of a long-cherished dream. Worse yet, he also had to face the probability that the fire had been deliberately set - perhaps by someone close to him. To this day, the mystery remains unsolved, but there are strong indications that the fire started by spontaneous combustion of oily rags which had been left in the building on that hot August night. London planned to rebuild Wolf House eventually, but at the time of his death in 1916 the house remained as it stands today, the stark but eloquent vestige of a unique and fascinating but shattered dream. The destruction of the Wolf House left London terribly depressed, but after a few days he forced himself to go back to work. Using a $2,000 advance from Cosmopolitan Magazine, he added a new study to the little wood-frame ranch house in which he had been living since 1911. Here, in the middle of his beloved ranch, he continued to turn out the articles, short stories, and novels for which there was an ever-growing international market. From the time he went east to meet with his publishers in New York, or to San Francisco or Los Angeles on other business. He also spent a considerable amount of time living and working aboard his 30-foot yawl, the Roamer, which he loved to sail around San Francisco Bay and throughout the nearby Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. In 1914 he went to Mexico as a war correspondent covering the role of U.S. troops and Navy ships in the Villa-Carranza revolt. In 1915 and again in 1916 Charmian persuaded him to spend several months in Hawaii, where he seemed better able to relax and more willing to take care of himself. His greatest satisfaction, however, came from his ranch activities and from his ever more ambitious plans for expanding the ranch and increasing its productivity. These plans kept him perpetually in debt and under intense pressure to keep on writing as fast as he could, even though it might mean sacrificing quality in favor of quantity. His doctors urged him to ease up, to change his work habits and his diet, to stop all use of alcohol, and to get more exercise. But he refused to change his way of life, and plunged on with his writing and his ranch, generously supporting friends and relations through it all. If anything, the press of his financial commitments and his increasingly severe health problems only made him expand his ambitions, dream even larger dreams, and work still harder and faster. On November 22, 1916, Jack London died of gastrointestinal uremic poisoning. He was 40 years of age and had been suffering from a variety of ailments, including a kidney condition that was extraordinarily painful at times. Nevertheless, right up to the last day of his life he was full of bold plans and boundless enthusiasm for the future.

John Howard Griffin
Black Like Me John Howard Griffin was a journalist and a specialist on race issues. After publication, he became a leading advocate in the Civil Rights Movement and did much to promote awareness of the racial situations and pass legislature. He was middle aged and living in Mansfield, Texas at the time of publication in 1960. His desire to know if Southern whites were racist against the Negro population of the Deep South, or if they really judged people based on the individual's personality as they said they prompted him to cross the color line and write Black Like Me. Since communication between the white and African American races did not exist, neither race really knew what it was like for the other. Due to this, Griffin felt the only way to know the truth was to become a black man and travel through the South. His trip was financed by the internationally distributed Negro magazine Sepia in exchange for the right to print excerpts from the finished product. After three weeks in the Deep South as a black man John Howard Griffin produced a 188-page journal covering his transition into the black race, his travels and experiences in the South, the shift back into white society, and the reaction of those he knew prior his experonce the book was published and released. John Howard Griffin began this novel as a white man on October 28, 1959 and became a black man (with the help of a noted dermatologist) on November 7. He entered black society in New Orleans through his contact Sterling, a shoe shine boy that he had met in the days prior to the medication taking full effect. Griffin stayed with Sterling at the shine stand for a few days to become assimilated into the society and to learn more about the attitude and mindset of the common black man. After one week of trying to find work other than menial labor, he left to travel throughout the Southern states of Mississippi, Alabama, and Texas. November 14, the day he decided to leave, was the day after the Mississippi jury refused to indict or consider the evidence in the Mack Parker kidnap-lynch murder case. He decided to go into the heart of Mississippi, the Southern state most feared by blacks of that time, just to see if it really did have the "wonderful relationship" with their Negroes that they said they did. What he found in Hattiesburg was tension in the state so apparent and thick that it scared him to death. One of the reasons for this could be attributed to the Parker case decision because the trial took place not far from Hattiesburg. He knew it was a threat to his life if he remained because he was not a true Negro and did not know the proper way to conduct himself in the present situation. Griffin requested that one of his friends help him leave the state as soon as possible. P.D. East, Griffin's friend, was more than willing to help his friend out of the dangerous situation that he had gotten himself into and back to New Orleans. From New Orleans, traveled to Biloxi, Mississippi and began hitch hiking toward Mobile, Alabama. Griffin found that men would not pick him up in the day nearly as often as they would at night. One of the reasons being that the darkness of night is a protection of sorts and the white men would let their defenses down. Also, they would not have to be afraid of someone they knew seeing them with a Negro in their car. But the main reason was of the stereotypes many of these men had of Negroes, that they were more sexually active, knew more about sex, had larger genitalia, and fewer morals and therefore would discuss these things with them. Many of the whites that offered Griffin rides would become angry and let him out when he would not discuss his sex life with them. One man was amazed to find a Negro who spoke intelligently and tried to explain the fallacies behind the stereotypes and what the problem with Negro society was. Many Negroes he encountered on his journey through the Deep South were very kind and opened their hearts and homes to him. One example of this is when Griffin asked an elderly Negro where he might find lodging, the man offered to share his own bed with him. Another instance was when Griffin was stranded somewhere between Mobile and Montgomery and a black man offered him lodging at his home. The man's home was a two-room shack that housed six members of his family, but he accepted John into his home and refused any money for the trouble saying that "he'd brought more than he'd taken." In Montgomery, Alabama, Griffin decided it was time for him to reenter white society, but he also wanted to gain a knowledge of the area as a black man. So, he devised the technique of covering an area as a black and then returning the following day as a white. What he found was, as a black he would receive the "hate stare" from whites and be treated with every courtesy by the black community. As a white, it would be the exact opposite, he would get the "hate stare" from blacks and be treated wonderfully by the same people who despised him the previous day. After a few days of zigzagging across the color line, Griffin decided that he had enough material from his journal to create a book and enough experience as a black man so he reverted permanently into white society. Crossing over into the white world was unsettling to Griffin, if only because of the way he was treated by the same people who despised him previously due to his pigmentation. The sudden ability to walk into any establishment and not be refused service was also a shock after having to search for common conveniences days before. After returning to his hometown of Mansfield, Texas Griffin was not widely accepted back into the community he once knew. Many of the residents of the city were racists, therefore they considered him one of the 'niggers.' The racists even went as far as to hang Griffin in effigy from the town's stop light one morning. This prompted him and his family to leave the area until the situation considerably calmed down. Griffin was interviewed by various television and radio hosts as well as magazine and newspapermen after the book was made public. His main objective was to educate the public of the situation in the South and people couldn't help but hear about it. Wether or not they accepted the information was not up to Griffin, but he did his best to make the knowledge available. This book relates to American history because it takes the reader into the Deep South before the Civil Rights Movements took hold and shows what it was like to be black. In the Preface, the author states "I could have been a Jew in Germany, a Mexican in a number of states, or a member of any 'inferior' group. Only the details would have differed. The story would be the same." The details he mentioned were he being black and in the South, and the story is of hatred and racism directed toward him and others like him on account of those details. The account he related showed America and the world that race relations in the South was not the pretty picture it was painted as. Instead, he showed the daily struggle of the blacks to survive. Griffin's bias is that white Southern Americans of that period were racist toward the African American population. The only thing altered from before he entered New Orleans to after was his appearance. He dyed his skin a very dark brown and shaved his head, his clothing, speech patterns, and references had not changed and every question was answered truthfully. If people did judge others by their qualities and qualifications, his time in the Deep South should have been fairly uneventful. Instead, there were daily quests to find rest-room facilities, restaurants, stores, and various other 'conveniences' that he took advantage of before he crossed the color line. During his stay in New Orleans, blacks were forced to use specific facilities designated for them and they were usually few and far between. Other than the Greyhound station or other public buildings that blacks were allowed to enter, there were no facilities that were at par with the ones the whites had access to. His now black skin also prevented him from entering any store and purchasing something to drink, instead he would have to find a Negro Cafe. These Cafes were not nearly as numerous as the many places the lowliest white could acquire a drink. The color of his skin also prevented him from gaining anything other than menial labor job, although his qualifications could easily get him any number of positions if he were white. ". . . I walked toward Brennan's, one of New Orleans' famed restaurants . . . I stopped to study the menu . . . realizing that a few days earlier I could have gone in an ordered anything on the menu. But now, though I was the same person with the same appetite . . . appreciation . . . and wallet, no power on earth could get me inside this place for a meal. I recalled hearing some Negro say, 'You can live here all your life, but you'll never get inside one of the great restaurants except as a kitchen boy.'" The above passage represents just one of many instances where he was barred from entering an establishment solely based on his pigmentation. As stated before, Negroes were not permitted to enter many restaurants, but libraries, museums, concert halls, and other culturally enhancing places were also barred to him even though there was no formal law against them entering. The many stereotypes of blacks being intellectually inferior just made it easier to deny them access because they did not have the mental capacities to appreciate it. It became apparent to Griffin that because the black population was widely uneducated, they would never be able to succeed in life. One of the things inhibiting their education was the inferior quality of schools and the inability to enter establishments such as libraries and museums. The whites, usually knew this and used it to their advantage to keep the black population subordinate. Black Like Me John Howard Griffin was a journalist and a specialist on race issues. After publication, he became a leading advocate in the Civil Rights Movement and did much to promote awareness of the racial situations and pass legislature. He was middle aged and living in Mansfield, Texas at the time of publication in 1960. His desire to know if Southern whites were racist against the Negro population of the Deep South, or if they really judged people based on the individual's personality as they said they prompted him to cross the color line and write Black Like Me. Since communication between the white and African American races did not exist, neither race really knew what it was like for the other. Due to this, Griffin felt the only way to know the truth was to become a black man and travel through the South. His trip was financed by the internationally distributed Negro magazine Sepia in exchange for the right to print excerpts from the finished product. After three weeks in the Deep South as a black man John Howard Griffin produced a 188-page journal covering his transition into the black race, his travels and experiences in the South, the shift back into white society, and the reaction of those he knew prior his experonce the book was published and released. John Howard Griffin began this novel as a white man on October 28, 1959 and became a black man (with the help of a noted dermatologist) on November 7. He entered black society in New Orleans through his contact Sterling, a shoe shine boy that he had met in the days prior to the medication taking full effect. Griffin stayed with Sterling at the shine stand for a few days to become assimilated into the society and to learn more about the attitude and mindset of the common black man. After one week of trying to find work other than menial labor, he left to travel throughout the Southern states of Mississippi, Alabama, and Texas. November 14, the day he decided to leave, was the day after the Mississippi jury refused to indict or consider the evidence in the Mack Parker kidnap-lynch murder case. He decided to go into the heart of Mississippi, the Southern state most feared by blacks of that time, just to see if it really did have the "wonderful relationship" with their Negroes that they said they did. What he found in Hattiesburg was tension in the state so apparent and thick that it scared him to death. One of the reasons for this could be attributed to the Parker case decision because the trial took place not far from Hattiesburg. He knew it was a threat to his life if he remained because he was not a true Negro and did not know the proper way to conduct himself in the present situation. Griffin requested that one of his friends help him leave the state as soon as possible. P.D. East, Griffin's friend, was more than willing to help his friend out of the dangerous situation that he had gotten himself into and back to New Orleans. From New Orleans, traveled to Biloxi, Mississippi and began hitch hiking toward Mobile, Alabama. Griffin found that men would not pick him up in the day nearly as often as they would at night. One of the reasons being that the darkness of night is a protection of sorts and the white men would let their defenses down. Also, they would not have to be afraid of someone they knew seeing them with a Negro in their car. But the main reason was of the stereotypes many of these men had of Negroes, that they were more sexually active, knew more about sex, had larger genitalia, and fewer morals and therefore would discuss these things with them. Many of the whites that offered Griffin rides would become angry and let him out when he would not discuss his sex life with them. One man was amazed to find a Negro who spoke intelligently and tried to explain the fallacies behind the stereotypes and what the problem with Negro society was. Many Negroes he encountered on his journey through the Deep South were very kind and opened their hearts and homes to him. One example of this is when Griffin asked an elderly Negro where he might find lodging, the man offered to share his own bed with him. Another instance was when Griffin was stranded somewhere between Mobile and Montgomery and a black man offered him lodging at his home. The man's home was a two-room shack that housed six members of his family, but he accepted John into his home and refused any money for the trouble saying that "he'd brought more than he'd taken." In Montgomery, Alabama, Griffin decided it was time for him to reenter white society, but he also wanted to gain a knowledge of the area as a black man. So, he devised the technique of covering an area as a black and then returning the following day as a white. What he found was, as a black he would receive the "hate stare" from whites and be treated with every courtesy by the black community. As a white, it would be the exact opposite, he would get the "hate stare" from blacks and be treated wonderfully by the same people who despised him the previous day. After a few days of zigzagging across the color line, Griffin decided that he had enough material from his journal to create a book and enough experience as a black man so he reverted permanently into white society. Crossing over into the white world was unsettling to Griffin, if only because of the way he was treated by the same people who despised him previously due to his pigmentation. The sudden ability to walk into any establishment and not be refused service was also a shock after having to search for common conveniences days before. After returning to his hometown of Mansfield, Texas Griffin was not widely accepted back into the community he once knew. Many of the residents of the city were racists, therefore they considered him one of the 'niggers.' The racists even went as far as to hang Griffin in effigy from the town's stop light one morning. This prompted him and his family to leave the area until the situation considerably calmed down. Griffin was interviewed by various television and radio hosts as well as magazine and newspapermen after the book was made public. His main objective was to educate the public of the situation in the South and people couldn't help but hear about it. Wether or not they accepted the information was not up to Griffin, but he did his best to make the knowledge available. This book relates to American history because it takes the reader into the Deep South before the Civil Rights Movements took hold and shows what it was like to be black. In the Preface, the author states "I could have been a Jew in Germany, a Mexican in a number of states, or a member of any 'inferior' group. Only the details would have differed. The story would be the same." The details he mentioned were he being black and in the South, and the story is of hatred and racism directed toward him and others like him on account of those details. The account he related showed America and the world that race relations in the South was not the pretty picture it was painted as. Instead, he showed the daily struggle of the blacks to survive. Griffin's bias is that white Southern Americans of that period were racist toward the African American population. The only thing altered from before he entered New Orleans to after was his appearance. He dyed his skin a very dark brown and shaved his head, his clothing, speech patterns, and references had not changed and every question was answered truthfully. If people did judge others by their qualities and qualifications, his time in the Deep South should have been fairly uneventful. Instead, there were daily quests to find rest-room facilities, restaurants, stores, and various other 'conveniences' that he took advantage of before he crossed the color line. During his stay in New Orleans, blacks were forced to use specific facilities designated for them and they were usually few and far between. Other than the Greyhound station or other public buildings that blacks were allowed to enter, there were no facilities that were at par with the ones the whites had access to. His now black skin also prevented him from entering any store and purchasing something to drink, instead he would have to find a Negro Cafe. These Cafes were not nearly as numerous as the many places the lowliest white could acquire a drink. The color of his skin also prevented him from gaining anything other than menial labor job, although his qualifications could easily get him any number of positions if he were white. ". . . I walked toward Brennan's, one of New Orleans' famed restaurants . . . I stopped to study the menu . . . realizing that a few days earlier I could have gone in an ordered anything on the menu. But now, though I was the same person with the same appetite . . . appreciation . . . and wallet, no power on earth could get me inside this place for a meal. I recalled hearing some Negro say, 'You can live here all your life, but you'll never get inside one of the great restaurants except as a kitchen boy.'" The above passage represents just one of many instances where he was barred from entering an establishment solely based on his pigmentation. As stated before, Negroes were not permitted to enter many restaurants, but libraries, museums, concert halls, and other culturally enhancing places were also barred to him even though there was no formal law against them entering. The many stereotypes of blacks being intellectually inferior just made it easier to deny them access because they did not have the mental capacities to appreciate it. It became apparent to Griffin that because the black population was widely uneducated, they would never be able to succeed in life. One of the things inhibiting their education was the inferior quality of schools and the inability to enter establishments such as libraries and museums. The whites, usually knew this and used it to their advantage to keep the black population subordinate.

293
In William Shakespeare’s play, Julius Caesar, there is a major difference between two of the characters, Brutus and Mark Antony. Brutus was very honorable and Antony was very persuasive. When Brutus spoke at Caesar’s funeral, he appealed to the people’s logic and Antony spoke to the emotions of the people. Antony is very smart and uses his brain frequently during the play and Brutus is very naive about many of things. Brutus was very honorable and Antony was very persuasive. Brutus was very honorable in the way that he always told people the truth. Antony was persuasive in the way that he used people to get whatever he wanted. For example, Antony used Lepidus to seek revenge on all of the conspirators to take the blame for their deaths. In the speech at Caesar’s funeral Brutus spoke to the people’s logical mind and Antony spoke to the emotions of the people. Brutus’ speech was very short and to the point and spoke to the logic of the people in the crowd. For example, Brutus spoke in a detached way about Caesar’s death while Antony spoke to the emotions of the crowd by crying and talking about all the good things that Caesar did for Rome. Antony’s intelligence was very apparent throughout the play and Brutus appeared to be naive about many things. Antony is smart in the way that he manipulates people to his own advantage. For example, Antony was manipulative in his emotional approach to persuade people to become outraged at Brutus. Brutus appears to be naive throughout the whole play because he believed everyone was as honorable as he. Brutus did not question what he was told, assuming it was always true. In conclusion, in William Shakespeare’s play, Julius Caesar, there is a major difference between the two characters, Brutus and Mark Antony. The strongest contrast between the two characters appears to be their ability and inability to be both honorable and persuasive.

1118
Jurassic Park by Michael Crichton Kevin Number of pages: 399 Block B Plot Summary Introduction The Story takes place on an Island off the Coast of Costa Rica. Where A very wealthy man, John Hammond, Has set up A Genetically engineered Dinosaur preserve. Before he opens this living attraction to the public(only the people who can afford it) He needs people, who he thinks will be good judges of the Park. He brings them in and begins to awe them with the sights of real dinosaurs. One of the visitors, Ian Malcolm, predicts that this is impossible to accomplish. For he says there are flaws in the system, and according to his chaos theory these animals cannot be predicted. Activating Circumstance While they are in awe one of the computer programmers, Dennis Nedry, Is secretly planning to steal dinosaur embryos from the park and sell them to a company that is trying to stay in business with Hammond. The only way Nedry can obtain these embryos id to shut down the park power so he can sneak into the freezing chamber. Rising action He does while the other visitors are touring the park, and everything goes wrong from there. As he is racing to get to the dock, where a boat is waiting to take the embryos, He realizes that he has gone the wrong way. He gets out of the car to try and figure out where he is and he's attacked and killed by one of the dinosaurs. Climax Now the power is out and all the animals can get out of the no longer electrified fences. The others are stopped in front of the T-Rex holding area and he breaks through and attacks them. Everyone flees and is scattered through the park. The animals begin attacking the control building. Since all the power is out there is no way to stop them. One of the Scientists, Wu, finds that the once all female dinosaurs are beginning to breed. They think they got the power back on so they try to put all the animals back in their holding areas. Falling Action Little did they know that the whole time the park was running on auxiliary power, and once this power ran out they could not restore the main power. When all the power finally ran out the animals began attacking full forced now. The only way to get the park running again was to have someone manually turn on another auxiliary power generator so they could get the main power running again. Conclusion Two people died attempting this and finally one succeeded. They got power on and were able to call the Costa Rican government to come in and rescue them out. Once they were flying away bombs were dropped on the island and it was totally destroyed. Characters There were many main characters in Jurassic Park. First there was Alan Grant, a Paleontologist who was about 5' 11', thin, and was very interested in dinosaurs. He didn't have any strong opinion about the park except that he was so excited to see real dinosaurs. Next there was Ellen Sattler, She was Grant's partner in digs. She was very beautiful, but very active and strong. She seemed to be very interested in this amazing new world of the dinosaurs. Next there was Ian Malcolm, a tall mathematician who always wore black. He had very strong opinions opposing the park. He knew things would go wrong but no one listened to him. I enjoyed his way of proving everything he said. Next there was John Hammond, a very stubborn old man who insists that his park is fine. He constantly shuns away suggestions of how to make his park better. Next there are a brother and sister, Tim and Alexis. Tim is ten and very smart for his age. He tries to do what he can to help and stays out of the way when he can't. He said sister Alexis is just the opposite, She is young, immature, and is constantly getting in the way. She thinks this whole thing is a game and does whatever entertains her regardless of other people. Conflict The conflict was that man created dinosaurs without thinking. Now the dinosaurs were trying to live freely and in the process trying to destroy the barriers in the way which happen to be the men that created them. I believe that we should not temper with things that are living and unpredictable. I was not satisfied in the way this problem was solved. After the men created dinosaurs they were trying to survive on instinct and the men got scared and decided to obliterate the helpless dinosaurs. They didn't even think twice about killing them. Since they were a threat the needed to be eliminated. Men should before they act in a way that could come back to haunt them. Theme I believe the authors theme was that when you have the power do incredible things you need to be responsible and think about the out come. The purpose is to teach people that you can be affected by other people's choices and they can be affected by yours. Everyone needs to realize this and the world will come together easier. Setting This strory took place in an island off Costa Rica, in the late 1990's. My Critique This book opened my eyes as to what could happen in tough situations. During my reading I constantly became frustrated as the little girl, lex, would keep getting in the way during tough situations. In some places I couldn't stop reading because I felt the need to know what happened next. I wanted to tell the characters what to do or what they should watch out for. I felt like I was Tim when he was with the Raptors trying to outsmart them. The book satisfied me Thoroughly I loved how many things were happening at once and I had to read into the story to figure things out. I would recommend this great book to anyone, and everyone.

Killing Mr. Griffin 
 
I read the book Killing Mr. Griffin, by Lois Duncan. There was an English teacher, Mr. Griffin, which nobody liked. Especially one particular group of friends. They disliked him so much that they wanted to try and scare him some how. He was a tough teacher, and didn’t give anyone an A. Not even the smartest student, Susan McConnell.
One day after school, Mark told his friends his idea of what to do to take care of Mr. Griffin. He decided that they should threaten to kill him so he would give them better grades. But not actually kill him. After some convincing, all Mark’s friends agreed to his plan.
The day came when they carried out their plan, and got Mr. Griffin where they wanted him. All alone, tied up in the mountains. Susan and David were worried about Mr. Griffin, so after a couple of hours they just went to check on him. But when they got there, they found and realized that Mr. Griffin was dead! They panicked, and didn’t know what to do. They went back and told the others. They had to figure out something to do, but what?
They finally all promised each other that they wouldn’t tell anyone what had happened. They just had to cover up all the evidence that my lead to them. Mark was willing to do anything to do that!
After a few days, Mr. Griffin’s disappearance was on the news. Of coarse, no one knew where Mr. Griffin really was, and what had actually happened to him. It was hard for them to keep it in. They all felt so bad, except for Mark.
Mark was the leader of this plan, and he secretly did things to cover up evidence that his friends didn’t know about. Not at first anyway. He killed David’s, but Susan figured that out. He also tried to kill Susan because she was going to tell the police the whole story. She couldn’t stand keeping it in anymore. But after a while, people started putting things together and figured out what had really happened. They knew who had actually killed Mr. Griffin. What was going to happen to them now? They didn’t know! They all wished that they wouldn’t have went along with Mark, but were glad they didn’t have to hold this huge secret in anymore!
I would recommend you to read this book if you like mystery. I loved it and thought it was a great book. It keeps your attention through the whole thing with all the suspense.
 

528
“The Last of the Mohicans” The main difference between “The Last of the Mohicans” book version by James Fenimore Cooper and “The Last of the Mohicans” movie version, generally speaking, is that the book has a more adventurous theme and the movie has a more love and romantic theme. Never the less, both stories were extremely interesting. Main details that support this difference are that in the movie, Cora is supposed to wed with Heyward and Cora agreed with that. Then she met Hawkeye when he saved her from an ambush from the Hurons. From there they fell in love and Heyward was out of the picture as far as love is concerned. So, Cora is the one who is in love with Hawkeye and Alice takes the role of Cora. Another factor, dealing with the love theme differences is in the book, there was not a big love scene between Hawkeye and Alice as there was in the movie between Hawkeye and Cora. Thus making the movie a more romantic story. In the movie, key things that happen have different importance because the roles switch. For instance, towards the end of the book, Cora dies. In the movie, Alice dies. This is important because Alice and Cora have certain traits that make this more and/or less important to the story. Differences in the between Heyward are that in the book, Heyward does not play as an important role as he did in the movie. In the movie, he sacrifices himself to the Hurons, in exchange for Hawkeye and Cora. The Hurons put him under a fire as a sacrifice and is tortured. He is only tortured for a short amount of time because as Hawkeye runs away with Cora, he shoots Heyward in the head putting him out of his misery and torture. Another difference in the movie from the book is that Heyward and Hawkeye disliked each other more in the movie than the book. There are small but general differences between the book and the movie that are not really important but are differences, never the less. Such as, In the book, the main goal was to get everybody to the fort and make it alive. In the movie, the main goal was for Hawkeye and Cora to be together alive, and in love. Also, in the book, Hawkeye dresses up as a bear to sneak into and around the village and no one can tell its him except Uncas. In the movie, this never happened. Another small but visible difference was that in the book, it seemed like Magua had a lot to say. In the movie, he barely peeped a word. As far as people dying, in the movie Alice commits suicide after Uncas is killed and dumped off of the cliff. Actually, she is about to be killed by Magua, but she jumps before he can get to her. In the book, Alice doesn’t die. In conclusion, the book and the movie were similar in many more ways than they were different. Both the movie and the book, although having semi-different themes, are excellent and I would recommend both of them to anyone interested.


Martian Chronicles
The Issues of Past and Present!
If the Martian Chronicles had been written in the 1999’s instead of fifty years ago, many issues and problems would change. Ray Bradbury wrote his book in 1946. In it he wrote about problems such as censorship, man’s cruelty to man, and loneliness. Each issue shows up in one or two of his chronicles. All of his issues affect every one of his characters in many different ways.
Censorship is a main problem or issue today, and in the book it shows up in one of his chronicles, “Usher II”. In this chronicle, a man builds a house of Usher. One man points (he was from a group that was against all forms of imagination) out, “No books, no houses, nothing to be produced which in any way suggests ghosts, vampires, fairies, or any creature of imagination.” Yet in this house he saw all of these things and more. The chronicle also brings up the issue of censoring certain books by authors such as Edgar Allen Poe. The house that is built is based on a house that is in one of Poe’s books. The unimaginative man is ignorant to the facts of Edgar A. P.’s books and does not even recognize the kind of death he was about to face that was directly copied out of a book. If it were to happen today and now, the only books that would be allowed would be schoolbooks, and even those books could not contain theories. That is the way censorship is brought up in the book. Today, however, it affects more than just books. It is used in movies, TV, news, magazines, and the Internet. Words, obscenity, and some vulgar things can be kept from the viewing audience. They can keep certain people, those seventeen and younger from seeing movies, TV, or Internet sites. In the book one character makes a point of saying, “ignorance is fatal.”
Man’s cruelty to man is another issue in the Martian Chronicles that is and was a problem in the real world. In the book, it shows up in three chronicles, “Ylla”, “The Off Season”, and “Way in the Middle of the Air”. “Ylla” and “The Off Season” are more of family cruelty, while “Way in the Middle of the Air” deals more with racism. Both are reasons that people get hurt and even die for no reason. Or for a stupid reason like color or gender. In “Ylla”, Ylla, or Mrs. K., is noticing that her marriage is not as fun as it used to be and her and her husband don’t go out anymore. But one day she has a dream or people from earth (she lives on Mars) coming to visit Mars. She wants to meet the earthmen, but makes the mistake of telling Mr. K., or Yll. Yll gets jealous and demands that Ylla not leave the house. He thinks that she has fallen in love with the earthling. While she is at home waiting like a good wife, he goes out and shoots the men, not even thinking of his wife.
The form of cruelty in that chronicle is less physical and more on the note of just trying to keep your wife happy. Yll did not even regard his wife and only had his own intentions intended upon. In “The Off Season” it is more of not listening to your wife when she is right and even a little bit of physical violence. In “The Off Season”, Sam Parkhill pushes his wife down and won’t listen to her when they are in trouble, even though she was right most of the time. The entire time, she tells him what she thinks he should do, and he doesn’t listen to her. One incident happened when aliens (who were really nice) were chasing them and the wife told him to stop and talk to the aliens. He just pushed her down and kept on going, and when he finally did stop, the aliens gave him a present. Proving that the wife was right the entire time.
Today, family cruelty happens more often than it should. Husband on wife, wife on husband, or parents on children are the most common. Abused children are likely to grow up to abuse their children too. Family members can even be taken advantage of, too. Sometimes it can be an illness that makes them abuse others, or alcohol. Most of the time, the person who is being abused can’t do anything to help the situation.
In “Way in the Middle of the Air”, Teece, a white racist man, finds out that all of the African Americans are going to Mars. This upsets Teece because he uses the African Americans for work and torture. One boy asks Teece what he will do nights now that his African Americans are leaving whom will he rape, lynch, or hunt after? Who will do his work by force? Who can he laugh at when he is bored? This upsets Teece very much. He considered the African Americans his, like property even though slavery had already been abolished.
Even now, almost fifty years later, racism is a huge problem. In probably every city, suburb, town, or village there is at least one racist person who lives there. And now you can be racist against not only people who look different then you, but also people who choose a different living style then you. And the killings still happen too. Just because someone is different then you. There are huge groups like the K. K. K. (Klu Klux Klan) and neo nazis. Even high-school hate groups. This is one issue that concerns the entire world. This is not just happening in America, it is happening everywhere!
Loneliness shows up in two chronicles, “The Silent Towns” and “The Long Years”. In “The Silent Towns” Walter and Genevieve and are the last people on Mars. When they find each other Walter described Genevieve as “Her fingers, cuddling it, were plump and pallid. Her face, as he stepped into the light was round and thick, and her eyes were like two immense eggs stuck into a white mess of bread dough.” So even though they found each other, Genevieve disgusted Walter in every way. Walter left in frustration and disgust. Both, Walter and Genevieve, never saw a human again. In “The Long Years”, Mr. Hathaway and his family robot family live on Mars. His real family had died years before. He was so lonely that he created robots to replace his dead family. He could not handle the fact that his family had died and left him to live alone. Many people, if they could, would bring back their diseased family members, loved but unforgotten.
Most people miss family and friends that have moved or died. Some just may be shy and not have friends. Loneliness is something one can’t do anything about. It will happen. You can’t even make a law against it because it is a feeling. Some get over there loneliness by meeting new people, but still others never get over it and live lonely.
All of these issues mentioned are important today and it the book. Some have become better of over the last fifty years; some have become worse. Other issues not chosen affect life and the world too. Although these issues are still a problem, the world is what it is because of the, be that good or bad. Censorship, man’s cruelty to man, and loneliness will affect us even if we are on another planet. However that does not mean that we shouldn’t try to stop the problem. If we work together we can abolish the wrongs of this world!
 

1795
My Brother Sam is Dead Author: by James Lincoln Collier and Christopher Collier Category: Historical Fiction Summary: It starts out in the 1770's during the Revolution War and Samuel Meeker or Sam for short just interred the room of the tavern and he chimes in to everybody who is waiting to eat, he comes in saying where beating the Lobster Backs. His father, Eliphalet Meeker but called Life for short, starts arguing with son. After a while they calmed down and change the subject. Finally Tim Meeker or sometimes called Timmy, the narrator and one of the main two character's of the story in the story goes out to the barn to milk the cow Old Pru. Witches are one of his daily chores and ask Sam to join him. While Tim is milking Old Pru he's talking to Sam about how has he been lately and what is he doing back at home. And Sam tells him truth why he is back at home, and it's to get the Brown Bess. Which is the family's gun and Tim swears that he can't tell Mom or Dad. Well in the morning when Sam try's to get the Brown Bess his father catches him and they get big fight whether he's going to fight the British or not and finally his dad throws him out the house. While the Meeker's are at Church, Sam goo's back to the Tavern, where his family lives and work's and he stills the Brown Bess. Well later on the Rebel's or the patriot's or now called the American's. Went threw the town of Redding. Which is where the Meeker's live. They where going door to door. Taking peoples guns and goods. When they came to the Tavern they where demanding for there gun. They wouldn't believe that there son stole it and took it with him to the Rebel's camp and they wouldn't believe him cause it was Tori territory and that they where threatening to kill Life if they didn't give them there gun. Then Tim ran out the door and he ran to go get Colonel Read. Since he knew that Sam was a Rebel and colonel read was a colonel for the Rebel's, but when he got to where he was he saw Sam with the Gun sleeping with it. Then he snatched it and started running back to his house and when he was half way there Sam woken up and was yelling him to stop but he wouldn't stop, but since Sam was older and bigger he caught Tim right as they reach the town of Redding. Then Tim had to explain what had happen and Sam didn't want to go back but he went with Tim just in case. When they got back his dad was all right just beaten up a little bit. Sam ran out there like a bad out hell and when he was far enough from Tim and his Dad. he looked at them from top of Rock and waved and left. later on the seasons pass by and in the Winter Tim and his Dad have to go down to Verplanks to exchange cattle for money and goods. when they where half way there they run into some Cowboys ,(Cattle thieves) and they say there Rebel's and notice that Life is trying to sell Beef to the Tori's. so they threaten to kill Life and his son, and also take their goods. well there luck comes in and some Escort's come along and scared off the cowboys and the cowboys very where pissed. While they get up to Verplanks, which is by Hudson River, Life makes his trades. On there way back Life is very catious about the Cowboys, but on way there it starts to snow, and it makes it hard for them and it takes them and extra day. next day Life is on the horse and he and Tim leave. about every five minutes or so he goo's up and down to check to see if there's cowboys coming. after a while Tim notices that it's been a long time since his dad came back so Tim gets to worry. so finally he gets going again and starts thinking what is he going to do if the cowboys come up to him with out an escort or his father with him to protect him. Finally when he's coming along he sees the Cowboy's. he out smarts them by acting like he thinks their escorts and asking questions to throw them off. while the Cowboy's are trying to play along and he starts acting like he has no food and ask if they got some and says he needs some goods. then the cowboys get pissed off cause they don't know if the boy is pulling there chain or that he really has no goods. some are thinking its not worth it and some are saying come on lets take this punk well after them all arguing for a long time. they start haring dogs barking and they think it's the escorts. So they leave the boy there. when there finally gone Tim is so happy that he out smarted the cowboys and was thinking Sam would be proud of him. Then he gets back on the wagon and heads home. When he gets home he tells his mother what happen to his father and that he's been kidnapped and probably taken to prison and its down to Susanah and Tim to run the Tavern and do all chores. Later they find out that Life dies from being sick in the prison ships and him and fifty others died from the common Flu. After that the lobster Backs come threw the town of Redding and nobody knows what there doing. Then later they knock down the door of a Rebel's house and take all Rebel's that where hiding in there and they take them away. While leaving the town Tim follows them and when they where almost out of the area. they were ambush. by this old farmer's house and about six Rebels's where in it. They started shooting at all of the British troops, the British retaliate by breading down wall killing all the men and burned down the house. After all of that Sam's troop set up an encampment in there area not far from town, while they where there Tim found Sam and they where happy to see each other since its been like two years and they had a get together. While he visits them he tells them they should butcher the cattle and save the meat before any of the Rebel's take it. Even though if anybody gets caught stealing they will be hanged. But still Tim wanted to hold on to them and try to sell them to somebody cause that all they had that could make them money. While Sam was visiting Tim again they notice the cows where making some noises. Ran out the door and Tim got all but the missing cow back into the barn and Sam went chasing after the thief, when he caught up to them they knocked Sam out. They accused Sam was the guilty one and they caught him, after the whole family trying to convince that he didn't do it the court decided that Sam should be shot. Tim was so mad that he took his bayonet and sharpens it as much as he can and he went after Sam. When he got to the prison area he charged the guarded with the sword and when guard woke up he got his gun up and Tim threw his bayonet over the wall and said "Sam catch!" Then Tim took off running and trying to dodge all the shots that where fired at him. When he was going up the hill he felt a tug in his left shoulder. It was a shot, but he kept on going. When he was far enough he relies Sam wasn't in his cell, it turns out nobody was and they move everybody out of there. Finally Execution Day came and everybody in the crowd was watching first there where two men who got hundred lashings, then there was man who was hanged. Then Sam was next they put a pillow case over his face the three men hold there guns to him and they where so close that the guns where almost touching. BOOOOM!!! The guns went off , but Sam wasn't dead they were so close that the explosion from the guns caught am on fire. He was squirming around and finally another man shot him. He stopped moving and Tim was very mad. After the war, Tim and his mother moved out town they hated and moved to Pennsylvania. Tim got married and started his own tavern. he got married with children. Susanah would never ever talk or even be nice to any American cause she lost a son and her husband cause of this war. But she was a strong woman. Settings: It took place during the Revolutionary War from about 1776 to 1778 in Redding Connecticut but there where some parts in New York in other small towns but almost everything happen in Redding. Main Character: Even though the book was named after Sam it all came from his younger brother Tim. It came from Tim's point of view and he did all the narrating, and you saw every thing threw his eyes. He was a twelve year old boy and by time book was over he was a fourteen year old young adult. Who was bright and smart just like his brother but had better matters. He was timid when it came down to scary things in the begging but when he grew older you can see he became braver. For example when he charge the guard trying to kill him so he could rescue Sam. When he was younger he always wanted to do what Sam did but when he became maturer he started to rely that he can think for himself. In the end he is a mature young adult who always did what had to be done with out playing games with his mother just to get out of chores instead he got down and dirty and did what work needed to be done. Evaluation: I though this was a well written book it was very detail and good storywriter but the end didn't have a big enough bain. Like it just made it like a dull ending but all the way up to where Tim goes crazy on the Rebel's. He also kind of fueled you which is kinda good when u first read this tittle you think the British killed Sam when it was Rebel's. what kinda sucked about it is that they dragged out to the end. which made you know what's going to happen when ending came. that's why it was so dull cause I was on the last page and Sam still hasn't been killed yet so I knew right away what was going to happen. Recommendations: I would recommend this if you want to study the sight affects of the war. but if your like me and you're proud to be an American, Patriot, or a Rebel then I wouldn't read this it talks about how bad it was for the Rebel's to go war for no good reason. When in fact it was cause later we became the greatest country in the whole wide world. Everything about this country is so much better than anything else so that's why IM proud to be an American. Copyrights: 1974 to James Lincoln Collier and Christopher Collier. # of Pages: 211 pages including the Epilogue

1498
My Antonia by Willa Cather Author: Willa Sibert Cather, Nebraska's most noted author was born in Virginia. At the age of ten she moved with her family to Webster County, Nebraska. Many of Cather's acquaintances and Red Cloud area scenes can be recognized in her writings. Cather wrote poetry, short stories, essays and novels, winning many awards. In 1920 she won the Pulitzer Prize for her novel One of Ours, about a Nebraska farm boy who went off to World War I. Willa Cather's reputation as one of America's finest novelists rests on her novels about Nebraska and the American Southwest. These novels express her deep love of the land and her distaste for the materialism and conformism of modern life. Devoted to values such as the importance of family and the need for human courage and dignity, she created strong female characters whose sort of strength and determination had previously been attributed to only men. My Antonia, one of Cather's best works, is an unconventional, romantic novel of prairie life. It tells the story of a remarkable woman whose strength and passion epitomize the pioneer spirit. Characters: Jim Burden - The man narrating the story. Antonia Shimerda -The daughter of Bohemian immigrants and the heroine of the story. Ambrosch Shimerda - Antonia's mean brother Marek Shimerda -Antonia's mentally disabled brother. Yulka Shimerda - Antonia's younger sister. Mr. and Mrs. Shimerda - Antonia's gently father who committed suicide, and her bitter, complaining mother. Larry Donovan - The man Antonia thought was going to marry her. Lena Lingard - A girl that Jim grew up with and was successful. Anton Cuzak - Antonia's husband. The Book The book begins with an introduction. In the introduction it tells about James Quale Burden (Jim Burden) and how the story came to be written. The introduction is written by a woman who is an old friend to Jim and who grew up in the same Nebraska town as he did. They are both now living in New York where Jim is a successful lawyer. She tells about Jim's wife, Genevieve, who she does not like, and doesn't think she is well suited for Jim. They start talking about Antonia, who they both knew and admired, and wondering why something wasn't written about her. Months later, Jim brings her what he had written and She writes the narrative as Jim had written it. The story begins with ten year old Jim Burden traveling from Virginia to Nebraska to live with his grandparents after losing his parents. They live on a prairie farm and Jim enjoys the land and doing chores and being with his grandparents and their hired help. The author shows her love of the land by the way she has Jim to describe it: "The new country lay open before me: there were no fences in those days, and I could choose my own way over the grass uplands, trusting my pony to get me home again. . . . I used to love to drift along the pale-yellow cornfields, looking for the damp spots one sometimes found at their edges, where the smartweed soon turned a rich copper colour and the narrow brown leaves hung curled like cocoons about the swollen joints of the stem. Sometimes I went south to visit our German neighbours and to admire their catalpa grove, or to see the big elm tree that grew up out of a deep crack in the earth and had a hawk's nest in its branches" He soon met the Bohemian immigrants, the Shimerdas, who had come out on the same train as he had. He soon became friends with their daughter, Antonia, whom he thought was very pretty. "I remember what the conductor said about her eyes. They were big and brown and full of light, like the sun shining on brown pools in the wood. Her skin was brown too, and in her cheeks she had a glow of rich, dark color." The Shirmadas had been conned into buying their place. They lived in a dingy, dirt floor cave and were very poor. They didn't speak English. Jim started teaching Antonia English, and she was a good learner. Antonia's father felt that he couldn't deal with the strains of his new life and support his family so he committed suicide. She is forced to do the work of a man and turns from a gentle young lady into a man, in some ways. The elements of fun in her childhood were few and far in between. 'Antonia's life is full of disappointment and she is forced to grow up much too quickly. The road she takes is full of ditches and bends but it clears and straightens in the end. As soon as her father is buried, Antonia realizes that she now has a heavy burden on her shoulders. Since she is one of the eldest in the family, she must now work to put food on their table. Her mother is a complainer and can't speak English, her oldest brother, Ambrosch, is strong, mean and not well liked, the second oldest brother, Marek, is mentally and physically disabled and her sister, Yulka, is still a youngster. With the help of their neighbors, the Burdens, 'Antonia is able to establish a meager living for her family. She does this by working on her farm as well as the other farms in the area. While this work is very beneficial for the family, 'Antonia is turned into a rough and wild creature. When she is old enough, 'Antonia leaves the prairies and goes in to town to find work. She becomes what we would call today, a live-in housekeeper. She works hard and sends all of her wages home to help her mother and siblings on the farm. The hours were long and the breaks few so when she did get to go out, 'Antonia and her friends create quite a reputation for themselves. She somehow gets mixed up with the wrong crowd and slowly begins to lose the honor and respect she worked so hard to gain. 'Antonia leaves to marry a " no-good " and comes home alone, sorrowful and dejected. Her fiancée had told her that they had been married but then ran off without her. 'Antonia later gives birth to a girl, the illegitimate child of this supposed marriage. She takes great pride in her daughter but with her birth, she loses whatever respect she had left. Years later, 'Antonia is found in Hastings, Nebraska, married with eleven children. Her dream has come true, to have land of her own and many delightful little children running wild all over the place. She works hard and is weary but has been repaid as her wish has been fulfilled. She has her land, her family, her garden and she still has the fire of life within her. 'Antonia's life was a difficult one. The burdens that she had to carry were not meant for her shoulders. All through her life's difficulties she remained devoted to whatever family she had. Thoughts of her family always came before thoughts of herself. "She lent herself to immemorial human attitudes which we recognize by instinct as universal and true. . . She was a battered woman now, not a lovely girl; but she still had that something which fires the imagination, could still stop one's breath for a moment by a look or gesture that somehow revealed the meaning in common things. She had only to stand in the orchard, to put her hand on a little crab tree and look up at the apples, to make you feel the goodness of planting and tending and harvesting at last. All the strong things of her heart came out in her body, that had been so tireless in serving generous emotions." Jim Burden makes an important sociological observation when he notes that the town boys admire the Bohemian girls, but won't marry them; while the hard-working Bohemian women help to make their farms profitable, and the "refined' town girls don't. He then lives out this observation by marrying 'well', a woman whose wealth and family connections help establish him in business (as marrying Antonia would not - would, in fact, have prevented him from ever achieving the status he has acquired at the beginning of the book), but who brings him neither happiness nor children. Antonia, in spite of her difficulties with her family and her first attempt at marriage, does achieve a real and satisfactory life. Comments When I finished this book, I realized how many lessons I had learned about life. For instance, life may be hard but it's the hard times that make us stronger. It is a wonderful story of a strong woman who builds a great life out of a bad situation.

Night by Elie Wiesel 
In reading, Night by Elie Wiesel and A Man's Search For Meaning by , many stories of the torturous life in the concentration camps during the second world war. In each book, the reader gets a different point of view from each book because in Night, you get to read about a teenager's view and in the book, A Man's Search For Meaning, you get to read about a middle aged man's view. In the book, Night, Elie, his family and his community go through a system of indoctrination which in each step it makes you seem less and less of a human.
The first step is that the Hungarian police made all the Jewish people wear yellow stars, so they could be picked out easily. The next step is that all the Jewish people had to get rid of all their valuable belongings. The next step in the system is moving all the Jewish people to the ghettos either in the large one or the small one. Elie and his family was moved to the large one. The next step is that Elie and his family had to move to the small ghetto where they were getting ready to leave or be sent some where else. The following step of the system is everyday they take a certain amount of Jewish people into the center of the town square and then they let them sit there for a while.
The next step was that they had to walk to the synagogue and then they had to walk to train after being in the synagogue for a day. Once they reach the train, the Hungarian police put eighty people in a thirty person train car. The next step is the long trip on the train, where people start going crazy, people not getting fed well and no room to sit. Life in the camp, the next step is when the train arrives at Auschwitz and then SS men ordered everyone out and makes them leave their personal stuff behind.
In the next step they separated the men from the women and children, this was a point where families were separated and most of the families never saw each other again. Elie never saw his mother and his sisters again. He could have stay with his mother but he told the SS men that he was eighteen years old and that was better because the most people they killed were children. The older people got to live longer because they thought that they will all die because of the way they were treating them bad, by not feeding and making them work longer hours.
The next step was to separate the handicapped from the normal. After that the young and old are separated. The next step is all the men had take of the clothes and be shaven and cleaned. The doctor went around check all the people for any diseases and or handicaps. The next step is that all the people had to get tattooed and the tattoo was that of a number and that number now replaced your name. Then after that the sent you into room and they
gave you the same clothes. After that moment you definitely lost your individuality because you looked like everyone else and everything about you has been taken away so you start to think that you a just one of a million. These ideas are taken from pages 8 to 39 in the book, Night. The concentration camps seemed to bring out the worst in people because what happen was that all the people there reverted to animals and they only thought on their minds was me. Most of them wanted to survive as an individual rather than helping out and surviving as a group. The issue of primary importance for the prisoners was survival by any means necessary. Either young or old, everyone wants to get out the concentration camps alive. Everyone had a different method of
survival, one example of that is that some people step over other people to survive but others actually tried to be social and helpful, so that family and friends of theirs could survive also. There is a four point methodology that can be used to understand more the situation that both authors were in.
The nature of the universe is life in the concentration camp for men. Our role is that we have to do everything in our power to survive the concentration camps. The flaw is that not everyone wants to do everything in their power to survive the concentration camps. The remedy is that you would have to give the people that do not want to live a reason for living. You can tell them that their family members are waiting for them when they get out or someone needs them to be alive, so they could survive another day. Wiesel talks about how everyone has something inside them that they want to live for, but if they cannot see that then someone will have tell them about it. Wiesel believes that we should all see our something that makes us want to live because life is very valuable and you cannot just let it go like that. In the reading of both these books, I have learned many things about the human race. I learned how cruel it can be and how fragile it can be.
I believe that if I was in a position of either being a prisoner, a SS man or a Kapo, I really do not know how I would act. If I was a SS man, I probably would have listen my conscience and done everything in my power to get out of that position. If I was a prisoner, I would probably do everything in my power to live and survive the camps. If I was a Kapo, I would not treated my follow men bad so that I will not face any harm. Even though I think I would have done these things if I was in those positions, I probably would have done something else because I can never really understand the situation and the experience of it.
 

710
Sophocles "Oedipus the King" is a tragic play which discusses the tragic discovery of Oedipus that he has killed his father and married his mother. The story of Oedipus was well known to the athenian’s. Oedipus is the embodiement of the perfect Athenian. He is self-confident, intelligent, and strong willed. Ironically these are the very traits which bring about his tragic discovery. Oedipus gained the rule of Thebes by answering the riddle of Sphinx. Sophocles used the riddle of the sphinx as a metaphor for the 3 phases of Oedipus’ life and to futher characterized him as a tragic man. The Sphinx posed the following riddle to all who came to obtain the rule of thebes: "What is it that walks on 4 feet and 2 feet and 3 feet and has only one voice, when it walks on most feet it is the weakest?" Oedipus correctly answered "Man" and became the king of Thebes. This riddle is a metaphor for the life of Oedipus. As a child man crawls on his hands and knees this is the four feet to which the Sphinx refers. Also man is at his weakest as a small child. He depends solely on others for his nourishment and well being. Oedipus was the child of Jocasta and King Laius who was taken to the mountain by a shepard to be killed so the omen of the god apollo that Laius’ son would kill him and lay with Jocasta would not come true. Oedipus was the weakest of his life at this point. If it has not been for the shepard spairing his life and giving him to Polybus to raise as his own Oedipus would have died. Man walks on 2 feet when he has matured. This is a metaphor for Oedipus when he reaches adulthood and leaves Corinth to escape the oracle. Oedipus meets up with a band of travelers and in a rage kills them. Inadvertently Oedipus has killed his own father. Oedipus then answers the riddle of the sphinx and becomes king of Thebes. By becoming king of Thebes he marries Jocasta the Queen of thebes and his own mother. Many years later after bearing children with Jocasta a plague kills many of the inhabitants of Thebes. Oedipus is told by the gods to find the killer of Laius. He is very dilligent in the inquiriy and finally comes to the horrible truth that he himself is the murderer. Jocasta kills herself at the horrible realization that she has layed with her son and Oedipus puts out his eyes at finally seeing the truth. This fulfills the final part of the Sphinx’s riddle for Oedipus will have to walk with a cane for the rest of his life because of his blindness, this will give him the 3 feet which man walks with at the end of his years. Oedipus used his intellect and diligence to answer the riddle of the Sphinx. Many of the most intelligent young men of thebes has been killed attempting to answer the riddle but Oedipus proved his intelligence superior to theirs. Oedipus uses the same intelligence and perseverence to find the killer of Laius. He does not give up his search even when Jocasta warns him to stop and let the matter rest. He calls the shepard and interrogates him till he discovers the horrifying truth that he is the killer. Oedipus’ intelligence was ultimately his flaw. Also, if Oedipus had not had been as coarageous he would have have never ventured to answer the riddle of the Sphinx. Thus even though he had killed his father he would have never become king of Thebes and laid with his mother. In addition, if Oedipus had had the courage but not the intelligence the Spinx would have killed him for answering the riddle incorrectly. Sophocles used this to characterized Oedipus as a tragic man for he came about his tragic discovery not because of an evil act or an evil trait but because of the person he was. Oedipus traits which gave him riches and power ultimately led to his tragic ending. Also, the god apollo did not predestine that Oedipus would kill his father and marry his mother by the oracle, he only stated what he knew was inevitable because of who Oedipus was. The sphinx’s riddle was used by Sophocles to characterize Oedipus as a tragic man and as a parallel to his life. The riddle describes the 3 stages which Oedipus went through in his life. Also in answering the riddle Oedipus inevitable brought about his own tragic ending by a horrible discovery.

909
In the play Oedipus Rex by Sophocles, Oedipus is a classic tragic hero. According to Aristotle's definition, Oedipus is a tragic hero because he is a king whose life falls apart when he finds out his life story. There are a number of characteristics described by Aristotle that identify a tragic hero. For example, a tragic hero must cause his own downfall; his fate is not deserved, and his punishment exceeds the crime; he also must be of noble stature and have greatness. Oedipus is in love with his idealized self, but neither the grandiose nor the depressive "Narcissus" can really love himself (Miller 67). All of the above characteristics make Oedipus a tragic hero according to Aristotle's ideas about tragedy, and a narcissist according to Alice Miller's The Drama of the Gifted Child: The Search for the True Self. Using Oedipus as an ideal model, Aristotle says that a tragic hero must be an important or influential man who makes an error in judgment, and who must then suffer the consequences of his actions. Those actions are seen when Oedipus forces Teiresias to reveal his destiny and his father's name. When Teiresias tries to warn him by saying "This day will give you parents and destroy you" (Sophocles line 428), Oedipus still does not care and proceeds with his questioning. The tragic hero must learn a lesson from his errors in judgment and become an example to the audience of what happens when great men fall from their lofty social or political positions. According to Miller, a person who is great, who is admired everywhere, and needs this admiration to survive, has one of the extreme forms of narcissism, which is grandiosity. Grandiosity can be seen when a person admires himself, his qualities, such as beauty, cleverness, and talents, and his success and achievements greatly. If one of these happens to fail, then the catastrophe of a severe depression is near (Miller 34). Those actions happen when the Herdsman tells Oedipus who his mother is, and Oedipus replies "Oh, oh, then everything has come out true. Light, I shall not look on you Again. I have been born where I should not be born, I have been married where I should not marry, I have killed whom I should not kill; now all is clear" (Sophocles lines 1144). Oedipus's decision to pursue his questioning is wrong; his grandiosity blinded him and, therefore, his fate is not deserved, but it is far beyond his control. A prophecy is foretold to Laius, the father of Oedipus, that the destiny of Oedipus is a terrible one beyond his control. But when it is prophesized to Oedipus, he sets forth from the city of his foster parents in order to prevent this terrible fate from occurring. Oedipus's destiny is not deserved because he is being punished for his parent's actions. His birth parents seek the advice of the Delphi Oracle, who recommends that they should not have any children. When the boy is born, Laius is overcome with terror when he remembers the oracle. Oedipus is abandoned by his birth parents and is denied their love, which is what results in what Miller calls "Depression as Denial of the Self". Depression results from a denial of one's own emotional reactions, and we cannot really love if we deny our truth, the truth about our parents and caregivers as, well as about ourselves (Miller 43). The birth of Oedipus presets his destiny to result in tragedy even though he is of noble birth. In tragedies, protagonists are usually of the nobility to make their falls seem greater. Oedipus just happens to be born a prince, and he has saved a kingdom that is rightfully his from the Sphinx. His destiny is to be of noble stature from birth, which is denied to him by his parents, but given back by the Sphinx. His nobility deceived him as well as his reflection, since it shows only his perfect, wonderful face and not his inner world, his pain, his history (Miller 66). When he relies on his status, he is blind, not physically, but emotionally. He is blind in his actions; therefore he does not see that the questioning would bring him only misery. Later, after his self-inflicted blinding, Oedipus sees his actions as wrongdoing when he says "What use are my eyes to me, who could never - See anything pleasant again?" (Sophocles line 1293) and that blindness does not necessarily have to be physical as we can se when he says, "If I had sight, I know not with what eyes I would have looked" (Sophocles line 1325). In the play Oedipus Rex, Sophocles portrays the main character, Oedipus, as a good-natured person who has bad judgment and is frail. Oedipus makes a few fatal decisions and is condemned to profound suffering because of them. I agree with Aristotle that Oedipus' misfortune happens because of his tragic flaw. If he hadn't been so judgmental or narcissistic, as Miller would characterize a personality like Oedipus, he would never have killed King Laius and called Teiresias a liar. In the beginning, Teiresias is simply trying to ease him slowly into the truth; but Oedipus is too proud to see any truths, and he refuses to believe that he could have been responsible for such a horrible crime. He learns a lesson about life and how there is more to it than just one person's fate.

346
The Excruciating Truth of Oedipus Oedipus is a man of integrity and passion whose goal in life was to seek the raw truth. Throughout the story, he constantly tried to obtain that goal, but at times he tried to swallow his tongue because he sometimes had the inclination way down in his gut, he might be a killer. Worse then the fate of a killer, would be the reality of being married to his mother. If fate/destiny determines everything a person will do before they are born, as it suggests by the play, then what crime is Oedipus guilty of? I will answer that, MURDER. In my mind, when a person describes a pacific place, time, and event, and I was there, I would probably remember. “A land called Phocis, at a spot where the road from Delphi meets the road from Daulia. (Sophocles 41)” And with this, it really narrows it down to either knowing that you were a murderer, or wanting to deny being a murder. On the other hand, for a short time after he killed his father, Laius, I do not believe that he knew he was marrying his mother or that he killed his father. As a newborn, he was brought up by the king and queen of Cornith, where he was told by the Oracle of Delphi, that he would someday kill his father and marry his mother. Therefore, after this, he led himself to believe that he would never return to this town due to the fact of killing his father, but most of all, marring his mother. At this point, he was thinking just like any other human. Get out. Leeman 2 “Indeed I shall. I do. I vent it all on you. Yes, you, you planned this thing, and I suspect you of the very murder even, all but the actual stroke. And if you had your eyes I’d say you played the chief part to. (sophocles 20.)” And with this I come to a conclusion that he is not a cold-blooded murder, but a murder. He did a great cover up job, and do to the fact that he married his mother, shows that he didn’t know that he killed his father at first, or did he?

Of Mice and Men: Movie Vs. Book 
The movie 1992 movie version of Of Mice and Men shows differences along with similarities to the book written by John Steinbeck. Differences were common mainly within the plot of the story. The first notable variation was in the beginning. The book started off with George and Lennie walking on a dirt road near a swamp while the movie started off with George on a train with a flashback. This shows how the movie differs by starting off in a different time frame than the book. Another case in point of a small but noticeable plot change was when Lennie kills the puppy. The book states that Lennie is sitting on the ground of the barn crying with the puppy lying in front of him. On the contrary, the movie shows Lennie standing up with the puppy in his hands pacing back and forth while worried yet not crying. Hence, the movie provides a different picture for the viewer than Steinbeck gives for the reader. In the last instance, which possibly shows the greatest contradiction between the two, is the ending. The novel illustrates the ranch workers coming and finding that George had just killed Lennie. Slim tries to comfort George while they move away from the scene as Carlton says “Now what do ya ‘spose is eatn’ them two?” In sharp contrast to this, the movie ends with George on a train once again, possibly to make it a traditional denouement, and visualizing him working on the ranch with Lennie walking off into the sunset. Indeed, two completely dissimilar endings plot wise. Along with those differences there are aspects in the movie that show a strong resemblance to those in the book. For example, Lennie’s characteristic of being childlike shows in the movie as well as in the novel. John Malkovich who plays Lennie does a great job at showing a glimmering expression on his face when he looks at George as well as a playful expression when he is playing with the puppies. This is parallel to Steinbeck’s description of Lennie’s facial expressions. By the same the token, George’s character keeps his characteristic of being a father figure towards Lennie. George, played by Gary Sinise, does this primarily with his tone of voice by varying it from strict, such as when he is scolding Lennie about Curley’s wife, to more compassionate, for instance when he is cleaning the blood off Lennie’s face after the fight with Curley. The tone characteristics coincide with those described in the same situations in the book. A correlation is shown between the book and movie as well with the basic mood of the story. The dismal ambiance is illustrated through George’s look of helplessness and grief from Lennie’s mistakes. The sense of a righteous closure is also felt at the end due to the fact that even though Lennie had been shot point blank by the only person in the world that had an ounce of care or affection for him, the feeling that it was the only suitable action for George to take resides in the movie in an almost equivalent way to Steinbeck’s novel. To recapitulate, John Steinbeck’s novel Of Mice and Men possesses aspects of resemblance as well as discrepancy to the 1992 film version of the classic narrative.
 

Of Mice & Men compared to My Brother Jack 
Sow how the personalities of the principle characters have affected their relationships and the power they have been able to exert in those relationships.
In society, the identity/personality of people often affects their relationships and the power they have within those relationships. The issue of power varies considerably in law and moral values, and the amount of power obtained varies in accordance to the position of whom in the relationship it is held by. It is then dependent on the personality of the person as whether the power is exerted or not, and if so how it is done. Through the novels ‘Of Mice and Men’ and ‘My Brother Jack’ parallels can be drawn between principle characters in reference to their personalities and how this affects their relationships and the power they have been able to exert in those relationships. There are many similarities between the characters of both novels such as George and Lennie with Jack and Davy, Curly and his wife with Jack Senior and Min, also the relationship that Curly and Davy had with those in the workforce and the power they exerted through that. From these examples you will discover the affect of power one has through their personalities and the relationships they have.
In ‘Of Mice and Men’ the two main characters, George and Lennie, have a very close relationship. George and Lennie were best friends and went everywhere together, always looking after each other.
George was a character with leadership skills, he was the one who provided for the two, and this was mainly due to the fact he was the brains out of the pair. He was responsible, alert and very smart, and it was because of these factors that made him a very cunning sort of person. In their friendship George was the parental figure to Lennie as it is demonstrated in the following quote:
“ George undid his bundle and bought out three cans of beans. He stood them
about the fire, close in against the blaze, but not quite touching the flame”
(Page 11)
Here George cooks tea for Lennie, just like a parental figure. Through the portrayal of a parental figure, George had power over Lennie. Lennie looked up to George and as a result he would do what George told him. George used his power over Lennie to control him, controlling what he said and did. This control was used to George’s advantage as it was through his power over Lennie that George was able to find work, with only a main concern for himself. Despite all that George was, Lennie also had power in their relationship. Lennie can be described as being dumb, irresponsible, of child innocence, hopeful, dependent on George and physically very strong. His power in the relationship, surprisingly, did not lie in his physical strength, it lay in his ability to manipulate George through his characteristic of a child like innocence. Lennie’s power was emotional power, and he used it to manipulate George into having pity for him by way of guilt.
“Cause I can jus’ as well go away, George, an’ live
in a cave” (page 17)
As Lennie was dumb, his physical power was not used properly to his best advantage. Lennie only used his physical power to protect George and himself, and it was even at these times that he used it on command from George.
The relationship George and Lennie had was very similar to that of Jack and Davy. Though George and Lennie were not brothers like Jack and Davy, they had a brotherly relationship between them. In “ My Brother Jack” Jack and Davy shared a brotherly relationship. It wasn’t one that was not overly close but it was one where the younger brother looked up to the older one, when they were young. Though as time went on and they grew into adults with their own families the position each of them held swapped, having the older brother looking up to the younger one as situations changed. Jack was a very loud person, who was very confident in himself for the first half of the book. He was straight forward- never beating around the bush, humorous, bold/brave, strong willed, very loyal and open. From these traits Jack became a very popular boy in his childhood, something Davy was not, making him want to be even more like his older brother. This strong influence was very powerful in the relationship between the two brothers, so powerful that Davy wanted to prove he could be just as good- if not better than his big brother. Such a feeling, as this, led Davy to beat up a "special" child.
“ I hit him and hit him and hit him until his face was covered with blood…I saw Jack approaching. I looked across for his approbation, but hi face was hard set.”
(page 45-46)
Davy, in comparison to Jack, was quite the opposite. Davy was quiet, was devious, had selfish motives, lacked in loyalty, and was a follower with no real goals or opinions- similar to Lennie only much smarter and alert. Davy was easily manipulated, which is particularly demonstrated through his relationship with Helen. Helen told Davy what to do, how to run his life etc, and Davy chose not to do anything about it. Again in this relationship Davy is the follower, but he remains powerless in this relationship throughout the novel where it is not the case in the relationship between Jack and Davy.
When the two brothers became adults Davy became the more popular one out of the two. It was through Davy’s work that he was able to achieve public recognition and hence popularity, whereas Jack hadn’t become more than a husband with a family to support. Jack now looked up to Davy and all his success, which led him to later live his life through Davy.
“… he had invested all his brave pride and passion and purpose in me.
I had become his vicarious adventure” (Page 365)
Davy, and what he had become now had power over Jack’s life. Davy hadn’t obtained this power over Jack’s life intentionally, it wasn’t until toward the end that Davy realised the impact he had on his brother, and the same can also be said for Jack when he and Davy were young.
 
The relationships above are ones of friendship and kinsman, both of which are common in both novels. Another type of relationship commonly found in both novels is the relationship between husband and wife. In “ Of Mice and Men” Curly and wife had a very unstable marriage. It lacked communication, love and respect. Curly was manipulative, intimidating, ignorant and very insensitive. All of these characteristics were taken into the marriage, and affected his wife who was a very lonely young women with dreams and the need to be loved. She was also very devious and was not the least bit stupid. It is obvious to say that Curly had power over his wife in their marriage as she never once attempted to leave Curly this could be due to the fact that she was married to a man with a house, a great job and money. Possessions like this added to the power Curly had over her. The only type of power Curly’s wife had, which is recognised through the text, is power over Curly’s mind. Curly’s wife often would wander off and flirt with the male workers on the ranch, and being the beautiful woman that she was, men would take notice. The thought of this scared Curly and would often stress him out, resulting in him constantly looking for her.
“ ‘You seen a girl around here?’ he demanded angrily.” (Page 39)
In the novel “My Brother Jack” the marriage relationship between Jack Senior and Min has similarities to that of Curly and his wife. These similarities only cover the fact that the husband is the most dominant and powerful in the relationships and that the personalities of them are also very much the same. Jack Senior had the same characteristics as Curly, he was a chauvinist, authoritative, self centered, insensitive, and insocialable. He had physical power over his children also which is seen when he beat Jack and Davy. A lot of Jack Senior’s traits are responsible for his power and the difficult marriage. Min, his wife, was a very loving, family orientated, self-sacrificing person- the complete opposite to her husband. She loved Jack Senior very much and that is why she stayed with him, she probably couldn’t bare the thought of leaving him to fend for himself. Min didn’t have much power, and the power that she did possess was used not for her own benefit but for the benefit of others. Min was a very reserved person. Overtime she had found a way to neutralise herself from the power Jack senior had over her so that she felt safe and protected.
“… Dad was powerless to hurt or intimidate or frighten her” (Page 216)
In both novels there was at least one character that through their personalities, and relationships with those in the work force, they were able to exert power.
The characters I am referring to are Curly, “Of Mice and Men”, and Davy, “My Brother Jack”. Both these characters, through their personalities, in some way abused or took advantage of the power they had in the relationships with fellow workers. The workers did not respect Curly, having his personality already been described above. He only had power over weak people that could not stand up for themself. Using the tool of manipulation he would get his own way. Curly loved to control people and it was these factors which were the main reason why Curly’s relationship with the other workers was not well established, he never allowed himself to be brought to their standard. Davy had similar characteristics but wasn’t as controlling. Davy kept to himself and done his job, though when he went over seas Davy used his friends. Again here it was in his personality to be lazy and use others. A lot of what Davy wrote about wasn’t written at first hand, he gathered information from those who had been in the incident or at it when it occurred. He took the information, wrote it up and put his name on it. It was very deceiving as it led people to believe that he was there in the action, when he wasn’t. Davy obtains power through the recognition of his pieces of work, and from the fame that came with it. This fame was not gained fairly; the same too for the power Curly had because he gained his through his father being the head boss of the ranch.
Clearly from the personalities of the principle characters from the novels “Of Mice and Men” and “ My Brother Jack” their relationships and the power they exerted from those relationships were affected in one way or another. Through the relationships of brothers to husband and wife to work colleges, the personality of a person will determine the types of relationships they will have and the power they will exert within them, whether it be for beneficiary reasons or not. What type of relationships do you have, based on your personality?

1486
This part of the story has to do with Santiago against nature and the sea. In this part of the story, he goes out and fights nature in the form of terrible forces and dangerous creatures, among them, a marlin, sharks and hunger. He starts the story in a small skiff and moves out in a journey to capture a fish after a long losing streak of eighty-four days. Unfortunately his friend must desert him due to this problem and a greater force, his parents. Santiago must go out into the danger alone. For three harsh days and nights he fights a fish of enormous power. This is the second form of nature he must conquer. Earlier in the story, the first part of nature is himself, for which he must fight off his hunger. This is a harsh part of the story. He manages though to get a few bites in the form of flying fish and dolphin of which he would like to have salt on. This part of the story tells of a cold and harsh sea, that is, one that has value and mystery as well as death and danger. It has commercial value as well as the population of life in it. It is dark and treacherous though, and every day there is a challenge. A similar story tells about a tidal pool with life called `Cannery Road'. This part of the story has to deal with figures of Christ. It mainly deals with Santiago as being a figure of Christ and other characters as props, that is, characters which carry out the form of biblical themes. On the day before he leaves when he wakes up, Manolin, his helper, comes to his aid with food and drink. Also a point that might be good is that he has had bad luck with his goal for a great period of time and is sure it will work this time. Later, though, when Santiago needs him for the quest he sets out to do, Manolin deserts him, although he may not have wanted to at this time. In the novel Santiago comes upon a force bigger than his skiff, the marlin which misleads him out far past his intended reach. This is where he starts to lose his strength against something which seems a greater force. Santiago has a struggle of three days, which is significent because of the three days in Easter, and continues to fight on though his goal may not aquire anything. This is another idea through which Christ did, a struggle to get a goal done even though it may mean certain destruction to himself. This might accomplish nothing but the satisfaction of doing this and also has great risks. Finally he comes upon a painful experience with his hand which is in great pain and won't move. This is useful in the place where Christ loses his physical self and has less to deal with. On the third day, he recovers himself and returns to his home even though his only remaining treasure was a broken skiff, experience, and a torn up marlin. And in the final conclusion, you can see him dragging the mast of his skiff, a cross-like object, in his hand. This story has a certain sequence of events, first it has a hunter vs. his prey. This hunter does respect th e prey. Throughout the book it has this series of events: encounter, battle, defeat, and respect for the prey. This is Hemmingway's `Code of Honor'. This part of the novel has to do with relationships between two characters. The first to discuss are Santiago and Manolin, Manolin being the small follower of the old man named Santiago. Manolin is a small person that follows Santiago and listens to his wisdom. They treat each other unfriendly though for Manolin calls the Santiago 'old man' and he calls Manolin `boy' which seems to be absurd. In that situation I would consider both of them to go see a doctor. The next relationship to talk about would be that between Santiago and the village, which seems to be much better. He is given credit for food and he also is waiting to show his greatness to the villageby catching a great fish as soon as he can. His thought on that, though, is that any fisherman can ctach it during the easy season but only a few can go out and catch one during the hard season. He has no consideration for the luck, and would rather try to fish through being exact rather than being lucky. The other relationship in this story has to do with Manolin and his parents. Manolin seems to be very rebellious against his parents, although he does submit to their demands. Santiago's greatest link to the village is the boy. Santiago may be poor in the story, yet is proud. This story when compared to being imaginative is good, but in real life is somewhat of a `Fish Story'. The part where an old man being able to load in a ton of fish is very unimaginable. The scenario, though, is very interesting for the part of the old man. He goes out all alone into the depths of the ocean without an idea for what is in store. This story has good points, for when it comes to the better parts of the story, it emphasizes by placing in mind step by step of the way he does certain actions. The part of the story which, to the best of my belief, had no part or reference in the story was the dream of lions on a beach of Africa, which this fisherman probably had never even visited much less seeing lions on a beach. This was like most stories in the main plot. First characters are introduced, then a threat reveals itself, showing true natures of all the characters, and finally the threat is fought off or it remains, leaving the reader in suspense. This had a good plot but needed more to go on in my opinion. Hemingway's strong parts of this story are emphasized on vocabulary. He probably learned these fisherman terms for he once was a fisherman in Cuba. There is one problem to this, though. Throughout the story he uses these terms over and over although the ordinary person, like me, would forget them after the first use of them and unfortunately he doesn't ever re-coin the terms again throughout the book. Some vocabulary he uses stands for sharks or the sea itself. Others he uses for bait. The main idea though in this part is to let the reader get the feel for the life, setting and character of the fisherman himself. This is a great move to place yet is also very hard to co-exist with the average reader. This has some good points, though, and among them is review. The reader must review the story and skim it in order to rethink the concept of the word. Then he or she must return to the current position in the book and place it into the text. The concept of vocabulary is a standard not to live by, and should not be placed into most books unless the terms are to be used many times throughout the book. Hemingway has merged three themes already mentioned above successfully unto this book. Among them are figures of Christ, Nature (the sea), and a code of honor. This was challenging. The obvious ones were nature, it's cruelty and compassion. Nature caused his hand pain yet healed it, caused hunger yet satisfied it, and gave the fish yet reclaimed it. This is the way nature works. Nature is actually more luck than a set of rules, for it can shift back and forth with the greatest of ease. The second theme, religion, could not be easily pulled from the text. The best clue to where it happens is the falls of Santiago as well as his carrying the mast. This symbolizes the end of Christ, although Santiago on the other hand is just retiring for the night. But it could be interpreted as the end of the book for which it is. The code of honor is not actually probably the hardest to interpret. It can only be pulled from context, which is the hardest to do. It has mainly to do with the rise, battle and fall of the prey and respect following. The problem in this is that Santiago was at fault for expanding out so far, and it was dangerous. This is similiar to the book A Journey to the Center of the Earth, which I recently read.

1657
Polonius: A Fool in Shakespeare’s Hamlet Hamlet is the most popular of Shakespeare’s plays for theater audiences and readers. It has been acted live in countries throughout the world and has been translated into every language. Polonius is one of the major characters in Hamlet, his role in the play is of great interest to scholars. Parts of Hamlet present Polonius as a fool, whose love of his own voice leads to his constant babbling. Scholars have been analyzing the character of Polonius for centuries, and his role in Hamlet will continue to be analyzed for centuries to come. Scholars believe that Shakespeare created Polonius as a fool because of his foolish dialogue throughout the play. Polonius granted Laertes permission to go back to school in France. While saying good-bye in his chambers, Polonius tells his son: Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in, Bear’t that th’ opposed may beware of thee. Give every man they ear, but few thy voice. Take each man’s censure, but reserve they judgment. Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy) For the apparel oft proclaims the man, And they in France of the best rank and station (Are) of a most select and generous chief in that. Neither a borrower or a lender (be,) For (loan) oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing (dulls the) edge of husbandry. This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. (1. 3. 71-87) The advice that Polonius gives to Laertes is simple and sounds foolish being told to a person of Laertes’ age. Martin Orkin comments on the nature of Polonius’ speech: 2 “Shakespeare’s first audience would recognize in Polonius’ predilection for such commonplace expressions of worldly wisdom a mind that runs along conventional tracks, sticking only to what is practically useful in terms of worldly self-advancement” (Orkin 179). Polonius gives Laertes simple advice, to keep his thoughts to himself and to never lend or borrow money. While this advice is simple, when looked at in full context his advice to his son is all about self-advancement. Polonius will go to all extremes to protect his reputation. Grebanier states on the foolishness of Polonius’ speech: “Such guidance will do for those who wish to make the world their prey, but it is dignified by no humanity. Who can live humanly without ever borrowing or lending? Is one to turn his back on his best friend in an hour of need?” (Grebanier 285). Scholars believe that the advice Polonius gives to his son is simple, an when looked at in full context, is foolish and selfish. After Laertes returns to Paris, Polonius send his servant Reynaldo to Paris to spy on Laertes and question his acquaintances. Polonius says to Reynaldo: At “closes in the consequence”-ay, marry- He closes thus: “I know the gentleman. I saw him yesterday,” or “th’ other day” (Or then, or then, with such or such), “and as you say, There was he gaming, there (o’ertook) in’s rouse, There falling out at tennis”, or perchance “I saw him enter such a house of sale”- Videlicet, a brothel- or so forth. See you now Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth; And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out. (2. 1. 61-75) 3 By spying on Laertes, Polonius is showing the audience and the reader, that he does now trust him. After giving Laertes a speech on how to behave, Polonius still feels that he has to spy on his son. Joan Hartwig comments on Polonius’ plan to spy on his son: “A machiavellian schemer who takes his plotting to absurd proportions, Polonius pursues ‘indirection’ for its own sake. His efforts to discover Laertes’ reputation in Paris assume that Laertes will not follow his earlier advice; thus, the later words become a comic reduction of his previous sermon to his son” (Hartwig 218). Another reason for Polonius’ foolishness is that Polonius is convinced, and tries convincing others, that the reason for Hamlet’s madness is his love for Ophelia. He tells Ophelia: Come, go with me. I will go seek the king. This is the very ecstasy love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passions under heaven That does afflict out natures. I am sorry. What, have you given him any hard words of late? (2. 1. 113-119) After hearing of Hamlet’s madness, he immediately reaches a conclusion and believes, throughout the play, that he is correct. He does not consider other possibilities and foolishly jumps to the conclusion that Hamlet is mad for Ophelia’s love. R.S. White believes that Polonius should have considered other options for Hamlet’s madness: “But when saying that it is simply Ophelia’s rejection that has made Hamlet mad, he is ignorant of the predisposed mental state of the young man caused by his mother’s remarriage, the recent encounter with the ghost and the whole repressive machinery of Denmark’s social 4 and political life” (White 67). Polonius foolishly believes that he knows what underlies Hamlet’s madness, while Hamlet, and the audience, knows that he is wrong. Polonius continues to demonstrate his foolishness by babbling and losing his train of argumentation when speaking to the King and Queen. Polonius is convinced that Hamlet is mad in love for Ophelia and says: My liege, and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. Therefore, (since) brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, I will be brief. Your noble son is mad. ‘Mad’ call I it, for, to define true madness, What is ‘t but to be nothing else but mad? But let that go. (2. 2. 93-102) He says that he will be brief, but continues to babble. The Queen responds to his statement by saying “More matter with less art” (2. 2. 103). The Queen acknowledges Polonius’ constant babbling and wants him to get quickly to the point. Grebanier comments on the character of Polonius: “Nothing is left of is ability and shrewdness but a few tags, a few catch-phrases, to which, even when they do express some grains of truth, he pays scant heed in his own demeanor. It is he, for example, who utters the celebrated: ‘brevity is the soul of wit’ (2. 2. 90) -a profound truth; but no character in Shakespeare is so long winded as Polonius” (Grebanier 283). Polonius continues to complicate a simple statement and is viewed as a babbling fool by scholars. Throughout the play, Hamlet continues to insult Polonius and make him look foolish to the audience. Hamlet tells Polonius: “You are a fishmonger” (2. 2. 190). 5 According to Leo Kirschbaum: “A fishmonger is a barrel, one who employs a prostitute for his business. Hamlet is obliquely telling the old councilor that he is using his own daughter for evil ends” (Kirschbaum 86). After Hamlet insults Polonius and Ophelia, Polonius still refuses to give up this theory that Hamlet is madly in love. Martin Dodsworth comments on the reaction of Polonius after Hamlet insults him: “Polonius accepts the bad treatment meeted out to him as that of a man who is out of his mind: ‘How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. He is far gone’” (Dodsworth 100). The Shakespearean audience viewed Hamlet as the protagonist of the play, and some scholars believe that Polonius served as his perfect foil. Bert States comments, “Polonius is not only the perfect foil for Hamlet’s wit (since irony is the mortal enemy of the order prone mind), but a shadow of Hamlet as well. Indeed, Polonius literally shadows Hamlet, or tails him and in shadowing him falls into a thematic parody of his own habits” (States 116). Thus, Polonius’ role in the play as Hamlet’s foil, would be the role of the fool. The last time Polonius appears in Hamlet is wen he hides behind a curtain in Gertrude’s room, to hear Hamlet’s conversation with his mother. Hamlet frightens Gertrude and she cries for help. Immediately after, Polonius foolishly echoes her cry and is stabbed by Hamlet, thinking it is Claudius. Hamlet, realizing he has killed Polonius says: Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell. I took thee for my better. (3. 4. 38-39) Elizabeth Oakes comments on this scene, “Although Polonius is not in motley, Hamlet calls him a fool often enough, although nowhere more significantly than in the closet scene 6 after the murder” (Oakes 106). Hamlet ruthlessly calls Polonius a fool, and his opinion, as the play’s protagonist, would greatly influence an Elizabethan audience’s view of Polonius. When Gertrude tells Claudius of Polonius’ death, Claudius responds by saying: O heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there. (4. 1. 13-14) Claudius knows that Polonius has been killed in his place. Oakes comments on Polonius’ role a the plays fool: “He is suited for this role because of his incarnation of the fool, the one traditionally chosen as a substitute for the king in ritual” (Oakes 106). Scholars view Polonius as a character mocked throughout the play and the nature of his death, as the Kings substitute, lead scholars to view him as a fool. In conclusion, Shakespeare created Polonius as a very unique and complex character. Scholars argue and will continue to argue over the reasons for Polonius’ foolishness. Throughout the play Polonius tends to act foolish thinking that he knows the reason for Hamlet’s madness, while the audience knows that he is wrong. Shakespeare created Polonius as a controversial character and only he will ever know why Polonius was created so foolish. Bibliography Works Cited Grebanier, Bernard. The Heart of Hamlet. New York: Thomas Y. Cromwell Co, 1960. Hartwig, Joan. “Parodic Polonius”. Texas Studies in Literature and Language: vol. 13, 1971. Kirschbaum, Leo. Character and Characterization in Shakespeare. Detroit: Wayne State UP, 1962. Oakes, Elizabeth. “Polonius, the Man behind the Arras: A Jungian Study.” New Essays on Hamlet. New York: AMS Press, 1994. Orkin, Martin. “Hamlet and the Security of the South African State.” Critical Essays on Shakespeare’s Hamlet. New York: G.K. Hall and Co, 1995. Shakespeare, William. The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. New York: Washington Square Press published by Pocket Books, 1992. States, Bert O. Hamlet and the Concept of Character. Baltimore: John Hopkins UP, 1992.

Pygmalion
Higgins' Philosophy Professor Higgins is seen throughout
Pygmalion as a very rude man. While one may expect a well
educated man, such as Higgins, to be a gentleman, he is far
from it. Higgins believes that how you treated someone is
not important, as long as you treat everyone equally. The
great secret, Eliza, is not having bad manners or good
manners or any other particular sort of manners, but having
the same manner for all human souls: in short, behaving as if
you were in Heaven, where there are no third-class
carriages, and one soul is as good as another. -Higgins, Act
V Pygmalion. Higgins presents this theory to Eliza, in hope
of justifying his treatment of her. This theory would be fine
IF Higgins himself lived by it. Henry Higgins, however, lives
by a variety of variations of this philosophy. It is easily seen
how Higgins follows this theory. He is consistently rude
towards Eliza, Mrs. Pearce, and his mother. His manner is
the same to each of them, in accordance to his philosophy.
However the Higgins we see at the parties and in good times
with Pickering is well mannered. This apparent discrepancy
between Higgins' actions and his word, may not exist,
depending on the interpretation of this theory. There are two
possible translations of Higgins' philosophy. It can be viewed
as treating everyone the same all of the time or treating
everyone equally at a particular time. It is obvious that
Higgins does not treat everyone equally all of the time, as
witnessed by his actions when he is in "one of his states" (as
Mrs. Higgins' parlor maid calls it). The Higgins that we see in
Mrs. Higgins' parlor is not the same Higgins we see at the
parties. When in "the state" Henry Higgins wanders aimlessly
around the parlor, irrationally moving from chair to chair,
highly unlike the calm Professor Higgins we see at the ball.
Higgins does not believe that a person should have the same
manner towards everyone all of the time, but that a person
should treat everyone equally at a given time (or in a certain
situation). When he is in "one of those states" his manner is
the same towards everyone; he is equally rude and
disrespectful to all. Yet when minding his manners, as he
does at the parties, he can be a gentleman. If the second
meaning of Higgins' theory, that he treats everyone equally at
a particular time, is taken as his philosophy, there is one
major flaw. Higgins never respects Eliza, no matter who is
around. In Act V of Pygmalion, Eliza confronts him about his
manner towards her. "He (Pickering) treats a flower girl as
duchess." Higgins, replying to Eliza, "And I treat a duchess
as a flower girl." In an attempt to justify this Higgins replies
"The question is not whether I treat you rudely, but whether
you ever heard me treat anyone else better." Eliza does not
answer this question but the reader knows that Higgins has
treated others better than Eliza. At the parties, for example,
Higgins is a gentleman to the hosts and other guest, but still
treats Eliza as his "experiment." Higgins could never see the
"new" Eliza. Higgins only saw the dirty flower girl that had
become his "experiment." Much like an author never sees a
work as finished, Higgins could not view Eliza lady or
duchess. Since Higgins knew where Eliza came from it was
difficult for him to make her parts fit together as a
masterpiece that he respected. Part of Higgins' problem in
recognizing the "new" Eliza is his immaturity. He does not
see her as what she is, he only sees her as what she was.
This immaturity is representative of Higgins' childish
tendencies that the reader can see throughout the play.
Higgins' child-like actions can partially explain the variations
in his philosophy. Try to imagine Higgins as a young
teenager. A young Higgins, or any teenage boy for that
matter, has a very limited outlook. They treat everyone the
same; depending on the situation they may be little gentlemen
or rude dudes. When around parents the teenager is rude
and inconsiderate yet when among his friends he a complete
gentleman. The adult Higgins' actions are the same as the
child.
 

Red Badge Of Courage
Henry
In Stephen Crane's novel "The Red Badge of Courage", we examine the episodes of war through the eyes of the main character, Henry Fleming. Because the book is rather vague about many details, we don't know how old Henry is, what he looks like, or where he comes from. We do know that Henry is from somewhere in New York and that he was raised by his mother. Although some people argue that throughout the novel Henry matures and becomes a better person, facts from the book show just the opposite. Henry is a conceited , smug young man who sees himself as a martyr and a hero; when in fact he is a coward. Henry begins his journey by signing up for the Union army. While this may seem like a brave step, Henry takes it for the wrong reasons. He is unsure of the Union cause, and without really understanding what he was fighting for, Henry saw visions of himself as a hero. Henry's thoughts of war are rather distorted: He had read signs of marches, sieges, conflicts, and he had longed to see it all. His busy mind had drawn for him large pictures, extravagant in color, lurid with breathless deeds(Crane, 3). This simply shows that Henry had romanticized the was to something of a glorious adventure in his head. Even when his mother tries to give him rational advice, Henry sat disappointed, expecting a speech on heroism and pride.
When Henry and his regiment (the 304th New York) finally integrate into camp life, he begins to question himself. His regiment had been static for a long time and Hauptman 2
Henry becomes bored and unhappy. For time he begins to question his bravery and he feels rather insecure. In the regiments first battle, Henry fights well. His admiration for himself reaches a disgusting level: He felt that he was a fine fellow. He saw himself even with those ideals that he had considered far beyond him. He smiled in deep gratification (Crane, 30). In this passage one can see Henry beginning to falsely view himself as a hero. At the beginning of the 304th New York regiment's second battle, Henry notices that two other soldiers are running in fear of the fight. He suddenly becomes rather scared and flees the battle as well. He tries to rationalize his actions to himself by saying: Death about to thrust him between the shoulder blades was far more dreadful than death about to smite him between the eyes (Crane, 32). However, when Henry discovers that they had won the battle, he feels angry and jealous of the other soldiers: The youth cringed as if discovered at a crime...The imbecile line had remained and become victorious...He turned away, amazed and angry. He felt that he had been wronged(Crane 34).
Now, Henry is not fleeing in terror, but in shame. He is trying to run away from his own cowardice. He begins to pity himself and loose faith in his own romanticized reasons for enlisting. After walking through the woods for a long time, Henry came upon a dead soldier. The sight of the body scares him and again he flees from the harsh realities of war. Later in the novel, Henry is knocked in the head with a rifle by a retreating Union soldier. Henry is ashamed of the wound and becomes embarrassed and scared that the other soldiers will tease him. When he meets back up with his regiment, they question his wound. Henry lies and makes up some story about a fight with another regiment: I've- I've had an awful time. I've been all over. 'Way over on th' right. Terrible fightin' over there. I had an awful time. I got separated from the reg'ment. Over on th' right, I got Hauptman 3
shot. I never see sech fightin'. Awful time. I don't see how I could'a got separated from th' reg'ment. I got shot, too(Crane, 62). The rest of Henry's regiment believe his tall tale and are amazed at his false bravery. The next day, Henry once again begins to view himself as a hero. He almost forgets that the wound wasn't made by a bullet, but by another Union soldier. He forgets about his past cowardly actions and becomes rather vain. He even goes so far as to criticize the generals. Henry's conceit continues to grow: His self pride was now entirely restored...when he remembered his fortunes of yesterday, and looked at them form a distance he began to see something fine there. He had license to be pompous and veteran-like (Crane, 71).
The second day, the regiment once again goes into battle. Here, Henry stops basking in thoughts of his own heroism, and is able to fight like a well-trained soldier. while he has made a real achievement in this battle, Henry sees it as his achievement and becomes pleased with himself. He revels in the praise bestowed upon him by the lieutenant and the colonel. When the fighting ends, Henry feels he was courageous and had finally become a man. Understanding Henry's personality is imperative to understand the real meaning of "The Red Badge of Courage". The book itself is about the romanticizing of the experience of was by a boy wanting to be a hero. While reading the book, I noticed that there are suggestions that Henry is actually becoming a better person, however, not to much later, there is almost always something that Henry does or says that contradicts it. I see the main character as a self-glorifying coward. He thinks only of himself and sees himself as a martyr. I feel that Henry has not changed that much by the end of the book. Even after fleeing from a battle, he can still tell himself that he is braver than another soldier. Also, Hauptman 4
Henry's feelings of love for the flag in Chapter 19 can simply be chalked up to childish romanticism. However, can see how this possibly could relate to war in today's world. Young soldiers go into battle with certain expectations. They want to be heroes and save the day, have over-sized wrought iron statues made of them and be remembered in history books. However, unlike Henry, once they have seen the ravages and truths of war, most become disheartened and disillusioned. Stephen Crane's original ending to the story shows Henry's naive view of himself as a brave soldier and as a hero. Henry ends his journey choosing to ignore that the other soldiers are plagued with war while he romanticizes and fantasizes about himself and his own glorious future: It rained. The procession of soldiers became a bedraggled train, despondent and muttering, marching with churning effort, in a trough of liquid brown mud under a low wretched sky. Yet the youth smiled, for he saw that the world was a world for him though many discovered it to be made of oaths and walking sticks (Crane, 109).
 

Redstorm Rising Book Report
Red Storm Rising is a book about the Soviet Union and Russia's attempt to overtake the Atlantic so they can launch an offensive against the United States of America and maybe other NATO countries such as England and Germany. The story begins in 1980 at a very productive but old, Soviet oil refinery in Nizhnevartovsk. The refinery is blown up by Islamic terrorists that hope to be 'heard' by their God Allah by commiting this violent action. The devestation of the refinery leads Russia into chaos with a much smaller supply of oil. The story escalates as the Russian army makes a push on Iraq to gain control over the precious oil fields to setup refineries and also an attack on Iceland. Conquering Iceland is an important step because this allows the Russians to reach farther into the Atlantic and possibly into North America with their aircraft. The Russian's greed for land control is immense and they are desperate for more resources and materials to manage more war campaigns. The Soviet Union soon decides that to gain ultimate power, Russian military must first cripple NATO and start the worst non-nuclear war imaginable.
This book is unique because the story is told through many different character's points of view.
Tom Clancy tells the story through eyes of NATO and Russian naval captains who command both surface and underwater boats. Most of the character's actions would seem reasonable at war time, making the story realistic. Almost every chapter in the book takes place in a different location during the war, on both the Russian and NATO fronts of battle. At the end of the book the Russians are defeated because they are severly outnumbered by NATO forces and are desperatly low on munitions, thus forcing them to retreat out of the countries they have occupied and return to their Soviet Union. Although the book is a long read, I enjoyed it because of the struggles between the two greatest military superpowers: the United States and Russia.
 


