



THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
a novella
by
BARBARA J. TAYLOR
Smashwords Edition
Copyright 2011 Barbara J. Taylor
Cover Design Roberta Bates




License Notes: This ebook is licensed for your personal enjoyment only.  This ebook may not be resold or given away to other people.  If you would like to share this book with another person, please purchase an additional copy for each recipient.  If you are reading this book and did not purchase it, or it was not purchased for your use only, then please return to Smashwords.com and purchase your own copy.  Thank you for respecting the hard work of this author.




Now he has departed from this strange world a little ahead of me. That means nothing. People like us, who believe in physics, know that the distinction between past, present and future is only a stubbornly persistent illusion.
Albert Einstein


***


When I taught controversial theories in quantum physics, students were captivated by the cat experiment.  Naturally, they asked how a cat could be dead and alive at the same time.  Parallel universes.  Are they real?  Are they far away or up close?  Do you have to see something for it to exist?
“You start with questions,” I used to say.  “That is how you find your answers.”
 After my son Duncan’s murder, life became an experiment.  And the scientific method was my prayer and my salvation.


***




identifying the question


I started thinking out of the box a few months after what my mother referred to only as the senseless tragedy. 
“When did we fall into the habit of defining life in terms of our waking hours?” I asked the produce guy at Food Lion.  His plastic nametag read ‘Miles.’  Miles to go before I sleep, I thought.  He was spraying radishes with water from a tiny red nozzle.
“We have organic,” Miles said, sounding like a robot.  
I moved on to the meat section where a woman wearing a ketchup-stained tank top stared blankly at a pile of frozen briskets while keeping a grip on a squirming baby.  Maybe she was regretting the blue dolphin tattooed on her upper arm.  It must have seemed like a good idea at the time.  The things we do in our youth.  The mistakes in judgment.  The people we marry. 
“Sleeping could become the focus of existence at this point in history.  The be-all and end-all,” I said to her.  
“That would be awesome,” she sighed.  The butcher behind the glass hacked at a chicken with a cleaver while Michael Jackson sang; Beat it, beat it.  The grocery store had become a surreal and frightful place.
We live in troubling times and as a result the majority of our population roams around sleep deprived, crying out for an alternative reality—a pathway to deeper meaning.  Only a handful of brave and dedicated scientists have dared debate this provocative question: Is time more valuable awake or asleep?  Their under-funded research lies hidden in obscure journals because the government wants to cover up preliminary findings that sleeping as much as possible appears to be in the best interest of society.  It hit me right there at Food Lion that I was free to choose the infinity of the unconscious.  
“We’re free to choose,” I said in wonder.  By then, the woman had been replaced by a man in a business suit, punching the buttons on his cell phone in an angry way.  He needed a shave, but this look may have been intentional.
“All I want is a fresh salmon fillet,” he said, slapping the bell on top of the counter.  I flinched. 
Being confined to the conscious wasn’t doing a whole lot for me.  I reasoned we really aren’t born to haunt the aisles of Food Lion; we are born to dream.  It’s the only preparation we have for death, our most time-consuming state.  Our days on this planet are limited and it’s only logical we should spend them in creative exploration.  There’s no time like the present to give the unconscious free rein because some of us don’t even make it to middle age due to stress-related illnesses, accidents and crime.
“There’s no time like the present,” I said to the check-out girl as I fished around in my purse for money. 
“You said a mouthful,” she answered, popping her gum.  
I left with four containers of yogurt, all black cherry, and one baking potato; not recognizing the woman reflected in the plate glass window.  She was a stranger to me; no, possibly someone I had a class with in college or graduate school who hadn’t aged well.  I couldn’t remember her name.


***


After the murder I quit teaching and had nothing to shape my days except for contemplating various horrors.  I was too shocked to sleep.  There was a new and unsettling awareness of the sound of my own breathing and, at the same time, a neglect of certain basic functions.  Too many days stretched into an unknown future and the only sure things were the repetitiveness of shopping and the flood of concerns from implacable callers on National Public Radio talk shows.  
At first I thought I was only imagining that the lyrics of songs I’d heard all my life were downright nonsensical.  Classical was out because violins were unbearably painful to my psyche.  In the interest of keeping random emotions at bay, I stopped listening to music altogether.  Total silence was preferable, but peacefulness eluded me.  Noises of various kinds were ever-present.  So were unavoidable domestic chores I’d performed cheerfully in the past.
After showering I had to decide what to wear and then wash the clothing after wearing it, not to mention the sorting, drying, folding.  Eventually I’d be faced with buying new clothes and figuring out what to do with the old ones.  The whole relentless, exhausting cycle would repeat and repeat.  Years of life go down the drain in this fashion.  Grass must be fertilized and watered to remain green, and this is yet another never-ending activity we seem to be caught up in, ignoring the fact we are fighting losing battles in all directions.  Clothes wear out and lawns are inevitably overtaken by weeds.  Traveling to buy clothes and weed killer means we must have gasoline to power our individual gas-guzzling vehicles and before we know it we’re invading Iraq.  Politicians would do well to spend more time in bed dreaming up original alternatives to war.  To turn on the television and the radio is to be infected with bad music and news of the war and politics and death.  How the announcers could bring themselves to smile was beyond me.  
Duncan wasn’t killed in the war; he was killed downtown while walking home from the library.  A bunch of teenage boys were driving around in a red compact car.  One of them had a gun in his possession, as so many parents these days insist on exercising their right to bear arms and leave them on top of the refrigerator for their kids to grab on their way out the door.  Maybe these boys thought Duncan’s backpack was full of money, but it was full of books.  Duncan was a reader and a walker as opposed to a consumer of petroleum products.  I lost my urge to walk or read after they shot Duncan.  I found myself getting lost on formerly familiar routes and reading the same sentence over and over, never getting the drift.
Self-help, spirituality and poetry books were left on the doorstep, chosen by well-meaning but misguided gift-givers who didn’t know they could say they were sorry and leave it at that.  They didn’t know that someone in my situation could no longer make sense of the written word.  Deciphering a paragraph was as challenging as swimming the English Channel.  When I saw the words cope, loss, or death on the covers I sat on the floor, ripped out the pages one by one and burned them in the fireplace.  Poetry was a different matter, though.  While innocent people are murdered on the streets, self-indulgent poets sweat at their desks over images like ripe mango sunsets.  If they think their profundity compares to what I see behind my eyes, they have a lot of ego.  Clearly, burning was way too good for them.  They went into the middle of the mulch pile where the worms could eat them.
When I didn’t respond to the books, family and friends offered up activities they thought would be appropriate for the grief-stricken.  Support groups, knitting, aerobics, Labrador rescue, makeovers and ballroom dance lessons were only a few of the ones I declined.  On the other hand, the cultivation of dream life needs no instruction.  That’s the beauty of it.  It’s entirely out of our control, hence the appeal.  Beyond designing and sticking to a bed-time ritual (BTR), my life was stress-free compared to BTM (Before the Murder) when I worked, baked, entertained, kept up with current events and tracked the quality of the waking activities of others as well as my own.  It wasn’t easy to keep everything running smoothly BTM.  Now only the sheets had to be smooth with the fan running nearby.  Baths could be lukewarm.  Career and relationship concerns became a thing of the past, as quietness of mind is essential for lucid dreaming.  I kept a journal on the bedside table and a favorite pen so I could write down my dreams and make sense of them later.
Since daytime hours had been mistakenly prioritized and their importance exaggerated over the years, I altered my schedule to correspond with my revised goals.  I continued to sleep at night because it’s less noisy, but in a normal 24-hour period I slept for eighteen and rose for six, which is the reverse of the American average.  During the six hours I remained awake, I attended to the things that needed to be taken care of in order to dream optimally.  This meant making sure I had chamomile tea in the house, clean laundry and clutter free space.  Messiness in one’s environment interferes with the quality of the sleep cycle, so I eliminated a number of non-essential objects, such as furniture.  The place took on a Zen-like atmosphere, but a few concerned individuals couldn’t resist putting their two-cents in.  Sleeping for long periods can be construed as a symptom of depression, they said, and giving away one’s possessions is a warning sign of suicide.  
Against my better judgment, I outlined my theory concerning the value of waking versus sleeping hours.  I pointed out a new balance could be in order considering scary politicians and so forth.  These people pretended to pay attention and agreed that, yes, we have a lot of serious problems to be concerned about, but I wouldn’t see them taking to their beds in despair.  They weren’t throwing in the towel on the democratic process.  Social action was de rigueur once upon a time and maybe I should revisit this notion and volunteer for something like delivering lunches to those less fortunate.  Granted, salsa dancing was a hasty off-the-wall suggestion, but everyone agreed I needed to do something to get my mind off Duncan.  It was a tragic loss, losing my son, my only child, but I had to move on, they claimed.  I agreed.  I moved into another dimension; away from them.


***


With the concept of sleep as my new focus of existence came a profound sense of relief.  I could stop struggling to find meaning in meaningless daytime endeavors and embrace oblivion.  I hired a lawn man and signed up for the Basic Plan which did not include spraying green dye over everything.  He swore to mow and trim only during my six-hour window of wakefulness.  Clean comfortable loungewear became my uniform; nothing binding or synthetic.  Yoga pants and t-shirts in the event I needed to answer the door.  Cotton underwear and nightgowns ordered from the Vermont Country Store catalog.  One quick weekly trip to Food Lion and my refrigerator was stocked.  
The contents of my dream journal justified my decision to sleep but I didn’t share my accounts of significant nightly brain activity with anyone.  Naturally, I had my share of garbage dreaming when old acquaintances rose up out of nowhere.  True, some of them represent archetypal themes like random cruelty and superficial values but dreams of this type just blew out the pipes and made room for Duncan to step into my unconscious wearing a white oxford shirt with the sleeves rolled up or his old green jacket and John Lennon glasses.  I woke up smiling because it was such a pleasure to see him regularly and look forward to hearing his voice.  At this point he only beamed from ear to ear but it was simply a matter of time before he said something.  Something important.  
Clearly I was doing the right thing by emphasizing sleep.  Duncan was still with me in a way he couldn’t be if I’d stayed awake.  Claiming to see a dead person in any context other than a dream state might propel my relations into locating a doctor who administered shock treatments and confined his or her patients in locked wards.  At the institution I’d be given all kinds of drugs that had the potential to dull my perceptions and ruin my dream life.  The medical establishment would bring me around to seeing things their way sooner or later.  If I knew what was good for me I’d adhere to the custom of putting more weight on wakeful daytime hours, extending them little by little until I’d be watching David Letterman and falling into bed exhausted and quashed from the neck up like everybody else.  They’d congratulate themselves on interrupting my complete retreat from typical American life.  
I failed to see how developing outside interests and volunteering at a Labrador retriever rescue, say, could be considered healthier than discovering a creative way to remain in touch with Duncan, the person I loved most in the world.  However, I was betting a psychiatrist would vote in favor of a daytime schedule with the dogs. 
My mother invented reasons to drop over unannounced with my Aunt Lois.  They suggested a pet.  I could have a cat with a litter box, they said, or a small dog trained to do its business on a disposable diaper.  I patiently explained that excrement in the house destroys any attempt at feng shui, not to mention the odor of urine and dung and wet fur that hangs in the air.  Maybe my relatives didn’t appreciate the effort it took to achieve just the right level of lavender with scented candles and potpourri.  We agreed animals belong outside anyway but I rejected the idea of a timetable based on their need to eat smelly canned food or to pee or howl.  I reeled off a lengthy list of acquaintances who found themselves in the untenable position of being dictated to by the demands of wire-haired dachshunds, ferrets, lop-eared rabbits and even tropical fish.  
Once my mother and Aunt Lois ran across orange cranberry scones at Trader Joe’s that would be so nice with tea, and, by the way, why wasn’t I dressed?  Was I sick?  When was I going back to teaching?  The school system was crying out for science teachers at the middle-school level.  They expected a response, so I said I was busy researching a subject of interest to me.  They perked up at this.
“Actually, I’m doing a little writing,” I said.  In my dream journal.  I decided to give in and sit down with them at the little French bistro set I had chosen to keep because it was so small.  A table and four chairs that are so light they're practically invisible from a distance.
“I knew it.  She’s writing a science textbook.”  Aunt Lois was rattling the teacups in the cupboard.  If I didn’t go over there and brew some tea she was going to break up what was left of my china.
“Well, sort of,” I said, locating the tea ball on the drain board.  The dream journal was a book, if not exactly a treatise based on the scientific method per se.  More accurately, a memoir of my life as I chose to live it on the road less traveled.
“There are writers’ camps in upstate New York.  I read about them in the Times magazine section.  You scribble away in a cabin during the day and they deliver all your meals on a tray so as not to interrupt the flow,” my mother said, counting sugar cubes in the bowl.  I noticed how she stressed the words ‘during the day.’  She was thinking camp called for appropriate dress, walks in the woods of upstate New York and maybe early morning dips in a lake.  “It’s not cheap but I could send you for your birthday present this year.”  Money was no object because she could relax about me then.
“I’ll think about it,” I said.  It had been a long time since my mother last sent me off to summer camp.  A trip such as that would turn my sleep schedule upside down.  I understood writers drank a lot of cocktails when they got together in groups and there is nothing quite as chaotic to deep sleep as significant alcohol consumption.
“What should I get you?” Aunt Lois asked, selecting three teaspoons from a crock on the counter.
“An ambient noise machine,” I blurted out before thinking.  I did want one but couldn’t face the idea of going to the kind of store that had them in stock.
“What’s that?” Aunt Lois looked to my mother for an explanation.  
“It makes a noise that isn’t exactly a noise to block out other noises,” my mother said, as I plunked down the tea pot.
“How about a radio?” Aunt Lois asked.  “Some music would be nice.”
“Ambient noise would help me sleep better,” I said.  They didn’t need to know I now hated music and thought-provoking NPR talk shows.  Thinking spelled trouble.  “Sometimes I can hear the traffic through the windows.  Opening them is out of the question, so I have the fan for circulating air.”
“She doesn’t need an ambient noise machine, Lois,” my mother said, passing her a paper napkin.  “She needs to learn to adjust.  To the realities of life.  Here, have a scone.”  
They had disrupted my rhythm and I went to bed immediately after getting them out the door.  Not surprisingly, I was restless for quite a while trying to digest the scone and couldn’t seem to conk out.  Tossing and turning is a signal to give up and get out of bed and do something.  That’s when it occurred to me to watch a bit of CNN.  This error in judgment sucked me into the life story of Ricky Nelson and his plane crash and caused me to awaken every hour on the hour thereafter and not have a single productive dream the entire night.  I felt pressured the following night to connect with Duncan again.  Maybe he’d talk to me this time.  The tension prevented me from relaxing and I resorted to HTP capsules I had purchased from the health food store in case of just such an emergency.  It wasn’t the ideal situation but the Griffonia extract and other ingredients finally put me back on track.  Anyone who thinks sleep is taking the easy way out doesn’t appreciate the discipline it takes.  Proper scheduling is crucial and consistency is the key.
Although I was careful about sleep hygiene and began each session on a positive note with a respectful request for contact with Duncan, there are no guarantees.  Sometimes a frightening image comes out of the blue.  For example, there was the series of nightmares when I found myself back in the courtroom for the boys’ hearing.  Actually, I should say ‘boy’ because three of them testified against the one who shot Duncan and they were all granted immunity from prosecution because of that.  These three were marched into court anyway so they could hear the judge’s comments about young people and their lives and where they had obviously made a wrong turn.  All four showed up at the courthouse dressed in long baggy shorts and basketball shoes because they weren’t in jail and had been shooting baskets prior to showing up.  I recalled they played a game of basketball after killing Duncan and were apprehended all together at a public park sharing a jug of Gatorade.  They left him to bleed to death on the sidewalk behind the police station, of all places.  
At the actual hearing, the mother of the shooter sat on the other side of the courtroom in her flip flops and hair curlers.  Maybe she had someplace more important to go later and wanted to look her best.  But in my dream, she sat right next to me, shoulder to shoulder.  When the defense attorney said with all sincerity, “These are good boys and they’ve never been in trouble before now” the woman turned and grinned at me with shiny gold caps on her teeth.  This visual was so terrifying I woke up screaming in the empty house.  After carefully writing all the details in my dream journal I wept bitterly for a while about the waste and tried to think of people in the world who had it worse than I did, like Holocaust survivors, starving children and patients on life support.  I had made the unpopular decision to live asleep, but it was my choice.  It’s still a free country in some ways.  I wasn’t breaking any laws.  As long as I stayed even with the IRS I thought I’d be all right.
The chain of bad dreams included Duncan on a gurney in the morgue.  The air smelled strongly of rubbing alcohol.  He was covered by a sheet, but I knew he was under there.  I wasn’t dreaming of the available and accessible Duncan any longer; I was dreaming of the cold dead Duncan, the one who had to be buried because that’s where people go when they’ve left you for good.  These allusions made me reluctant to visit dreamland.  Things had been going so well there.  But now I felt betrayed; tricked.  Perhaps this was a phase I had to get through before the good dreams would start again.  After all, lawyers, red stains on concrete and the horror of teenagers without conscience are part of Duncan’s story and Duncan was all about truth.  Just the same, notes I made on the nightmares were brief because I didn’t need reminders of Duncan’s spiritless body.  What I needed was some evidence of Duncan’s soul.  I wanted it back.


***


My mother and Aunt Lois made another appearance, this time with an herb container gardening kit.  They started opening packages of seeds and potting soil on my kitchen counter.
“Unwrap the pots,” my mother said to me.
“Do we have to do this right now?” I asked.
“Why are you using that tone?  Don’t you want some fresh basil growing on your windowsill?”
“Not particularly.”
“What about chives?”
“No.”
“Plants won’t poop on your floor.”
“I really don’t care,” I sighed.
“You look thin,” said Aunt Lois, squinting.  “Pale.”
“Like a poor little plucked chicken,” my mother said.  This was a reference to my hair.  To save trips to the salon I’d started cutting it myself with nail scissors.  From the looks on their faces they must have thought I’d gone a little too far.  We all stood there for a minute while the two of them stared at my head like I was a freak of nature.  They agreed I should definitely get some sun.  My mother went back to her dirty work.
“How about a snack?”  Aunt Lois produced a brown paper bag.  “I have a nice loaf of cinnamon raisin bread right here.”
“I need to take a nap,” I said.  “I can’t sleep at night.”
“Go ahead,” my mother said, spilling dirt on the linoleum.  “Don’t mind us.”
The bed was unmade because it was true: I didn’t care about anything anymore, not even sleep hygiene.  I’d moved the TV in there since I was waking up at all hours in a panic, thinking, Where is Duncan?  I watched paid advertisements for exercise equipment and old black and white movies made when Angela Lansbury was young.  The bedroom was chilly with the fan going so I pulled a plaid flannel nightgown out of the dirty clothes hamper and layered it over my yoga pants and t-shirt.  Scattered on top of the mismatched sheets were used Kleenex and a couple of HTP capsules.  I brushed them aside.  As I crawled under the covers, I felt the remote control trapped under my hip.  I must have landed on a button, because “Mr. Rogers’ Neighborhood” came on.  I read he’d died, but here he was, sporting one of his familiar sweaters with a zipper, coloring Easter eggs and gently explaining how he liked me just the way I am.  He was still with us in holographic form and, unless you knew him personally, this was just as good as the real thing.  I wished I’d filmed Duncan’s entire life.  Mr. Rogers hummed his way over to the electric train and I turned the volume all the way down.  Duncan, I whispered, an ache around my heart.  I hugged a pillow and soaked it with tears until I finally dropped off.
In my dream a neighbor was throwing a party.  The guests were spilling out of the house onto the porch and yard.  There were paper egg-shaped Chinese lanterns hanging in the trees and somebody was playing the guitar and singing something Joan Baez-ish.  I was standing on a spotless sidewalk wearing a white sleeveless dress and trying to decide whether or not to enter the gate and join the party.  I felt a slight breeze to my left, and there was my Duncan, riding by on a new yellow bicycle.  The sleeves of his shirt were rolled up, as usual, and as he tipped his blue baseball cap his golden brown hair flopped over his forehead.  He made a slow loop in the middle of the street and passed me one more time as Mom filled the air.  Mom.  It was Duncan saying it.  I’d know that voice anywhere.  I stood with my hands clasped as if in prayer and watched his white-shirted back as he waved his cap and disappeared down the block into a cloud.
My mother popped in the bedroom door without knocking and came over to plant a wet kiss on my forehead.  Aunt Lois was making a ruckus in the kitchen.  I smelled tea and cinnamon toast and dirt.  “Come and get it,” she said, and I swung my legs out of bed with the damp pillow still in my arms like a child.


***


Newspapers are rife with tales of cold and senseless acts.  Man Shot After Violent Pursuit, screams the typical headline.  Then there’s politics, corruption and drought; information on products I would never buy, clothing I would never wear and advice I would never follow.  I lost the motivation to collect papers at the end of my driveway.  Neighbors took note of the accumulation and started checking on me so I stopped the subscription.  When my mother heard this, she began clipping articles she found topical.  
One was titled Modern Day Hermits.  How did the interviewer locate these people out in the wilderness and in various cities and towns and convince them to talk to him?  I wouldn’t have.  Hermits are not publicity seekers.  Being interviewed conflicts with the idea of turning ones back on society.  Nevertheless, my heart did a little skip, jumping to the conclusion that the admirable qualities of solitary individuals would be illuminated.  I forgot that legitimate hermits (not run-of-the-mill recluses) live the way they do for religious reasons, not because they want to be alone like Marlene Dietrich.  The writer made these hermits sound like kooks and that was the point of the piece—to show they were mentally ill.  I took this very personally.  
 My next door neighbor, Joyce, commented my voice sounded strange on the telephone—weak, as if I hadn’t spoken in days.  “My throat is sore,” I lied.  The truth was, I rarely answered the phone anymore, not that it rang all that often.  People glued to their phones become numb to the demanding rude nature of the rings.  There is no law that says one has to interrupt their current conversation and pick up right then and there to begin another one.  Why would I stop sleeping or eating or thinking because of a ring?  Answering the phone is an optional thing.  
I listened to messages every now and then, and if I wanted to talk to a particular person I called them back.  I was seldom moved to talk to anyone, though, because if I did they said my voice sounded strange and flat.  They were compelled to point out that any sparkle I once had was lacking.  I’d claim to have laryngitis, but it was obvious they didn’t believe me and had called out of obligation in the first place.  My one contribution to civilization now was to act as a receptacle for misplaced feelings of obligation.  Injecting a lilt or a trace of perkiness was beyond the realm of possibility, so I continued to invent imaginary illnesses.  It wasn’t hypochondria because I knew there was nothing physically wrong with me.
Neighbor Joyce married Clay in late middle age.  She claimed God had chosen him especially for her, but when I observed Clay, clad only in swimming trunks and mowing the lawn on his riding mower shaded by a tiny awning, I wondered if Joyce ever had second thoughts; if she entertained the possibility of a huge cosmic mistake.  But they stood around and watched their mangy little dog pee and rearranged plastic lawn furniture by the hour so perhaps it was best they stumbled upon each other at their evangelical church’s geriatric singles group.  I became a kind of ministry for Clay and Joyce.  Their religion encourages them to offer unwanted guidance to lost lambs.
“You should see a doctor,” Joyce said.  “I could recommend one.  He goes to our church.  He tithes one-third of his income.”  How did she know this?
“Gargling with Listerine should take care of it.  I need to rest my vocal cords, that’s all.”  
“Do you keep Vicks in your medicine cabinet?  They make tissues with soothing moisturizers, too.”  I decided not to respond.  I didn’t want to encourage Joyce.  “The reason I called is I have someone from church I’d like you to meet.  A good God-fearing man.”
“I’m all right.  Really.  I don’t need a doctor.”
“No, I don’t mean him.  He’s been married to the same woman for thirty-five years.  But Clay was saying the other day, ‘That woman next door needs a mate.’  We’ve been praying about it.”
“I don’t want a mate, Joyce.”
“That’s what you think now.”
“Sorry.  I have to go.  Talking is hurting my throat.”
“Ernest, his name is.  A good God-fearing man.  Rub some Vicks on your chest.  I’ll be over later.”  She hung up before I could say I was leaving the house to avoid her.
I wasn’t certain the Volkswagen would even start.  The last couple of times I’d tried, the battery was dead and I had to call AAA for a jump.  The same guy showed up both times.  “When was the last time you drove the car?” he demanded to know, but I honestly had no idea.  I stood in the driveway shading my eyes with my hand and tried to remember.  The guy got tired of waiting for an answer.  “You gotta drive it to keep the battery charged,” he said from inside the hood.
Driving became an almost impossible challenge due to traffic, rude speeders and my tendency to lose my bearings.  It seemed to take an inordinate amount of time to get where I was going.  Newspaper stories I used to read about intoxicated illegal aliens without valid social security numbers, driver’s licenses or insurance were never far from my mind.  
Then there was the heat wave that sucked away the air and the green and all the moisture from the atmosphere.  The world had become a dry, dangerous and alien place.  Deciding to venture out in the car was no small thing but being unable to breathe made walking unthinkable.  Walking also meant talking to people in clingy exercise wear.  Three neighbors, in the guise of inquiring about the abandoned newspapers and my welfare, accosted me one evening with grim statistics about house break-ins and the unresponsiveness of local police.  It was all over the paper, they said, and there were suspicions about who had done it—a boy spotted riding a bicycle around the neighborhood late at night.  Would I care to join Neighborhood Watch and help keep an eye out?  They provided a phone number to call and volunteer for guard duty.  
Joyce’s arrival was imminent.  I wracked my brain for a compelling errand, an item I urgently needed, and came up with cucumber soap.  Desperate for moisture of any kind, I was willing to take the risk of driving a few miles to Big Lots.  This was taking a considerable chance due to traffic on the route and the possibility there would be no cucumber soap.  You couldn’t count on Big Lots.  I might risk life and limb only to find quantities of lawn ornaments and vanilla-scented garbage bags.  The only constants I was aware of at this store were Pepsodent toothpaste and giant bags of blue disposable razors.
Dead plants lined the driveway.  The Volkswagen coughed and then started.  I opened all the windows and the sunroof and turned on the air-conditioner for good measure.  The steering wheel was too hot to touch and the seat burned the backs of my legs.  The idea of Joyce forcing me to drive to Big Lots under these conditions!  By the time I got home she would be busy preparing a fried dinner for Clay and then they would have their devotions or whatever they did together at night.  I’d lower myself into a soothing bath with cucumber soap, exfoliate all my dead skin and see if there was anything under it.  I anticipated a rare feeling of accomplishment followed by sound sleep and dreams of Duncan.
The trip required a high degree of alertness as I confronted new and unexpected pot-holes.  My mother posted a newspaper photograph on my refrigerator of a car that was recently swallowed by one of them.  Ever-present orange construction barrels had been rearranged since my last outing.  Brittle brown leaves clung to skinny tree branches against the colorless summer sky, and homeless people sat cross-legged in the medians rattling coffee cans or stood like mannequins holding cardboard signs.  Tempted to verbally abuse some of the horrible drivers I encountered who insisted on blasting their horns at me for no good reason, I tried to stay focused on my destination until I finally made it to the giant griddle of a parking lot in front of the store.  The asphalt moved under my feet like broken pieces of peanut brittle as I hiked towards the entrance flanked by square concrete trash cans.
If I was going to be disappointed, I wanted to get it over with immediately, so I headed straight for the soap aisle.  Palmolive and other inferior, obsolete brands were in abundance but no cucumber soap.  I continued to scan, knowing full well there was no rhyme or reason to product placement at Big Lots.  When I located the cucumber soap at the end of another aisle, I appreciated the logic of the display.  They were going for a trendy “treat yourself, you deserve it” theme.  Alongside the soap were bright pink and yellow synthetic net puffs on strings to dangle from the tap, garish candles wrapped in gold cellophane and Nair for the face, body and sensitive skin.  The soap was a bargain—fifty-nine cents a bar.  I picked up six and went looking for more bargains.  Who knew when I would pass this way again?  Failing eyesight was one of my symptoms, so I grabbed a pair of blue and yellow striped reading glasses for $2.99.  It appeared my reading days were over, but if I ever had to examine something closely I'd be prepared.  I paid for my purchases and steeled myself for the car trip home.  
The windshield was covered with dust and grime and the light was shining in such a way that it seemed I was peering through wax paper.  Who last washed the car and when?  I hated to think.  The Volkswagen was unsightly, but now there was a safety issue as well.  I was afraid of a wreck because of my limited visibility.  Therefore, in spite of the drought, I pulled into the first automatic carwash I managed to recognize.  It turned out to be the most dreaded kind where you must steer one wheel squarely onto a narrow slope of metal to get the mechanism running.  The inside of the car was stifling hot.  This kind of pressure was too much after shopping at Big Lots and battling traffic.  I backed up and went forward four times until I managed to hit the little metal thing but not before scraping the left fender on a pole conveniently located in exactly the wrong place.  Now I would have to drive to the horrible thoroughfare where the car dealerships were to buy touch-up paint.  This would need to happen before the scratches started to rust.  In my agitated state, a wreck on the way to buy touch-up paint was likely so I chose instead to go straight home.  At least Joyce wasn’t sitting and praying by the door with Clay or some other God-fearing man when I arrived in damp clothes.  I had forgotten to roll up my window upon entering the car wash.  
I let myself in—I’d left the door unlocked again—and poured a glass of green tea.  Flying further in the face of the drought, I ran a tubful of bathwater.  What a relief to be back inside the walls of my house.  I turned on the fan, stripped off my clothes and the key I wore on a chain around my neck and climbed into the tub with a bar of cucumber soap.  I went limp staring up at the white bead board ceiling.  It would take more energy than I had to exfoliate.  I closed my eyes.  Maybe I dozed.
Did I hear footsteps?  I sat up, splashing water on the floor as the bathroom door opened.  Joyce walked in and sat so heavily on the toilet that it moved.  She was crying.  I attempted to cover myself with a washcloth.
“Joyce,” I said.
“The back door was unlocked,” she sobbed.  I fumbled for a towel.
“Don’t bother,” she said, pulling a Kleenex out of the box.  “I know what a naked woman looks like.”  My choices: I could stay in the tub or step out onto the bathmat inches from Joyce.  I stayed put and rearranged the washcloth.
“What’s wrong?” I asked.  
“It’s Bobo,” she whispered.  I had to think for a second.  Bobo was her ratty little dog, the one who smelled and yipped continuously whenever he caught sight of me, hopping in place.  “My precious doggie.”  She buried her head in her arms.  “He’s gone.”  Her voice was muffled, but angry.
“He ran away?” It wasn’t unusual for this dog to disappear, but it was very unusual for me to be naked in the tub with Joyce inches away on the toilet.  I’m afraid my tone was a hopeful one, as though Joyce was the bearer of glad tidings.
“He died!” she yelped.  At that moment it seemed a waste of time to be trapped in the bathtub without exfoliating so I reached for the scratchy pad I use for this purpose and started rubbing.  Joyce lifted her head and stared.  “Aren’t you going to say anything?”
Bobo knocked over my garbage can and neither Joyce nor Clay bothered to clean up after him.  He nipped my ankle, and Clay and Joyce proclaimed, “He’s not a biter, he’s just territorial.”  But Bobo was in my yard at the time.  Defecating and then digging.  No, I wasn’t sorry to see Bobo go.  He had lived quite long enough, in my opinion.  I attacked my calf with the exfoliating pad and appreciated the infusion of cucumber in the air.  My skin was feeling smoother already.  Joyce continued to stare.  She was expecting something, it seemed.  An apology?  
“I’m sorry,” I said.  
Apparently I paused too long before speaking or maybe my disingenuousness came through.  Her face was now alarmingly blotchy.  But here she was in my bathroom, uninvited.  This seemed to me the worse offence.  I scrubbed an elbow.  
“That’s all you’re going to say?”  Her voice bounced off the tile.
If I gave her a minute, surely she would think better of her decision to invade my privacy.  She might recall the true nature of my relationship with Bobo and realize how inappropriate it was to be overreacting in my bathroom.  Instead Joyce leaned forward in such a way that I could see up her nostrils.  Joyce’s nose was attached to her face in an odd way to begin with, one that cried out for cosmetic surgery, but this angle was especially unflattering.  My revulsion brought to mind the Bible verses she had spouted after Duncan was killed, implying I had something to be happy about because Jesus had called Duncan home.  If she actually believed Jesus worked that way, it seemed irrational to ever set foot in church.  
“I can’t believe I forgot to lock the door,” I muttered.  “I must have been dazed from the glare.”
Joyce flew up like a jack-in-the-box and I automatically pulled my knees to my chest.  Then I heard my mother calling my name from the direction of the kitchen and the footsteps of more than one person in the hall.
“I’m in the bathroom!” I screamed.  I was becoming afraid of Joyce.  Her face had turned bright red and was shiny with tears and snot.  Saliva ran down one side of her mouth and threatened to drip into my bathwater.  I could not be responsible for what I might do if that happened.
My mother came to a halt at the open bathroom door.  “What’s going on in here?” she wanted to know.
Aunt Lois pushed her way in behind her.  “You moved your car,” she beamed.  She was happy about any kind of movement.  
“And your car is clean,” my mother said.  Her enthusiasm was more guarded.  Suspicious, almost.  “Where have you been anyway?  What is going on?”
Joyce collapsed on the bathmat and rested her head against the edge of the tub.  This was definitely too close for comfort.  I moved as far to the other side as I could and clutched the washcloth.
“I’d like to get out now,” I said.  “Why don’t you all go into another room?  Preferably the living room.”  Joyce quietly sobbed.  No one moved.  I twisted the hot water faucet to warm things up a little.  It’s funny, but even when it’s hot outside no one really wants to sit in cold bathwater.
Joyce’s head shot up.  “What are you doing,” she said.  It wasn’t a question, it was a statement.  She disapproved of me turning on the water.
“Are you the neighbor?” my mother asked Joyce.  “The one with the husband in the bathing suit and the barking dog?”  Joyce’s sobs got louder again.
“The dog died and Joyce wants me to meet someone from her church,” I had to holler over Joyce. “A God-fearing man.”  
“It would never work in a million years,” Mom said.
“That’s the reason I went to Big Lots,” I said.  “I was trying to avoid a confrontation.”
“So what did you buy?” asked Aunt Lois, propping herself on the sink.
“Soap,” I answered, holding up the bar.  
“It smells like a green salad,” Aunt Lois said.  
“After that I washed the car and came home and got in the tub.  Joyce let herself in and here we are, I guess.”
“You of all people should know to lock your door,” my mother said.  “Crime is everywhere these days.”
“Bobo died,” Joyce interrupted.
“Who’s Bobo?” my mother asked, grabbing her throat.
“The dog,” I said.  “Not the husband.”
“That little yappy dog?” Aunt Lois said. “The one that knocked over your garbage can?  The one that bit you and left a mark?”
Joyce picked herself up off the bathmat, lint and baby powder clinging to her Capri pants.  I wasn’t embarrassed by the state of my bathroom.  After all, Joyce and Clay displayed dead cactus on their window sills, and then there was the bleached out plastic yard furniture scattered around like tumbleweeds in the desert.  I hadn’t had the slightest urge to invade their interior space.  
“I’ve decided not to introduce you to Ernest,” she said, as if it was a threat.
“Okay,” I said, squinting down at my midsection.  My problems went beyond dry skin.  My body was getting slack where it had once been firm, but then my eyesight was going fast.  
For instance, on a recent sleepless night I thought I saw “The Godfather” flashing across the TV screen as though it was the next attraction.  There are no surprises in “The Godfather” and I always find this comforting.  You don’t get attached to Mafia men and it’s business as usual for them to gun each other down.  No one misses them.  But the movie was “The Gunfighter” with Gregory Peck.  I moved closer so I could read the preview.  Gregory must have been the “haunted man” with a bad moustache.  Upstarts challenge the fastest gun in the West, I read.  Forget that.  Instead I watched some women apply cosmetics made from minerals.  They seemed to feel good about the fact that the minerals did not wash off in plain water and it was safe to wear them to bed.
“You are not a feeling person,” Joyce was saying.  I was shocked to hear this and, then again, I wasn’t.  “I’m suffering and you have nothing to offer.  You have no empathy.”
There was evidence to support her hypothesis.  I’d been thinking lately that I had nothing left to offer.  Not that I wanted to offer myself up to anything.  Certainly not to Joyce.  Swallowed in her spasm of grief over Bobo, she’d forgotten all about Duncan.  She hadn’t mentioned him since the lecture that seemed to imply Jesus thought murder was an acceptable way to bring people home.  No one talked about Duncan, come to think of it.  Not even my own mother.  
“I said I was sorry, Joyce.”
“You didn’t mean it.  Anyone can see that.”  This was also accurate.  I didn’t mean it and clearly anyone could see that.  Death can change everything.  Bobo’s death had turned Joyce into a fountain of truth and directness and she had stopped quoting from the Bible.  I liked her much better this way.  “You don’t deserve a person like Ernest.”  I nodded in agreement.  Joyce blew her nose for a long, deafening time.  “Ernest has enough problems already with his teeth and gums.  You never cared about poor Bobo.  It doesn’t bother you that he’s gone forever.”
She was right again.  Like “The Godfather,” it didn’t bother me that he was gone.  The world wouldn’t suffer from one less yippy dog or criminal.  And I had no use for a man afraid of God who needed somebody to drive him around in traffic to dentists and gum specialists.  In fact, I didn’t want to be needed in any way.  It was then that my mother decided to fill the silence by pulling a piece of paper out of her giant purse.  
“This was under a rock on the step.  It says ‘Neighborhood Watch Needs You!’”
“They’re looking for that boy on the yellow bicycle,” Joyce sniffed.
Oxygen was suddenly in short supply in my cramped bathroom.  “A boy on a yellow bicycle?” I heard myself saying.  
“If you weren’t such a hermit, you’d know about the neighborhood burglar,” she hissed through clenched teeth.  “They haven’t caught him yet.”  
For a second there was a glimmer—a reminder of happiness.  That little ping.  I pulled the plug out of the drain by its chain and the water flowed from the tub with a satisfying gulp that drowned out every other sound in the world.  And they won’t, I thought.  They’ll never catch him.


***


According to the Neighborhood Watch newsletter, there is a right way and a wrong way for everything.  Above all, they warned individuals against taking the law into you’re own hands!  The Neighborhood Watchers, as they called themselves, couldn’t spell and marched in twos and threes armed with flashlights, cell phones, whistles and pepper spray.  They wore t-shirts with a large eye on the back (a watching eye) and a badge with their name and address inside another eye over their hearts.  Elected officers included a president, a vice-president, an assistant vice-president, a secretary, a treasurer and something called a watcher-at-large.  They were happy to be called anytime, day or night, and welcomed new volunteers.
I decided to call the watcher-at-large, Corinne Hartnagle, for more information.  If I remembered correctly, she put henna on her hair and drove a van with peeling fake wood paneling.  Her husband’s name also began with the letter ‘C’ as did the names of her children.  She didn’t pick up so I left a message after her recorded instructions of how to do it and have a blest day.  Then I was treated to the sound of a toy piano plinking and a child singing “Piano Man”.  I wasn’t sure I would ever hear the beep Corinne had promised, but the child was suddenly cut off and I blurted out, a bit too loudly, that I would appreciate some information about the boy on the yellow bicycle.  I remembered to leave my name and number.  Then there was a long boring beep and some instructions on how to expand on my message, erase my message and record another message or just to hang up and have a blest day.  I hung up.  About an hour later, the phone rang.  There was an out-of-breath woman on the line.
“Have—you—been—robbed?” she gasped.
“No,” I answered.  I didn’t recognize the voice.  For a few seconds there was a noise like a bellows or an iron lung.  “Hello?” 
“This is—Corrine Hartnagle?  The watcher-at-large for Neighborhood Watch?  As soon as I got your message I dropped everything.  I was at the PTA—I’m the gift wrap chairperson?  Otherwise I would have been right here at home when you called, because Christopher has an ear infection—a double ear infection, actually—but being the gift wrap chairperson I had no choice but to take him over to the school so I could give my report.  Have you seen that boy?  The one on the bicycle?”
“No, but I got your flyer yesterday and—”
“I keep a list of the sightings.  That’s my job for the committee.  Well, one of my jobs.  I try to keep track of who’s going out on patrol and when.  If someone drops out, I call a sub from the directory of substitute watchers.  I have a schedule right here.  And the t-shirts are down in my basement.  Did you want to volunteer for a team?”
“No.”  I had to shake my head.  These people couldn’t even spell.  But I wanted something, so I didn’t plan to point out this glaring flaw.  “I was just wondering about—”
“Security?  Do you have a security system?  My husband Charles is in the business.  Do you realize how long it takes the police to show up after a 911 call?  I have the statistics on that, if you’re interested.”
“I’ve been out of touch with the local news recently.”
“You don’t read the newspaper?”
“Not lately, no.”
“The 6 o’clock news?  Do you watch it?  Homeless people are out here now, you know, sleeping in our park."
“Corrine, you said you have a list of the sightings.”
“Yes, I have to keep up with that for the committee.  If we had to rely on the police, well.”
“Could I please have a copy?”
“A copy?  Of the list?”
“Yes.”
“Well, I don’t know.  That’s official committee business.”
“I would really appreciate it, Corrine.”
“Well, it’s not for general publication.”
“I would keep it to myself.  I promise.  Cross my heart.”
“Well.”
“I’d like to run by and pick it up as soon as possible.  Right now, actually.”
“It’s just that I’ll have to dig it out of my expanding file and I’m on my way to the drug store for Christopher’s prescriptions.  I’m all out of Ampicillin.  I usually keep a bottle in the fridge, but with the wrapping paper sale and all I’ve just been overwhelmed.  We still have a few rolls, by the way, if you’re interested.  The dancing Santa Claus, the rainbow snowflakes and—what was that other one?”
“I can be there in five minutes.”  I hung up before she thought of anything else to sell me.  When I got to her house, a hand emerged from a narrow opening in the storm door.  Clutched in it were some papers: an order sheet for Christmas wrapping paper, a brochure about security systems, a business card with her husband’s photograph, and the list scribbled in pencil on a grease-stained envelope.  I grabbed them as the door slammed.  Corrine was trying to contain a small child with a runny nose who wanted very badly to get out.
“Hope you can read my chicken scratch!” she yelled through the glass as I ran for my car.  When I arrived at home, my mother and Aunt Lois were coming down my front steps wearing terrycloth cover-ups and straw hats that looked like upside-down waste baskets.
“We were on our way to water aerobics and saw your car was gone again,” my mother called as I opened the car door.
“Where have you been?” Aunt Lois wanted to know.  
“A neighbor’s house,” I said, clutching the envelope.
“You ought to be more careful about locking up.”  My mother lowered her voice.  “That Joyce is a case.”
“Yes, lock your door,” Aunt Lois said, shaking her head. 
“I was in a hurry.  I drove over to see the watcher-at-large,” I said.  
“What?” my mother said, tipping her head.
“The Neighborhood Watch person.  Do you want to come in?”
“No, we’ve already done that and now we have to get to the YWCA.  But I cut out an article for you.  It’s about that burglar.”
“The one on the bicycle?”  She handed me the clipping.  She never gave me the entire paper, just certain columns, photographs, cartoons and horoscopes.
“He doesn’t take things like silverware or TV sets.  Only food.”
“Food?”
“And he cleans up after himself.  He’s very neat.  If he makes a tuna sandwich, he wipes up the counter and puts the mayonnaise back in the refrigerator.  He’ll wash off the knife.”
“That sounds very considerate.”
“If there’s a cake, he doesn’t steal the whole thing—just part of it.  He might take some cereal in a paper sack and a couple of bananas.  Oh—envelopes of instant oatmeal, too.”
“Once there was a $20 bill on a table in plain sight,” Aunt Lois said.  “He didn’t touch it.  He just took some pickles.  Dill pickles, I think they said.”
“People count their pickles?”  Duncan was fond of dill pickles, cake, bananas, oatmeal and tuna fish.  He was always good about cleaning the kitchen, making his bed, removing his clothes from the dryer.
“We have to go,” my mother said.  “Do you have any other plans today?”
“I’m not sure,” I said.
“It’s nice to see you outdoors,” Aunt Lois said.  “Maybe you could go to water aerobics with us sometime.  Get back into the swing of things.”
“Holding inflated balls under water tone the arms.  Men are allowed to swim at the YWCA, but there are no men in the class.  You’d enjoy it.”
“Maybe,” I said. 
“I wish you’d go to the beauty parlor and get your hair shaped,” my mother said.  “That wouldn’t hurt.”
“Lock your door,” Aunt Lois instructed, wagging a finger.
“’Bye,” I said, my hand on the knob.  Once inside, I turned the dead-bolt, dropped my purse on the couch and headed directly to Duncan’s room.
  

***


The door to Duncan’s bedroom stayed closed.  I had to go in there before the funeral to get his suit, of course, but afterwards I locked the door with a small skeleton key I wore around my neck on a long chain.  It seemed odd they would put shoes on him, but it seemed even odder he would be wearing a suit for all eternity with nothing on his feet.  Duncan so rarely wore a suit, but he needed one for prom so it was brand new.  He never got to prom.
Since he was to be buried in shoes, the funeral home wanted socks, clean underwear, everything.  I opened the drawers in his bureau.  I expect I may have stood frozen half an hour over his sock drawer.  He rolled his socks into balls and they were nestled there—all different colored woolen eggs.  I ran my hands over them.  It was such a beautiful drawer; I didn’t want to disturb its symmetry.  Fortunately, there was a laundry basket on Duncan’s bed and I pulled some clean socks and underwear from it along with a handkerchief I knew I would need.  Not for tears, because I was numb then and for some time after that.  No, just for the smell of Duncan’s room—the molecules of him going down into my lungs and through my blood.    
Naturally, there was blood on the clothes they gave me after his murder.  What did they expect me to do with them?  They were in a gray plastic bag along with his other “effects”—his backpack, for instance.  I was supposed to look at everything right then and there so I couldn’t claim anything was missing and sue them later.  One of his running shoes had fallen off so there was only one shoe in the bag.  They didn’t know what had happened to the other shoe (the left shoe) and I didn’t want to know.  I dumped the bag on the floor of his closet when I arrived home.  I remember standing in the closet, smelling the clean clothes on hangers and covering my face with them.  It occurred to me the smell of him was escaping into the atmosphere; his freshly washed hair, his neck, his body.  How long before this evidence of his existence was gone?  It was a commodity never to be replenished.  No one smelled as good as Duncan, and this had been true since his birth when I first put my nose to the top of his head in the delivery room.  I considered having someone seal the closet door with duct tape with me inside it, but I couldn’t think of anyone who would agree to this.
His prom (funeral) suit was in a garment bag along with his new white dress shirt and the tie that coordinated with his prom date’s dress.  Fiona, her name is.  She brought me gardenias from her mother’s yard.  She couldn’t speak; her face was all twisted and raw and all she could do was hand me the flowers and a poem she had written for Duncan that was printed in the school paper: “Star Dust”, the theme of the prom they didn’t attend.  The first line read: Dust to dust.  I stuck it into a book.  The odor of gardenias will always remind me of death; the curled edges of pure white petals that shrivel and turn brown in a matter of hours.  
In Duncan’s room time had stopped.  His watch had stopped, the clock had stopped.  Nothing had been touched since I gathered his clothes for the burial.  No one had slept in his bed.  The laundry basket was still on top of it.  The invitation to the bar mitzvah of one of Duncan’s friends was tacked to his bulletin board.  Duncan and I went together.  One thing stuck in my mind about this bar mitzvah.  The rabbi read from the Talmud, and the Talmud said dreams were 1/60th of prophesy.  Sitting in the synagogue I thought that wasn’t a whole lot, but Duncan was beside me then.  Now I think it’s something.  I had heard miracles can happen.  People claim to have seen the Virgin Mary.  Some are insane but a few lucky ones reach saint status after rigorous investigations.  The saint-makers must have some proof.  Hard facts.  The envelope with the sightings of the boy on the yellow bicycle was folded in my hand along with the newspaper article.  I dreamed of Duncan riding a yellow bicycle, I heard him say, Mom and here in my hand was actual evidence that people had seen such a boy.  They were awake when they saw him.  What if Duncan was lost in a parallel universe?  What if he was hungry and couldn’t find his way home? 


dream journal entry

duncan is a baby.
i carry him out to the volkswagen.
i strap him into his car seat.
i check to see that it is secure.
i walk around to my door.
it is locked.
my key doesn’t work.
i see through the window that duncan has grown into a 2-year old.
he is undoing his strap.
as i struggle with the door, he pops the emergency break.
the car starts rolling backwards.
i cling to the door handle.
the car picks up speed.
our quiet street becomes a super-highway.
the volkswagen with my child inside is flying down the driveway.
i can’t hold on.
i can’t stop it.
in the blink of an eye, the cars disappear, including the volkswagen.
all i can hear is a bird singing.
what happened to my child?
where did he go?




formulating a hypothesis


Unless you count sleeping as a way of life, I hadn’t committed to a project in quite awhile.  I reviewed the facts one more time.
Fact #1:  Duncan was dead.
The police and a doctor had confirmed this, plus I had seen his body.  There was no possibility of error here.  The body on that table was definitely Duncan’s and he was definitely dead.  Although many details are foggy, I retained some recollection of later events.  The trip to the casket showroom, for one.  It was similar to a car lot except it was indoors and there were coffins in the parking spaces.
“On what basis am I to make this decision?” I heard myself asking the little man in the tan toupee.  I had a good view of the top of his head because he was five feet tall at most and I’m 5’7”.
There was the smell of new fabric.  Barely audible music played in the background, the kind you might hear in an elevator, and I considered it appropriate on some level.  The walls were pale pink.  Color experts say pink soothes the nerves.  The wall-to-wall carpet was gray, like squirrel’s fur.  Pink and gray was the color combination of our family bathroom growing up.  It was quite fashionable at that time but no longer.
“Which one do you prefer?” Little Man asked, just above a whisper.  
“I don’t care for any of them,” was my reply.  I had the sensation I was a passenger in a submarine, as in “20,000 Leagues under the Sea.”  It was other-worldly—I could have been in Iceland, the air-conditioning was turned up so high.  I could have been anywhere.  “There are no windows in here.  How do you know if it’s night or day?”
He made a move as if to pat me on the arm, and I took a quick step back.  
“Does any one of them appeal to you more than the others?”  He cupped his chubby hands in front of his stomach as if impersonating a St. Francis of Assisi birdbath.  He probably ran into stone walls like me day after day and repeated himself ten different ways until the walls tumbled down in a pile of rubble.  His job was worse than an oral surgeon’s.
“None of them appeal to me, no,” I said, setting my jaw.  
“Let’s approach it from the cost factor,” he said patiently.  Again I was reminded of a car dealership where options—interiors, exteriors, detailing—were listed and the must-haves checked off.  Coffins are a type of vehicle, after all, but without an engine or wheels.  Just handles.  Didn’t they use ropes in the Old West?  Ropes must have gone out of fashion at some point.  It occurred to me that Duncan would vote for the Volkswagen because he enjoyed driving it.  I knew without asking that this suggestion would be unacceptable.  There was bound to be an ordinance against burying people in cars.  
The casket showroom was not a place to linger, so I picked oak like the simple table Duncan used as a desk.  His favorite Mexican blanket would cover the inappropriate white satin lining.  The little man nodded sadly as if to say he was accustomed to ruining the effect of his iridescent, tufted satin with moth-eaten, cough syrup infused blankets.
The next step was to buy a plot in which to bury Duncan and the casket.  Actually, I bought two plots—one for him and one for me because I counted on the weight of grief crushing me sooner rather than later.  Surely I would be joining him before too long.  It was easy to imagine my heart giving out or my brain exploding.  I chose a location close to the cemetery’s winding road so I might drive by on rainy days and view the grave without leaving the car.  It was a moot point given the drought, but, if it ever rained again, my preference was to get soaked and catch pneumonia. 
I watched them lower the casket with Duncan inside it and did not leave until they filled the hole with dirt and topped the whole thing with Astroturf.  None of this would have happened if Duncan had not died but we must keep in mind that certain phenomena cannot be explained scientifically.  I moved along to other facts. 
Fact #2:  I dreamed about Duncan riding a yellow bicycle.
Out of dozens of theories about dreams I focused on the rabbi’s: Dreams are 1/60th of prophesy.  If this wasn’t a significant point, why did he bring it up?  There was definitely a chance here.  The Talmud is nothing to sneeze at; it’s the basis of an entire religion.  I’m not Jewish, but what difference does that make?
Fact #3:  A boy on a yellow bicycle was seen in the neighborhood.
Science doesn’t have the answer to everything by any means.  There’s plenty we don’t begin to understand—a mountain of unknowns.  In this case, the unknown was way better than the known.  Therefore, my hypothesis became:
Duncan is the boy on the yellow bicycle.
This was testable and I could prove it.  All I had to do was find the boy.  I didn’t need a team or a bright yellow t-shirt.  In fact, I planned to be a maverick, operating independently of Neighborhood Watch.  Their rules didn’t apply to me and the goals of the official watchers were not my goals. They were looking for a burglar and I was looking for Duncan.  
A magnifying glass from the kitchen junk drawer was needed to read Corrine Hartnagle’s handwriting on the stained envelope--the reading glasses I bought at Big Lot's were insufficient for the task.  I sat at the bistro table to see what I could make out.  Sure enough, she had scribbled the dates and times of the individual sightings and the addresses of the callers.  If I could establish some kind of pattern, it might be possible to predict the best time and place to spot the boy.  I grabbed my calendar.  
Months had passed since I turned a page on the calendar.  Months had passed since my life ended, and yet here I was, staring at the date Duncan died.  I didn’t want to think about that day.  I preferred to look back at the days he was alive and we were together, the days when he slipped up and drank the last of the milk and tracked the floor with dirty shoes.  The mornings when I called him three times to get up; the nights when I turned out the reading lamp over his bed because he fell asleep with a book.  My mouth was dry so I got a glass of water and sipped it as I watched the light move across the bistro table and listened to the silence.  
After the viewing at the funeral home and before the lid on the casket was closed, I was drawn to a sunny window and stood in its warmth.  There I felt Duncan.  I wanted desperately to feel him again.  So I turned the calendar pages forward one by one, and I found some graph paper and a pencil and started plotting dots.  Soon I had something resembling a circle.  There was no rhyme or reason to the dates, but the boy had been seen only after dark.


***


I’d ignored my appearance since the funeral.  That was about to change.  When I saw Duncan again I needed to look my best because, to him, I was a cool mother.  I didn’t want to disappoint my son, but, clearly, I was no longer cool.
My lighted magnifying mirror was buried in the linen closet.  I’d considered throwing it away back when I was divesting myself of belongings; less stuff for my mother to deal with after I wasted away and died, I reasoned.  But something made me hang on to the mirror.  I still examined my teeth with it because, no matter what happened, I refused to die with rotten teeth.  I dug out the mirror plugged it in.  There was my face, larger and closer than I had seen it in awhile.  I studied it like a specimen in a lab.  
In college it was impossible to imagine getting older or giving birth naturally or having my child die before me.  Just the same, all that had happened.  I couldn’t believe I looked this old prior to Duncan’s death.  I know I smiled at him and because of him quite often.  I remember the laughter.  Did all that smiling and laughing cause the lines like crepe paper that ran from my eyes across my cheeks or was I looking at the map of my grief?  I appeared dehydrated like a slice of apple left on a screen outdoors.  I was—my mother.  She was correct about my hair, by the way.  It needed to be shaped, but now it was fragile and dry and the color had leeched out of it.  I couldn’t pin down a specific shade.  It wasn’t brown, it wasn’t blond and it wasn’t gray.  All I could think of was a faded old sweatshirt.  
I searched the medicine cabinet for a jar of generic face cream and smeared the contents all over my face.  By the time I got to the phone the cream had sunk in leaving only the merest hint of greasy residue.  I looked up the number of the person who used to cut my hair—her name was Libby—and dialed.
“Energique!” an energetic voice said.
I couldn’t recall the name of the place where Libby had cut my hair for six years or more.  Something straightforward, like Haircuts ‘R Us.  
“Hello?”
“Hello, I was trying to reach Libby.”
“Libby?  We don’t have a stylist by that name.  This is the Energique Salon.”
“Oh.  I must have the wrong number.”
“Are you looking for a spa experience?  All our packages are on sale this month.”
“I don’t need a package, just a haircut.  I was hoping to find Libby.  She was always very understanding.”
“Do you have a problem with your hair?  Something hormonal?”
“Probably not.”  I doubted I had hormones anymore.  “It’s more like neglect.  I made a mistake, you see.”
“Sidney specializes in home hair coloring disasters.  Would you like to make an appointment?”
“I haven’t dyed my hair.”
“It’s virgin?”
“I guess, but I cut it with a nail scissor.”  I heard a snort. “My hair was starting to bother me and it seemed like a good idea at the time.”
Maybe she covered the receiver with her hand.  Finally she was back.  “Okay.  Toto specializes in total overhauls.  Would you like an appointment with her?”
“I’m not sure.  This is starting to sound like such a big deal.”
“It is a big deal.  At Energique, we’re all about making the most of what we have, whatever that may be.  We don’t believe in letting ourselves go.  We fight the aging process every step of the way.  Madonna says she will never be old and fat, did you hear that on the news?”
“That’s news?”
“She’s a role model.  Don’t you watch the Insider?”
“No, I don’t.”
“Okay, I see we have our work cut out for us.  That’s all right, we love a challenge.  Toto has an opening on Thursday morning, how about that?  She’ll diagnose you and make recommendations for intervention.  Do you need a private room?”
“A what?”
“I mean, is your hair—embarrassing?  Would you rather be cared for in private?  That’s extra.”
“Cared for?  No.  No.  Just the haircut, that’s all I want.  I’ll come in with my hair wet.” 
“That’s not the way we do it here at Energique.”  She was grinding her teeth, I could tell.
“If I’m going to take a shower before I come, I may as well wash my hair.  I’m certainly not going to wash it and then do it all over again ten minutes later.  I mean, that’s ridiculous.”
“We use professional salon products specifically formulated for your particular hair type.  It’s an essential part of the Energique experience.  The shampoo, the conditioner, the mousse, the spray, whatever.  Then there’s the individualized cut designed especially for you.  It’s $125 for the initial consultation.  That includes the haircut.”
I went into shock.  “$125?  I’m a schoolteacher!”  At least, I was.  Now I was nothing.  Libby had charged $15 and I always gave her a $3 tip.  I was in and out of there in half an hour for less than $20.
“Why don’t you think about it and call back,” the person said coldly.  Cell phones started playing little tunes.  Customers waiting in line for the Energique experience, no doubt.  I was fouling up the gears.
Libby was too busy to care about Madonna.  She might even have admitted to cutting her bangs with nail scissors—who hadn’t?—and not to worry about it, honey.  I had pleasant memories of our discussions about Duncan and my students and her family and clients but I wasn’t prepared to forge an actual relationship with another hairdresser.  I didn’t even need to know the person’s name, especially if it was something like Toto.  Toto was the dog in the Wizard of Oz. 
Libby’s disappearance was unfortunate and ill-timed.  I’d have to adjust to someone new, that’s all, but I wasn’t up to an exhaustive search.  I recalled there was a Speedy Cuts next door to the Food Lion and they advertised haircuts for $12.  No appointment necessary.  All you had to do was sign a piece of paper and the next available technician appeared without fake smiles or chirpy conversation.  Not a soul batted an eyelash when I showed up with dripping hair.  God only knows the things they’d seen in that place—wet hair was nothing.  It looked slightly better wet anyway.  The girl assigned to me looked around twelve with a royal blue streak in front and no charm, but I wasn’t paying for charm.
“What do you want?” she demanded to know, closing her eyes until I answered.
“Just a trim,” I said. 
She combed roughly and lifted strands here and there.  I didn’t care to explain the nail scissors again.  “Whoever did this hacked the back.”
“What would you have to do to make it look intentional?”
“Huh?”
“Like you did it on purpose.  Like you wanted it to look some particular way.”
She thought for a second, no more.  “Remember that really old actress who went to the Oscars in a crew cut because she had cancer?  I think we’ve still got the People around here someplace.” 
“You want to give me a crew cut?”
“A buzz.  If you bleached it you’d look like Annie Lennox.”
Annie Lennox was cool.  Duncan liked her music and so did I.  “Okay,” I said.  “How long would it take?”
“For the buzz?  One minute.  You hardly have any hair left anyway.”
One minute later, what I had walked in with was on the floor.  I didn’t look like Annie Lennox; I looked like an elderly Marine recruit.  I could feel the air from the ceiling fan on my scalp.
“Pick up some Clairol.  Ash blonde,” the haircutter ordered, peering into the mirror and removing my apron with a flourish.  “A green concealer stick covers up eye circles, did you know that?  You must not be getting enough sleep, babe.”


***


After coloring the buzz later that week, I couldn’t decide if I looked better or worse.  It was different—that was obvious—so I went one step further and applied some lip gloss.  Something about taking these extreme measures made me want to go out into the yard in the early morning and walk around barefoot.  I did this occasionally in my younger years, noticing the various greens and the smell and feeling of wet grass.  I had even been known to dance in the rain, but this was not an option as there was no rain and very little grass.  These distant memories lifted me for a few seconds and then flipped me into another place altogether.  
What kind of a person could I be, thinking about pleasant sensations when Duncan was dead?  The kind of person who failed her son.  A bad mother.  This was the inevitable conclusion. 
I divorced his dad when Duncan was four.  No one said anything directly, but I know people thought it was a drastic move, leaving a man who was employed and didn’t beat me.  Against nature, somehow, because of the unwritten rule that wives/mothers should always stay while husbands/fathers have permission to leave, but I never looked back.  Further evidence of a self-centered personality.  I had rejected an artist, a musician and a writer/waiter to marry what I thought was a stable, dependable grown-up.  No pre-marital counseling, of course.  It should be required by law.  He turned out to be plodding and dull like my father and a lot of other things, besides.  
Yes, there were times at Little League games when, if Duncan’s father had been a different man, it would have been nice to have someone of the male persuasion to cheer my son on but, in any case, he moved to California and got married again and had twin girls named Daisy and Dolly.  I resented the fact their names began with the letter ‘D’, implying that his three children were connected in some way like the Hartnagles had done with the letter ‘C’.  He occasionally called for Duncan and sent postcards from vacation spots like Maui and Sun Valley.  He sent money and photographs of Daisy and Dolly and their Dog at Christmas.  His daughters didn’t resemble Duncan and Duncan didn’t resemble their (his) father.  Duncan was simply Duncan.  My boy.
There was no hard data to prove that the divorce was to blame for Duncan’s death.  But still.  If we had remained married, there might have been something different about the schedule that would have altered the course of that particular day.  Of course, if we had remained married, I might have had to spend a lot of time in therapy and Duncan, too, to analyze his father’s character and workaholism.  Without a doubt I’d have been on medication.  Other things could have happened.
Duncan’s father, his wife and Daisy and Dolly showed up for the funeral.  Their presence made things even worse, if that’s possible, because decisions had to be made about where they would sit and how, exactly, they would be involved even though they hadn’t actually been what I would call involved in Duncan’s actual life.  Duncan’s father’s wife looked at me in a way that said I was to blame for the whole thing—Duncan’s death, the funeral, her presence, Daisy and Dolly’s Easter-type dresses.  Duncan’s father stood next to me at the cemetery, holding my elbow as if it was his job.  I had the strange and almost irresistible urge to bite him—not a love bite, but a hard savage bite to the bone.  Everything that was good about him—things I must have once believed in long ago—were buried with my son.  There is no reason to speak again.
Women often say it was all worth it because they got their children out of the deal.  Their children are still living so it’s understandable.


***


I’m not sure how long I lay curled up in the front yard because I lost track of time when I wasn’t quite sleeping and not awake, either.  I do know the heat had started rising from the ground.  It could have been a savannah in Africa—hot and dry as a splintery, bleached bone.  It took a minute to remember exactly where I was.  And then Joyce came over.
There had been a funeral for Bobo but I had not been included.  Clay and Joyce didn’t have a garden, per se, but they did have a square of dirt surrounded by railroad ties that were out of line.  There was nothing growing inside except some scrubby yellowish monkey grass sprigs.  This was Bobo’s final resting place.  I heard singing and looked out the kitchen window to see Clay digging and Joyce singing what sounded like a hymn.
“Do you want me to call 911?” she yelled while leaning over me.  Her laced up shoes were very close to my face.  They weren’t canvas shoes, they were tan leather, and she wore little pink socks with them.  She had freckles on her legs.
“Why would you do that?” I growled.  Wasn’t it a free country?  Couldn’t I stretch out in my own yard if I felt like it?
“I thought you’d fallen and couldn’t get up,” she said.  “I didn’t know if you had one of those alert things.”
“Those are for old people,” I snapped.
“What are you doing down there?”  She continued to lean over me and I could see up her nostrils.  I was getting tired of Joyce thrusting her nose in my direction.
“Looking for four-leaf clovers.” I sat up straight and brushed off my knees.
“You weren’t on a towel or anything.  You looked unconscious.  You hadn’t moved for an hour.”
“You’ve been spying on me for an hour?”  I stood and waited for the feeling to return to my legs.  I’d been overextending lately and needed more rest indoors.
“Our religion teaches us to forgive,” she said in a superior way.  
“Forgive what?”
“The way you treated me in your bathroom.”  
I resisted the urge to push Joyce into the shrub bed.  “I didn’t invite you into my bathroom.”
She ignored this crucial fact.  “We buried Bobo the other day.”
“I heard the singing,” I said.
“We were praising God for Bobo.  I don’t know if I’ll ever recover from the loss.”  With that, she unexpectedly reached out and brushed the top of my head with a hand that had probably touched her nose. 
Before she could comment on my hair, I turned on my heel and stamped into the house, making sure I pulled the dead bolt.  Then I unlocked Duncan’s bedroom door, closed the blinds, climbed into his bed and wrapped the sheet around me like a cocoon.
This was where I belonged, and I couldn’t believe I hadn’t thought of it before.
I should have thought of a Do Not Disturb sign for the front door, too.  They work like magic in hotels.  Nobody bothers you when they have your credit card number and there’s a Do Not Disturb sign on the door knob.  My mother and Aunt Lois kept knocking until I opened the damn door.  It was dinnertime, I guess, because they had Kentucky Fried chicken in a box.  I could smell it.  I thought I might throw up on the welcome mat.
“What happened to you?” screeched my mother, clutching her head.
“Nothing,” I said.  “I was just napping.”
“Your hair,” Aunt Lois breathed.
“I had it done,” I answered.  “I hope you’re satisfied.”
“It’s gone,” my mother said.
“No, there’s still some there,” Aunt Lois said, squinting.  “Why is it yellow?”
“I thought sleeping during the day was over,” my mother said, stepping in with her chicken.  “Are you hungry?”
“No,” I said, rubbing my eye.  I couldn’t remember the last time I had an appetite.  I ate out of habit, frequently reminding myself to chew.
“We’re going to have Original Recipe with biscuits and mashed potatoes and slaw,” Aunt Lois said, heading towards the kitchen.
“I wish you’d get yourself straightened out,” my mother said.  “You have grass stains all over your clothes.  Those are almost impossible to remove.”
I peered down.  There was green stuff on my t-shirt and shorts.  Weeds are like cockroaches—they can survive without water.  They can survive anything. 
I followed Aunt Lois into the kitchen.  Left to her own devices she might start breaking my remaining dishes and glassware.  I collected some forks and paper napkins and put them out.  “Let’s have some iced tea,” she said.  I announced there was a bottle of green tea in the refrigerator.
“Can’t you have regular tea?” my mother cried.  “Can’t you ever do anything normally anymore?”
“I wasn’t expecting you,” I said.
“Are you going back to teaching in the fall?” my mother asked.  She was on a roll.
“I haven’t decided.”
“Don’t you think you should start making some decisions?”
“I have,” I said, pointing to my hair.  
“You need a manager.  If your father was still alive—”
“Duncan is who I need,” I said.  “Your grandson, remember?  Nobody ever talks about Duncan.  I don’t hear his name.  It’s like you want me to forget all about him.”
My mother and Aunt Lois dropped heavily into bistro chairs.  A look of terror passed over their faces.
“Let’s just have a little dinner,” Aunt Lois said.
“Could you pour us some water, at least?” my mother asked, staring at my head.
I didn’t move or speak for about a minute.  I was weighing leaving the house but couldn’t come up with a place I wanted to go.  “Would you like ice?”
“If it’s not too much trouble,” Auntie whispered.
“Oh, Lois, will you please stop talking to her like that?” My mother banged a hand on the table.  Once, twice.  Everything rattled against the metal.
“Like what?  How am I talking to her?”
“Like she’s a sick person.”
“I’m not hungry,” I said, setting down their ice water.  “I’ve decided to sleep in Duncan’s room from now on.  In fact, I think I’ll skip dinner and go back to bed.”  
No sooner was I settled than my mother was banging on the bedroom door.  “It’s locked,” she called. 
“You are not allowed in here.  There is just so much air and it’s mine.”
“I’m calling 911, Lois,” I heard my mother mutter.
I cracked the door a couple of inches.  “Joyce already threatened to do that today.  I was lying in the yard, is all, and now I’m trying to take a nap.  Are there laws I’m breaking that I don’t know about?  Is there a law that says I have to eat Original Recipe?  Is there a law that says my mother and my aunt have the right to barge into my house whenever they feel like it and criticize my hair and my grass stains and ignore the fact that I ever had a son?”  Aunt Lois and my mother were motionless with their arms hanging straight at their sides.  They seemed to be shrinking before my eyes, and this was empowering.  “Now listen here.  I don’t want the odor of chicken working its way into Duncan’s room and spoiling the mood.  Pack it up and go home and stay home and stop picking on me.  You two are as bad as Joyce.”
“We are not,” my miniature mother piped. “How can you say that to us?  We are not religious fanatics.  We are not crazy women.  We are concerned.”
“It's a burden.  Stop being concerned.”
“How can I?  I’m your mother!  I want you to snap out of it!  Do you think its easy watching you go down the toilet?  You have a master’s degree!”
“You were drawing things on graph paper,” Aunt Lois said, bursting into tears. “I thought you were getting better.”  
“Have you been looking at my maps?” I asked.
My mother turned to my tiny aunt.  “What maps, Lois?”
“For her science textbook.”  Aunt Lois wiped her eyes.  “Scientific-looking dots on graph paper.  I thought it was a good sign.”


***


I guess you could say I had a relapse.  In any case, my bad state got worse.  The plan was to look my best for a reunion with Duncan, but now I feared he wouldn’t recognize me.  I felt I had two choices: hurting someone or sinking into constant sleep.  Violence has never been my forte.  I hadn’t even been moved to spank Duncan.  But now I had unbidden thoughts of screaming directly into my mother’s ear and perforating her eardrum or removing Joyce’s nose with pliers.  I realized I was capable of doing a significant amount of damage without a shred of remorse.  Instead I threw away the welcome mat and tried to concentrate on dreams of Duncan.  When I wasn’t in his bed, I poured through his room.  Part of me wanted Duncan to be the last to touch anything, but I had already disrupted the bed and that was totally worth it.  I’d opened some drawers, too, and gotten into his closet, so what difference did it make if I kept on going?  I was careful to put everything back exactly as it was so he’d find everything in its place when he returned.
I listened to all his CDs, even rap music I hadn’t been particularly fond of when he played it at top volume.  For sentimental reasons, I played it at top volume also.  It actually felt as if I wasn’t alone in the house; that I’d simply fallen asleep and he was somewhere nearby.  Another plus: I couldn’t hear the phone or the doorbell.  But some people just refuse to give up.
I was rudely awakened by a siren in my driveway.  When I peered through the blinds, there was a police car out there with the blue light rotating.  A moment later somebody was banging on the front door with what could have been a nightstick.  I turned down the music.  
Two police officers were on the porch.  “Ma’am?” one of them said when I opened the door.  “Is everything okay here?”
“Fine,” I said.  “What’s the matter, officer?”  
“Your neighbor,” he said, jerking his head towards Clay and Joyce’s house.  “She said she’d heard some commotion and called your number but couldn’t get a response.  Then she came over and tried to get in but the door was locked and you didn’t answer the bell.  According to the report, she rang it twenty-five times.  She thought you might be in some kind of trouble.”  Joyce found her opportunity to dial 911 after all.
“Trouble?” I said, holding out my hands as if to show I wasn’t holding a knife.  “I fell asleep listening to some music.”
“Your neighbor said it was pretty loud, ma’am,” the officer said.  “She said it’s been blasting day and night.  The bass was vibrating her walls.”  Bobo barked continuously for years, but I wasn’t allowed to do whatever I wanted in the privacy of my own home, like crank up the CD player.
“Really?  Okay, I’ll watch that,” I said.  “Sorry.”
“Your neighbor said you passed out in your yard the other day.”
I made up my mind to remove Joyce’s nose the next chance I got.  My lawyer could argue that being without a nose was preferable to walking around with the nose she used to have.  We’d need proof, of course—before and after photos.  Then the judge would have to let me off with a warning.  
“No, no, no.  I was merely relaxing outdoors.  Wait a minute.  She said I was drunk?”  He looked at me without flinching.  “Well, I deny that.  That is absolutely ridiculous.  I haven’t had a drop of alcohol in months.”  It was true, I hadn’t.  But as I said this, I wondered why I didn’t consider numbing myself legally.  As an added bonus I could destroy my liver.
The officer moved closer as if to smell my breath while his partner stared at his shoes.  “Ma’am,” he said.  “We were on duty the night your son was shot.  We drove you downtown.  We just wanted to say…”
I’d have sworn in a court of law that these men were strangers.  Yes, the police came, but these police?  They were the ones who came to tell me Duncan had been shot and died at the scene?  They drove me to the morgue?  Then I got a whiff of Old Spice and noticed the familiar way the yellow outside bulb was shining down on their badges.  Everything went black, my knees buckled and I dropped.  I came to with an ammonia swab under my nose and a medic pumping a blood pressure cuff.  
“Ma’am?” the medic said.  “Do you know where you are?”
“On the floor,” I mumbled.
“Do you have diabetes?  Epilepsy?  Any history of heart problems?”
“No, no,” I said. “I’m fine, you can go now.”
“Are you on any medication?”
“Griffonia extract.”
“I’m not familiar.  Is it over the counter?”
“From the health food store.”
“Are you alone here?  Any other family members living in the house?”  I didn’t answer.  The police officers remained on the porch but I couldn’t look at their faces again.  “Is there anyone we could call?”
“I’ve called her mother,” I heard a voice behind them say.  Joyce.  I groaned.
“How on earth did you get the number?” I demanded to know.
She narrowed her eyes at the officers and bobbed her head in my direction.  “She’s one of those women who don’t change her name when they get married,” she said in an accusing tone.
“Joyce,” I said.  “Leave.”
“Maybe we should get her checked out at the emergency room,” the medic said, manipulating my arms and legs to see if I’d broken anything.  Everything seemed to be working.
“I fainted, that’s all.  I hadn’t eaten; I was feeling a little lightheaded.  Nothing to worry about.  You can go now.”
Then I heard another voice.  “I’m Corrine Hartnagle, the Neighborhood Watcher-at-Large?  What’s the problem?  A robbery?”
“Oh, hi, Corrine,” Joyce said.  “She claims she fainted, but the other morning I was sure I smelled alcohol on her breath.  Did you give her a breathalyzer test, officer?”  I muttered something obscene.  It just slipped out, but nobody noticed.  My tongue felt a little thick and they probably didn’t understand me.
“I heard the siren and then the ambulance flew by.  I’m on patrol tonight.”  I looked up.  Corrine was wearing her bright yellow t-shirt, shorts and the clogs.  Her legs needed shaving.  I was getting tired of looking at defective legs at close range.
“Everything’s under control here, ma’am,” one of the officers said to Corrine.  The medic started packing up his equipment.
“Yes, you can all go now,” I said, propping myself against the back of the sofa. 
“You look like a different person with your hair that way.” Corinne’s voice was toneless.
“We’ll wait until your mother gets here,” Joyce said, crossing her arms.  Corrine nodded.  She was probably mentally composing her report to the Neighborhood Watch committee.
“I wish you hadn’t called anyone, Joyce,” I said.  The restraint surprised me a little, but there was the one unexpected slip with the obscenity and I wanted to avoid being carried off by the medics.
“If you’d just answer your door,” Joyce said with a snort as my mother and Aunt Lois pulled up to the curb and honked the horn.


***


Somewhere there must be families that leave each other alone.  They’re allowed to have their despair.  If they need to play rap music and stop communicating, they get to do it.  On the other hand, my mother and Aunt Lois demanded I go home with them because I was a danger to myself.
“Look at you,” my mother said. “That crazy woman next door told me you’re an alcoholic.”
“I am not,” I said.
“Then why did you pass out in the yard?”
“I didn’t pass out.  I was reclining.”
“We want you to come with us.  Get in the car.”
“Please,” Aunt Lois said, wiping a tear.  “I’ll bring you Raisin Bran in bed and we’ll all go to water aerobics in the morning.  Doing something active will get your mind off—”
“Duncan?  No, I don’t think so.”
“Fine,” my mother said.  “We’ll stay here then.  We just need to borrow a couple of nightgowns.”  I sank into the sofa.  “Tomorrow we will sit down and figure out what to do with you.”
“’We’ will do no such thing.”  
“Well, we’re not leaving and there is nothing you can do about it,” my mother said.  “Little did I know Joyce would be calling in the middle of the night.  Do you want to get the nightgowns or do you want us to sleep in our underwear? Get up.  I need to pull out the sofa bed.  Lois, you can use the bathroom first.”
“Please don’t do this,” I begged.
“Lois, find some sheets in the linen closet.”  My mother was getting testy.  There was no telling what sort of damage Aunt Lois might do to my linen closet.
“All right, all right,” I said, heading for the hall.  “But first thing in the morning, out you go.  Both of you.  I mean it.”
“You are going to water aerobics, missy,” my mother said.
I found Aunt Lois rifling through the closet.  I grabbed a set of sheets and handed her those and some towels, then dug out a couple of old extra large t-shirts from the little bureau and placed them on top of her pile.  “Good night,” I said, slipping into Duncan’s room and closing the door. 
In the interest of turning the page, I accompanied them to the morning session of water aerobics.  The only bathing suit I could put my hands on was faded and stretched out but this was an emergency.  My mother and aunt couldn’t talk to me in a swimming pool, and after an hour or so more of togetherness we could go our separate ways.  Joyce’s 911-call and its aftermath would be a distant memory.
I was the youngest in the class by at least twenty years, yet we all had pale alligator skin and unattractive bulges in similar places.  These women overflowed with energy and enthusiasm, whereas I ran out of steam after approximately five minutes of wrestling with a ball underwater in time to Barry Manilow music.  I wanted to float on my back but we were all required to follow the instructions sung by a woman in a bright yellow tank suit with flabby arms and a flowery swimming cap.  As a visitor, it was essential that I not branch into anything free-form and risk shaming my relatives.  After bouncing for what seemed like an eternity and inhaling quarts of warm chlorinated water, we were allowed to haul ourselves out of the pool.  I looked forward to a nice hot shower in the locker room and bidding my mother and Aunt Lois adieu.
“Hurry up and get dressed,” my mother said.  “The group is going to McDonald’s.”
“What group?” 
“The water aerobics group, of course.  We go to McDonald’s every Wednesday.”
“What is the point of going to water aerobics if you eat at McDonald’s?” I asked.
“The two things have absolutely nothing to do with each other,” my mother said.  That was my exact point.  “And, by the way, your hair is green.”  
It seemed I had experienced a chemical reaction.  After showering, I stood in front of a cruel and unforgiving full-length mirror wrapped in a thin white towel.  Shampooing had not made a measurable difference.  A florescent light buzzed overhead while my mother continued her critique.  “Your complexion is washed out.  Try some of my blush.”  She dabbed a brush on my cheeks.  Now I had green hair and two pink dots on my face.
“I think I’ll skip McDonald’s,” I said, adjusting my towel.
“You came with us, remember?  Anyway, you need to eat.”
“I could call a cab,” I suggested, but I might as well have been talking to myself.
“We like to order the Chicken McNuggets with sweet and sour sauce,” Aunt Lois piped up from behind her locker.
“That’s interesting,” I said.
“They have salads now!” she called.
“Okay, okay!”
“You don’t have to scream.  We’re not deaf.”  My mother clicked her compact shut.  “A little lipstick wouldn’t hurt you.”  She handed me a tube.  I took it and applied two coats of Bermuda Coral.  I looked like a clown with wax lips.  “See what an improvement that is,” my mother said.  “Get dressed.  We’re going to be late.” 
“It’s 10:30,” I said.
“We like to beat the rush.  And Wednesday is our day to deliver Meals on Wheels to the shut-ins, you know.”
“I let you spend the night.  I came with you to the YWCA.  Now I’m letting you drag me to McDonald’s.  Please don’t make me deliver Meals on Wheels.”
“Fine.  It’s not like you have a job to go to.  But if you’re not interested in lifting a finger to help your fellow man, we’ll drop you off on the way so you can turn up the music again and Joyce the troublemaker will have an excuse to call the police.  Do you have a hat?” 
“What?”
“Do you have a hat with you?”  I stared into the mirror.  My hair wasn’t bright green.  It was the green of algae.  How unfortunate that all Duncan’s baseball caps were at home.  I could definitely have used one.
“Here,” Aunt Lois said, digging into her purse.  She pulled out one of those folded plastic rain hats you tie under the chin.  “It’s transparent, but maybe they’ll think it’s the hat that’s green and not your hair.”
“Is it raining?” I asked.
“It hasn’t rained in ages,” Auntie reminded me.  “We’re in the middle of a drought.”
“Just put it on,” Mom said, heaving a sigh.


***


“Can I get extra sauce with a Big Mac?” I asked the bug-eyed teenager behind the cash register.  My appetite had mysteriously returned with a vengeance and I didn’t care what happened to my arteries.  Someone made a movie about ruining your health by eating exclusively at McDonald’s and I was ready to get started.
“I guess so.  I don’t know.  I’ll ask,” she said around her gum.  Are check-out clerks required to chew gum these days?
“What are you doing?” my mother said behind me.  “Since when do you eat Big Macs?”
“They have salads,” Aunt Lois reminded me.
“I want a Big Mac with extra sauce, fries and a Coke.”
“You want a combo meal.” 
“Okay,” I said.  “A combo meal.  Don’t forget the extra sauce.”
“Is this separate or together?”
“Together.”  My mother stepped around me and removed her billfold from the bag on her shoulder.  “Lois and I want the Chicken McNuggets with sweet and sour sauce.”
“And to drink?”
“Iced tea.”
Aunt Lois and my mother juggled cardboard containers, paper cups and napkins.  I took no responsibility, captivated as I was by the anticipation of grease, salt and sugar corroding my organs.  “Over here!  Over here!” I heard someone call.  I turned to see six hands waving wildly.  The Water Aerobics Group.  
“Hello, hello, hello!  You must be the science teacher,” one woman said, pulling out a chair for me.  
“I don’t think there’s room for all of us at one table.” I mentally counted available chairs.  Maybe there wouldn’t be enough.
“Don’t worry, we’ll squeeze in,” Aunt Lois said, handing me my food.
“That pool water is so drying.  How smart of you to deep-condition your hair right away,” someone said.  The plastic cap on my head.  I’d forgotten it was there.  
“Maybe she has a date later.”  A couple of women winked and punched each other’s arms.
“My mother wouldn’t take no for an answer about water aerobics.  Nag, nag, nag.  She never knows when to quit.”  The ladies all nodded and smiled because they know my mother.  “So my hair turned green in the pool and my mother and aunt thought I should wear a rain hat to try and cover it up.”  Confession is good for the soul.
“Chlorine,” they chorused.
“Everybody blames chlorine, but it’s the copper.  Damn,” I said, unwrapping my burger.  “Where’s my extra sauce?”
“They don’t pay any attention to special orders,” a woman explained from across the table.  “McDonald’s strives for consistency.  All across the country.  In Europe, even.”
“They put too much sauce on there to begin with,” my mother sniffed.  Some of it was dripping down my arm.  
“I wish I could eat like that,” the woman next to my mother said.
“How did she know about copper in the pool?” someone asked. 
“She’s writing a science textbook.” This from Aunt Lois.  Everyone stopped chewing except for me.  I stuffed some more fries into my mouth and washed them down with Coke.  It was all delicious.  The perfect American meal.  I heard some muttering that my mother and aunt must be so proud of me but they ignored it and dipped Chicken McNuggets into small plastic containers of sweet and sour sauce.
“Actually, I’m just doing some preliminary research,” I offered after swallowing.   
“She puts dots on pieces of paper,” Aunt Lois explained.  “Maps, she calls them.” 
“Geography?” someone guessed.
“There’s geography involved, yes.  It’s part of an experiment,” I said.  Everyone blinked and waited to hear what kind of experiment it was.  I chewed a pickle and dived in.  “I’m going to prove that something can be dead and alive at the same time.” I stifled a burp.  “Scientifically.”
“That’s impossible,” my mother said, sipping from her straw.
“Erwin Schrodinger would disagree,” I said, starting to bag up my trash.  “He tried it with a cat and a particle of radioactive material.”
“Is that legal?”  And then they all started telling cat stories.
It was freeing to talk about life and death at McDonald’s, wearing a plastic rain hat and ingesting empty calories.  It didn’t matter what I said, how I looked, what I ate.  The Water Aerobics Group didn’t seem to realize it, but they were looking at an example of something that was sort of dead and sort of alive at the same time.  Just because I couldn’t produce documentation of existing simultaneously in both states didn’t mean it wasn’t true.  But here I was, Schrodinger’s cat, sitting at their lunch table.  I smiled and calmly waited for a break in the conversation before I spoke.  “I think I’m on the brink of testing my hypothesis,” I said.  With that, I rose, walked back to the counter and ordered an apple pie from the bug-eyed girl.


dream journal entry

i take duncan to the beach.
he is six.
he loves the water.
he is not allowed to go swimming alone.
he is not allowed to swim after eating.
i spread out our picnic on a big orange towel.
duncan calls hey to a man who is surf-fishing.
the man doesn’t answer.  he doesn’t turn around.
suddenly, the beach is empty.
duncan is gone.
no one is anywhere to be seen except for the man.
i run over to ask if he has seen my little boy.
the one in blue swimming trunks.
he says he doesn’t know anything about a little boy.
i realize the man is duncan’s father.
he continues to fish.
i scream duncan’s name.  i scream until i have no voice left.
i look down and see that i am bleeding.
the blood is running down my legs.
the sand turns brown, then black.
the ocean turns red.




testing the hypothesis


My morning with the Water Aerobics Group was a success.  If this is what it took to get my mother and auntie off my back, so be it.  Neither spoke a word on the way home—some kind of record.  Perhaps they saw the error of their ways and might think twice before exposing me to their friends or involving me in activities against my will.  Hadn’t my own friends, colleagues and acquaintances gotten the message and decided I had nothing to offer?  Who had pointed that out recently?  Oh, yes.  Joyce.  Joyce was a nosy, dense person, the kind you can never get rid of, but she had hit the nail on the head for once.  Anyway, my mother dumped me at the curb and headed out to Meals on Wheels where she and Aunt Lois were needed and appreciated.    
I’d forgotten to lock the back door again.  As soon as I walked into the kitchen, I smelled peanut butter cookies. 
Peanut butter was one of Duncan’s favorite snacks.  He ate it alone, with a spoon.  He mixed it with Cheerios.  Spread it on bananas, apples and toast.  And then there were the sandwiches.  Hundreds of sandwiches, with and without jelly.  He had even invented a peanut butter cookie recipe that didn’t require baking.  All you had to do was boil sugar, milk and margarine in a pan.  Then you added peanut butter, oatmeal and vanilla and dropped cookie-size blobs onto a piece of wax paper.  
I made an inventory.  
The Jif was missing from the pantry.  I found the empty jar on the trashcan along with some crumpled wax paper wrapped around a handful of tangerine peels.  A pan and spoon had been washed and placed on the drain board.  The cook top was still warm.  I sank into one of the bistro chairs and stared at the fruit bowl in the middle of the table.  One lone banana was in there and two apples, red and yellow.  No tangerines left at all.
Milk.  I made my way to the refrigerator to check the supply.  Duncan had left me a cup, covered with plastic wrap.
I tiptoed down the hallway, barely breathing, half expecting him to be eating cookies and drinking milk in his bedroom.  A no-no, strictly against the house rules, but I was prepared to forgive him.  The door was open.  Had I left it this way?  Everything looked the same except for the indentation on the pillow.  It appeared to have been made by a head.  I always fluffed the pillow in the morning when I made the bed.  I might not have the incentive to make my own bed, but I was careful with Duncan’s.  I lifted the pillow to my face.  It was infused with the scent of my son.
The noise coming from my throat was not quite human; something wild, between a laugh and a sob.  I knew it.  I ran down to the basement.  
I’ve never been a fan of our basement.  It is dank and cement gray and exudes a dungeon-like quality because of the partially visible stone foundation.  Duncan’s old ping-pong table is folded against one wall next to a metal shelf lined with National Geographic magazines.  Duncan inherited my father’s thirty-year collection and fell in love with Mexico at an early age.  I didn’t share his fascination with Mayans or Aztecs or expressions like, Que pasa.  A good mother would have taken an interest.  A glaring error was disposing of his threadbare MEXICO t-shirt and, when he protested, responding with the feeble excuse that it was worn out and he had plenty of others.  “Not with MEXICO on it,” he said.  What was I thinking?  If he still had the urge to move to Mexico, I was prepared to sell the house and leave immediately.  The ways I’d disappointed him must be legion, but I vowed to make it all up to him. 
In case of a real flood, the washer and dryer sit on cement blocks.  It hadn’t rained since Duncan died.  A dusty light bulb hangs from the ceiling, directly over the large drain in the floor.  This was the floor where Duncan used to ride his tricycle while I did the laundry.  Round and round the drain.  I knew exactly where he was when he was little.  The sand box, the kitchen, in bed for a nap.  Now he was someplace else, riding a new yellow bicycle.  All I had to do was figure out where.
I opened the cedar closet in the corner.  Inside was my grandmother’s fur coat with her initials embroidered on the satin lining.  Duncan wore it once on Halloween.  When asked about the costume, he said he was a bear.  There was a cardboard box containing his well-loved stuffed animals.  I sank down on the cool hard floor.  What heartless person had stuffed them in here?  I considered all the ways I was a monster for about an hour with my forehead on the concrete.  Nuns did this for penance, and if it worked for them maybe it would work for me.  Finally I reached out with one arm, dragged out the box and stood up stiffly to look for Duncan’s Boy Scout camping gear.
I chose a pair of dark green cargo pants and a faded green t-shirt.  I liked the idea of wearing his clothes to look for him.  He would recognize them as his, but, in my current state, he might think we had never met.  Duncan stuck a snapshot of the old me in his mirror frame.  I no longer resembled that woman, and the clothes I used to wear had gone off to Goodwill with the rest of my possessions.
I climbed the wooden stairs holding the clothes to my chest with one arm and the cardboard box under the other.  The clothes smelled like the cedar cabinet, not Duncan.  At least they didn’t smell like a basement.  This would be off-putting.  I didn’t want to smell like I was molting when I found Duncan.  I wondered if he would smell the way I remembered.  Would that be possible, or would he smell like wherever it was that he had been?  
Duncan was tolerant and forgiving, and once we were together again I’d have to explain what had happened to turn me into a wreck.  I’d explain everything and Duncan would listen sympathetically.  Then he’d express compassion for the boys who killed him, reminding me of their tragic disadvantages.  Under different circumstances, it would have been like him to befriend them; possibly invite them all over for dinner and a game of basketball.  Yes, eventually we’d get around to talking about his death and his return, but I wasn’t even curious about the scientific implications of the process or care that he and I were shoo-ins for the Nobel Prize if I ever got around to writing it up.  All I wanted was to get my hands on my son.
I sat down at the bistro table.  I wrote MEXICO on Duncan’s t-shirt with a magic marker.  My hand shook like someone with palsy, but that wasn’t unusual since the murder.  Holding my right wrist with my left hand helped somewhat.  The effort of printing neatly was not unlike completing my comprehensive exam in graduate school but it was worth it.  When Duncan saw the word MEXICO he would know I was his mother.  He would know that everything was going to be all right.  As the sun was going down, I released the stuffed animals from their cardboard prison and tucked them into bed. 


***


Duncan had made one visit home and he might do it again but waiting is a frustrating business, as we all know, and moving around randomly smacked of chaos.  I was drawn to the locations he’d chosen, so my decision was to go with the dots first before moving into the unknown area in the middle.  Naturally I was hoping on eventually running into Duncan.  Counting on it, actually.  An iffy proposition, relying on luck, but more promising than sitting around waiting for somebody to do what you want.  Especially someone who has died.  
I slung a canvas bag across my shoulder and tucked in a flashlight and some bug spray.  I considered calling out his name as I walked, but I didn’t want to draw attention to myself.  Word could travel to the Neighborhood Watchers.  Corrine would enjoy spreading the nasty rumor that I had a drinking problem and representatives would then feel compelled to lecture me about taking matters into my own hands and invading their territory.  They might think it was a little odd if I told the truth: I’m searching for my dead son.  The truth is such a rare commodity these days and, anyway, it would be a total waste of time to try and explain something so obvious.  Why should I have to, really?
The first dot was a neighbor who had a basketball court where Duncan had played with friends.  It made total sense he would come here for a snack.  There was a deck overlooking the court in the backyard.  Floodlights stayed on in case their kids wanted to shoot baskets at night so there was no place for me to hide.  Besides, the whole family was home.  I could see them from a distance through the French doors, gathered around their kitchen table playing a board game.  They passed around an enormous bowl of popcorn and laughed.  
I had a little trouble swallowing.  Maybe I’d caught something, lying on the cement floor in the basement for so long.  Everything was quiet and still except for the muffled sound of laughter inside the house.  It was not an opportune time for an appearance from Duncan at this location.  I wasn’t feeling too well, so I started back up the driveway clogged with a variety of vehicles.  I must have bumped into one of them because an alarm went off, breaking the sound barrier.  There was a giant hedge to the right and I beat my way into the middle of it.  I had to hide, because porch lights were flipping on all around me.  People came out their front doors.  Finally, somebody stopped the alarm.  More doors opened and closed and finally it got dark and quiet again.  I thought I’d better stay inside the hedge awhile longer, though, in spite of the fact I was getting poked and scratched by thorny branches.
It was harder getting out than it was getting in because of my initial motivation not to get caught trespassing on my first patrol.  If I’d worn a Neighborhood Watch t-shirt it would have been a different matter, but I was wearing a MEXICO t-shirt.  My presence would be hard to justify.  I hadn’t seen this family since Duncan’s funeral.  If I had dropped by to say hello, it would have made sense to ring the doorbell, not wander around in the yard.  One thing was certain: There were a lot of unknown variables and the process was going to be trickier than I thought.  I slowly and carefully disengaged myself from the hedge, feeling like a victim of a cat attack.  Some first aid would be required when I got home.  I’d left the door unlocked as usual, just in case Duncan decided to show up and make things easier for me.
I hadn’t taken a walk at night in ages and it made me sad, looking at houses with lights in the windows and families inside.  I could only imagine what it felt like to be a real criminal on the run.


***


I kept a notebook of my non-findings and approached my work like a diet or exercise program.  It was something I had to do, but the process wasn’t especially pleasurable.  
For example, the second dot on my map was a house with a yard that was totally surrounded by chain-link fencing.  Inside the fence were two mongrel dogs.  One was part German shepherd, part Doberman.  The other was a Beagle hybrid.  If I thought Bobo was bad, these two were off the charts on the barking scale.  When they weren’t barking they were chewing something apart, sharpening their teeth for an attack.  The remnants of unknown objects were scattered all over the place.  How Duncan managed to get past them and into this house was beyond me.  There was no way I was going to risk life and limb to go through that gate.  I made several trips back to this address to track any changes, but the dogs were out from 6 am until 11 pm and then they went into the house with two middle-aged women to sleep and work up the energy for more barking.  Duncan liked dogs and dogs liked him, but he must have magical powers, too.  I made a note of this.
The next dot was a Spanish-style house overgrown with vines.  An old man lived there.  Occasionally he would stand in the front yard holding a garden hose.  Other times he sat in an aluminum lawn chair wearing wrinkled khaki pants and an undershirt.  There was an old Chevy up on jacks in the gravel driveway.  I could see how almost anyone could get past this man and into the house because he napped quite frequently in his lawn chair with his chin on his chest.  But I was curious about the selection of groceries at this location.  If I needed food, it wouldn’t be my first choice.  I pictured old boxes of Grape Nuts and prunes and moldy cheese.  I wanted to know what sort of food had been taken.  Naturally I was concerned for Duncan’s overall nutrition.  An interview was in order.  One evening when he was out with the hose I stopped and spoke.
“Excuse me, sir?”
“What’s that, girlie?”
“I said excuse me.  I was just wondering about the burglary.”
“The what?”  He moved closer, dragging the hose.  Water was barely trickling out of the nozzle.  Watering outdoors was illegal now due to the drought, but maybe he didn’t know that.
“The burglary.   Food.  From your kitchen.  I’m a neighbor.  I was just wondering.”
“Wandering?” he yelled.
I cupped my hands around my mouth and tried to throw my voice as far as possible.  “Wondering.  About the burglary.”  
The man scratched his face and closed one eye.  He hadn’t shaved in awhile.  I could almost hear the sandpapery sound.  “I gotta have my oatmeal every morning.  Doctor’s orders.  Wants me to eat more fiber.”
“You’re saying he took your oatmeal?”
“Instant,” he said, flipping the water around to no place in particular.  “Apple and brown sugar.”
Somebody told me about the oatmeal.  Who was it?  “Anything else?” I called.
“Nope,” he said, looking me up and down.  “You single?”
“What?” I said.  
“My wife died last year.  Gladys.  Married fifty-five years.  Had an attack and fell headfirst into the bathtub.”
“Oh, I’m sorry,” I said, gesturing as if to go but not quite managing a wave.
“You want to come in for a cocktail?  I got some rye whiskey.”
“Oh, no.  No thank you.  I just wanted to ask about the burglary.”
“Gladys went out like a light.”
“What a shame.”
“Spam, you say?  What I’d like is a good old egg fried in bacon fat.  A fried egg sandwich on white bread with mayonnaise, catsup and a nice slice of Spam.  You know how to make a fried egg sandwich?”  He looked so hungry and hopeful, but it was really out of the question.  I already knew about the oatmeal, and since it was sealed in envelopes I didn’t see how any contamination could have worked its way in there.
I ignored the question and stuck to my agenda.  “Did you see the intruder?” I asked.
“I don’t watch that show,” he said, gesturing to the roof which was covered with obsolete antennas.  I was losing him, so I got moving and jotted everything down in my notebook on the way home, noting my doubts about the value of interviewing.  Perception is so subjective.  I wanted actual facts.
The third dot was a cottage with no dogs and no cars, just a metal trailer filled with firewood at the end of the driveway.  As far as I could tell, nobody was home.  The house was very close to the street and featured a thick wildflower garden in front.  Black-eyed Susans, mostly, up to my waist.  I walked around back.  No grass there, either—just vegetables planted row upon row.  Now, this was more like it.  Fresh, healthy food choices.  I hoped Duncan had picked some of the tomatoes and cucumbers.  They really looked good.  I couldn’t see in the windows because it was dark inside, but I expected the kitchen to be well-stocked and sanitary because these people were urban farmers.  As I’ve already pointed out, I was inadequate as a mother.  I didn’t provide my son with grandparents who lived on a farm.  No contact with cows or the country way of life.  No going to the bathroom in an outhouse, slopping hogs, drawing water from a well.  No exposure to a simple little country church.  Or any church.    
There were gingham curtains and canning jars lined along the windowsill.  I bet Duncan found his dill pickles here.  They were probably delicious.  Was it possible they had a pie safe?  I debated turning the doorknob and letting myself in to have a look but didn’t want to get a taste for invading other people’s homes or stealing their produce and canned goods, tempting as this was.  A rickety wooden structure in the right corner of the lot might have been a tool shed or chicken coop.  Someone had taken the trouble to paint a red heart on the side.  I sat on the back steps staring at it and waited for Duncan for about twenty minutes but he didn’t show up.  I noted the smell in my notebook and concluded it was in fact chicken shit.  Homemade fertilizer would come in handy around here, but something about the odor wafting over me seemed to justify helping myself to one tomato and one cucumber before heading home.  


***


One thing I couldn’t help noticing: I was alone on the streets.  I know it wasn’t just my imagination that the neighborhood was a busier place when Duncan was alive.  When did it change?  Didn’t kids chase fireflies anymore?  Or gaze at the stars through telescopes?  Had couples stopped strolling hand-in-hand?  The only person who seemed to spend any time outdoors was the man with the hose and he was asleep most of the time.  Cars moved from here to there but I couldn’t see the actual people in them due to tinted glass.  I doubted they could see me either.  I felt invisible in the dark.  
“I need my envelope back?”  It was Corrine Hartnagle on voicemail.  She didn’t leave her name or number but I knew who it was because of the breathlessness and the unusual inflection.  Then there was the unnecessary repetitive detail, like the greasy envelope was an essential piece of official committee memorabilia and it was part of her job to keep information organized.  “Call me?” 
My mother left a message, too.  She and Auntie would be “in the neighborhood” the next day and wanted to drop in.  Providing a warning was her way of trying to make me feel guilty.
“Where were you last night?” my mother demanded to know.  I called her back as instructed the next morning, and now she was grilling me.
“I went for a walk,” I said.
“Alone?  In the dark?”
“Yes.”
I heard noise in the background.  Aunt Lois had picked up the extension.  “I can’t believe you’d do such a foolish thing.”
“Just a little stroll around the neighborhood, that’s all.  Nothing to get upset about.  Now, what is it you wanted?”
“I told you, we want to come over today.”
“The Water Aerobics Group has been asking about your experiment,” Auntie injected. 
“Lois,” my mother said.  “Turn down Martha Stewart, would you?”
“Tell them it’s going fine,” I said.  “But I can’t do anything today.  I’ll call you when I have some free time, okay?”  I waited.  Finally I asked if they were still there.
“Yes, we heard you,” my mother said.  “You want us to know you have no time for your family.”
“Not today,” I said.  “Sorry.”
“What are you doing right now?” Auntie asked.
“I’m making a little cucumber and tomato salad for lunch.”
“I thought Big Macs were your new favorite,” my mother said.  
“That was a one time thing.”
“A cucumber and tomato salad sounds divine,” Auntie hinted.  “We would love some—”
“Are you planning to go back to teaching?” my mother interrupted.
“I’ll let you know.”  I said goodbye and hung up.
Then I called Corrine Hartnagle and told her I’d drop off her envelope that afternoon.  “Any more sightings?” I asked sweetly.
“Somebody’s car alarm went off the other night,” she said.  That was probably me.
“Has anybody reported seeing the boy on the yellow bicycle?”
“No.”
“Anyone missing any food?”
“Well, we are, but the kids could have raided the refrigerator.  Or their father.  Nobody has admitted anything yet.  I can’t say for sure what happened to the canned ham.  I know it was in there.”
“An entire ham?”
“Right.  Five pounds.”
“Wow.  When did you notice it was gone?”
“Yesterday.  And the neighbor next door had two cabbages sitting in a basket by her back door and one of them disappeared.  A giant cabbage the size of a basketball.  You say you’ll bring the envelope back?  I need it for my files.  I’m responsible for keeping a complete record--"
“I know.  I’ll definitely get it over there today.  Thanks, Corrine.”
“Do you need any Christmas wrapping paper?  There are some rolls left in the basement.  The dancing Santa Claus--"
“No, I don’t think so.  I’ll see you later, maybe.”  With that I hung up.  Practically speaking, ham and cabbage were cumbersome items.  Did Duncan have access to a refrigerator?  Where was he? 
I went back to bed with the stuffed animals to think.
Duncan had a home.  If he was in the position to wander around in the land of the living, why wasn’t he here—with me?  Why did he pop in to make peanut butter cookies and leave again to steal a ham from Corrine Hartnagle?  I had examined my role as a mother in depth and concluded by the luck of the draw I had gotten a good kid and blown the whole thing because of glaring flaws in my character.  If I had been a decent mother and my son had returned from the dead, he would have at least called.  In the best of all worlds he would have returned home and gone to prom with Fiona and things would be back to normal by now.  I was being punished for something.  Whatever it was must have been completely unacceptable or else I was feeling the cumulative effect of countless sins.  I stepped over the line one day and—boom.  Maybe Joyce and Clay were right and there’s a God who sends people to Hell.  There was evidence to support this theory.
As I was contemplating Hell, I heard someone calling loudly through the house.  It actually sounded like “Hell?  Hell?” but I guess the ‘o’ at the end was getting swallowed up because Joyce was hysterical again.  What was wrong now?  The shock of Bobo’s passing had faded, but, come to think of it, I hadn’t seen Clay on the riding lawnmower in quite some time.  But then again it hadn’t rained, so growth was a thing of the past.  I got up and walked out into the hallway.  Joyce was standing at the end of it, wringing her hands.
“Your door was unlocked,” she said.  I was doing this on purpose now, in the event Duncan needed to get in.  “We’ve been robbed!” she cried, dropping onto the sofa.  I couldn’t imagine what Joyce and Clay owned that anyone would want.  Then I thought of Duncan.
“Food,” I said in a dreamy voice.
“Our emergency supply,” she whispered.  Everyone in Joyce’s church stockpiled canned goods, bottled water and batteries.  Joyce invited me to their musical about the world coming to an end shortly after Duncan was shot.  I declined.  My world had come to an end, and I didn’t feel like singing about it.  
“The whole thing?” I asked.  Duncan had a bicycle, not a moving van.  I hoped the expiration dates were still good.  It would be like Joyce to hang on to tainted food until the containers exploded.  
“Pork and beans.  From the shelf in the garage.  I feel so violated.”  She clutched the front of her blouse.  “What am I going to do?”
“You could run over to Food Lion and buy some more.  I noticed they were on sale the other day.”
“Someone is running around willy-nilly, helping himself to whatever he wants.  We have to put a stop to this.  No one is safe.”
“He hasn’t hurt anybody.”  Actually, he had.  Duncan had cut me to the bone by choosing Joyce’s Last Days stash over his mother’s home cooking.  Pork and beans, my eye.
“Why are you defending him?”
“He’s hungry,” I snapped.  “You can’t tell me a few cans of beans make any difference to you.  How did you even know they were gone?”
“Because he wrote THANK YOU on the cardboard box.” 
“Show me,” I said.
There was no space for a car in Clay and Joyce’s dilapidated garage.  Instead it was a monument to hoarding; a holding tank for broken gnomes, dusty bowling balls, tattered badminton nets, yard sale rejects.  There was a narrow path inside through mountains of plastic bags stuffed with who knows what.  An avalanche was inevitable—then suffocation.  Duncan had taken a big risk coming in here.  Joyce mercifully pointed to the box I was there to see.  Written across its side was the THANK YOU in large block-printed letters.  He had used a magic marker from Clay’s workbench and he remembered to put the top back on so it wouldn’t dry out.  
“How thoughtful of him,” I said proudly.
“Thoughtful?”  Joyce’s voice sounded a bit shrill.  She flapped her hands.  “Where is Clay when I need him?”  I was curious about why she needed Clay.  To trim the bushes into rectangles?  Who needs that?  Joyce flapped some more.  “This is an emergency!”
“No, it isn’t,” I said.  “Believe me.  I know what an emergency is.”
“I’ve been telling Clay we need a padlock.  I’ve said it again and again—‘Clay, we need a padlock.’”
I examined the flimsy garage door hanging by rusty hinges.  I could see light through the roof.  “It looks like you’ve got wood rot here, Joyce,” I said, pulling a piece out of the wall.  “If it were mine, I’d burn it down.”  Joyce sank onto an abandoned mattress and I dusted off my hands, ready to make my exit.
“You can’t leave me alone, I’m in crisis!  We’ve been robbed!  My husband has vanished into thin air!”
“Don’t worry, he’ll be back.” It would be too much to hope for to see evidence of Duncan and have Clay vanish, all in one day.


***


In lieu of ringing the doorbell, I attached Corrine’s envelope to her mailbox with a wooden clothespin.  This transaction didn’t require conversation.  My agenda for the afternoon was scouting a permanent viewing post.  Data seemed to point to the total lack of site commonality.  Duncan hadn’t revisited any of them.  Where or when he might turn up on any given night remained an unknown factor.  What I wanted was a spot where I could see for some distance while not being seen.  I’d pack some binoculars in my bag and stay put until Duncan entered my territory.
That was when I caught sight of the play structure in the Hartnagle’s side yard.  I hadn’t noticed it before because it was next to an old maple tree with low hanging branches.  The structure was obviously homemade and leaning into the tree like the Tower of Pisa.  There was a ladder leading up to a small deck hidden by the leaves of the tree.  It seemed sturdy enough.  The leaning stilts were set in concrete.  I climbed to the top without any difficulty.
The deck was even and there was a bench up there to sit on.  There was a pretty good view, too.  I couldn’t imagine a better one short of a telephone pole and that wasn’t practical.  Children had written their names all over the structure with colored chalk.  A plastic bucket of it was right there, so I chose blue and wrote a note to Duncan:

I MISS YOU.
SEE YOU SOON.
LOVE, MOM


***


“Where can he be?” Joyce yelled this question as I approached my back door.  I was thinking about Duncan, of course, and how easy it had been to find an observation point and how it had been a good day, for a change.  For a second I thought Joyce had caught on and was finally talking about something relevant to my life.  That’s why I smiled.  “What are you smiling at?”  She was blocking my way into the house.  “Clay is still missing.  He hasn’t called.”
I checked my watch.  “How long has he been gone?”
“Hours,” she said, looking forlorn.  “I don’t know what to do.”
“Why don’t you go home and wait for him,” I said, making a move for the door.
“I don’t think I should be alone.  I’m too upset.”
“Well then, call a friend and ask them to stay with you,” I said.  It took me a minute to realize that Joyce was looking at me as if I was that person, as if I should ask her to come in and wait for however long it took for Clay to appear.  I tried to stay calm.  “Or call your minister.  That’s his job, isn’t it?  To comfort people?”
“You think something has happened to Clay.”
“No, I’m sure he’s fine.”
“How long do I have to wait before I can alert the police?”
“Twenty-four hours, I think.”
“Twenty-four hours?  I can’t be alone for twenty-four hours!”
“Clay will probably be back any minute now.  I think you ought to go home and try to relax.  I might have something from the health food store to help you sleep.  If you could just wait here one minute I’ll go get it.”  As soon as I got the door open, she followed me in and then down the hall to the bathroom.  I rooted around in the medicine cabinet and held out the bottle of HTP capsules.
“What are those?”
“They’re harmless.  They’ll help you rest.  Go on, take them home.”  I led her by the arm towards the kitchen.
“You’re trying to get rid of me, aren’t you?  It’s my hour of need and you’re trying to get rid of me.”
There was something about the way she said that—her hour of need, for Pete’s sake.  In my hour of need, Joyce had quoted some Bible verses.  I hadn’t reacted at the time because I had few words and didn’t care to waste the ones I had on her, but now I surprised myself.  “Joyce,” I said.  “There’s a question I’ve been wanting to ask you.”
“What?”
“Do you really think God picked Clay especially for you?  You told me that once.  Do you believe it?”  She blinked.  Once.  Twice.  Three times. 
“I guess so.  Why?”
“Then do you believe God picked Duncan especially for me?”
“Duncan.”
“My son.  Remember, I had a son.  I wondered if you also thought God picked Duncan to be my child.  And me to be his mother.  What do you think?”
“I—”
“If God plans everything, did he also plan on Duncan’s murder?  Call your minister and ask him to come on over here.  He could explain God’s plan.”
“Umm—“
“I don’t get why people act as if I have a craving for a doughnut and Food Lion has run out and I should just get used to the idea that I can’t have one.  If nobody mentions Duncan’s name, maybe I’ll forget I can’t live without him.”
Joyce was touching her nose.  She was moving it to the left and to the right.  It must have been a nervous habit she had indulged in for many years.  It explained a lot.
“Telling me that Duncan’s murder was God’s will was simply—unforgivable.” 
My words hovered in the air like hummingbirds and I didn’t have the urge to yank them back.  There was no what-have-I-done feeling.  It was like I’d solved a tricky equation that had been stumping me for months.  Joyce just stood there with her hand covering her nose.  
“If you think about it, you might see why I can’t get all torn up about Bobo kicking the bucket or Clay being late for dinner.  You might understand why I’d appreciate it if you’d take these damn pills, go home, and go to sleep.  It’s the best thing you can possibly do.”


***
  

Surveys have shown that the majority of Americans’ favorite word is their own name.  Where did they find the participants?  Singles complexes?  Saloons?  Golf courses?  Narcissist conventions?  These surveys couldn’t have been conducted scientifically.  There couldn’t have been any mothers in them.  
Do you stop being a mother when your child dies?  My favorite word is Duncan, but no one says that word anymore.  Maybe they’re afraid I’ll fall apart like—how does that song go?  A cake out in the rain?  But I wouldn’t—hearing his name would fill me up again, if only for a minute.  A memory or a story would be so refreshing; just hearing his name spoken from someone else’s lips.  A healthy person’s lips.
I didn’t know any healthy people.  Ironically, my mother had cut out an article on ‘energy vampires.’  They intrude on one’s life, ignoring boundaries and privacy.  Suggesting salsa dancing lessons or lunch at expensive restaurants.  Showing up uninvited in my bathroom.  The article was still taped to the refrigerator.  It said I should limit my time with energy vampires, stay calm and detached, and practice walking away.  It said I should avoid being in confined spaces with them.  It wasn’t as easy as it sounded.  
Duncan spent spring break of his junior year in Mexico with his Spanish class, helping to build houses in a poor village.  There is no Spanish name for Duncan, so he chose ‘Domingo,’ which means born on Sunday, which he was.  Habitat for Humanity International hadn’t taken him off the mailing list, at least.  He still existed there.  The mail included proof of this—a letter addressed to him, and I left it on top of the pile.  It was the best thing that had happened all day.  
I went into Duncan’s room and located his Spanish language tapes in the bookshelf.  I popped one into the player.  Duncan had asked me—his mother— to learn Spanish with him.  Imagine the opportunity.  The gift.  But instead of participating wholeheartedly, I sat at the dining room table and mouthed phrases while multi-tasking—grading papers or lesson planning.  That mistake points to one of my glaring character flaws: the inability to appreciate and live in the moment.  How many moments did I miss with Duncan?  
Speaking of missed opportunities, why didn’t I pick him up at the library the day he was killed?  Aren’t mothers supposed to have a sixth sense that something catastrophic is about to happen to her child?  I, on the other hand, sat through a boring teachers’ meeting and drove home without a clue of what was to come.  
To the tune of a Christmas carol sung in Spanish, my stomach turned.  I ran to the bathroom and threw up as if recreating the early months of pregnancy when I felt as if my organs were set to eject.  I wasn’t there, I wasn’t there.  I vomited until there was nothing left inside me.  Nothing at all.


***


“You look sick,” my mother said.  “Your eyes are hollow and your skin—“
“I have a stomach virus,” I said.  My mother had walked in on me again, curled up on the sofa in my pajamas, listening to Duncan’s Spanish tapes.  “Where’s Aunt Lois?”
“At the library,” she said.  “I need to pick her up in a little while.”
This scenario brought my fatal flaw to light once again, my failure as a mother.  I was the reason Duncan had died.  My mother followed me to the bathroom, where I heaved the ginger ale I had been sipping.
“I’ll be fine,” I panted.  “Why don’t you go now and let me rest?”
“How long has this been going on?” my mother asked, dampening a washcloth and holding it on my forehead as I leaned over the toilet.
“Since yesterday.”
“Were you up all night?”
“It’s all right.  I’m learning Spanish.”
“Come lie down.”  We went back to the living room where I stretched out on the sofa again and my mother covered me with an afghan.  “What are we going to do about you?”
“I’ve just picked up something, that’s all.  Don’t worry.”
“Let me make you some soup.”
“God, no.”
“You can’t go on like this.”
“I’ll try some more ginger ale later.”
“Gretel landed in the emergency room, you know.”
“Who’s Gretel?”
“The short one in our Water Aerobics group with the fat face.  She started throwing up and got dehydrated.  They pumped her full of—” Just then there was a knock at the door.  “I’ll get it,” my mother said.  I think she was hoping it was a doctor.  Unfortunately, it was Joyce.
“I found Clay,” she said.
“Clay?” my mother said.  
“Her husband,” I said weakly from the sofa.
“My daughter is sick,” Mom said.  “She can’t hold anything down.  It could be contagious.”  Joyce ignored this and walked on in.  The Spanish tape continued to play.  Que pasa?  Pause.  Que pasa?
“I went out looking for him,” Joyce said.
“Who?” my mother asked, still holding the door wide open.
“Her husband,” I said again.  “Good, Joyce.  I’m glad you found him.  I think I’m going to be sick again, so why don’t you go home to Clay.”
“He’s not there,” she said in a desperate kind of way.
“Maybe I should make some tea,” my mother said.  “You really should have something in your stomach.  Tea and saltines are always good.”
“No thank you,” I said.
“I haven’t eaten anything since yesterday,” Joyce said.  “It was the most horrible night of my life.”  My mother shut the door but stood next to it like an umbrella stand.
“Why don’t you get in bed?” my mother asked me.  “How do I turn off that Spanish talk?”
“I’m listening to it,” I said.
“Clay left me,” Joyce announced.
“I think maybe I will go to bed now,” I said.
“Do you have any more of those capsules?” Joyce asked.  “The sleeping pills?”
“Sleeping pills!” my mother cried. 
“He’s having a mid-life crisis,” Joyce muttered.  It seemed to me that train had already left the station.  Clay had to be at least sixty-five, and at the rate he was going, he wouldn’t live to be a hundred and thirty.  Not even close.  “I found him drinking coffee with a woman from choir.  At the coffeehouse up the street.” 
“What’s the big deal about cup of coffee?” my mother asked no one in particular.  
“I’ll get the HTP capsules,” I said, dragging myself off the sofa.
“Are they addictive?” my mother asked.
“They’re from the health food store,” I said.
“I brought you an article,” my mother said.  “It says people can overdose on vitamins.” 


***


A mother’s death by guilt is slow and excruciating.  There is a constant drum beat in the brain, If only I had done this instead of that.  If only I weren’t such a self-centered bitch.  If only.   My child died violently and alone.  I wasn’t where I needed to be.  I didn’t stop it, I didn’t save him.  I was worthless.  No wonder he didn’t want to come home.
Duncan had stayed away since the day he made the peanut butter cookies.  Another bad decision—not being home at the crucial hour.  I didn’t know it was crucial, just like I didn’t know it was crucial to skip a faculty meeting, drive over and pick up my son at the library.  If only I had done that he would be alive today.  The only thing keeping me going was seeing him again and telling him I was sorry.  Sorry I had failed him.  Begging his forgiveness for being a failure.
My mother and Aunt Lois delivered chicken soup, believing I had contracted a run-of-the-mill stomach virus even though in a delirious moment I explained I had no value as a human being and my body didn’t deserve nourishment.
“Stop talking,” said my mother.  “Put this cold washcloth on your head.”
“Is that crazy woman next door going to move?” Aunt Lois asked, flopping into the armchair in my bedroom.
“What?”  I tried to sit up in bed and felt dizzy.
“Joyce,” my mother said. “The one with the husband in the bathing suit who drank coffee with another woman.”
“Clay,” I said weakly.
“Now that he’s gone, maybe she’ll move to a condo.”  My mother was trying to straighten the bed with me in it.  “We’re keeping the doors locked so she can’t just walk in whenever she feels like it.”
“She called, by the way,” Aunt Lois said.  “And Dr. Pullapilly called, too.”  Dr. Pullapilly was the head of the science department at my old school.  “She said she hopes she can count on you to teach some classes in the fall.  Don’t worry, I told her you were sick in bed and you’d call her back as soon as you stopped vomiting.  She sounded very concerned.  But when I told her you were writing a science textbook—”
“You didn’t,” I groaned.
“Of course I did,” she said.  “And let’s not forget about your experiment.  She can’t wait to hear more about that.  I said the water aerobics group feels the same way.”
“Stop,” I said.
“They need you at that school,” my mother continued.  “That Dr. Pullapully is smart as a whip.  She knows a valuable resource when she sees one.  If you went back to teaching—”
“Would you please be quiet?  I’d like to get some rest now.  Why don’t you two go on home.  Better yet, why don’t you take a vacation.”
“We couldn’t possibly leave you like this.  I have soup on the stove.  How about some tea?”
“No thank you.”
“Your body deserves nourishment,” Aunt Lois said, with an emphasis on deserves.
“That was the fever talking, Lois,” my mother said.
“I want you to talk to me about Duncan,” I said firmly.  If I was going to die anyway, why not spit it out?  Why not discuss something important for a change?
“What?”  My mother sat on the end of the bed.
“What did she say?” asked Aunt Lois.
“I said I want you to talk about Duncan.”
“I don’t understand,” my mother said.  She wrapped her arms around her middle and rocked slightly.
“I want to know what you remember about him.  I want you to tell me stories.  I want to hear you say his name.”
“Oh, no,” my mother groaned.
“He was your grandson,” I said.
“Oh, dear,” Aunt Lois whispered.
“Please,” I said.
My mother dropped to one side covering my legs.
“She’s had a heart attack,” cried Aunt Lois, rushing over and grabbing my mother’s wrist.
“No, she just doesn’t want to talk about Duncan,” I said calmly.  “Neither do you.”
Auntie stretched out behind my mother, holding her tightly.  They were crushing my legs and feet, but I didn’t move.  I was thinking they probably slept that way as children—napped that way.  If one cried, the other did, too, as they were doing now; their shoulders shaking in unison, their faces contorted.  When my mother spoke, her voice was not her own.  It came from underground.
“We lost our brother in the war; that’s what killed our parents, you know.  They died within six months of each other.  We both lost husbands, but that’s to be expected.  We’ve lost a lot of friends, haven’t we, Lois?  But my grandson, that precious boy?  I can’t talk about him without losing what’s left of my mind.  Holding on to what’s left of you—that’s what I have now.  You and my baby sister, Lois.”  Aunt Lois wiped her wet cheek with the back of my mother’s shirt.  “We had a second cousin, Ethel, and she used to wear everybody out with her yacking.”
“She sure did,” Aunt Lois sighed. 
“And then she married a traveling salesman and had those awful twins.”
“What a mess,” Lois said.
“Her husband claimed she went off her rocker because she lost all her energy and stopped yammering every waking minute.  Isn’t that ridiculous?”
“You’re afraid I’ve gone off my rocker, is that it?” I asked.
“No, I think I have,” my mother said.  “I can’t do anything right anymore.  I’m just a dried up, useless old woman, no good to anybody.”
“That’s not true,” Aunt Lois whispered into my mother’s hair.
“I know what Harold would say.”  Harold was my father.  “’Inger,’ he’d say.”  Inger is my mother’s name.  “’Inger, what kind of a mother are you, anyway?  Get that girl out of bed.  Snap her back into reality.’”
“That sounds like Harold, all right,” I said.
“It does,” Aunt Lois murmured.  “That snotty tone.”
“I never liked that man you married,” Mom said to me.
“Me neither,” Aunt Lois chimed in.  “We thought you were brave for leaving him.”  This was the first I’d heard of it.
“I don’t want to die thinking I wasn’t a good mother,” Mom sobbed.  “That I wasn’t brave.  That I didn’t do everything I could for my child.  That I didn’t do every darned thing I could think of.”
I knew exactly how she felt.  I didn’t want her to die feeling that way.  I didn’t want her to die at all, ever.  I wanted her to continue to be around, nudging me.  Not giving up on me. 
 “You have, Mom,” I said with feeling.  “Harold was such a critic.  Screw him.”  There was a shocked silence, then short snorts of laughter from my mother and Lois.  “I love you.  I love you both,” I said.  
It was the first time I’d said I love you to anyone since Duncan.  A small window opened.  It felt like hope—hope that Duncan might be out there somewhere, waiting for me with open, forgiving arms.  I thought the bed we three were clinging to like a life raft might float away on a slow river of tears.  I was ready to go with its flow; where I landed remained to be seen.


dream journal entry

dreamless sleep.  what does it mean?




gathering & analyzing data


After the love fest in my bedroom, Mom and Auntie started feeling a global brand of love that spilled onto Joyce.  To be more accurate, they felt sorry for her instead of annoyed by her, and this phenomenon happened virtually overnight.  When my mother entered Joyce’s inner sanctum offering leftover soup, she discovered what I had always suspected: Joyce discarded nothing.  She was drowning in clutter, the detritus of life.  
“It was disgusting.”  My mother shuddered.  “She’s depressed.  That’s where that hoarding starts, you know.  I read an article about it in the AARP magazine.  That’s why she married that man, the one in the bathing suit.  She was depressed.”
“Thank you, Dr. Freud,” I said.  But she was probably right.
“I told her to thank her lucky stars.  Any man who rides around naked on a lawnmower has a screw loose.  Now he’s that other woman’s problem.”
“Let’s invite Joyce to the German buffet at the senior center tonight,” Aunt Lois said, clapping her little hands.  “She needs to get out and mingle.”
“You can’t go,” Mom said to me.  “You’re still recovering.  The last thing your stomach needs right now is sauerkraut.”
“Or canned herring,” Auntie added.
“I didn’t know herring was German,” I said.
“They served it last time.  You need to take care of yourself and drink plenty of fluids and get well.  Eat some Jell-O.”
“Okay,” I said, sighing as if I was disappointed to be left alone with the Jell-O.  My mental list was already forming.  This was to be my first night in the tree house.
“Those red flowers by Joyce’s front steps?  They’re plastic, from the dollar store, just stuck in the ground.  Says she collects them.  Bags full of cheap plastic flowers, thrown every which way.  Don’t get me started on the dolls.”  Mom and Auntie gathered up their satchels.  I felt a little tug inside.  They had been staying over, making sure I was hydrated twenty-four hours a day, listening to Spanish language tapes without complaint.  I realized I was going to miss them
“Thank you for nursing me back to health,” I said as my mother and my aunt hugged my waist, one on each side. 
“Don’t forget to call Dr. Pullapilly!” Auntie called over her shoulder as they walked to the car.  I nodded and waved.  Why not call Dr. P.  She came to the funeral, she phoned, she wrote.  She took my classes when I couldn’t finish the semester.  She was a rock.
“I hear you’ve had the flu,” she said in her musical accent touched with long ago Bombay.
“Something like that.”
Pause.  “Are you well?”
“Getting there,” I said.
“Good.  Then perhaps you will consider returning to us in the fall.”  Pause.  “If you prefer to teach part-time at first, we can work together on a schedule.”  Pause.  “A period of seclusion may make sense at first, but I trust you have concluded it is not the final solution, my dear.  Is it true you are writing a textbook?”
“No.”
“But you are keeping your mind occupied?”
“Most definitely.”
“Excellent.  It is essential to keep one’s mind occupied so as not to unravel, don’t you agree?”
“Absolutely, Dr. P.”
“So, you will think seriously about the teaching, then?”
“Yes.”
Pause.  “I have missed you.  We will speak again soon.” 
I didn’t have to explain suffering to steadfast, straight-talking Dr. Pullapilly.  She survived poverty and near starvation as a child in India.  After I hung up the phone, I stood for a minute with my forehead against the kitchen wall and heard a voice whisper, I miss you, too.


***


Nightfall finally arrived, and I hurried over to the Hartnagle’s tree house.  It was filled with Cub Scouts in their blue uniforms.  Their leader and Corrine Hartnagle stood guard by the ladder.  “Yoo Hoo!” she called, waving her hands at me.
“Hi, Corrine,” I said.  Hiding my disappointment wasn’t in the realm of possibility.
“Are you here for the peanut sale?” she asked, pointing to a cardboard box on the ground.
“Peanuts?”
“In the shell.  $2.50 a bag.  How many would you like?”
“Oh, dear.  I don’t have any money with me,” I said, indicating my pockets were empty.
“That’s okay, you can pay me later.”
“How long is this going to go on?”
“The sale?  It was officially over ten minutes ago, but for you I could—“
“I mean, how long will the Cub Scouts be here?”
“All night.  They’re camping out.  We’re getting ready to roast marshmallows on the Webber grill and tell ghost stories.”
“It must be 90’—”
“Why don’t you take the last three bags of peanuts?  That’ll be $7.50, the next time I see you.”
“Okay.”  I stuffed the peanuts into my satchel.  Duncan loved peanuts.  Peanut butter.  Peanut butter cookies.
The scout leader called up to the boys to pipe down.  Their rowdiness was so familiar, it tugged at my heart.  I wished they’d all go home so I could get up there and find Duncan.
“You shouldn’t be walking around by yourself,” Corrine said, hands on her hips.  “Did you hear about the meth lab in the neighborhood?”
“What?”
“Well, it didn’t turn out to be a meth lab, but the renters were growing marijuana in the garage.  People from out of the country, you know, not Americans at all.  Koreans, or something.  They ran off, of course, the police will never catch them.  By the way, have you signed our petition about the pot holes?  It’s disgraceful, the condition of the streets around here.”  I shook my head.  I hadn’t signed it.  “Okay, I’ll bring it by and pick up the money you owe the Cub Scouts after we get back from vacation.  We leave tomorrow morning for Disney World.  Do you want my husband to walk you?”
“No thanks.  How long will you be gone?”
“Ten days.  We’re renting a motor home.”
I didn’t hurry.  I listened carefully for the sound of bicycle tires and mentally kicked myself because I never took Duncan to Disney World when he was little.  It had never occurred to me to rent a motor home, but then there was only just the two of us.
My schedule had been disrupted, my vigil ruined by the Boy Scouts.  I wasn’t prepared to face an empty house, so I stood on the sidewalk and studied the stars.  Duncan had asked for a telescope for his birthday and I had come through there, at least.  Surely granting that wish counted in my favor.  Mom, Lois and Joyce had gone to the German buffet.  The ratty little dog had died, so the barking had ended.  Windows in houses across the street were black.  It was so quiet I could have been on the moon.
On a whim, I strolled down to the coffeehouse.  There sat Clay and an elderly woman, the only customers.  After ordering an iced coffee, I was drawn to their table, probably by the electrical force of the woman’s blue hair.  It gave new meaning to static.
“Hello, Clay,” I said.  They each had a cup of steaming coffee and were stirring them with little wooden sticks.  Hot coffee in a heat wave.  There was a leash in the middle of the table.
“Are you the waitress?” he asked.  The old woman’s eyebrows went up and stayed up.
“No, I’m your next door neighbor.”
He looked blank.  The woman’s head shook slightly, like Katherine Hepburn’s used to do.
“Clay?” I said.
“I’m Mary Alice,” the woman announced.  “He’s staying with me right now.”
“Yes, I heard.  How’s it going?”
“What?”
“Your—arrangement.”
Mary Alice lowered her voice.  “I bumped into Clay when he was looking for Bobo.  We know each other from church and all.”  She grabbed my free hand.  “What would Jesus do?  That’s what I asked myself.  He couldn’t go home without Bobo.  You know how his wife is.”
“Joyce?”
“That’s the one.”  She sighed.  Clay pointed out the window at someone walking a little dog and made a choking sound.
“I don’t understand.”  Mary Alice’s head continued to wobble.  “Listen, could you come to the ladies room with me for a minute?  Please?”  Mary Alice patted Clay’s arm and followed me into the tiny bathroom.  I didn’t bother to close the door.  “Okay,” I said, setting my paper cup on the edge of the sink.  “I don’t know exactly what’s going on here, but Bobo died weeks ago.  Clay and Joyce had a funeral for him and everything.”  In the harsh light of the restroom I could see Mary Alice was even older than I originally thought.  The odor of pink powdered hand soap combined with coffee reminded me it hadn’t been long since my stint with a stomach virus.  I wasn’t going to be able to take this for long.  I covered my nose with a square of toilet paper.  “I know you’re trying to—help poor Clay.  Temporarily.  Obviously he has some kind of a problem.”
“Problem?”
“Yes.  He disappeared suddenly.  And then Joyce found out he was—with you.  Has he seen a doctor?”
“Oh, no.  He’s not sick.  Eats like a horse, sleeps like a log.  Loves my olive loaf.  And we both drink coffee like it’s going out of style.”
“I cleared my throat.  “Have you talked to Joyce?”
“About what?”
“Clay staying with you.  The Bobo thing.”
“She’s mad as a hatter—about the dog running off, I guess.  No use talking to her until she calms down.”  She patted my arm as she did Clay’s.  “Don’t you worry, honey.  Clay’s no trouble at all—I’ve got a roll-out couch.  One day at a time, that’s the AA motto.”  She turned and peered out the open door.  Clay’s chair was empty and he was nowhere to be seen.  I threw my drink down the sink.
Mary Alice explained Clay had probably gone out hunting for Bobo and would turn up before closing time for another cup of coffee.  She settled back into her chair at the table to wait.  
I felt ready to rest my head, but first I had to walk a couple of blocks home.  On the way I wondered what Jesus would actually do in regard to Clay, if Clay might be better off on Mary Alice’s couch, if Joyce might be better off alone with her clutter, if I might be better off not saying a word to anyone about what I’d seen at the coffeehouse, when there was a whizzing sound to my right.  A welcome gust of air hit my face, and then I saw the boy.  The boy on the yellow bicycle.  It happened in the snap of a finger.  By the time I raised my hand, he had disappeared around the corner.


***


It’s true—joy can hit you at totally unexpected times.  I was walking along a dark street, thinking about Clay possibly living out the rest of his life on Mary Alice’s couch, and there was Duncan.  Just a flash, but it was enough.  Enough to know that my preparations weren’t in vain and the timing was perfect.  I slept soundly that night—no disturbing or jarring images popping up in dreams—and spent the next day cleaning the house and grocery shopping, as if Duncan was due to return from summer camp and we’d have the makings of a welcome home celebration on hand.  I was completely out of practice when it came to this energetic, optimistic, bubbly feeling, but I recognized it like an old friend.  For the first time in ages, I was happy to be at the Food Lion, even if it meant running into Joyce.
“Inger and Lois invited me to the German buffet last night,” Joyce said in the checkout line.  They were all on a first name basis now.
“I heard.  Did you enjoy the herring?” I asked as the girl rang me up.
“Since Bobo died and my husband left me for another woman, enjoyment is not in my vocabulary,” Joyce said flatly.  The checkout girl stopped what she was doing for a few seconds and then resumed scanning my items.
“Looks like you’re having some sorta get-together,” she said around her gum.  She was accustomed to my yogurts, not a roast.
Behind me, Joyce burst into quiet sobs and the checkout girl handed her a paper towel to mop her tears.  I could have gotten all embroiled.  I could have brought her back to earth with clear evidence that Clay’s cheese had fallen off his cracker, that Mary Alice was obviously a lonely old woman with age spots and blue hair, not Madonna.  Joyce could have gone over to the coffeehouse, picked up Clay and checked him into a hospital for psychiatric observation.  But I chose to stay inside my bubble.  My miracle.  I chose to stay happy; desperately happy, like the sun appearing out of nowhere after a hard rain.  


***


I couldn’t recall the last time it actually rained.  The days ran together like a hot dry desert.
Since I hadn't been reading and the library was the place Duncan had gone the night he died, I'd stayed away.  But I was an amateur at detective work and it occurred to me that there could be a manual of some sort on the basics of tracking someone down.  I didn't plan to mention to the librarian that the person I was trying to find was dead.  Thus detail could be off-putting.  I was willing to venture into the library to pick up a few tips.
A disadvantage to falling behind in current events: I didn't know the library was now closed on Sundays due to budget cuts.  The parking lot was empty, but I pulled the VW into a parking space and sat there thinking about Duncan.  I faced a grassy space with a grove of trees.  In the middle of those trees was a neat little tent and a man dressed in a gray t-shirt and khaki shorts, sitting on a stump in the shade, looking up at the leaves or the sky.
Something moved me to get out of the car.
“Hot, isn’t it?” I called.
He looked over, as if expecting me to show up any minute.  “That it is,” he said.  “You’re Duncan’s mother, aren’t you?”  The sun was burning the top of my head.  Mom and Auntie were right--I needed a hat.  The Tent Man was very tan and lean.  “I recognized the Beetle,” he said, strolling over.  
“You knew my son?”  
“We met at the library.”  He nodded at the building as if it was obvious why he chose to pitch a tent nearby.  “I saw the story in the newspaper.”
“Oh,” I said.  “Oh.”
“I’m sorry,” he said.
“Thank you,” I said.  “I think I need some water.  Do you have any water?" Suddenly I was very thirsty.  He lifted a plastic jug. 
 “Would you like to sit down?” he asked, as if we were in his living room, which I guess we were.  He motioned toward a log under a tree.  I sat down while he collected a couple of cups from his stash of belongings.  “You okay?”  I nodded, but I still felt a little spacey.  “You gotta watch that sun.  Use plenty of sunscreen.”  I nodded again.  “Your hair’s different.”  I reached up.  “It was longer at the funeral.”
“You came to Duncan’s funeral?”
“I wanted to pay my respects.  He was a friend.”  
“I—“
“There were a lot of people there.  Lots of kids.  You wouldn’t have noticed me.”  I drank my water which was unbelievably clear and ice cold.  It was the most delicious refreshing water I'd ever tasted.  “More?” he asked.
“Please,” I said.  
I drank a lot of his water talked while I did it—the first time I’d actually felt like talking in months.  I needed to hear what he remembered about Duncan—the way he sounded, what he said, how he looked. 
“Did he ever sit on this log?” I asked.
“Sure—right where you’re sitting.  He said it would be more like a bench if we lifted it up on these rocks, so we did.  It was sort of like—praying, doing that together.”
I gulped.  “You pray?”
“That’s what I was doing when you pulled up."
“Who do you pray to?”
“The Great Spirit.”  He smiled.  “You know, Duncan was a very accepting person.  He never asked why I live the way I do.  Why I don’t have a phone or a car.”
“I don’t get many calls anymore.  There’s no place I really want to go.  Driving has started to scare me.”
“There, see—we have a lot in common except I bet you live in a house.”
“You don’t live in a tent,” I said, softly.  “You live in a church.”
With this, I began my confession.  


***


I can see why dumping sins into somebody else’s lap caught on in the Catholic Church.  The problem is keeping track of them all.  I’d be making lists all day.  So I dumped mine into one big category.  The Tent Man listened patiently as I explained I was a bad mother.  A lot of people wouldn’t have wanted to hear this, denying the whole thing, interrupting frequently with, “No, you’re not.”  The Tent Man didn’t do this.
“What about Duncan?” he asked when I paused.  “Did he think you were a bad mother?”
“He was generous to a fault,” I said.  “He gave me the benefit of the doubt.  And he loved people unconditionally.”
“You raised a fine boy.  He would have made a fine man as long as he stayed out of the army.”
"Were you in the army?  In the war?"  He nodded.  "Were you injured?  Seriously?"
"Yes, it was serious," he said.
“Do you believe in miracles?” I asked.
He pointed to the trees and clouds and sly.  No words were necessary.  We were sitting in the middle of a miracle.


***


On the way home I turned on the radio and actually enjoyed listening to music on NPR until sirens drowned it out.  I smelled smoke before I noticed the black cloud rising from the direction of my house.
One sure way to know you’re at peace is not caring if your house is on fire.  There was no panic—nary a flash that I hadn’t bought enough insurance, no question of where I’d go, what I’d do.  I felt above it all; strangely free.  What with the fire truck and police cars, I had to park some distance down the block.  In my absence, the neighborhood had come to life.  A conglomeration of observers had congregated outdoors, half of them dressed in Sunday clothes, another motley group in lounge wear.  The Watchers were represented in full force.  As I drew closer, I saw that my house was still standing.  It was Joyce’s garage that had burned to the ground.
“Poof,” one fleshy woman in a sleeveless yellow zipped-up-the-front number announced to no one and everyone, snapping her fingers once.
“Was anybody hurt?”  I asked her, glancing at the ambulance.
“She’s the owner, I think,” the woman said, pointing to Joyce, who was running around the yard willy-nilly in a bright pink suit and carrying a red gas can.
“Hello,” I said to one of the fireman, sweating in his heavy gear.  “I live next door.  Could you tell me what happened here?”
“Arson,” he said, wiping his brow with his glove.  “You know the woman?”
“Sort of, “I said as Joyce disappeared around the corner of the house.
“The medics are trying to catch her now.  They’ll take her over to the hospital for observation.”
“She’s been under a lot of strain lately.”
“Something set her off, apparently.  You see the sermonette sign outside that church on Fairview?  She was yelling, 'THINK IT’S HOT NOW?  TRY ETERNITY, CLAY! '  Know anybody named Clay?”
“Her husband.  He wasn’t—in the garage, was he?”  
“Nope.  We would have found the body.  Better tell him to come on over to the hospital.  Psychiatric ward.”
“I think I know where to find him.” 
My mother and Aunt Lois arrived just as the ambulance pulled out.  I explained why Joyce wouldn’t be able to make their lunch date.
“Did you see her do it?” Mom asked, sniffing the air.
“No, I went to the library.”
“The library is closed on Sundays.”
“I forgot,” I lied.
“Joyce told us what you said about her garage.  Something like, if you had your way, you’d burn it down.  Maybe that’s where she got the idea.”
“Thanks, Mom.”
“You don’t seem the least bit upset.”
“I’m not.  That awful garage is gone and now maybe Joyce can get the help she needs.”
“The world is going crazy.  People stealing food, clogging up intersections with their signs, setting fire to—“
 “Not to mention senseless violence and unnecessary wars.”  She turned away from the charred remains of the garage and placed her hand on my cheek.  “Would you do me a favor?  Stop at the coffeehouse and tell Clay about Joyce?   Mary Alice can take it from there.  Go on, do your good deed for the day.”
“If he isn’t in a bathing suit and sitting on a lawnmower, I won’t recognize him.”
“The woman he’s with has a wobbly head.  Clay will be carrying a dog leash.”
“I thought the dog died.”
“It’s hard to explain.  Please, just do it.”
“Care to join us for lunch?” Aunt Lois asked.  “You could pick the restaurant this time.”
“No thanks, I have a lot to do.”
“Your science experiment,” Aunt Lois said, and I smiled.


***


My mind was clear and I had no doubts about my objective as I headed for the Hartnagle's.  They were safely off to Disney World and I would have the play structure all to myself to watch for Duncan.  Something about my conversation with the Tent Man and the garage burning down had put me in a good place.  I could feel a difference in the air, like butterfly wings brushing my skin.
Sitting under the tree canopy, I remembered the night I gave birth to Duncan--the anticipation of seeing my baby for the first time.  Holding him.  I had been through the pain of his loss these past months--worse than any labor.  But soon I would hold him again.  Like the Tent Man and Albert Einstein, I believed in miracles.
Two hours passed like a minute.  When I heard the whirring of bicycle tires my eyes were well-adjusted to the darkness and I saw the flash of yellow.  And the boy in the baseball cap.  I stood.  Something told me to be quiet so as not to startle him.
He propped the bicycle against a telephone pole and was moving swiftly toward the Hartnagle's back door.  When he started fiddling with the lock, I flew down the ladder and ran up behind him, saying Duncan.  Duncan.  His head snapped around and he held his hands out in front of him.  I couldn't see his face because the bill of his cap cast a shadow.  But I heard his voice.
"Por favor, senora!  No llame a la policia!"  I was wearing the MEXICO t-shirt, of course.  I pointed to it and laughed.  He'd gone to Mexico, where else?  He'd been planning to go again, and he went.  He'd been speaking Spanish for months, obviously.  He would never guess that I'd been listening to his Spanish tapes.  "No llame a la policia!"
"Don't be silly, darling.  Why in the world would I call the police, baby?  It's okay, it's okay, you're back now.  You're back.  Oh, I've missed you so much--"
He kept his hands up and kept repeating por favor, por favor.  When he bumped against the door, automatic outside lights activated from all sides.  I took one look at his face and dropped to my knees, moaning.
"Senora?" the boy said with real concern.  "Senora?"




making conclusions


Fact:  My name is Claudia Olson, mother of Duncan Logan.
Fact:  Duncan was shot and killed while walking home from the library April 21, 2010.  He was seventeen.
Fact:  The boy at the Hartnagle's was not my son.  His name is Juan Mendoz.  At the time he was a seventeen year old homeless illegal alien from Mexico, and he was trying to steal food to feed his family--mother, Abelena, and ten year old sister, Caridad.  They were living in the neighborhood park.  He said he occasionally borrowed the yellow bicycle from a boy named Domingo.  He did not know the boy's last name but he was often seen in the park with an Army veteran who had been wounded in the war.
Fact:  Juan had never been in my house until I invited the Mendoz family over for dinner.  They could not eat the peanut butter pie I made for dessert because Juan, Abelena and Caridad all have severe allergies to peanuts.  During the visit, I showed Juan a picture of Duncan.  "Domingo," he said.  "Si," said Abelena.
Fact:  I fell in love with Juan, Abelena and Caridad.  They have a lot to teach me about survival and faith.
Fact:  The Mendoz family is no longer hungry or homeless.  Mom, Auntie and the Water Aerobics Group have more connections that you can shake a stick at.  (Note: They also found an assisted living facility for Joyce and Clay when their house went into foreclosure.  They even helped Joyce sort out her clutter, as she could not take life-size dolls and bags of plastic flowers to Merry Oaks.)
Fact:  When I returned to the library to check in with the Tent Man, his campsite had disappeared.  There was no sign of the tent or the log bench.  I asked the librarian when he left and if she had any idea where he had gone.  Her face turned to stone and she declared no one would dare pitch a tent behind her library.  Hadn't I noticed the security cameras, inside and out?  "There was no camper," she said with a sniff.
Fact:  Thanks to Dr. Pullapilly, the Mendoz kids are in school and I'm back to teaching.  
Fact:  I still believe in physics.  And my experiment proved that I, Claudia Olson, believe in miracles, too.  I go to the park every chance I get. My senses are awake to notice the miracles, whatever form they take.  Although I haven't spotted Duncan or the Tent Man again except in dreams, I don't have to see them to know they're real.  Meanwhile, the trees and sky is my cathedral.  And when it rains again, I'll dance.


dream journal entry

i'm floating in clear healing waters..
maybe in mexico.
but no matter where I am,
duncan and his angel are close to me.
very close.


###
