Abraham


     Abraham, also known as Abram is most commonly known for being the Father of the
Jewish people. The majority of the information found on Abraham is located in
the Old Testament's Book of Genesis. Other than that, there are no real
historical records on the life of Abraham, so the history of his life was passed
by word of mouth, and were there after made into biblical stories. There is also
the question if Abraham really lived, do to the little information available on
his life. Abraham is most famous for making his Covenant with God.
	Abraham would have lived somewhere between the years of  2000 and 1500
BC.  He was born in the city of Ur. Abraham's real name was Abram. The father of
Abram , Terach, had two other sons , Haran and Nachor. While living in the city
of Ur , Abram married his half-sister,  Sarai who later took on the name of
Sarah. The newlyweds later learned that Sarai was sterile. They then traveled
north to Charan, accompanied by Abraham's father Terach. While in Charan Terach
died. It was in Charan where God made his first of a series of revelations to
Abram. God spoke to Abram, and told him that he would promise to bless him and
make a great nation of him. Abram willingly decided to follow God to the city of
Canaan. Abram not only traveled with his wife on this journey, but he also
picked up his nephew, Lot. He lived his life in Canaan as a Nomad. Famine
eventually struck the land of Canaan , forcing Abram and his family to move on
to Egypt.
	In Egypt, Abram was fearful that the Egyptians would  kill him and take
his wife Sarai if they were to discover that the two were married. Abram
attempted to cover this up by telling everyone that he and Sarai were just
brother and sister. The Pharaoh demanded that Sarai be brought to his palace,
and as result, God sent down plagues which devastated all of Egypt. In a
desperate attempt to save his kingdom, Pharaoh decided it would be best to  send
Abram and Sarai away.
	Abram and his family returned to Canaan after the Famine had ended. Both
Lot and Abraham had great wealth in Canaan. The two both owned livestock, and
large quantities of silver and gold. Eventually Abram and Lot found that the
land could no longer provide the resources that the two men required of it. The
two went their separate ways, Lot going to the Jordan Plain, and Abram staying
in Canaan. God once again appeared to Abram and revealed the land that he would
some day give to Abram and his children. This time, God promised Abram that his
offspring would be of so many that no one would be able to count them, just like
the dust of the earth.
	By this time a great war had started up in the Jordan Plain. As a result
of the war,  Lot was made a imprisoned by King Chedorlaomer of Elam. When Abram
got word that his cousin Lot was being held prisoner, he and a group of his
servants went to battle the captors. The army was able to successfully rescue
Lot and several other prisoners. Abram was then blessed by priest Melchizedek,
the king of Salem, for his brave heroic actions.
	By this point, Abram and Saraia still have no children. Saria tells
Abram to go and wed their slave Hagar, and to have Children with her. Abram does
so, and has a son, Ishmael. While Hagar was pregnant, fights between Hagar and
Saria began to break out questioning each other on who was the real mistress of
the house. Abram showed no favoring judgment over the two women, and restored
order in the house hold. Hagar eventually fled to the dessert due to the poor
treatment that Sarai was giving her. God eventually came down to Hagar and told
her to go back home and that some day the baby she was carrying would be blessed.
	Once Abram reached 99 years old, God made a Covenant with him promising
to make him the father of nations and to give Canaan to him and his offspring.
As part of the agreement of the Covenant, God required the circumcision of Abram
and his male descendants, This was to seal the covenant. God then made another
promise to Abram. God promised Abram that Sarai would soon bear a son, and that
she would some day be the mother of nations. Abram was said to have found God's
last promise rather amusing. It was probably because Sarai was 90 years old and
incapable of bearing children anymore. Sarah was also witness to the promise of
a child, for God sent angels to her promising that she would have a male son.
The last part of God's covenant was that the name Abram be changed to Abraham,
and Sarai changed to Sarah. Abraham means "Noble Father". Through this covenant,
God was planning to send his savior.
	God once again confided in Abraham by telling him that he was plotting
to soon destroy the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah due to the corruptness of their
inhabitants. Upon hearing this, Abraham pleads with God telling him that their
are many innocent people that do not deserve to die. God reconsidered, and
agreed that if he could find 50 innocent people he would not destroy the two
cities. Under pressure from Abraham, he reduced the number to just 10 innocent
people. God sent his Angels out in search of just 10 righteously guided people.
Upon reporting back to God, the angels were only able to find Lot to be innocent
and good. God then appeared to Lot and told him to take his entire family and to
leave. Lot's wife later disobeys God's orders to leave, and she is turned into a
pillar of salt.
	Abraham's family then migrated to Negev. While traveling through the
city of Gerar, he once again is fearful of Sarah being taken from him, so he and
Sarah tell everyone that they are Brother and Sister. This time, Abimelekh, the
King of Gerar, took Sarah away. God then appeared to King Gerar in a dream. King
Gerar later returns Sarah to Abraham and gave him extra compensation to make up
for his mistake of taking Sarah away.
	Some time later, Sarah had the son that God promised her. Sarah laughed
upon the birth of the child so they named the child Isaac. The term Issac means
"he laughed" in Hebrew. Sarah finds that Ishmael is a terrible influence on
Isaac, so she tells Abraham to send him away with his mother. Abraham at first
is very reluctant to send away his first born son, but God suggests that Abraham
listens to what his wife Sarah has asked.  God also promised that some day
Ishmael would have his own nation.
	Once Isaac was slightly older, God commanded Abraham to take Isaac to a
mountain and to sacrifice him at the top. This was an ultimate test that God
gave to Abraham. Being God's servant, Abraham went as he was told with Isaac to
the top of a mountain in order to sacrifice his son. Abraham prepared to cut
Isaac's throat, but just in the nick of  time God's angels stopped him. Seeing
that there was a ram caught in some bushes, Abraham sacrificed that to God
instead.
	Sarah later died in Hebron. Abraham decided to buy the Makhpelah Cave
and the adjoining field from Ephrom the Hittite for a burial site. Abraham then
realized that Isaac should have a wife. Abraham sent one of his servants back to
his homeland to search out a wife for Isaac. The servant was able to find
Rebecca, Isaac's cousin, and was able to get her to come back and marry Isaac.
Abraham also found himself marrying Keturah, a concubine. Abraham and Keturah
had 6 children , Zimran, Yakshan, Medan, Midian, Yishbak, and Shuach, before
dying at the biblical age of 175. Isaac and Ishmael buried their father in the
Makhpelah Cave next to their mother, Sarah.
	In the end, God kept his promise with Abraham. Abraham was father to a
new nation, that's how he got the title of Father to the Jewish people. The rest
of the bible primarily tells about the children of Abraham. Abraham is therefore
one of the most important early characters mentioned in the bible.




 
Apocalypse
by: Luke Hoagland

FOLLOWING IS AN IMPORTANT REVELATION BEING MADE 
TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC.  THIS IS THE ONLY TIME YOU WILL
BE CONTACTED.

     Disclaimer:  The following information contains predictions of
     the future.  This has been written for people who want to know
     what is on the horizon for humanity, and most importantly, WHAT
     THEY CAN DO ABOUT IT.  Please understand that if you read this
     material, you will be doing it by your own choice.  If your
     reaction causes you to want to report me to AOL for sending
     unsolicited email, it could result in my account being closed. 
     I don't ask that anyone believe what I say just because I say
     it.  I do ask that if you choose to read this material, please
     suspend your judgment of it until enough time passes for its
     validity to be proven or disproven.  Please don't let your
     personal beliefs cause you to want to deprive others of
     receiving this. 

Written October 20, 1996

NOTE:  This document is quite lengthy, so it might be best to either 
print it or copy it to your word processor so it may be read 
off-line.

     Dear Friend, 	 	 	

     	The choice of whether or not to read this message all the way
     through may have important consequences for you as the events
     of our immediate future unfold.  This is being done solely for
     the benefit of others so that people may understand what to do
     about the times now approaching humanity.   What I'm about to
     explain will strike many people as ridiculous, because this kind
     of thing has been predicted over and over again and people are
     not inclined to take things like this seriously.  I am not your
     average tabloid psychic.  In fact, I'm not a psychic at all.  I
     am what could be called a modern day seer, but I prefer to be
     thought of as just a human being with an important message.  

     	I have studied prophecy and the techniques used to produce it
     for many years now.  Through a combination of my own findings,
     the prophecies of Nostradamus, the prophecies given by Jesus
     and the prophet Daniel, I have figured out the future of
     humanity.  As stated above in the disclaimer, the reader's
     belief in what I say is not necessary at this point. 

     	This message has been written over and over again since I
     first set out to do this.  In previous versions, I have tried to
     describe what will cause the rough times to come... but everyone
     is pretty much aware of the world's problems and they don't
     really need to have it all pointed out to them.   Besides, it
     makes the message unnecessarily long.  I have therefore decided
     to re-write this once again and limit myself to only listing the
     events to come and explaining what everyone can do to save
     themselves from destruction. What is about to happen in the
     world will be unfair to all of us and people will need to know
     the way out.   The end times are upon us now, and the time has
     come for the way out to be explained more clearly.  I feel that
     this is why I have been blessed with the ability to gain this
     knowledge and I feel urgently pressed to share what I know with
     others.

     	First, I will list the events, complete with dates and biblical
     references.  The explicit detail given here will seem to be
     just a bunch of nonsense I have pulled from out of the air.  A
     lot of tedious study went into this though, and I have not been
     the only person involved in this study.  I cannot give biblical
     references for all of it because the bible simply does not
     explain clearly enough, for it was not meant for this
     information to become understood so clearly until close to the
     time for it to happen.  

     1.  Around New Year's, 1997-  Saddam Hussein will defiantly
     force  President Clinton to make a move.  Most likely, Saddam
     will initiate another invasion and people will be slaughtered by
     the hundreds, as was done in Kuwait.

     2.  At the end of January, President Clinton will  launch a
     massive strike against Iraq, and Saddam will be killed.  This
     will anger the Russians because Iraq still owes them money from
     the cost of the war in 1990.  As Russia is still having a hard
     time financially since the collapse of the Soviet Union,
     America's reaction to Saddam will be seen as inconsiderate of
     Russia's financial woes.  France will join in the arguments,
     defending President Clinton's decision with the attitude that
     Saddam's destruction was in the best interest of keeping peace
     in the world.  Russia will still feel that it's problems have
     not been given enough consideration.  By June, the egotism
     between America, France and Russia will become so intense that
     the discussion of it will be cut off and a silent hatred will
     smolder for awhile.    

     3.  In September 1997, even after a warning from the pope about the
     consequences of another world war, Russia will suddenly invade
     Western Europe, starting WWIII.  As a Russian naval fleet from
     Murmansk positions itself along the French coast, Paris will be
     demolished overnight by the Russian Air Force.  American troops
     will be sent to counter the invading Russian and Moslem forces,
     and battles will take place all over southern France. After
     fleeing from the invasion of Italy, the pope dies at Lyon on
     December 13th. 

     4.  The war will  last three years and seven months, ending in
     March 2001, immediately after the rapture.  (Daniel 12:7)
     Fortunately for Americans, the fighting will be most heavily
     concentrated on the European continent as Russia attempts to
     take the whole place into its possession.  (A vague
     description of WWIII can be found in the last chapters of
     Daniel.)

     5.  Jesus said no one knows the exact date or hour of His
     return, but the approximate period can be determined.  The
     rapture lasts forty-five days, taking place in February and
     March 2001, beginning 1,290 days after the start of the war and
     ending 1,335 days after the start of the war.  (Daniel
     12:11-12) It begins when the second pope after John Paul II
     introduces a messiah in February 2001 (Matthew 24:15)

     6.  Jesus' description of the rapture: (Matthew 24:15-28) 
     Jesus' description of extra-terrestrials targeting the
     aftermath of the false messiah scene: (Matthew 24:27-28) 
     Jesus' description of the collection of the false messiahs
     after the rapture is completed and the stunned reaction of the
     people to the display of extra-terrestrial spacecraft in the
     skies: (Matthew 24:29-31)

     	The remainder of this explanation should help the reader
     understand how to escape destruction.  Some who read this will
     suspect that I am only creating confusion so that people will be
     misled.  Some may even accuse me of being one of the false
     prophets I speak about.  Some will automatically cringe at the
     sight of the name "Jesus" and assume I'm just a preaching holy
     roller.  Others will laugh when they finish reading and assume I
     must be crazy.  Indeed, this story will get harder and harder to
     believe as I go.  There will be at least a few people though,
     who will recognize that the description given by Jesus has
     actually been clarified and the truth about the end will be
     understood clearly.  I will leave it to the reader to make his
     own conclusions. 

     	Jesus foretold of His return near the end, to "cut the days
     short for His Father's children" because life will become so
     unlivable at the end that the entire race would be destroyed
     otherwise.  When He was here, Jesus did three very important
     things.  One, he taught us how to live together peacefully and
     successfully, although the majority of humanity has never
     understood what He meant.  Thus, the paradox that is facing
     the world now. The second thing Jesus did was demonstrate what a
     human being is capable of if he/she can love enough.  The third
     and most important thing He did was set up "part one" of a trick
     that will cause those who have not understood His teachings to
     separate themselves from those who have just prior to
     Armageddon.  The way it will be done will make it clear to the
     savior as to where the true children of God can be found. 	

     	Jesus foretold of many false messiahs who would rise and
     perform miracles so impressive that even His most committed
     followers would be misled by it if possible.  Before He left,
     Jesus formed what is now known as the Catholic Church,
     appointing the apostle Peter as the world's first pope.  In the
     beginning, His church was very simple.  However, since it was
     His church, He knew what would happen.  Peter was chosen
     because of his unshakable faith in Jesus.  All of the heads of
     the church who have followed in the tradition have thus had one
     goal in mind-- to make the Catholic Church what Jesus Himself
     would have made it.  When the rules were established in the
     Catholic Church, they were taken very seriously.  They were
     considered absolute and must never be changed or abolished for
     any reason. Jesus knew how difficult it would become near the
     end of the world for a church dedicated to its doctrines and
     established methods. Therefore, in such trying times, He knew
     that His church could be relied on to introduce another person
     like Him when one finally comes along. 	       	

     	So, where Jesus was actually rejected by religious authority
     because of His apparent rebellion against the established ways,
     something quite different will occur when religious authority
     actually introduces someone just like Him.  Since authority
     itself will trust him, the world will also trust him, even
     though he is only a spiritual healer who wants to ease the
     world's pain and suffering.  The public's attention will be
     dominated as this man goes around miraculously healing people
     of AIDS, Cancer and all sorts of other diseases, and producing
     food right out of thin air to feed everybody with. As the war
     rages on between the countries, humanity will desperately want
     to believe this man is the return of Christ, and after all, he
     will have been introduced by the church Jesus started Himself.

     	The Catholic Church's intentions will have been completely
     honest and righteous, for the man they introduce will be as
     much like Jesus as anyone could ever be.  It will be society
     itself that will take a good thing and turn it into something
     evil.  This is exactly the way Jesus planned it, for He knew the
     world will have become very dependent on authority near the
     end, and will be ready to just completely hand itself over,
     expecting to never have to do anything again.  But He warned
     about these false messiahs.  Those of us who have learned
     Jesus' message will recognize what is really going on as this
     man goes around creating a social dependency on himself. 
     Electricity will become too expensive to produce around this
     time, due to the cost of the war.  As the world loses its
     ability to stay informed about foreign places, this man will
     begin popping up all over the planet and people will be drawn to
     him like moths to a flame.

     	Everyone will respect his apparent authority too much to ask
     questions about how he transports himself from one place to the
     next. People will also wonder where all the followers have gone
     as he re-appears in new places, but it will be assumed that he
     has already taken them to Heaven.  The man will be worshipped
     and everybody he touches will feel they have just felt the touch
     of God.  Then after awhile, some innocent person will ask a
     question like, "Are you really Jesus?  You don't look like
     him... and the bible warns about false messiahs."  The reaction
     from those who would have died without his help will be one of
     angry protectiveness.  "How DARE you question the Son of God!
     Don't you KNOW who he is?" they will shout.  Then another
     innocent person will join the first one, insisting that the
     messiah be allowed to speak for himself.  But he will never be
     allowed to speak. His followers will be too loyal to him to
     allow anyone to put him in the humbling position of explaining
     himself.   The violent reactions of these devout followers will
     frighten many of the people and a division will begin to occur.

     	The arguments will become more heated as the crowd divides,
     and those who are breaking away will look on with suspicion as
     they watch everyone defending their messiah with such zeal. Then
     the followers will become very disturbed by what is happening
     and they will want the people not to be afraid. They will plead
     for those who have become suspicious to please come back so they
     can all ascend to Heaven soon.  But as they plead, the suspicion
     will only increase because the messiah himself has never been
     allowed to say anything.  Then their pleading will turn into
     authoritativeness.  The followers will be appalled by the sudden
     lack of respect that has overcome these people as the crowd
     divides further.  Finally, force will begin to be exerted under
     the notion that the non-believers should be punished.  As the
     non-believers put up further resistance, violence will break
     out.  Innocent people will stand by and helplessly watch their
     loved ones being ruthlessly beaten.  As the violence increases,
     those who are trying to fight back will be killed. 	

     	The people who are left over will cry out in hysteria over the
     loss of their loved ones, yelling, "Why?  Why did you have to
     kill them?"  The followers will self-righteously maintain their
     positions, blaming the non-believers for their sudden demise. 
     Then the followers will try to escape their guilt by abandoning
     these completely broken, weeping people.  The crying will last 
     for hours as these people sulk in confusion about what they ever
     did to deserve to be forsaken by the God they have always been
     committed to. Within three days though, something truly
     miraculous will occur for these people.

     	Now this is where the story gets extremely unbelievable.  It
     was meant to be this way though, because faith and understanding
     of Jesus' teachings is what will cause these people to end up in
     this situation.  The sheer craziness of what happens next is
     what will make it okay for me to go ahead and reveal it.  Nobody
     will believe it anyway unless they can thoroughly understand the
     cause of the division of the people as described above.  Here is
     basically why the followers of the messiah will divide-- The
     people of the world are already divided right now. The false
     messiah's purpose is to lovingly draw everybody together. 
     Those who want to remain in a divided state will cause the crowd
     to divide.  Those who are frightened away will be the ones who
     genuinely want unity, although most of them  won't understand
     this at the time because it will all be so confusing.  The pain
     they will go through from witnessing the riot and then being
     left behind even though they didn't do anything wrong  will
     leave an irrevocable impression on them.  The lesson it will
     teach them is the reason they will be rescued.    

     	As these weeping people stay close to their dead friends and
     loved ones, feeling completely helpless, and starving half to
     death, with no way to provide for themselves, they will sit in
     the darkness of the night and see something strange in the sky. 
     Beautiful, majestic lights will speed toward them, and in a
     flash, there will be these gigantic machines hovering in the air
     over them. Glorious colored floods of light will radiate from
     underneath and everyone will begin to float up through the air
     and into the beautifully lit crafts.  Then, instantly, they will
     all be gone and since these people will have been left for dead
     anyway, nobody will even notice that they are missing.

     	They will be transported to another planet far away from here,
     where they will be the honored guests of everyone there,
     visitors to a Heavenly Kingdom, respected by everyone because of
     what they had to go through.  Meanwhile, back on Earth, the
     thousands of clones of the false messiah they have planted will
     be busy causing the same process all over the planet for a total
     period of forty-five days. 

     	Then, after every person in the world has had exposure to the
     messiah scene, the messiahs themselves will all be collected and
     the remaining people of the Earth will be stunned by the
     realization of what has happened.  People will cry out in pain
     as everybody witnesses the beautiful displays of
     extra-terrestrial spacecraft dancing through the sky
     everywhere. The war will stop then, and the leaders of the
     countries will realize what they have been doing as they have
     just missed the rapture. The remaining people of the world will
     feel a pain that will last a long while and there will be a
     period of sober peace but everyone will still be suffering due
     to all the social damage.  The leaders of the world will
     consider how the extra-terrestrials have succeeded in not doing
     what the world has been engaged in since 1997. 

     	Then the idea of a single government for the whole world will
     occur to them so that they can dispose of the nuclear weapons
     and stop fighting with each other.  But they will find
     themselves in a dilemma over who should be the leader. The
     Russians will elect a new president of Asian Buddhist descent
     who has the same spiritual healing abilities as that of the
     false messiahs.  Then when this choice is not accepted by the
     other leaders of the world, the conflict will start all over
     again.  The Russians will require those who agree with the idea
     to accept a mark of identification so that they may be
     distinguished from everyone else.  The citizens of Russia who
     refuse the mark will be tortured and if they don't give in, they
     will be killed.  

     	The U.S. government and the peoples of Asia will all recognize
     what has happened, and as the whole world tries to stop what
     Russia is doing, the Russians will finally launch nuclear
     weapons.  Then the rest of the world will begin firing back at
     Russia and the holocaust will burn like the fires of Hell. 
     Those who die from refusing the mark will have saved their
     souls, for they will have died in righteousness as Jesus did. 
     They will therefore live again, as Jesus did.  

     	After the war of the antichrist finally ends in 2026
     (according to Nostradamus,) those of us who were rescued will
     make a new start here, after the destruction of the war is
     cleaned up for us. No one will ever want there to be a need for
     authority figures, so no one will engage in crime.  Those who
     try to commit a crime will have their peers to answer to and
     everyone will regard the harmony of the community as precious. 
     There will be no monetary system and everyone will simply do the
     kind of work he or she enjoys (no taxes!)  Everyone will simply go to the
     person or organization who provides whatever he or she needs,
     and everyone will gain their sense of security from how well
     they do their work. Instead of depending on money for security,
     people will get their security from the strength of their
     integration in the community.  The community itself will be
     called "The Father" and the family these people will form
     together all over the globe will propel them into the
     technological age with such a force that they will soon expand
     the boundaries of what man calls home.  Humanity will become
     part of the intergalactic neighborhood that has been out there
     all along, watching us quietly. 

     	 Anyone who has done well enough to survive on their own until
     the messiah scene reaches his/her home town should avoid the
     chaos altogether by simply staying away from it as Jesus
     instructed.  These fortunate people should stay aware of the
     scene from a distance though, until after the rioting passes and
     the messiah leads his followers away.  Then they should join the
     crying people left over.  The dead bodies scattered about the
     area is the sign the extra-terrestrials will be looking for.

     	"As the lightning in the east flashes to the west, so will the
     coming of the Son of Man be.  Where the carcass lies, there the
     vultures gather."   
                                    -- Jesus (Matthew 24:27-28)    

   


 

Arianism

A heresy which arose in the fourth century, and denied the Divinity of Jesus Christ.

DOCTRINE

First among the doctrinal disputes which troubled Christians after Constantine had
recognized the Church in A.D. 313, and the parent of many more during some
three centuries, Arianism occupies a large place in ecclesiastical history. It is not a
modern form of unbelief, and therefore will appear strange in modern eyes. But we
shall better grasp its meaning if we term it an Eastern attempt to rationalize the
creed by stripping it of mystery so far as the relation of Christ to God was
concerned. In the New Testament and in Church teaching Jesus of Nazareth
appears as the Son of God. This name He took to Himself (Matt., xi, 27; John, x,
36), while the Fourth Gospel declares Him to be the Word (Logos), Who in the
beginning was with God and was God, by Whom all things were made. A similar
doctrine is laid down by St. Paul, in his undoubtedly genuine Epistles to the
Ephesians, Colossians, and Philippians. It is reiterated in the Letters of Ignatius, and
accounts for Pliny's observation that Christians in their assemblies chanted a hymn
to Christ as God. But the question how the Son was related to the Father (Himself
acknowledged on all hands to be the one Supreme Deity), gave rise, between the
years A. D. 60 and 200, to number of Theosophic systems, called generally
Gnosticism, and having for their authors Basilides, Valentinus, Tatian, and other
Greek speculators. Though all of these visited Rome, they had no following in the
West, which remained free from controversies of an abstract nature, and was
faithful to the creed of its baptism. Intellectual centers were chiefly Alexandria and
Antioch, Egyptian or Syrian, and speculation was carried on in Greek. The Roman
Church held steadfastly by tradition. Under these circumstances, when Gnostic
schools had passed away with their "conjugations" of Divine powers, and
"emanations" from the Supreme unknowable God (the "Deep" and the "Silence")
all speculation was thrown into the form of an inquiry touching the "likeness" of the
Son to His Father and "sameness" of His Essence. Catholics had always maintained
that Christ was truly the Son, and truly God. They worshipped Him with divine
honors; they would never consent to separate Him, in idea or reality, from the
Father, Whose Word, Reason, Mind, He was, and in Whose Heart He abode from
eternity. But the technical terms of doctrine were not fully defined; and even in
Greek words like essence (ousia), substance (hypostasis), nature (physics), person
(hyposopon) bore a variety of meanings drawn from the pre-Christian sects of
philosophers, which could not but entail misunderstandings until they were cleared
up. The adaptation of a vocabulary employed by Plato and Aristotle to Christian
truth was a matter of time; it could not be done in a day; and when accomplished
for the Greek it had to be undertaken for the Latin, which did not lend itself readily
to necessary yet subtle distinctions. That disputes should spring up even among the
orthodox who all held one faith, was inevitable. And of these wranglings the
rationalist would take advantage in order to substitute for the ancient creed his own
inventions. The drift of all he advanced was this: to deny that in any true sense God
could have a Son; as Mohammed tersely said afterwards, "God neither begets, nor
is He begotten" (Koran, cxii). We have learned to call that denial Unitarianism. It
was the ultimate scope of Arian opposition to what Christians had always believed.
But the Arian, though he did not come straight down from the Gnostic, pursued a
line of argument and taught a view which the speculations of the Gnostic had made
familiar. He described the Son as a second, or inferior God, standing midway
between the First Cause and creatures; as Himself made out of nothing, yet as
making all things else; as existing before the worlds of the ages; and as arrayed in all
divine perfections except the one which was their stay and foundation. God alone
was without beginning, unoriginate; the Son was originated, and once had not
existed. For all that has origin must begin to be. 

Such is the genuine doctrine of Arius. Using Greek terms, it denies that the Son is
of one essence, nature, or substance with God; He is not consubstantial
(homoousios) with the Father, and therefore not like Him, or equal in dignity, or
co-eternal, or within the real sphere of Deity. The Logos which St. John exalts is an
attribute, Reason, belonging to the Divine nature, not a person distinct from
another, and therefore is a Son merely in figure of speech. These consequences
follow upon the principle which Arius maintains in his letter to Eusebius of
Nicomedia, that the Son "is no part of the Ingenerate." Hence the Arian sectaries
who reasoned logically were styled Anomoeans: they said that the Son was "unlike"
the Father. And they defined God as simply the Unoriginate. They are also termed
the Exucontians (ex ouk onton), because they held the creation of the Son to be out
of nothing. 

But a view so unlike tradition found little favour; it required softening or palliation,
even at the cost of logic; and the school which supplanted Arianism form an early
date affirmed the likeness, either without adjunct, or in all things, or in substance,
of the Son to the Father, while denying His co-equal dignity and co-eternal
existence. These men of the Via Media were named Semi-Arians. They
approached, in strict argument, to the heretical extreme; but many of them held the
orthodox faith, however inconsistently; their difficulties turned upon language or
local prejudice, and no small number submitted at length to Catholic teaching. The
Semi-Arians attempted for years to invent a compromise between irreconcilable
views, and their shifting creeds, tumultuous councils, and worldly devices tell us
how mixed and motley a crowd was collected under their banner. The point to be
kept in remembrance is that, while they affirmed the Word of God to be
everlasting, they imagined Him as having become the Son to create the worlds and
redeem mankind. Among the ante-Nicene writers, a certain ambiguity of expression
may be detected, outside the school of Alexandria, touching this last head of
doctrine. While Catholic teachers held the Monarchia, viz. that there was only one
God; and the Trinity, that this Absolute One existed in three distinct subsistences;
and the Circuminession, that Father, Word, and Spirit could not be separated, in
fact or in thought, from one another; yet an opening was left for discussion as
regarded the term "Son," and the period of His "generation" (gennesis). Five
ante-Nicene Fathers are especially quoted: Athenagoras, Tatian, Theophilus of
Antioch, Hippolytus, and Novatian, whose language appears to involve a peculiar
notion of Sonship, as though It did not come into being or were not perfect until the
dawn of creation. To these may be added Tertullian and Methodius. Cardinal
Newman held that their view, which is found clearly in Tertullian, of the Son
existing after the Word, is connected as an antecedent with Arianism. Petavius
construed the same expressions in a reprehensible sense; but the Anglican Bishop
Bull defended them as orthodox, not without difficulty. Even if metaphorical, such
language might give shelter to unfair disputants; but we are not answerable for the
slips of teachers who failed to perceive all the consequences of doctrinal truths
really held by them. >From these doubtful theorizings Rome and Alexandria kept
aloof. Origen himself, whose unadvised speculations were charged with the guilt of
Arianism, and who employed terms like "the second God," concerning the Logos,
which were never adopted by the Church - this very Origen taught the eternal
Sonship of the Word, and was not a Semi-Arian. To him the Logos, the Son, and
Jesus of Nazareth were one ever-subsisting Divine Person, begotten of the Father,
and, in this way, "subordinate" to the source of His being. He comes forth from
God as the creative Word, and so is a ministering Agent, or, from a different point
of view, is the First-born of creation. Dionysius of Alexandria (260) was even
denounced at Rome for calling the Son a work or creature of God; but he explained
himself to the pope on orthodox principles, and confessed the Homoousian Creed. 

                                 HISTORY

Paul of Samosata, who was contemporary with Dionysius, and Bishop of Antioch,
may be judged the true ancestor of those heresies which relegated Christ beyond
the Divine sphere, whatever epithets of deity they allowed Him. The man Jesus,
said Paul, was distinct from the Logos, and, in Milton's later language, by merit was
made the Son of God. The Supreme is one in Person as in Essence. Three councils
held at Antioch (264-268, or 269) condemned and excommunicated the
Samosatene. But these Fathers would not accept the Homoousian formula,
dreading lest it be taken to signify one material or abstract substance, according to
the usage of the heathen philosophies. Associated with Paul, and for years cut off
from the Catholic communion, we find the well-known Lucian, who edited the
Septuagint and became at last a martyr. From this learned man the school of
Antioch drew its inspiration. Eusebius the historian, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and
Arius himself, all came under Lucian's influence. Not, therefore, to Egypt and its
mystical teaching, but to Syria, where Aristotle flourished with his logic and its
tendency to Rationalism, should we look for the home of an aberration which had it
finally triumphed, would have anticipated Islam, reducing the Eternal Son to the
rank of a prophet, and thus undoing the Christian revelation. 

Arius, a Libyan by descent, brought up at Antioch and a school-fellow of Eusebius,
afterwards Bishop of Nicomedia, took part (306) in the obscure Meletian schism,
was made presbyter of the church called "Baucalis," at Alexandria, and opposed the
Sabellians, themselves committed to a view of the Trinity which denied all real
distinctions in the Supreme. Epiphanius describes the heresiarch as tall, grave, and
winning; no aspersion on his moral character has been sustained; but there is some
possibility of personal differences having led to his quarrel with the patriarch
Alexander whom, in public synod, he accused of teaching that the Son was identical
with the Father (319). The actual circumstances of this dispute are obscure; but
Alexander condemned Arius in a great assembly, and the latter found a refuge with
Eusebius, the Church historian, at Caesarea. Political or party motives embittered
the strife. Many bishops of Asia Minor and Syria took up the defence of their
"fellow-Lucianist," as Arius did not hesitate to call himself. Synods in Palestine and
Bithynia were opposed to synods in Egypt. During several years the argument
raged; but when, by his defeat of Licinius (324), Constantine became master of the
Roman world, he determined on restoring ecclesiastical order in the East, as already
in the West he had undertaken to put down the Donatists at the Council of Arles.
Arius, in a letter to the Nicomedian prelate, had boldly rejected the Catholic faith.
But Constantine, tutored by this worldly-minded man, sent from Nicomedia to
Alexander a famous letter, in which he treated the controversy as an idle dispute
about words and enlarged on the blessings of peace. The emperor, we should call
to mind, was only a catechumen, imperfectly acquainted with Greek, much more
incompetent in theology, and yet ambitious to exercise over the Catholic Church a
dominion resembling that which, as Pontifex Maximus, he wielded over the pagan
worship. From this Byzantine conception (labelled in modern terms Erastianism)
we must derive the calamities which during many hundreds of years set their mark
on the development of Christian dogma. Alexander could not give way in a matter
so vitally important. Arius and his supporters would not yield. A council was,
therefore, assembled in Nicaea, in Bithynia, which has ever been counted the first
ecumenical, and which held its sittings from the middle of June, 325. (See FIRST
COUNCIL OF NICAEA). It is commonly said that Hosius of Cordova presided.
The Pope, St. Silvester, was represented by his legates, and 318 Fathers attended,
almost all from the East. Unfortunately, the acts of the Council are not preserved.
The emperor, who was present, paid religious deference to a gathering which
displayed the authority of Christian teaching in a manner so remarkable. From the
first it was evident that Arius could not reckon upon a large number of patrons
among the bishops. Alexander was accompanied by his youthful deacon, the
ever-memorable Athanasius who engaged in discussion with the heresiarch himself,
and from that moment became the leader of the Catholics during well-nigh fifty
years. The Fathers appealed to tradition against the innovators, and were
passionately orthodox; while a letter was received from Eusebius of Nicomedia,
declaring openly that he would never allow Christ to be of one substance with God.
This avowal suggested a means of discriminating between true believers and all
those who, under that pretext, did not hold the Faith handed down. A creed was
drawn up on behalf of the Arian party by Eusebius of Caesarea in which every
term of honour and dignity, except the oneness of substance, was attributed to Our
Lord. Clearly, then, no other test save the Homoousion would prove a match for
the subtle ambiguities of language that, then as always, were eagerly adopted by
dissidents from the mind of the Church. A formula had been discovered which
would serve as a test, though not simply to be found in Scripture, yet summing up
the doctrine of St. John, St. Paul, and Christ Himself, "I and the Father are one".
Heresy, as St. Ambrose remarks, had furnished from its own scabbard a weapon to
cut off its head. The "consubstantial" was accepted, only thirteen bishops
dissenting, and these were speedily reduced to seven. Hosius drew out the conciliar
statements, to which anathemas were subjoined against those who should affirm
that the Son once did not exist, or that before He was begotten He was not, or that
He was made out of nothing, or that He was of a different substance or essence
from the Father, or was created or changeable. Every bishop made this declaration
except six, of whom four at length gave way. Eusebius of Nicomedia withdrew his
opposition to the Nicene term, but would not sign the condemnation of Arius. By
the emperor, who considered heresy as rebellion, the alternative proposed was
subscription or banishment; and, on political grounds, the Bishop of Nicomedia was
exiled not long after the council, involving Arius in his ruin. The heresiarch and his
followers underwent their sentence in Illyria. But these incidents, which might seem
to close the chapter, proved a beginning of strife, and led on to the most
complicated proceedings of which we read in the fourth century. While the plain
Arian creed was defended by few, those political prelates who sided with Eusebius
carried on a double warfare against the term "consubstantial", and its champion,
Athanasius. This greatest of the Eastern Fathers had succeeded Alexander in the
Egyptian patriarchate (326). He was not more than thirty years of age; but his
published writings, antecedent to the Council, display, in thought and precision, a
mastery of the issues involved which no Catholic teacher could surpass. His
unblemished life, considerate temper, and loyalty to his friends made him by no
means easy to attack. But the wiles of Eusebius, who in 328 recovered
Constantine's favour, were seconded by Asiatic intrigues, and a period of Arian
reaction set in. Eustathius of Antioch was deposed on a charge of Sabellianism
(331), and the Emperor sent his command that Athanasius should receive Arius
back into communion. The saint firmly declined. In 325 the heresiarch was
absolved by two councils, at Tyre and Jerusalem, the former of which deposed
Athanasius on false and shameful grounds of personal misconduct. He was
banished to Trier, and his sojourn of eighteen months in those parts cemented
Alexandria more closely to Rome and the Catholic West. Meanwhile, Constantia,
the Emperor's sister, had recommended Arius, whom she thought an injured man,
to Constantine's leniency. Her dying words affected him, and he recalled the
Lybian, extracted from him a solemn adhesion to the Nicene faith, and ordered
Alexander, Bishop of the Imperial City, to give him Communion in his own church
(336). Arius openly triumphed; but as he went about in parade, the evening before
this event was to take place, he expired from a sudden disorder, which Catholics
could not help regarding as a judgment of heaven, due to the bishop's prayers. His
death, however, did not stay the plague. Constantine now favoured none but
Arians; he was baptized in his last moments by the shifty prelate of Nicomedia; and
he bequeathed to his three sons (337) an empire torn by dissensions which his
ignorance and weakness had aggravated. 

Constantius, who nominally governed the East, was himself the puppet of his
empress and the palace-ministers. He obeyed the Eusebian faction; his spiritual
director, Valens, Bishop of Mursa, did what in him lay to infect Italy and the West
with Arian dogmas. The term "like in substance", Homoiousion, which had been
employed merely to get rid of the Nicene formula, became a watchword. But as
many as fourteen councils, held between 341 and 360, in which every shade of
heretical subterfuge found expression, bore decisive witness to the need and
efficacy of the Catholic touchstone which they all rejected. About 340, an
Alexandrian gathering had defended its archbishop in an epistle to Pope Julius. On
the death of Constantine, and by the influence of that emperor's son and namesake,
he had been restored to his people. But the young prince passed away, and in 341
the celebrated Antiochene Council of the Dedication a second time degraded
Athanasius, who now took refuge in Rome. There he spent three years. Gibbon
quotes and adopts "a judicious observation" of Wetstein which deserves to be kept
always in mind. From the fourth century onwards, remarks the German scholar,
when the Eastern Churches were almost equally divided in eloquence and ability
between contending sections, that party which sought to overcome made its
appearance in the Vatican, cultivated the Papal majesty, conquered and established
the orthodox creed by the help of the Latin bishops. Therefore it was that
Athanasius repaired to Rome. A stranger, Gregory, usurped his place. The Roman
Council proclaimed his innocence. In 343, Constans, who ruled over the West from
Illyria to Britain, summoned the bishops to meet at Sardica in Pannonia.
Ninety-four Latin, seventy Greek or Eastern, prelates began the debates; but they
could not come to terms, and the Asiatics withdrew, holding a separate and hostile
session at Philippopolis in Thrace. It has been justly said that the Council of Sardica
reveals the first symptoms of discord which, later on, produced the unhappy schism
of East and West. But to the Latins this meeting, which allowed of appeals to Pope
Julius, or the Roman Church, seemed an epilogue which completed the Nicene
legislation, and to this effect it was quoted by Innocent I in his correspondence with
the bishops of Africa. 

Having won over Constans, who warmly took up his cause, the invincible
Athanasius received from his Oriental and Semi-Arian sovereign three letters
commanding, and at length entreating his return to Alexandria (349). The factious
bishops, Ursacius and Valens, retracted their charges against him in the hands of
Pope Julius; and as he travelled home, by way of Thrace, Asia Minor, and Syria,
the crowd of court-prelates did him abject homage. These men veered with every
wind. Some, like Eusebius of Caesarea, held a Platonizing doctrine which they
would not give up, though they declined the Arian blasphemies. But many were
time-servers, indifferent to dogma. And a new party had arisen, the strict and pious
Homoiousians, not friends of Athanasius, nor willing to subscribe to the Nicene
terms, yet slowly drawing nearer to the true creed and finally accepting it. In the
councils which now follow these good men play their part. However, when
Constans died (350), and his Semi-Arian brother was left supreme, the persecution
of Athanasius redoubled in violence. By a series of intrigues the Western bishops
were persuaded to cast him off at Arles, Milan, Ariminum. It was concerning this
last council (359) that St. Jerome wrote, "the whole world groaned and marvelled
to find itself Arian". For the Latin bishops were driven by threats and chicanery to
sign concessions which at no time represented their genuine views. Councils were
so frequent that their dates are still matter of controversy. Personal issues disguised
the dogmatic importance of a struggle which had gone on for thirty years. The
Pope of the day, Liberius, brave at first, undoubtedly orthodox, but torn from his
see and banished to the dreary solitude of Thrace, signed a creed, in tone
Semi-Arian (compiled chiefly from one of Sirmium), renounced Athanasius, but
made a stand against the so-called "Homoean" formulae of Ariminum. This new
party was led by Acacius of Caesarea, an aspiring churchman who maintained that
he, and not St. Cyril of Jerusalem, was metropolitan over Palestine. The
Homoeans, a sort of Protestants, would have no terms employed which were not
found in Scripture, and thus evaded signing the "Consubstantial". A more extreme
set, the "Anomoeans", followed Aetius, were directed by Eunomius, held meetings
at Antioch and Sirmium, declared the Son to be "unlike" the Father, and made
themselves powerful in the last years of Constantius within the palace. George of
Cappadocia persecuted the Alexandrian Catholics. Athanasius retired into the desert
among the solitaries. Hosius had been compelled by torture to subscribe a
fashionable creed. When the vacillating Emperor died (361), Julian, known as the
Apostate, suffered all alike to return home who had been exiled on account of
religion. A momentous gathering, over which Athanasius presided, in 362, at
Alexandria, united the orthodox Semi-Arians with himself and the West. Four years
afterwards fifty-nine Macedonian, i.e., hitherto anti-Nicene, prelates gave in their
submission to Pope Liberius. But the Emperor Valens, a fierce heretic, still laid the
Church waste. 

However, the long battle was now turning decidedly in favour of Catholic tradition.
Western bishops, like Hilary of Poitiers and Eusebius of Vercellae banished to Asia
for holding the Nicene faith, were acting in unison with St. Basil, the two St.
Gregories, and the reconciled Semi-Arians. As an intellectual movement the heresy
had spent its force. Theodosius, a Spaniard and a Catholic, governed the whole
Empire. Athanasius died in 373; but his cause triumphed at Constantinople, long an
Arian city, first by the preaching of St. Gregory Nazianzen, then in the Second
General Council (381), at the opening of which Meletius of Antioch presided. This
saintly man had been estranged from the Nicene champions during a long schism;
but he made peace with Athanasius, and now, in company of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, represented a moderate influence which won the day. No deputies
appeared from the West. Meletius died almost immediately. St. Gregory Nazianzen
(q. v.), who took his place, very soon resigned. A creed embodying the Nicene was
drawn up by St. Gregory of Nyssa, but it is not the one that is chanted at Mass, the
latter being due, it is said, to St. Epiphanius and the Church of Jerusalem. The
Council became ecumenical by acceptance of the Pope and the ever-orthodox
Westerns. From this moment Arianism in all its forms lost its place within the
Empire. Its developments among the barbarians were political rather than doctrinal.
Ulphilas (311-388), who translated the Scriptures into Maeso-Gothic, taught the
Goths across the Danube an Homoean theology; Arian kingdoms arose in Spain,
Africa, Italy. The Gepidae, Heruli, Vandals, Alans, and Lombards received a
system which they were as little capable of understanding as they were of
defending, and the Catholic bishops, the monks, the sword of Clovis, the action of
the Papacy, made an end of it before the eighth century. In the form which it took
under Arius, Eusebius of Caesarea, and Eunomius, it has never been revived.
Individuals, among them are Milton and Sir Isasc Newton, were perhaps tainted
with it. But the Socinian tendency out of which Unitarian doctrines have grown
owes nothing to the school of Antioch or the councils which opposed Nicaea.
Neither has any Arian leader stood forth in history with a character of heroic
proportions. In the whole story there is but one single hero - the undaunted
Athanasius - whose mind was equal to the problems, as his great spirit to the
vicissitudes, a question on which the future of Christianity depended.
 

Baptism

Baptism is the door to life and to the kingdom of God. Baptism in Christian churches, the universal rite of initiation, performed with water, usually in the name of the Trinity or in the name of Christ. Orthodox and Baptist churches require baptism by total immersion. In other churches, pouring and sprinkling are more common. Most churches regard baptism as a sacrament, or sign of grace; some regard it simply as an ordinance, or rite, commanded by Christ. Therefore, Baptism is the sacrament of faith by which we, enlightened by the Spirit's grace, respond to the Gospel of Christ. 
Scriptural Basis Jesus was baptized by John at the beginning of his public ministry. Although it is uncertain that Jesus himself baptized, the risen Christ commanded his disciples to preach to and baptize the nations as the sign of God's coming rule. Thus, from the outset, baptism became the Christian rite of initiation. Purpose and Symbols The purpose of this sacrament is to purify your soul and to destroy all evil. That is one of the main reasons why water is used for a symbol.
Water is both destructive and creative which matches baptism. Water was used as a symbol of purification in many religions at a very early date. Other symbols of baptism include oil, a white cloth, and a candle. People able to receive Baptism Infants were probably baptized in the early church. Baptism was often postponed as long as possible. Between the 4th and 6th centuries, however, infant baptism began to be required. Now almost anyone can receive this sacrament old or young depending on what religion you are. The church believes that baptismal celebration should be: a) Made as soon as possible, and even before the child is born, the parish priest should be informed so that the proper preparations can be made. b) Done without delay, if the child is in danger of death. c) Made within the first weeks after birth if everything is all right. Part II Interview Mom- My mom was a baby when receiving baptism so it didn't mean much to her. She said that once you receive baptism that you cannot receive again so she would not like to receive it again. Her life changed because she became a member of the Church. Her godparents went through a two week course, she did nothing. Dad- My dad said, "I felt saved and believed I will go to heaven." Yes was his answer right away to the question, "Would you go through the sacrament again." He replied that he is a very religious guy. He felt it was a milestone in his religious development. He received this sacrament a late stage so he prepared by praying and reading the bible with his parents.
Sister- My sister was a child when receiving this sacrament and didn't recall what it meant to her. She said that she would go through it again because it is a sign that you are a Christian. Her life has changed because she is now a Christian. She didn't go through any kind of preparation because she was so young. Part III I believe that this sacrament is a very special one. It is so important that you get godparents to help your spiritual growth. I have received this sacrament at an early age and if given the chance to receive it again, I would. In my opinion baptism should be given around the age of seven when the child is able to commit sin in the eyes of God. Never-the-less baptism is a very important step in one's life no matter when it was received.
Bibliography
Bible Encarta 96 Encyclopedia CD ROM. "Baptism." Windows 95 version Catechism of the Catholic Church c. 1983 Sacraments Today. "Baptism" p. 28, c.1978
 


 
	To tell you the truth I have never really felt betrayed by God.  It's most likely due to the fact that I haven't had many significant life experiences come up.  Also when something goes wrong I don't look at God as a scapegoat.  I feel you should blame whoever or whatever caused the tragedy.  Blaming God is just the easy way out or just a quick answer to your  problems.  All this aside and even though I've never felt betrayed, I know others who have.
	I work at a deli in my town and it recently burnt  down.  If I were    the owner, I would have felt betrayed or denied.  I mean, it's his life.  It's  the way he supports  his family.   One day he woke up and it was gone.  Even worse is the time of year it happened, Christmas.  This is the time when you need every penny  but the only thing he's getting now is lost-wages paid by his insurance company.  It doesn't even close to what he would be making if the deli were still up and running.  But it's better than nothing, I guess. 
	His business has been through a lot of hardships over the last 16 years.  Another difficulty was the building of the Blue Route near his business.  The construction blocked almost everyone from entering the building.  I don't know if you could blame God for that sort of problem or maybe it was just fate.  But with these dilemmas and problems, he didn't question why God allowed these things to happen.   He  looked insstead to the way  he  benefited from the experiences.
	One benefit was it made him stronger mentally aand spiritually.  To keep a business going for three years with minimal customers  is hard.  It takes dedication and will to show up every morning and basically prepare for nothing, but he did .   He was much more grateful when people came in and developed a better business.  Perhaps God knew what He was doing.
	Even the fire was a blessing in disguise.  Some of the equipment was getting old and things just weren't all in top condition.  So now he will have new equipment, walls, ceiling and so on.  He wouldn't have had the pocket money to do this alone.  Now you might be thinking it was just an insurance scam, but he had many inspectors come in and  checked the cause . It was faulty wiring.
	God might have seen that things weren't exactly great and things needed to be done to help out in the future.  The deli equipment might have not been falling apart but in the future it could have and  possible at an even worse moment when money was even more scarce.  So having a fire around now might have been easier to deal with then say if his daughter was getting married and then equipment broke.  Money for a wedding is ten fold compared to the money for Christmas.    My boss didn't dispair when the fire took his business.   He trusted God.   In a sense maybe everything did work out for the better becaause he will have  newer deli to better support himself and his family. .
	Now I don't really  know if any of this had anything to do with God but if my boss  looked  to God to comfort, he probably got it.  For some people God is involved in everything and therefore people look to Him for help and guidance and that's how they pull through things.   I don't think you should blame your problems on God. 	Instead think about them, look to God for strength  and  possibly problems and disappointments will be easier to bear.
							Peter Surrena - Period 2 


 

Siddhartha Gautama was born about 563 BC in what is now modern Nepal.  His father, Suddhodana, was the ruler of the Sakya people and Siddhartha grew up living the extravagant life on a young prince.  According to custom, he married at the young age of sixteen to a girl named Yasodhara.  His father had ordered that he live a life of total seclusion, but one day Siddhartha ventured out into the world and was confronted with the reality of the inevitable suffering of life.  The next day, at the age of twenty-nine, he left his kingdom and new-born son to lead an modest life and determine a way to relieve universal suffering.  For six years, Siddhartha meditated under a bodhi tree.   But he was never fully satisfied.  One day he was offered a bowl of rice from a young girl and he accepted it.  In that moment, he realized that physical hardships were not the means to freedom.  From then on, he encouraged people not to use extremes in their life.  He called this The Middle Way.   That night Siddhartha sat under the bodhi tree, and meditated till dawn.  He cleared his mind of all worldly things and claimed to get enlightenment at the age of thirty-five, thus earning the title Buddha, or "Enlightened One."  For the remainder of his eighty years, the Buddha preached the dharma in an effort to help other people reach enlightenment.
When Siddhartha is a Brahmin, he believes in the existence of many gods, and performs sacrifices to them.  After a while he realizes this is meaningless and decides to leave his family and community and become a Samana.  As a Samana, he tries to destroy himself in may ways.  He feels if he kills himself, with its passions and emotions, he will find the great secret.  Siddhartha doesn't spend much time as Buddha, although he has an important revelation.  He discovers he can't find peace by learning from a master.  He finds the only way to have peace with the world is by finding it for himself.  When Siddhartha leaves Buddha, he is enthralled with the world.  He starts paying more attention to the world because he knows he must get experience for himself.  As he walks he comes upon a town.  He stays and becomes a merchant.  At first he looks at his actions as a game.  After a while he becomes more serious.  He starts drinking and gambling and becomes lazy.  Siddhartha sees this and decides to leave the town.  He wanders through a forest and comes upon a river.  Just as he's about to kill himself he hears Om.  Siddhartha decides there is much to live for.  He looks a this experience as a rebirth, and starts a new life.  Siddhartha stays by the river and looks for a ferryman he met years ago who's name was Vasudeua.  Vasudeua had found peace with himself, and Siddhartha stays with him.  He comes to peace with the world and learns he must love everything, because everything has good in it.  He also sees the difference between past, present, and future is just a myth.
In his hometown, Siddhartha's social status was very high.  He was popular, and lived by everyone, but he decided that he could not stay.  When he was with the Samanas, this social status sunk to an all time low.  He was considered a beggar.  When Siddhartha visited the Buddha, his social status was changing.
Siddhartha is involved with Brahmin rituals in his hometown.  He lives with his family and is in good health.  He eats well, has good hygiene, and wears decent clothes.  But when the Samanas come to his village, he decides to leave his family for life in the forest.  He travels with the Samanas in the Forrest.  He often meditates.  He doesn't eat good or clean himself, and only wears a loin cloth.  He leaves the Samanas by hypnotizing the leader and convinces  him to let him go.  Siddhartha goes to see Buddha.  HE soon leaves Buddha and travels on his own as an independent Samana.  Eventually he becomes weary of his lifestyle and decides to live in a village.  There he finds Kamala, a beautiful prostitute.  He works hard to get clothes, shoes, and money for Kamala.  Joining Kamaswami, a merchant.  Siddhartha becomes rich.  This gets him nice clothes, shoes, tasteful meals, and good hygiene.  After a while he becomes tired of his life in the village and leaves.  He tries to commit suicide, but then decides not to kill himself.  He falls asleep and sleeps for a long, long time.  When he wakes up he decides he wants to be a ferryman and join Vasudeva.  Siddhartha lives in Vasudeva's hut with him and occasionally talks with him.  Siddhartha now wears few clothing,  eats small meals, and keeps poor hygiene.  Soon, he has to take care of his son, this takes time.  Siddhartha eventually completely takes over Vasudeva's business
Siddhartha was unhappy following Hinduism.  He says, that since Atman created the other gods, then he is the only true god, and the others are temporary.  Siddhartha's discontent with Hinduism grows strong enough to drive him from home.  Siddhartha's experience with the Buddha shows his growing doubt of teachings.  He sees Nirvana in Buddha, but knows in his heart that teachings cannot bring it.  After leaving Buddha Siddhartha becomes depressed and decides to leave virtue for vices. After living with Samsara for may years, Siddhartha becomes depressed.  He realizes that the beautiful bird that once sang in his soul has become silent.  When he reaches the river he sits above it, and hears of his soul the holy Om, this is proof that the bird exists. The river teaches him more than any human teacher could have, like the fact that time is an illusion.  Siddhartha finally finds peace in this.  

.  
 
 
	For nearly four hundred years Gothic style dominated the architecture of Western Europe. 
It originated in northern France in the twelfth century, and spread rapidly across England and the
Continent, invading the old Viking empire of Scandinavia.  It confronted the Byzantine provinces
of Central Europe and even made appearances in the near East and the Americas.  Gothic
architects designed town halls, royal palaces, courthouses, and hospitals.  They fortified cities and
castles to defend lands against invasion.  But it was in the service of the church, the most prolific
builder of the Middle Ages, that the Gothic style got its most meaningful expression, providing the
widest scope for the development of architectural ideas.1
	Although by 1400 Gothic had become the universal style of building in the Western world,
its creative heartland was in northern France in an area stretching from the royal domain around
Paris, including Saint-Denis and Chartres, to the region of the Champagne in the east and
southward to Bourges.  Within this restricted area, in the series of cathedrals built in the course of
the 12th and 13th centuries, the major innovations of Gothic architecture took place.2 
	The supernatural character of medieval religious architecture was given a special form in
the Gothic church.  "Medieval man considered himself but an imperfect refraction of Divine Light
of God, Whose Temple stood on earth, according to the text of the dedication ritual, stood for the
Heavenly City of Jerusalem."3  The Gothic interpretation of this point of view was a cathedral so
grand  that seems to belittle the man who enters it, for space, light, structure and the plastic effects
of the stonework are made to produce a visionary scale.   The result of the Gothic style is
distortion as there is no fixed set of  proportions in the parts.  Such architecture did not only
express the physical and spiritual needs of the Church, but also the general attitude of the people
of that time.  Gothic was not dark, massive, and contained like the older Romanesque style, but
light, open, and aerial, and its appearance in all parts of Europe had an enduring effect on the
outlook of succeeding generations.4
	Gothic architecture evolved at a time of profound social and economic change in Western
Europe.  In the late eleventh and twelfth centuries trade and industry were revived, particularly in
northern Italy and Flanders, and a lively commerce brought about better communications, not only
between neighboring towns but also between far-distant regions.    Politically, the twelfth century
was also the time of the expansion and consolidation of the State.  Along with political and
economic developments, a powerful new intellectual movement arose that was stimulated by the
translation of ancient authors from Greek and Arabic into Latin, and a new literature came into
being.  Gothic architecture both contributed to these changes and was affected by them.5
	The Gothic style was essentially urban.  The cathedrals of course were all situated in
towns, and most monasteries,  had by the twelfth century become centers of communities which
possessed many of the functions of civic life.   The cathedral or abbey church was the building in
which the people congregated on major feast days.  It  saw the start and the end of splendid and
colorful ceremonies, and it held the earliest dramatic performances.   The abbey traditionally
comprised at least a cloister, a dormitory and a refectory for the monks.  But the cathedral also
was around a complex of buildings, the bishop's palace, a cloister and the house of canons, a
school, a prison, and a hospital.  However the cathedral dominated them all, rising high above the
town like a marker to be seen from afar.6
	The architectural needs of the Church were expressed in both physical and iconographical
terms.  Like its Romanesque predecessor, the Gothic cathedral was eminently adaptable.  It could
be planned larger or smaller, longer or shorter, with or without transepts and ambulatory,
according to the traditions and desires of each community.  It had no predetermined proportions or
number of parts, like the Roman temple or the centrally planned church of the Renaissance.  Its
social and liturgical obligations demanded a main altar at the end of a choir where the chapter and
the various  dignitaries would be seated, a number of minor altars, and an area for processions
within the building.7  There were rarely more than about two hundred persons participating in the
service, even though the smallest Gothic cathedral could easily contain that number.  The rest of
the building simply supplemented this core and provided space for the laity, who were not
permitted to enter the choir or sanctuary.  Still, after the middle of the twelfth century, the choir
was usually isolated by a monumental screen that effectively prevented laymen from even seeing
the service, and special devotional books came into use to supply the congregation with suitable
subjects of meditation during mass.8
	The program of the Gothic church fulfilled iconographical as well as social requirements. 
The intellectual centers of the Middle Ages had long been associated with the Church, and the
tradition of learning that had been preserved in monastic and cathedral schools gave rise to
universities such as Paris and Oxford in the late twelfth and thirteenth centuries.  Such an
association obviously had an effect on the arts, which were still primarily religious in nature. 
Scholarly clerics, for instance, were appointed to arrange the intricate, theological programs for
the sculpture and the stained glass that decorated the church.  The relationship is thought by some
historians to have been even closer, for scholastic thinking first took shape in Paris early in the
twelfth century, at the very time that Gothic architecture came into being there.  It is possible that
architects, who were "abstract" thinkers in their own right, may occasionally have absorbed some
of the habits of thought of the philosophers.  In the absence of written documents, however, it
cannot be proved whether these habits  were consistently embodied in the design of the buildings.9
	The Gothic age, as has often been observed, was an age of vision.  The supernatural
manifested itself to the senses.  In the religious life of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the
desire to behold sacred reality with bodily eyes appeared as the dominant theme.  Architecture
was designed and experienced as a representation of an ultimate reality.10  The Gothic cathedral
was originated in the religious experience and in the political and even physical realities, of
twelfth-century France.  It was described as an illusionistic image of the Celestial City as evoked
in the Book of Revelation.  The essence of Gothic style was most fully developed in its conquest
of space and its creation of a prodigious, visionary scale in the cathedrals of the twelfth century.11


Bibliography

Branner, Robert.  The Great Ages of World Architecture: Gothic Architecture.  New York:
	George Braziller,  1967.

Gimpel, Jean.  The Cathedral Builders.  New York: Grove Press, 1983.

Mitchell, Ann.  Great Buildings of the World: Cathedrals of Europe.  Feltham: The Hamlyn
	Publishing Group,  1968.

Panofsky, E.  Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism.  Latrobe: Faber and Faber Limited, 1951.

Simson, Otto von.  The Gothic Cathedral.  New York: Bollingen Foundation,  1956.

Worringer, Wilhelm.  Form In Gothic.  New York: Alec Tiranti Limited,  1957. 


Christianity


	"Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,  teaching them to
observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the age."1  A simple directive spoken by God himself through Jesus
Christ in the Sermon at the Mount, this Great Commission has impacted a
countless number of lives throughout the years.  The command given by Jesus at
that time was actually to act as a continuance of His ministry after his death.
Apparently this command continued to be fulfilled even far beyond His ascension
into heaven.  The commandment sparked the beginning of Christianity and
throughout the years, its cultures, religions and beliefs poured out upon the
continents, including the New World.  The intent of this report is to show the
transfer of Christianity from the Old World to the Americas; it is to outline
its beginnings and show its impact on the Indian people.

	The Catholic Church during the Middle Ages played an all encompassing
role over the lives of the people and the government. As the Dark Ages came to a
close the ideas of the Renaissance started to take hold, and the church's power
gradually began to dwindle. The monarchies of Europe also began to grow
replacing the church's power. Monarchies, at the close of the Middle Ages and
the dawn of the Renaissance, did not so much seek the guidance of the church as
much as it sought their approval. However, the Church during the Age of
Discovery was still a major influence. The discovery of the New World and its
previously unknown inhabitants presented new problems in the Catholic Church in
the late 14th and early 15th century. When Spain's rulers and emissaries decided
to physically conquer and populate the New World, and not just trade with it,
the transplantation of Christian institutions followed.

	The church established contact with the New World, and made it a goal to
establish the Catholic doctrines among the native population there. The Catholic
Church and the Spanish monarch, however, looked upon the native population in
the New World as souls to be saved. They did not consider or treat the Indians
as equals.  To them, the population seemed to mean more than the individual's
spiritual standpoint.  The implanting of Christianity in the New World, and the
treatment of the native population by the missionaries and Christian conquerors
was harmful or even destructive to New World. Through men such as Cortez and
Bartolome Las Casas, accounts of the conversions have been recorded. One of the
reasons for this was the alliance of the Catholic Church with the Spanish
monarchy. The status of the Indians was irrelevant and disregarded by the
Christian conquerors and missionaries who wanted to convert them.  The
missionaries subjected them to violence and reduced them to a laboring
population. The Indians, however did not always respond in a negative way to the
work of the church.

	The Catholic Church arrived in the New World immediately after
Christopher Columbus laid claim to it for Spain. After Columbus's discovery of
the new lands he wrote a series of treaties as to what the European purpose
there was. Columbus, in his writings, said that the purpose of the New World was
two-fold. He said that: (1) The gospel message of the church should be spread
globally beginning with his discoveries in the New World. and (2) Second, he
stated that the riches discovered in the New World should be dedicated to the
recapture of Jerusalem from the Moslems.2 Columbus saw the discovery of the New
World as a prophesy coming true. He saw the Indians that lived there as a labor
source that should be Christianized and used for the greater good of the church.
The implementation of his two fold plan had its difficulties; However, this did
not stop or discredit the use of this part of the plan as a prime directive of
the New World.

	Two papal bulls or verdicts were issued in the year of 1493 that
established the Spanish position in the New World.3  They also established the
role that the church was going to play in the New World.  The first bull was
issued on May 3 given the name Inter Caetera. It said that the lands discovered
by Spanish envoys not previously under a Christian owner could be claimed by
Spain. The bull also gave the Spanish monarch the power to send men to convert
the natives to the Catholic faith and instruct them in Catholic morals.  The
second papal bull issued in the same year expanded on the meaning of the primary
bull.  The bull fixed a boundary for Spanish and Portuguese spheres of influence
in the New World.  This boundary heavily favored Spain further showing the
alliance between Spain and the Church.

	The history of the Catholic Church in the New World began in the year
after Columbus' first voyage. The Spanish monarchy sent the first missionaries
to establish Christianity there. The number of missions sent to the New World
accelerated in tempo and density until the final decade of the 16th century. The
crown paid for the sending of missionaries, and its officials kept track of the
many "shiploads" of religious personnel sent and of the expenses they incurred.
The records show that the Spanish dispatched missionaries to more than 65
destinations, ranging from Florida and California to Chile and the Strait of
Magellan.4 Between 1493, when the first mission left for Espanola, and Spanish
American independence (roughly 1821) more than 15 thousand missionaries crossed
the Atlantic under royal approval and support. 5

	The Spanish, when choosing who to send as their principle emissaries of
the Catholic Church, disregarded the opinions of the Spanish bishops and clergy,
and called up friars belonging to several monastic orders. There were three
monastic orders of friars that came to the New World. These were the Franciscans,
the Dominicans, and the Augustianians.6 While other secular priests were not
discouraged from going to the New World, the Crown did not send them as
missionaries. "By sending friars instead of secular priests to convert the
Indians, Spain took advantage of an old evangelical strain in European
monasticism".7  If one looks back further, in the times before the Christianity
of Europe, monks wandered and roamed the countryside converting the rural
populations. The present monarchy reimplemented this obsolete idea as a primary
missionary tactic in the New World. The Spanish monarch also picked the monastic
orders to fulfill this task because they were among those who possessed an
education. Spain at this time lacked seminaries and religious education
facilities.  The local priests were either undereducated or uneducated to the
point  were they were seen as largely ignorant.

	Once in the New World the missionaries played an indispensable role in
conquering the Indian population for the Gospel, concentrating it in towns and
villages and taking charge of administration. Some times these settlements were
largely left in the hands of church officials because they were unreachable by
colony administrators. "Rural churchmen, in the frontier settings of the 16th
century acted in an atmosphere of independence which bordered on impunity".8
These missions were not always run in the best interest of the Indians. The
natives were often subject to harsh conditions, and they were not protected by
the missions. The missions instituted by the government were described this way,
"The church, with few exceptions, accompanied and legitimized the genocide,
slavery, ecocide, and exploitation of the wealth of the land. The mission left a
bitter fruit inherited by the descendants of the survivors of the invasion". 9

	No country at this time conceived of setting up anything but a Christian
empire. "The monarch of Castile not only exercised supreme secular authority,
but he was also the head of the colonial church. Indeed, his laws of the Indies
began with the words, 'On the Holy Catholic Faith' ".10  The Church because it
was under the Spanish monarchy participated in the wrongs incurred in the New
World. The Church went along with the government in instituting the unfair
practices against the native population.

	Las Casas writings about the treatment and conversion of the Indians are
some of the best that survive today. Las Casas was a Spanish bishop who late in
life became a renowned champion of the Indians. He was born in Seville in August
1474, and he first went to the New World in 1502. He became a priest and
participated in the acquiring of Cuba. He received land and slaves as a reward
for his contribution. In 1514 he experienced a radical change of heart and came
to feel that the native population had been unjustly treated by his countrymen.
He then became determined to dedicate the remainder of his life to their defense.
Las Casas was one of the notable authorities on the Indians, and was remarkable
because he realized the Indians should not be measured by the Spanish yardstick,
but must rather be understood with in the framework of their own culture. He saw
the Indians not as heathens and savages, but in a different stage of development
from Europe. Las Casas contended that the Indians had many skills and
accomplishments, and in fact possessed a culture worthy of respect.11

	Las Casas writes about the treatment of the Indians upon being subjected
to the Spanish Christians. He accompanied the Spanish entourage on the
occupation of Cuba. In this venture he accompanied the expedition in the office
of Clerico. He stated that one of the chief cares of this office was when they
halted in any town or village, it was his job to assign separate quarters to the
Spanish and the Indians. This was to prevent violence from erupting between the
two peoples. His principle job; however was to assemble the children in order to
baptize them. This was a sad task for Las Casas because scarcely any of the
children remained alive a few months afterward. This was due to violence or the
disease that the Spanish brought with them. Las Casas on his travels also saw
the violence and horrors which the Indians were subject to. Las Casas describes
this scene upon entering the Indian village of Caonao:  "The Clerico was
preparing for the division of the rations amongst the men, when suddenly a
Spaniard, prompted, as was thought, by the Devil, drew his sword: the rest drew
theirs; and immediately they all began to hack and hew the poor Indians, who
were sitting quietly near them, and offering not more resistance than so many
sheep".12

	Las Casas then goes on to describe the scene as "heaps of bodies . . .
strewn about, like sheaves of corn, waiting to be gathered up".13  The
Spaniard's job was to convert the native population to Christianity, not use
them to test the sharpness of their swords which they had done in this case.

	In Mexico, Hernan Cortez, the conqueror, recognized the need for
religious instruction among Indians. His instructions he received from the
Spanish monarchy and the Pope for his venture included the order to, "spread the
knowledge of the true faith and the Church of God among those people who dwell
in darkness,".14 Cortez followed these instructions very diligently. When he
encountered the Indians on the mainland of Central America, he undertook their
religious conversions. He explained the Christian religion to them, and wanted
the natives to renounce their idols and embrace the Christian religion. He and
the religious men with him preached against sodomy and human sacrifice to the
tribes that they encountered. In Mexico, like other Spanish colonies, numerous
Friars and priests came and worked to Christianize the native population.
However, this was largely ineffectual because the various Holy men could only
sow a few grains here or there. Cortez realized the need for order in the
Catholic Church in the New World to convert the native population. Cortez wrote
to the king of Spain, Charles V, about the need for missionaries to convert the
Indians. He asked for friars of the St. Francis or St. Dominic order who would
set up monasteries to instruct and convert the native population. There,
presently arrived in Mexico at San Juan de Ulua on May 13 or 14, 1524 the famous
mission of Twelve, who began the methodical conversion of the Indians.

	Cortez's envisions of monastic communities, where the native population
could be converted to Christianity, came true especially in Mexico. Huge
monasteries were built for the purpose of the conversion of the native
population. These monasteries built were of enormous size and decorated
ostentatiously. The monasteries included pomp and circumstance in their
ceremonies. The reason claimed for doing this was to keep the Indians interested
in Catholicism and away from their native religions. "On February 8, 1537,
Zumarraga wrote the Council of the Indies that beautiful churches helped in the
conversion of the Indians and strengthened their devotion. Twenty years later,
on February 1, 1558, Viceroy Luis de Velasco make the same observation to Philip
II".15

	These churches, supposedly built for the benefit of the native
population, were built or supported by the native population. For them this was
a heavy burden, whether they built the churches themselves or had to pay workmen
to the labor. They had to do this at the cost of neglecting their fields or
trades. There were also accounts of the friars physically punishing the Indians
for their work or lack of it,  "But one must accept with reserve the testimony
of the Indians who complained of abuses by the Dominicans during the
construction of the convent at Puebla, claiming they were exhausted from work,
and that one of the religious had loaded them with large stones and them beaten
them over the head with a stick".16

	The missions set up by the church were also guilty of abusing the native
population. The Indians were supposed to benefit from these missions, but all
they received from them was more misery. The Indians in having to support these
new edifices and having to convert to Christianity suffered from a double edged
sword.

	The native Americans had three responses to the thrusting of the
Christian religion upon them. One response was the incorporation of elements of
Christianity into their own religion, creating a new religious system. They took
the beliefs out of the Christian religion that agreed or make sense with their
religion and combined the two.

"Ancient rituals attached to Christian ones included a sweeping ceremony that
accompanied the bringing of the Eucharist to the sick, the lighting of fires on
the eve of the nativity, the extreme use of self-flagellation, the burning of a
traditional incense before images of saint, dedicating strings of ears or corn
to the Virgin".17 Some Indians outright rejected Christianity. An example of
this written by Thomas Giles was, "among the Incas of Peru, baptism was
considered subjection to the invader; some Incan chiefs killed those who
accepted the rite".18  The Indians largely could not accept Christian beliefs
because of the actions of the Christians themselves. The brutality and the lack
of concern or remorse that the Spanish showed to the Indians played a large role
for the rejection of the Spanish religion. The Indians did not want any part of
a religion that preached rape, slaughter, and cruel subjugation. The explanation
of a Mayan who objected to the behaviors of the Spanish was the following,  "The
true God, the true Dios came, but this was the origin too of affliction for us:
the origin of tax, of out giving them alms; of trial through the grabbing of
cacao money, of trial by blowgun; stomping the people; violent removal; forced
debt, debt created by false testimony; petty litigation, harassment, violent
removal; the collaboration with the Spaniards on the part of the priests, . . .
and all the while the mistreated were further maltreated...but it will happen
that tears will come to the eyes of God the Father. The justica of God the
Father will settle on the whole world." 19

	Not all the Indians rejected the Christian religion. Many of them
accepted it. They desired Christian friendships and to change their habits to
the ones of the Spanish. The reasons for the acceptance of Christianity vary,
but one of these is fear. Some Christian conquerors threatened lives if the
Indians were not baptized and did not actively participate in the Church.
Another reason for the conversion is that the Indians were in awe of the
conquers. The Spanish represented power and the Indians were in reverence of
their great amount of power they represented. Some accepted the religion because
the missionaries demonstrated boundless zeal, high morals, and great courage.
Not all of the missionaries sent by the Church were violent or corrupt. There
were some who worked for the benefit of the native population. The Indians saw
this and respected it.

	The Catholic Church helped the Spanish monarchy administer to the native
population in the New World. The Church, by being subject to the Spanish
monarchy, is also to be held accountable to the numerous evils inflicted upon
the Indians in the Spainish colonies. In many cases they were forced to convert
to Christianity, and their views about god and religion were not taken into
account. The Catholic Church incurred a great injustice to the native population
in the New World. They were reduced to second class citizens, and forced to work
toward goals that they did not fully understand. Through the writings of Las
Casas, it is seen how the Indians were slaughtered needlessly, and how they were
baptized without regard to their feelings. Cortez paved the way for missions to
be founded in the New World supposedly for the good of the Indian population.
This, however, also turned against them. The Catholic Church role in the lives
of the native population was a negative one due to its alliance with the Spanish
monarchy and its forced conversion of the Indians.



 
Michael Williams								Religion
10/28/96									Essay

		            Halloween and Christianity

	It is often said that Halloween is not the "harmless" holiday it is thought to be, instead it is believed to be a pagan ritual which dates back to the ancient Celtic Druids.  According to the article "Should Our Kids Celebrate Halloween?" in Catholic Digest  Halloween's origin is very much Christian and American.
	Although the ancient Celts celebrated a minor festival on the 31st of October, it fell on that day because the Feast of All Saints or "All Hallows" falls on November 1st.  During the 840s Pope Gregory IV gad All Saints Day to be celebrated everywhere.  The day before the feast became known as "All Hallows Even" or "Hallowe'en".  At the time, that day did not have any real significance.  In the year of 998, the abbot of the monastery of Cluny in southern France, St. Odilo added a celebration on November 2nd called All Souls Day.  The new celebration was a feast whose purpose was to recognize those in heaven and in purgatory.
	The tradition of dressing up in costumes on Halloween is derived from the Feast of All Souls Day in France.  During the 14th and 15th centuries when Europe was hit by outbreaks of the bubonic plague, about half of its population was wiped out.  Since life spans were greatly shortened because of the plague, Catholics began to focus on the after life.  The number of Masses help largely increased and people of all social classes gathered to dress in different garments and lead lost spirits to the tomb in a daisy chain which became known as the "Dance of Death".
	Dressing up did not become part of Halloween until the creation of the British colonies in North America.  During that period of time, Catholics had no legal rights in England.  At times English Catholics attempted to resist.  One such occasion was a plot to destroy King James I and his Parliament with gunpowder.  The plan was ill-conceived and easily foiled when the guard of the powder, Guy Fawkes, was found and hung on November 5, 1605.  The date became widely celebrated in England. Bands of revelers began to wear masks on that date and visited local Catholics during the night demanding beer and cakes for their celebration.  This is the root of what has become known as "trick or treat!".  As French and Irish Catholics immigrated into the colonies, they began to inter-marry.  The combination of their traditions mixed with people of other nationalities is what led to the current way we celebrate Halloween.
	In conclusion, Halloween is not the occult which most people believe, it is the product of several cultures including Christianity.
 

 

CHURCH OF GOD

I.  ORIGIN
Most of the Pentecostal churches which bear the name "Church of God" can be traced to a holiness revival in the mountains of northwest Georgia and eastern Tennessee.  In 1884, R.G. Spurling, a Baptist minister in Monroe County, Tennessee, began to search the Scriptures for answers to the problems of modernism, formality, and spiritual dryness.  An initial meeting of concerned people was held on August 19, 1886, at the Barney Creek Meeting House to organize a new movement that would preach primitive church holiness and provide for reform and revival of the churches.  Christian Union was the name accepted by the first eight members enrolled that day.  Spurling died within a few months and was succeeded in leadership by his son, R.G. Spurling, Jr.  After ten years of little growth, three laymen influenced by the Spurlings' work claimed a deep religious experience similar to that written about by John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, and as a result began to preach sanctification. The three laymen began to hold services at Camp Creek, in Cherokee County, North Carolina, among a group of unaffiliated Baptists, Spurling and the Christian Union moved their services to Camp Creek and united with the group in North Carolina.  During this revival that followed this merger, spontaneous speaking in tongues occurred.  After searching the Scriptures, the group recognized the phenomena as a Biblical occurrence and as a new outpouring of the Holy Spirit. 


II.  BASIC THEOLOGY AND BELIEF
The Church believes in an experiential understanding of justification by faith, sanctification as a second work of grace, and the baptism of the Holy Spirit evidenced by speaking in tongues.  It also believes in the restoration of both ministerial and spiritual gifts to the Church.  They are believing Christians, who use the Holy Bible as the basis of their teachings.  They do practice "footwashing" at least annually, and they do encourage mid-week services, usually held Wednesday evening.

III.  GOVERNANCE
The Government of the Church of God in centralized.  Authority is vested in the general assembly, which meets every two years and is chaired by the general overseer.  A supreme council operated between general assemblies, and a general executive committee oversees the boards and agencies.  State overseers have charge over the churches in their areas and appoint the pastors.  Tithing is a central feature of finances.  The height of centralization came in 1914 when the annual elections of the general overseer were discontinued and Tomlinson became overseer for life.

IV.  ORDER OF WORSHIP
The order of worship is much like the Pentecostal Church, but more orderly.  They still practice speaking in tongues, singing praises, lots of prayer, and preaching the gospel message.

REFERENCES



Conn, Charles W.  "Church of God Distinctives."  Encyclopedia Americana.  1995 ed.  

Hughes, Ray H.  "Church of God."  Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia.  Vers. 7.0.  
	Computer Software.  Grolier Inc., 1995.  CD-ROM. 




Deep Ecology And Religion

Through this portion of class readings and discussions, we have sought deeper meaning and understanding of philosophies of individuals and organizations that revolve around the fundamental aspects and notions of deep ecology and eco-activism. These associations offer more views and attitudes on how an individual and society can create and maintain a kinship and positive influence with the natural environment. Like deep ecologists view on the metaphysical relationship of man and nature. Eco-activists contend to a belief of ecology as religion(Kinsley 193). They take their duty with the environment as a deeply spiritual, physical, and emotional connection. Specifically, an environmental-action group called Green Peace, brings forth a new term called planetary consciousness(Kinsley 199). This consciousness parallels the views of deep ecologists by means that they believe and affirm the inter-dependence and significance of all living things. This planetary consciousness outlines and proclaims that individuals and society must learn to respect the entire earth as an integral and animated system, this respect must equal the respect each individual shows themselves. This view is reasonable and valid and allows mankind a more intimate, religious, and personal vantage of the living world. However, the application of this lifestyle and relationship to the majority of society seems inconceivable. Since humanity cannot even maintain an intimate relationship with another individual, for instance the ever-increasing rate of divorce and separations in marriages. This matrimony has been viewed as sacred throughout the history of humanity yet infidelity and divorce remain severely high. While societys view of nature, as a revered and animated character is still frequently unfamiliar and unpracticed. Therefore, it seems implausible for immediate action to occur because based on the history of mankinds slow and inflexible ability to change their behavior and conduct. Max Oelschlaeger claimed in The Sacred Earth that the modern person has lost sight of the sacredness of creation(539). This accurate statement can be furthered that mankind has lost touch with the sacredness in all relationships, most importantly with themselves. Therefore, in order to change an individuals perceptions on the natural world they must first reanalyze and reconstruct their image and behavior of and towards themselves. Through our readings and in class speaker a notion arose that I believe will aid and promote this idea of planetary consciousness. This objective is to start with a small or local community to implement the redefinition of natures role with mankind instead of losing the context.
This will allow the opinions and assumptions towards the planetary consciousness to slowly penetrate the roots of society. An example of the type of movement to start changing ideology locally is bio-regionalism movement which aims to rebuild our cosmology locally and putting a greater emphasis on an individuals place in the natural world particularly the resources that immediately surround them.
This idea of finding your place is an exceptional solution for an individual to get back in touch with nature further it will allow an individual to have a deeper connection and knowledge with the people that encircle them. Chad Myer, who spoke to our class about Bioregionalism claims that economic globalization, has led us to displacement with people, environment, and ourselves. This globalization stemmed from the colonization of America. As the Europeans migrated the sense of individuality rose while the sense of belonging decreased. In order to reverse this individualism Bio-regionalism and Green Peace and other deep ecology organizations believe that society should reconstruct their lifestyles and beliefs to image that of the Indigenous Americans. Utilizing their conception of nature as kin and taking on a lifestyle that is both nurturing and respectful to the environment. Specifically, the Native American Indians way of life that utilizes and upholds their immediate surroundings. Through the habitude of acquiring their food, shelter, and clothing the Indians appreciated and respected the environment that provided their life necessities. The Indians therefore protected and maintained their neighboring natural environment. The leaders of Green Peace apply the principles from a specific indigenous culture known as the Cree. In our prior studies in class, we learned that the Crees fundamental principles revolve around mankinds righteous inhabitation of the land. This intrinsic relationship allowed the Crees to have a greater understanding and respect with the land and natural resources that surrounded them. To create increased awareness of a communitys natural surroundings is a fundamental principle in redefining and reconstructing an individuals perception and actions to the environment. Once an individual forms even a small relationship or understanding of their natural surroundings they will be able to experience a sense of belonging and devotion to the environment which will allow them to seek to preserve it. Chad Myers presented a few suggestions and thoughts on how to apply these bio-regionalist thoughts. Such as learning and experiencing our immediate natural surroundings: ocean, bay, hills, trees. Also, to utilize our native food supply from our community, such as acorns and artichokes from the bay area. Myers also promoted the idea of buying produce from local farmers to encourage a stonger connection with the community. It is difficult to convince society to retreat from a market economy where you can purchase a wide variety of food and products at a competitive cost to buying locally where the cost is usually higher and the selection is much lower. However, it is possible for society to begin and adapt slowly to purchasing locally grown produce. By taking small steps, such as an individual purchasing a few of their products a week through a local farmer will allow and individual to gradually contribute financially and emotionally to their community. Further, they will become more aware of the land and local farmers, which will create a greater desire in an individual to maintain their commerce locally. Therefore, in order to implement a planetary consciousness or respect for our animate environment we must start within our own communities. By first learning and understanding, the immediate natural environment an individual can then be able to grasp a better awareness on larger or worldlier environmental preservation. To attack or fight environmental destruction on a larger scope can often frighten or obscure societys view or conduct towards preservation. The eco-activist group, Earth First, is an organization that tries to grasp the worlds attention through radical actions to save the environment. Their beliefs are extended from deep ecologist thought believing that every non-human entity deserves the same rights and respect as humans. This organization will give society a jaded notion on how to preserve the environment through their violent actions and protests. Their code claims that they will abide by any and all means to resist the destruction of the natural world (Kinsley 200). Their acts will definitely be noticed by society through media but I feel many will close their eyes to the fundamental idea Earth First is trying to represent because of their radical and malicious acts. Though this organization is acting for the higher good of the environment, they are putting other humans in danger, which is not a justifiable or principled achievement. Therefore, in order to reconstruct an individuals view to a more positive and respectful relationship with environment we must teach and act non-violently, unlike the organization Earth First, and apply the principles of bio-regionalism, Green Peace, and deep ecology.
 

Earth-mother-goddess

Describe an original response to the meaning of existence with reference to the Earth-Mother-Goddess: What we find as an original response to existences meaning is the belief in a greater being or higher power, eg. God, that we serve and obey in the trade for a fruitful, everlasting life. This can be connected to the theory of the Earth-Mother-Goddess. The female in nature was intended to represent re-occuring life. Ancient people held the belief that they would return to the body of the womb of mother earth and then be given a new life. This ancient belief is similar to our own when compared.
How does a religious world view give meaning and purpose to the lives of the people ?
The view of the religious world can give meaning and purpose to the lives of the people as it gives them hope. Hope that if they live their lives as God had intended for them, they will be granted entrance into heaven, an everlasting, peaceful place. It gives people meaning as to what they should do with their lives. The religious view also brings order in peoples lives. Purpose in someones life is also introduced in the world view as there they can go to church and have the holy rituals which every religion will go through. This may offer people a sense of purpose in their life. Religion cannot be contained by any definition. However, the religious response is distinctive in its understanding of reality and its characteristics. i) Why cant religion be contained by a definition ? ii) How is religion a distinctive response and what are some common characteristics of religious responses ? Religion cannot be contained by a certain definition because religion is, simplistically enough, what you want it to be. No one can write a definition of religion as it is really just personal opinion. Religion can be the way you live your life, but for someone else it may just be another word in their dictionary and they could argue with the last definition and
 
Exogetical Essay on Matthew 11:25-30


	This passage opens up with the phrase, "I praise you, Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned,
and revealed them to little children.  This speaks of two kinds of people in his
prayer:  the "wise" - arrogant in their own knowledge - and the "little
children" - humbly open to receive the truth of God's Word.  Are we wise in our
own eyes, or do we seek the truth in childlike faith, realizing that only God
hold all the answers?  God wants us to be open at all times.  When we become too
"informed" and "wise" we can sometimes become to sure of our own knowledge, and
possibly miss what God is really telling us.
	The next passage says, "All things have been committed to me by my
Father.  No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father
except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him."  According to
my Life Application Study Guide, in the Old Testament, "know" means more than
knowledge.  It implies an intimate relationship.  The communion between God the
Father and God the Son is the core of their relationship.  For anyone else to
know God, God must reveal himself to that person, by the Son's choice.  How
fortunate we are that Jesus has clearly revealed to us God, his truth, and how
we can know him.
	The last major section of this passage reads, "Come to me, all you who
are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.  Take my yoke upon you and
learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for
your souls.  For my yoke is easy and my burden is light."  A yoke is a heavy
wooden harness that fits over the shoulders of an ox or oxen.  It is attached to
a piece of equipment the oxen are to pull.  A person may be carrying heavy
burdens of (1) sin, (2) excessive demands of religious leaders, (3) oppression
and persecution, (4) weariness in the search for God, or any number of other
problems we may face day to day.  The beautiful thing is that Jesus frees people
from all these burdens.  The rest that Jesus promises is love, healing, and
peace with God, not the end of all labor.  A relationship with God changes
meaningless, wearisome toil into spiritual productivity and purpose.  How
wonderful God is, that he will do all these things for us.  So many religions
and faiths portray God as a spiteful, vengeful God who is constantly needing to
be appeased.  How thankful I am that I serve a God who cares about me and wants
to nurture me and wants to watch me grow into my relationship with him.




 

Francis of Assisi - " Brother Son Sister Moon"


                                               Ben Ngkaion
                                               per: a
                                               2/26/97

Crisis and conversion:

While Francis is sick and dreaming, he has images of nature which represent the
happiness and peacefulness. He also has images of war which help him understand
that it isn't the greatest thing neither is it the most honorable.

Francis has many great conflicts with his father. Francis' father is very
materialistic and possessive. Francis' father did not honorably earn the money,
he bought the "loot" from the crusades for a small price and sold them to their
rightful owners for a much higher price. Father expects a lot of Francis. He
expects Francis to be just like him a so called businessman, who is profitable,
but not in an honorable way. Francis' father sends him to war so Francis can get
bring his father back a triptych. Francis and his father have different views of
life. Francis believes in freedom, believes that a person does not have to be
rich to be prosperous, and he would rather be poor like Jesus then be rich,
which Jesus was not. He thinks that the rich are misrepresenting Jesus because
the rich are placing the poor behind themselves. Francis thinks that Jesus
represents the poor as well as the rich "all men are created equal".

Francis can't help but to feel scared of lepers in the beginning. After all,
being scared is a normal human trait. Being in a big, bulky, helmet must feel
awkward. It feels like your being closed in. Francis also feels comfort. He sees
birds as a sign of freedom. This idea helps him become independent. Francis
going on the roof represents the feeling of freedom compared to his bed where he
was miserably enclosed.

The way mass was held was inappropriate because equality was not assessed. The
poor were dressed in rags and they were seated as far back as possible. On the
other hand, the rich were elegantly dressed and were seated right up front.
Christ's face was constructed in a rich expensive way. Christ's eyes "opened"
and Francis understood that the mass should be celebrated equally, not held
discretely. Francis screamed "no" to the idea itself that the mass should be
held like the way it was held. He also is saying no to the misunderstood fact
that Jesus favors the rich over the poor.

Francis' father cares very much for his  possessions. When Francis goes down in
the "dungeon" where slaves are making money, he feels sorry for them and
realizes that his father is not a honorable man he has slaves work in grave
conditions and probably doesn't pay them enough or doesn't pay them at all. He
realizes the importance of human life over money. Francis' father becomes
violent because he didn't raise his son in a way of not caring for money. He
wanted Francis to take over the family business.

The bishop is a corrupt man. His duties include a judge and the interpreter of
the mass. Francis believes that possessions are only material; but, a soul is
something that cannot be taken away. The bishop lies in order to continue eating
he says that he was praying; but, in fact he was eating. Francis' father lies by
saying that he worked hard to get all the money for his son. This is obviously
not true because his father wants the money for himself, and it's not like the
father worked hard to get the money. Francis, in no way, wants his father's
money or his birthright.

Spiritual and Ecclesial Development:

Francis goes to San Damiano. He becomes the "community builder", he helps out to
build the place. Francis' work song implies that it is not a job or task that he
has to do it's a pleasure for him. Francis has many thoughts which come back to
one main one the idea that a man should be free and that they should all be
treated equally.

Francis' dreams become a reality. His friends don't understand in the beginning
why Francis would want to become poor; but, they understand after awhile that
wealth isn't everything and they also help him out. Bernardo feels guilty for
killing so many people in war that it doesn't take him long to realize Francis'
idea. Francis' wants to get the message that the Emperor should "throw his
scepter in the mud" to show that u don't need all those riches to be "rich" in
life.

Everybody hates what Francis is doing, especially the nobility, because he in
actuality is right.

The mass at San Damiano is the way the mass should be celebrated. There is no
assigned seating place, the music is sung by anyone or anything( as the ducks
are shown to be singing). Bread and animals are given at the alter to show the
quality of sharing. The cross at Assisi is made with expensive items and is
fully and overly expensively dressed. The cross at San Damiano; however, is
simple and is not made with expensive materials. It truthfully represents the
image of Jesus a beggar. The mass back in Assisi became less crowded. The poor
went to the mass at San Damiano and left the mass at Assisi high and dry.

Paulos says  that Francis is too simple because he could have so much more but
yet picks too live like a beggar. He also believes that Francis will fall
because the pope back in Assisi can do whatever he wants to Francis and San
Damiano. He helps Francis out by getting the pope to talk to him. He places the
view of the church members in order from least to greatest. The clerics of the
church become enraged at Francis because he criticizes the pope. The pope claims
that power and riches go along with the job. I don't agree with this statement.
When the pope understands what Francis is talking about, then he calls Francis
back in and kneels to his feet and kisses them to show that he is not higher in
rank than Francis. The cardinals are just stunned and don't understand why the
pope is kneeling and kissing the feet of a beggar.

