Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
Koran, Buddhist scripture . . . they all carry similar requirements-and similar
penalties. They claim that if I
don't live by a specific code I will go to hell. I can't imagine a God who would
rule that way."
"I hope you don't let your students dodge questions that shamelessly."
The comment caught him off guard. "What?"
"Mr. Langdon, I did not ask if you believe what man says about God. I asked if
you believed in God. There
is a difference. Holy scripture is stories . . . legends and history of man's
quest to understand his own need
for meaning. I am not asking you to pass judgment on literature. I am asking if
you believe in God. When
you lie out under the stars, do you sense the divine? Do you feel in your gut
that you are staring up at the
work of God's hand?"
Langdon took a long moment to consider it.
"I'm prying," Vittoria apologized.
"No, I just . . ."
"Certainly you must debate issues of faith with your classes."
"Endlessly."
"And you play devil's advocate, I imagine. Always fueling the debate."
Langdon smiled. "You must be a teacher too."
"No, but I learned from a master. My father could argue two sides of a Möbius
Strip."
Langdon laughed, picturing the artful crafting of a Möbius Strip-a twisted ring
of paper, which technically
possessed only one side. Langdon had first seen the single-sided shape in the
artwork of M. C. Escher.
"May I ask you a question, Ms. Vetra?"
"Call me Vittoria. Ms. Vetra makes me feel old."
He sighed inwardly, suddenly sensing his own age. "Vittoria, I'm Robert."
"You had a question."
"Yes. As a scientist and the daughter of a Catholic priest, what do you think of
religion?"
Vittoria paused, brushing a lock of hair from her eyes. "Religion is like
language or dress. We gravitate
toward the practices with which we were raised. In the end, though, we are all
proclaiming the same thing.
That life has meaning. That we are grateful for the power that created us."
Langdon was intrigued. "So you're saying that whether you are a Christian or a
Muslim simply depends on
where you were born?"
"Isn't it obvious? Look at the diffusion of religion around the globe."
"So faith is random?"
"Hardly. Faith is universal. Our specific methods for understanding it are
arbitrary. Some of us pray to
Jesus, some of us go to Mecca, some of us study subatomic particles. In the end
we are all just searching
for truth, that which is greater than ourselves."
Langdon wished his students could express themselves so clearly. Hell, he wished
he could express himself
so clearly. "And God?" he asked. "Do you believe in God?"
Vittoria was silent for a long time. "Science tells me God must exist. My mind
tells me I will never
understand God. And my heart tells me I am not meant to."
How's that for concise, he thought. "So you believe God is fact, but we will
never understand Him."
"Her," she said with a smile. "Your Native Americans had it right."
Langdon chuckled. "Mother Earth."
"Gaea. The planet is an organism. All of us are cells with different purposes.
And yet we are intertwined.
Serving each other. Serving the whole."
Looking at her, Langdon felt something stir within him that he had not felt in a
long time. There was a
bewitching clarity in her eyes . . . a purity in her voice. He felt drawn.
"Mr. Langdon, let me ask you another question."
"Robert," he said. Mr. Langdon makes me feel old. I am old!
"If you don't mind my asking, Robert, how did you get involved with the
Illuminati?"
Langdon thought back. "Actually, it was money."
Vittoria looked disappointed. "Money? Consulting, you mean?"
Langdon laughed, realizing how it must have sounded. "No. Money as in currency."
He reached in his
pants pocket and pulled out some money. He found a one-dollar bill. "I became
fascinated with the cult
when I first learned that U.S. currency is covered with Illuminati symbology."
Vittoria's eyes narrowed, apparently not knowing whether or not to take him
seriously.
Langdon handed her the bill. "Look at the back. See the Great Seal on the left?"
Vittoria turned the one-dollar bill over. "You mean the pyramid?"
"The pyramid. Do you know what pyramids have to do with U.S. history?"
Vittoria shrugged.
"Exactly," Langdon said. "Absolutely nothing."
Vittoria frowned. "So why is it the central symbol of your Great Seal?"
"An eerie bit of history," Langdon said. "The pyramid is an occult symbol
representing a convergence
upward, toward the ultimate source of Illumination. See what's above it?"
Vittoria studied the bill. "An eye inside a triangle."
"It's called the trinacria. Have you ever seen that eye in a triangle anywhere
else?"
Vittoria was silent a moment. "Actually, yes, but I'm not sure . . ."
"It's emblazoned on Masonic lodges around the world."
"The symbol is Masonic?"
"Actually, no. It's Illuminati. They called it their 'shining delta.' A call for
enlightened change. The eye
signifies the Illuminati's ability to infiltrate and watch all things. The
shining triangle represents
enlightenment. And the triangle is also the Greek letter delta, which is the
mathematical symbol for-"
"Change. Transition."
Langdon smiled. "I forgot I was talking to a scientist."
"So you're saying the U.S. Great Seal is a call for enlightened, all-seeing
change?"
"Some would call it a New World Order."
Vittoria seemed startled. She glanced down at the bill again. "The writing under
the pyramid says Novus . .
. Ordo . . ."
"Novus Ordo Seculorum," Langdon said. "It means New Secular Order."
"Secular as in nonreligious?"
"Nonreligious. The phrase not only clearly states the Illuminati objective, but
it also blatantly contradicts
the phrase beside it. In God We Trust."
Vittoria seemed troubled. "But how could all this symbology end up on the most
powerful currency in the
world?"
"Most academics believe it was through Vice President Henry Wallace. He was an
upper echelon Mason
and certainly had ties to the Illuminati. Whether it was as a member or
innocently under their influence,
nobody knows. But it was Wallace who sold the design of the Great Seal to the
president."
"How? Why would the president have agreed to-"
"The president was Franklin D. Roosevelt. Wallace simply told him Novus Ordo
Seculorum meant New
Deal."
Vittoria seemed skeptical. "And Roosevelt didn't have anyone else look at the
symbol before telling the
Treasury to print it?"
"No need. He and Wallace were like brothers."
"Brothers?"
"Check your history books," Langdon said with a smile. "Franklin D. Roosevelt
was a well-known
Mason."
32
L angdon held his breath as the X-33 spiraled into Rome's Leonardo da Vinci
International Airport.
Vittoria sat across from him, eyes closed as if trying to will the situation
into control. The craft touched
down and taxied to a private hangar.
"Sorry for the slow flight," the pilot apologized, emerging from the cockpit.
"Had to trim her back. Noise
regulations over populated areas."
Langdon checked his watch. They had been airborne thirty-seven minutes.
The pilot popped the outer door. "Anybody want to tell me what's going on?"
Neither Vittoria nor Langdon responded.
"Fine," he said, stretching. "I'll be in the cockpit with the air-conditioning
and my music. Just me and
Garth."
The late-afternoon sun blazed outside the hangar. Langdon carried his tweed
jacket over his shoulder.
Vittoria turned her face skyward and inhaled deeply, as if the sun's rays
somehow transferred to her some
mystical replenishing energy.
Mediterraneans, Langdon mused, already sweating.
"Little old for cartoons, aren't you?" Vittoria asked, without opening her eyes.
"I'm sorry?"
"Your wristwatch. I saw it on the plane."
Langdon flushed slightly. He was accustomed to having to defend his timepiece.
The collector's edition
Mickey Mouse watch had been a childhood gift from his parents. Despite the
contorted foolishness of
Mickey's outstretched arms designating the hour, it was the only watch Langdon
had ever worn.
Waterproof and glow-in-the-dark, it was perfect for swimming laps or walking
unlit college paths at night.
When Langdon's students questioned his fashion sense, he told them he wore
Mickey as a daily reminder
to stay young at heart.
"It's six o'clock," he said.
Vittoria nodded, eyes still closed. "I think our ride's here."
Langdon heard the distant whine, looked up, and felt a sinking feeling.
Approaching from the north was a
helicopter, slicing low across the runway. Langdon had been on a helicopter once
in the Andean Palpa
Valley looking at the Nazca sand drawings and had not enjoyed it one bit. A
flying shoebox. After a
morning of space plane rides, Langdon had hoped the Vatican would send a car.
Apparently not.
The chopper slowed overhead, hovered a moment, and dropped toward the runway in
front of them. The
craft was white and carried a coat of arms emblazoned on the side-two skeleton
keys crossing a shield and
papal crown. He knew the symbol well. It was the traditional seal of the
Vatican-the sacred symbol of the
Holy See or "holy seat" of government, the seat being literally the ancient
throne of St. Peter.
The Holy Chopper, Langdon groaned, watching the craft land. He'd forgotten the
Vatican owned one of
these things, used for transporting the Pope to the airport, to meetings, or to
his summer palace in
Gandolfo. Langdon definitely would have preferred a car.
The pilot jumped from the cockpit and strode toward them across the tarmac.
Now it was Vittoria who looked uneasy. "That's our pilot?"
Langdon shared her concern. "To fly, or not to fly. That is the question."
The pilot looked like he was festooned for a Shakespearean melodrama. His puffy
tunic was vertically
striped in brilliant blue and gold. He wore matching pantaloons and spats. On
his feet were black flats that
looked like slippers. On top of it all, he wore a black felt beret.
"Traditional Swiss Guard uniforms," Langdon explained. "Designed by Michelangelo
himself." As the man
drew closer, Langdon winced. "I admit, not one of Michelangelo's better
efforts."
Despite the man's garish attire, Langdon could tell the pilot meant business. He
moved toward them with
all the rigidity and dignity of a U.S. Marine. Langdon had read many times about
the rigorous requirements
for becoming one of the elite Swiss Guard. Recruited from one of Switzerland's
four Catholic cantons,
applicants had to be Swiss males between nineteen and thirty years old, at least
5 feet 6 inches, trained by
the Swiss Army, and unmarried. This imperial corps was envied by world
governments as the most
allegiant and deadly security force in the world.
"You are from CERN?" the guard asked, arriving before them. His voice was
steely.
"Yes, sir," Langdon replied.
"You made remarkable time," he said, giving the X-33 a mystified stare. He
turned to Vittoria. "Ma'am, do
you have any other clothing?"
"I beg your pardon?"
He motioned to her legs. "Short pants are not permitted inside Vatican City."
Langdon glanced down at Vittoria's legs and frowned. He had forgotten. Vatican
City had a strict ban on
visible legs above the knee-both male and female. The regulation was a way of
showing respect for the
sanctity of God's city.
"This is all I have," she said. "We came in a hurry."
The guard nodded, clearly displeased. He turned next to Langdon. "Are you
carrying any weapons?"
Weapons? Langdon thought. I'm not even carrying a change of underwear! He shook
his head.
The officer crouched at Langdon's feet and began patting him down, starting at
his socks. Trusting guy,
Langdon thought. The guard's strong hands moved up Langdon's legs, coming
uncomfortably close to his
groin. Finally they moved up to his chest and shoulders. Apparently content
Langdon was clean, the guard
turned to Vittoria. He ran his eyes up her legs and torso.
Vittoria glared. "Don't even think about it."
The guard fixed Vittoria with a gaze clearly intended to intimidate. Vittoria
did not flinch.
"What's that?" the guard said, pointing to a faint square bulge in the front
pocket of her shorts.
Vittoria removed an ultrathin cell phone. The guard took it, clicked it on,
waited for a dial tone, and then,
apparently satisfied that it was indeed nothing more than a phone, returned it
to her. Vittoria slid it back
into her pocket.
"Turn around, please," the guard said.
Vittoria obliged, holding her arms out and rotating a full 360 degrees.
The guard carefully studied her. Langdon had already decided that Vittoria's
form-fitting shorts and blouse
were not bulging anywhere they shouldn't have been. Apparently the guard came to
the same conclusion.
"Thank you. This way please."
The Swiss Guard chopper churned in neutral as Langdon and Vittoria approached.
Vittoria boarded first,
like a seasoned pro, barely even stooping as she passed beneath the whirling
rotors. Langdon held back a
moment.
"No chance of a car?" he yelled, half-joking to the Swiss Guard, who was
climbing in the pilot's seat.
The man did not answer.
Langdon knew that with Rome's maniacal drivers, flying was probably safer
anyway. He took a deep
breath and boarded, stooping cautiously as he passed beneath the spinning
rotors.
As the guard fired up the engines, Vittoria called out, "Have you located the
canister?"
The guard glanced over his shoulder, looking confused. "The what?"
"The canister. You called CERN about a canister?"
The man shrugged. "No idea what you're talking about. We've been very busy
today. My commander told
me to pick you up. That's all I know."
Vittoria gave Langdon an unsettled look.
"Buckle up, please," the pilot said as the engine revved.
Langdon reached for his seat belt and strapped himself in. The tiny fuselage
seemed to shrink around him.
Then with a roar, the craft shot up and banked sharply north toward Rome.
Rome . . . the caput mundi, where Caesar once ruled, where St. Peter was
crucified. The cradle of modern
civilization. And at its core . . . a ticking bomb.
33
R ome from the air is a labyrinth-an indecipherable maze of ancient roadways
winding around buildings,
fountains, and crumbling ruins.
The Vatican chopper stayed low in the sky as it sliced northwest through the
permanent smog layer
coughed up by the congestion below. Langdon gazed down at the mopeds,
sight-seeing buses, and armies
of miniature Fiat sedans buzzing around rotaries in all directions.
Koyaanisqatsi, he thought, recalling the
Hopi term for "life out of balance."
Vittoria sat in silent determination in the seat beside him.
The chopper banked hard.
His stomach dropping, Langdon gazed farther into the distance. His eyes found
the crumbling ruins of the
Roman Coliseum. The Coliseum, Langdon had always thought, was one of history's
greatest ironies. Now
a dignified symbol for the rise of human culture and civilization, the stadium
had been built to host
centuries of barbaric events-hungry lions shredding prisoners, armies of slaves
battling to the death, gang
rapes of exotic women captured from far-off lands, as well as public beheadings
and castrations. It was
ironic, Langdon thought, or perhaps fitting, that the Coliseum had served as the
architectural blueprint for
Harvard's Soldier Field-the football stadium where the ancient traditions of
savagery were reenacted every
fall . . . crazed fans screaming for bloodshed as Harvard battled Yale.
As the chopper headed north, Langdon spied the Roman Forum-the heart of
pre-Christian Rome. The
decaying columns looked like toppled gravestones in a cemetery that had somehow
avoided being
swallowed by the metropolis surrounding it.
To the west the wide basin of the Tiber River wound enormous arcs across the
city. Even from the air
Langdon could tell the water was deep. The churning currents were brown, filled
with silt and foam from
heavy rains.
"Straight ahead," the pilot said, climbing higher.
Langdon and Vittoria looked out and saw it. Like a mountain parting the morning
fog, the colossal dome
rose out of the haze before them: St. Peter's Basilica.
"Now that," Langdon said to Vittoria, "is something Michelangelo got right."
Langdon had never seen St. Peter's from the air. The marble façade blazed like
fire in the afternoon sun.
Adorned with 140 statues of saints, martyrs, and angels, the Herculean edifice
stretched two football fields
wide and a staggering six long. The cavernous interior of the basilica had room
for over 60,000 worshipers .
. . over one hundred times the population of Vatican City, the smallest country
in the world.
Incredibly, though, not even a citadel of this magnitude could dwarf the piazza
before it. A sprawling
expanse of granite, St. Peter's Square was a staggering open space in the
congestion of Rome, like a
classical Central Park. In front of the basilica, bordering the vast oval
common, 284 columns swept
outward in four concentric arcs of diminishing size . . . an architectural
trompe de l'oiel used to heighten
the piazza's sense of grandeur.
Peter would think if he were
here now. The Saint had died a gruesome death, crucified upside down on this
very spot. Now he rested in
the most sacred of tombs, buried five stories down, directly beneath the central
cupola of the basilica.
"Vatican City," the pilot said, sounding anything but welcoming.
Langdon looked out at the towering stone bastions that loomed ahead-impenetrable
fortifications
surrounding the complex . . . a strangely earthly defense for a spiritual world
of secrets, power, and
mystery.
"Look!" Vittoria said suddenly, grabbing Langdon's arm. She motioned frantically
downward toward St.
Peter's Square directly beneath them. Langdon put his face to the window and
looked.
"Over there," she said, pointing.
Langdon looked. The rear of the piazza looked like a parking lot crowded with a
dozen or so trailer trucks.
Huge satellite dishes pointed skyward from the roof of every truck. The dishes
were emblazoned with
familiar names:
TELEVISOR EUROPEA
VIDEO ITALIA
BBC
UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL
Langdon felt suddenly confused, wondering if the news of the antimatter had
already leaked out.
Vittoria seemed suddenly tense. "Why is the press here? What's going on?"
The pilot turned and gave her an odd look over his shoulder. "What's going on?
You don't know?"
"No," she fired back, her accent husky and strong.
"Il Conclavo," he said. "It is to be sealed in about an hour. The whole world is
watching."
Il Conclavo.
The word rang a long moment in Langdon's ears before dropping like a brick to
the pit of his stomach. Il
Conclavo. The Vatican Conclave. How could he have forgotten? It had been in the
news recently.
Fifteen days ago, the Pope, after a tremendously popular twelve-year reign, had
passed away. Every paper
in the world had carried the story about the Pope's fatal stroke while
sleeping-a sudden and unexpected
death many whispered was suspicious. But now, in keeping with the sacred
tradition, fifteen days after the
death of a Pope, the Vatican was holding Il Conclavo-the sacred ceremony in
which the 165 cardinals of
the world-the most powerful men in Christendom-gathered in Vatican City to elect
the new Pope.
Every cardinal on the planet is here today, Langdon thought as the chopper
passed over St. Peter's
Basilica. The expansive inner world of Vatican City spread out beneath him. The
entire power structure of
the Roman Catholic Church is sitting on a time bomb.
34
C ardinal Mortati gazed up at the lavish ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and tried
to find a moment of quiet
reflection. The frescoed walls echoed with the voices of cardinals from nations
around the globe. The men
jostled in the candlelit tabernacle, whispering excitedly and consulting with
one another in numerous
languages, the universal tongues being English, Italian, and Spanish.
The light in the chapel was usually sublime-long rays of tinted sun slicing
through the darkness like rays
from heaven-but not today. As was the custom, all of the chapel's windows had
been covered in black
velvet in the name of secrecy. This ensured that no one on the inside could send
signals or communicate in
any way with the outside world. The result was a profound darkness lit only by
candles . . . a shimmering
radiance that seemed to purify everyone it touched, making them all ghostly . .
. like saints.
What privilege, Mortati thought, that I am to oversee this sanctified event.
Cardinals over eighty years of
age were too old to be eligible for election and did not attend conclave, but at
seventy-nine years old,
Mortati was the most senior cardinal here and had been appointed to oversee the
proceedings.
Following tradition, the cardinals gathered here two hours before conclave to
catch up with friends and
engage in last-minute discussion. At 7 P.M., the late Pope's chamberlain would
arrive, give opening prayer,
and then leave. Then the Swiss Guard would seal the doors and lock all the
cardinals inside. It was then that
the oldest and most secretive political ritual in the world would begin. The
cardinals would not be released
until they decided who among them would be the next Pope.
Conclave. Even the name was secretive. "Con clave" literally meant "locked with
a key." The cardinals
were permitted no contact whatsoever with the outside world. No phone calls. No
messages. No whispers
through doorways. Conclave was a vacuum, not to be influenced by anything in the
outside world. This
would ensure that the cardinals kept Solum Dum prae oculis . . . only God before
their eyes.
Outside the walls of the chapel, of course, the media watched and waited,
speculating as to which of the
cardinals would become the ruler of one billion Catholics worldwide. Conclaves
created an intense,
politically charged atmosphere, and over the centuries they had turned deadly;
poisonings, fist fights, and
even murder had erupted within the sacred walls. Ancient history, Mortati
thought. Tonight's conclave will
be unified, blissful, and above all . . . brief.
Or at least that had been his speculation.
Now, however, an unexpected development had emerged. Mystifyingly, four
cardinals were absent from
the chapel. Mortati knew that all the exits to Vatican City were guarded, and
the missing cardinals could
not have gone far, but still, with less than an hour before opening prayer, he
was feeling disconcerted. After
all, the four missing men were no ordinary cardinals. They were the cardinals.
The chosen four.
As overseer of the conclave, Mortati had already sent word through the proper
channels to the Swiss Guard
alerting them to the cardinals' absence. He had yet to hear back. Other
cardinals had now noticed the
puzzling absence. The anxious whispers had begun. Of all cardinals, these four
should be on time! Cardinal
Mortati was starting to fear it might be a long evening after all.
He had no idea.
35
T he Vatican's helipad, for reasons of safety and noise control, is located in
the northwest tip of Vatican
City, as far from St. Peter's Basilica as possible.
"Terra firma," the pilot announced as they touched down. He exited and opened
the sliding door for
Langdon and Vittoria.
Langdon descended from the craft and turned to help Vittoria, but she had
already dropped effortlessly to
the ground. Every muscle in her body seemed tuned to one objective-finding the
antimatter before it left a
horrific legacy.
After stretching a reflective sun tarp across the cockpit window, the pilot
ushered them to an oversized
electric golf cart waiting near the helipad. The cart whisked them silently
alongside the country's western
border-a fifty-foot-tall cement bulwark thick enough to ward off attacks even by
tanks. Lining the interior
of the wall, posted at fifty-meter intervals, Swiss Guards stood at attention,
surveying the interior of the
grounds. The cart turned sharply right onto Via della Osservatorio. Signs
pointed in all directions:
PALAZZIO GOVERNATORIO
COLLEGIO ETHIOPIANA
BASILICA SAN PIETRO
CAPELLA SISTINA
They accelerated up the manicured road past a squat building marked RADIO
VATICANA. This, Langdon
realized to his amazement, was the hub of the world's most listened-to radio
programming-Radio Vaticanaspreading
the word of God to millions of listeners around the globe.
"Attenzione," the pilot said, turning sharply into a rotary.
As the cart wound round, Langdon could barely believe the sight now coming into
view. Giardini Vaticani,
he thought. The heart of Vatican City. Directly ahead rose the rear of St.
Peter's Basilica, a view, Langdon
realized, most people never saw. To the right loomed the Palace of the Tribunal,
the lush papal residence
rivaled only by Versailles in its baroque embellishment. The severe-looking
Governatorato building was
now behind them, housing Vatican City's administration. And up ahead on the
left, the massive rectangular
edifice of the Vatican Museum. Langdon knew there would be no time for a museum
visit this trip.
"Where is everyone?" Vittoria asked, surveying the deserted lawns and walkways.
The guard checked his black, military-style chronograph-an odd anachronism
beneath his puffy sleeve.
"The cardinals are convened in the Sistine Chapel. Conclave begins in a little
under an hour."
Langdon nodded, vaguely recalling that before conclave the cardinals spent two
hours inside the Sistine
Chapel in quiet reflection and visitations with their fellow cardinals from
around the globe. The time was
meant to renew old friendships among the cardinals and facilitate a less heated
election process. "And the
rest of the residents and staff?"
"Banned from the city for secrecy and security until the conclave concludes."
"And when does it conclude?"
The guard shrugged. "God only knows." The words sounded oddly literal.
After parking the cart on the wide lawn directly behind St. Peter's Basilica,
the guard escorted Langdon and
Vittoria up a stone escarpment to a marble plaza off the back of the basilica.
Crossing the plaza, they
approached the rear wall of the basilica and followed it through a triangular
courtyard, across Via
Belvedere, and into a series of buildings closely huddled together. Langdon's
art history had taught him
enough Italian to pick out signs for the Vatican Printing Office, the Tapestry
Restoration Lab, Post Office
Management, and the Church of St. Ann. They crossed another small square and
arrived at their
destination.
The Office of the Swiss Guard is housed adjacent to Il Corpo di Vigilanza,
directly northeast of St. Peter's
Basilica. The office is a squat, stone building. On either side of the entrance,
like two stone statues, stood a
pair of guards.
Langdon had to admit, these guards did not look quite so comical. Although they
also wore the blue and
gold uniform, each wielded the traditional "Vatican long sword"-an eight-foot
spear with a razor-sharp
scythe-rumored to have decapitated countless Muslims while defending the
Christian crusaders in the
fifteenth century.
As Langdon and Vittoria approached, the two guards stepped forward, crossing
their long swords, blocking
the entrance. One looked up at the pilot in confusion. "I pantaloni," he said,
motioning to Vittoria's shorts.
The pilot waved them off. "Il comandante vuole vederli subito."
The guards frowned. Reluctantly they stepped aside.
Inside, the air was cool. It looked nothing like the administrative security
offices Langdon would have
imagined. Ornate and impeccably furnished, the hallways contained paintings
Langdon was certain any
museum worldwide would gladly have featured in its main gallery.
The pilot pointed down a steep set of stairs. "Down, please."
Langdon and Vittoria followed the white marble treads as they descended between
a gauntlet of nude male
sculptures. Each statue wore a fig leaf that was lighter in color than the rest
of the body.
The Great Castration, Langdon thought.
It was one of the most horrific tragedies in Renaissance art. In 1857, Pope Pius
IX decided that the accurate
representation of the male form might incite lust inside the Vatican. So he got
a chisel and mallet and
hacked off the genitalia of every single male statue inside Vatican City. He
defaced works by
Michelangelo, Bramante, and Bernini. Plaster fig leaves were used to patch the
damage. Hundreds of
sculptures had been emasculated. Langdon had often wondered if there was a huge
crate of stone penises
someplace.
"Here," the guard announced.
They reached the bottom of the stairs and dead-ended at a heavy, steel door. The
guard typed an entry code,
and the door slid open. Langdon and Vittoria entered.
Beyond the threshold was absolute mayhem.
36
T he Office of the Swiss Guard.
Langdon stood in the doorway, surveying the collision of centuries before them.
Mixed media. The room
was a lushly adorned Renaissance library complete with inlaid bookshelves,
oriental carpets, and colorful
tapestries . . . and yet the room bristled with high-tech gear-banks of
computers, faxes, electronic maps of
the Vatican complex, and televisions tuned to CNN. Men in colorful pantaloons
typed feverishly on
computers and listened intently in futuristic headphones.
"Wait here," the guard said.
Langdon and Vittoria waited as the guard crossed the room to an exceptionally
tall, wiry man in a dark blue
military uniform. He was talking on a cellular phone and stood so straight he
was almost bent backward.
The guard said something to him, and the man shot a glance over at Langdon and
Vittoria. He nodded, then
turned his back on them and continued his phone call.
The guard returned. "Commander Olivetti will be with you in a moment."
"Thank you."
The guard left and headed back up the stairs.
Langdon studied Commander Olivetti across the room, realizing he was actually
the Commander in Chief
of the armed forces of an entire country. Vittoria and Langdon waited, observing
the action before them.
Brightly dressed guards bustled about yelling orders in Italian.
"Continua cercando!" one yelled into a telephone.
"Probasti il museo?"another asked.
Langdon did not need fluent Italian to discern that the security center was
currently in intense search mode.
This was the good news. The bad news was that they obviously had not yet found
the antimatter.
"You okay?" Langdon asked Vittoria.
She shrugged, offering a tired smile.
When the commander finally clicked off his phone and approached across the room,
he seemed to grow
with each step. Langdon was tall himself and not accustomed to looking up at
many people, but
Commander Olivetti demanded it. Langdon sensed immediately that the commander
was a man who had
weathered tempests, his face hale and steeled. His dark hair was cropped in a
military buzz cut, and his
eyes burned with the kind of hardened determination only attainable through
years of intense training. He
moved with ramrod exactness, the earpiece hidden discreetly behind one ear
making him look more like
U.S. Secret Service than Swiss Guard.
The commander addressed them in accented English. His voice was startlingly
quiet for such a large man,
barely a whisper. It bit with a tight, military efficiency. "Good afternoon," he
said. "I am Commander
Olivetti-Comandante Principale of the Swiss Guard. I'm the one who called your
director."
Vittoria gazed upward. "Thank you for seeing us, sir."
The commander did not respond. He motioned for them to follow and led them
through the tangle of
electronics to a door in the side wall of the chamber. "Enter," he said, holding
the door for them.
Langdon and Vittoria walked through and found themselves in a darkened control
room where a wall of
video monitors was cycling lazily through a series of black-and-white images of
the complex. A young
guard sat watching the images intently.
"Fuori," Olivetti said.
The guard packed up and left.
Olivetti walked over to one of the screens and pointed to it. Then he turned
toward his guests. "This image
is from a remote camera hidden somewhere inside Vatican City. I'd like an
explanation."
Langdon and Vittoria looked at the screen and inhaled in unison. The image was
absolute. No doubt. It was
CERN's antimatter canister. Inside, a shimmering droplet of metallic liquid hung
ominously in the air, lit
by the rhythmic blinking of the LED digital clock. Eerily, the area around the
canister was almost entirely
dark, as if the antimatter were in a closet or darkened room. At the top of the
monitor flashed superimposed
text: LIVE FEED-CAMERA #86.
Vittoria looked at the time remaining on the flashing indicator on the canister.
"Under six hours," she
whispered to Langdon, her face tense.
Langdon checked his watch. "So we have until . . ." He stopped, a knot
tightening in his stomach.
"Midnight," Vittoria said, with a withering look.
Midnight, Langdon thought. A flair for the dramatic. Apparently whoever stole
the canister last night had
timed it perfectly. A stark foreboding set in as he realized he was currently
sitting at ground zero.
Olivetti's whisper now sounded more like a hiss. "Does this object belong to
your facility?"
Vittoria nodded. "Yes, sir. It was stolen from us. It contains an extremely
combustible substance called
antimatter."
Olivetti looked unmoved. "I am quite familiar with incendiaries, Ms. Vetra. I
have not heard of antimatter."
"It's new technology. We need to locate it immediately or evacuate Vatican
City."
Olivetti closed his eyes slowly and reopened them, as if refocusing on Vittoria
might change what he just
heard. "Evacuate? Are you aware what is going on here this evening?"
"Yes, sir. And the lives of your cardinals are in danger. We have about six
hours. Have you made any
headway locating the canister?"
Olivetti shook his head. "We haven't started looking."
Vittoria choked. "What? But we expressly heard your guards talking about
searching the-"
"Searching, yes," Olivetti said, "but not for your canister. My men are looking
for something else that does
not concern you."
Vittoria's voice cracked. "You haven't even begun looking for this canister?"
Olivetti's pupils seemed to recede into his head. He had the passionless look of
an insect. "Ms. Vetra, is it?
Let me explain something to you. The director of your facility refused to share
any details about this object
with me over the phone except to say that I needed to find it immediately. We
are exceptionally busy, and I
do not have the luxury of dedicating manpower to a situation until I get some
facts."
"There is only one relevant fact at this moment, sir," Vittoria said, "that
being that in six hours that device
is going to vaporize this entire complex."
Olivetti stood motionless. "Ms. Vetra, there is something you need to know." His
tone hinted at
patronizing. "Despite the archaic appearance of Vatican City, every single
entrance, both public and
private, is equipped with the most advanced sensing equipment known to man. If
someone tried to enter
with any sort of incendiary device it would be detected instantly. We have
radioactive isotope scanners,
olfactory filters designed by the American DEA to detect the faintest chemical
signatures of combustibles
and toxins. We also use the most advanced metal detectors and X-ray scanners
available."
"Very impressive," Vittoria said, matching Olivetti's cool. "Unfortunately,
antimatter is nonradioactive, its
chemical signature is that of pure hydrogen, and the canister is plastic. None
of those devices would have
detected it."
"But the device has an energy source," Olivetti said, motioning to the blinking
LED. "Even the smallest
trace of nickel-cadmium would register as-"
"The batteries are also plastic."
Olivetti's patience was clearly starting to wane. "Plastic batteries?"
"Polymer gel electrolyte with Teflon."
Olivetti leaned toward her, as if to accentuate his height advantage.
"Signorina, the Vatican is the target of
dozens of bomb threats a month. I personally train every Swiss Guard in modern
explosive technology. I
am well aware that there is no substance on earth powerful enough to do what you
are describing unless
you are talking about a nuclear warhead with a fuel core the size of a
baseball."
Vittoria framed him with a fervent stare. "Nature has many mysteries yet to
unveil."
Olivetti leaned closer. "Might I ask exactly who you are? What is your position
at CERN?"
"I am a senior member of the research staff and appointed liaison to the Vatican
for this crisis."
"Excuse me for being rude, but if this is indeed a crisis, why am I dealing with
you and not your director?
And what disrespect do you intend by coming into Vatican City in short pants?"
Langdon groaned. He couldn't believe that under the circumstances the man was
being a stickler for dress
code. Then again, he realized, if stone penises could induce lustful thoughts in
Vatican residents, Vittoria
Vetra in shorts could certainly be a threat to national security.
"Commander Olivetti," Langdon intervened, trying to diffuse what looked like a
second bomb about to
explode. "My name is Robert Langdon. I'm a professor of religious studies in the
U.S. and unaffiliated with
CERN. I have seen an antimatter demonstration and will vouch for Ms. Vetra's
claim that it is
exceptionally dangerous. We have reason to believe it was placed inside your
complex by an antireligious
cult hoping to disrupt your conclave."
Olivetti turned, peering down at Langdon. "I have a woman in shorts telling me
that a droplet of liquid is
going to blow up Vatican City, and I have an American professor telling me we
are being targeted by some
antireligious cult. What exactly is it you expect me to do?"
"Find the canister," Vittoria said. "Right away."
"Impossible. That device could be anywhere. Vatican City is enormous."
"Your cameras don't have GPS locators on them?"
"They are not generally stolen. This missing camera will take days to locate."
"We don't have days," Vittoria said adamantly. "We have six hours."
"Six hours until what, Ms. Vetra?" Olivetti's voice grew louder suddenly. He
pointed to the image on the
screen. "Until these numbers count down? Until Vatican City disappears? Believe
me, I do not take kindly
to people tampering with my security system. Nor do I like mechanical
contraptions appearing
mysteriously inside my walls. I am concerned. It is my job to be concerned. But
what you have told me
here is unacceptable."
Langdon spoke before he could stop himself. "Have you heard of the Illuminati?"
The commander's icy exterior cracked. His eyes went white, like a shark about to
attack. "I am warning
you. I do not have time for this."
"So you have heard of the Illuminati?"
Olivetti's eyes stabbed like bayonets. "I am a sworn defendant of the Catholic
Church. Of course I have
heard of the Illuminati. They have been dead for decades."
Langdon reached in his pocket and pulled out the fax image of Leonardo Vetra's
branded body. He handed
it to Olivetti.
"I am an Illuminati scholar," Langdon said as Olivetti studied the picture. "I
am having a difficult time
accepting that the Illuminati are still active, and yet the appearance of this
brand combined with the fact
that the Illuminati have a well-known covenant against Vatican City has changed
my mind."
"A computer-generated hoax." Olivetti handed the fax back to Langdon.
Langdon stared, incredulous. "Hoax? Look at the symmetry! You of all people
should realize the
authenticity of-"
"Authenticity is precisely what you lack. Perhaps Ms. Vetra has not informed
you, but CERN scientists
have been criticizing Vatican policies for decades. They regularly petition us
for retraction of Creationist
theory, formal apologies for Galileo and Copernicus, repeal of our criticism
against dangerous or immoral
research. What scenario seems more likely to you-that a four-hundred-year-old
satanic cult has resurfaced
with an advanced weapon of mass destruction, or that some prankster at CERN is
trying to disrupt a sacred
Vatican event with a well-executed fraud?"
"That photo," Vittoria said, her voice like boiling lava, "is of my father.
Murdered. You think this is my
idea of a joke?"
"I don't know, Ms. Vetra. But I do know until I get some answers that make
sense, there is no way I will
raise any sort of alarm. Vigilance and discretion are my duty . . . such that
spiritual matters can take place
here with clarity of mind. Today of all days."
Langdon said, "At least postpone the event."
"Postpone?" Olivetti's jaw dropped. "Such arrogance! A conclave is not some
American baseball game you
call on account of rain. This is a sacred event with a strict code and process.
Never mind that one billion
Catholics in the world are waiting for a leader. Never mind that the world media
is outside. The protocols
for this event are holy-not subject to modification. Since 1179, conclaves have
survived earthquakes,
famines, and even the plague. Believe me, it is not about to be canceled on
account of a murdered scientist
and a droplet of God knows what."
"Take me to the person in charge," Vittoria demanded.
Olivetti glared. "You've got him."
"No," she said. "Someone in the clergy."
The veins on Olivetti's brow began to show. "The clergy has gone. With the
exception of the Swiss Guard,
the only ones present in Vatican City at this time are the College of Cardinals.
And they are inside the
Sistine Chapel."
"How about the chamberlain?" Langdon stated flatly.
"Who?"
"The late Pope's chamberlain." Langdon repeated the word self-assuredly, praying
his memory served
him. He recalled reading once about the curious arrangement of Vatican authority
following the death of a
Pope. If Langdon was correct, during the interim between Popes, complete
autonomous power shifted
temporarily to the late Pope's personal assistant-his chamberlain-a secretarial
underling who oversaw
conclave until the cardinals chose the new Holy Father. "I believe the
chamberlain is the man in charge at
the moment."
"Il camerlegno?" Olivetti scowled. "The camerlegno is only a priest here. He is
not even canonized. He is
the late Pope's hand servant."
"But he is here. And you answer to him."
Olivetti crossed his arms. "Mr. Langdon, it is true that Vatican rule dictates
the camerlegno assume chief
executive office during conclave, but it is only because his lack of eligibility
for the papacy ensures an
unbiased election. It is as if your president died, and one of his aides
temporarily sat in the oval office. The
camerlegno is young, and his understanding of security, or anything else for
that matter, is extremely
limited. For all intents and purposes, I am in charge here."
"Take us to him," Vittoria said.
"Impossible. Conclave begins in forty minutes. The camerlegno is in the Office
of the Pope preparing. I
have no intention of disturbing him with matters of security."
Vittoria opened her mouth to respond but was interrupted by a knocking at the
door. Olivetti opened it.
A guard in full regalia stood outside, pointing to his watch. "ÉÉ l'ora,
comandante."
Olivetti checked his own watch and nodded. He turned back to Langdon and
Vittoria like a judge
pondering their fate. "Follow me." He led them out of the monitoring room across
the security center to a
small clear cubicle against the rear wall. "My office." Olivetti ushered them
inside. The room was
unspecial-a cluttered desk, file cabinets, folding chairs, a water cooler. "I
will be back in ten minutes. I
suggest you use the time to decide how you would like to proceed."
Vittoria wheeled. "You can't just leave! That canister is-"
"I do not have time for this," Olivetti seethed. "Perhaps I should detain you
until after the conclave when I
do have time."
"Signore," the guard urged, pointing to his watch again. "Spazzare di capella."
Olivetti nodded and started to leave.
"Spazzare di capella?" Vittoria demanded. "You're leaving to sweep the chapel?"
Olivetti turned, his eyes boring through her. "We sweep for electronic bugs,
Miss Vetra-a matter of
discretion." He motioned to her legs. "Not something I would expect you to
understand."
With that he slammed the door, rattling the heavy glass. In one fluid motion he
produced a key, inserted it,
and twisted. A heavy deadbolt slid into place.
"Idiòta!" Vittoria yelled. "You can't keep us in here!"
Through the glass, Langdon could see Olivetti say something to the guard. The
sentinel nodded. As Olivetti
strode out of the room, the guard spun and faced them on the other side of the
glass, arms crossed, a large
sidearm visible on his hip.
Perfect, Langdon thought. Just bloody perfect.
37
V ittoria glared at the Swiss Guard standing outside Olivetti's locked door. The
sentinel glared back, his
colorful costume belying his decidedly ominous air.
"Che fiasco," Vittoria thought. Held hostage by an armed man in pajamas.
Langdon had fallen silent, and Vittoria hoped he was using that Harvard brain of
his to think them out of
this. She sensed, however, from the look on his face, that he was more in shock
than in thought. She
regretted getting him so involved.
Vittoria's first instinct was to pull out her cell phone and call Kohler, but
she knew it was foolish. First, the
guard would probably walk in and take her phone. Second, if Kohler's episode ran
its usual course, he was
probably still incapacitated. Not that it mattered . . . Olivetti seemed
unlikely to take anybody's word on
anything at the moment.
Remember! she told herself. Remember the solution to this test!
Remembrance was a Buddhist philosopher's trick. Rather than asking her mind to
search for a solution to a
potentially impossible challenge, Vittoria asked her mind simply to remember it.
The presupposition that
one once knew the answer created the mindset that the answer must exist . . .
thus eliminating the crippling
conception of hopelessness. Vittoria often used the process to solve scientific
quandaries . . . those that
most people thought had no solution.
At the moment, however, her remembrance trick was drawing a major blank. So she
measured her options .
. . her needs. She needed to warn someone. Someone at the Vatican needed to take
her seriously. But who?
The camerlegno? How? She was in a glass box with one exit.
Tools, she told herself. There are always tools. Reevaluate your environment.
Instinctively she lowered her shoulders, relaxed her eyes, and took three deep
breaths into her lungs. She
sensed her heart rate slow and her muscles soften. The chaotic panic in her mind
dissolved. Okay, she
thought, let your mind be free. What makes this situation positive? What are my
assets?
The analytical mind of Vittoria Vetra, once calmed, was a powerful force. Within
seconds she realized their
incarceration was actually their key to escape.
"I'm making a phone call," she said suddenly.
Langdon looked up. "I was about to suggest you call Kohler, but-"
"Not Kohler. Someone else."
"Who?"
"The camerlegno."
Langdon looked totally lost. "You're calling the chamberlain? How?"
"Olivetti said the camerlegno was in the Pope's office."
"Okay. You know the Pope's private number?"
"No. But I'm not calling on my phone." She nodded to a high-tech phone system on
Olivetti's desk. It was
riddled with speed dial buttons. "The head of security must have a direct line
to the Pope's office."
"He also has a weight lifter with a gun planted six feet away."
"And we're locked in."
"I was actually aware of that."
"I mean the guard is locked out. This is Olivetti's private office. I doubt
anyone else has a key."
Langdon looked out at the guard. "This is pretty thin glass, and that's a pretty
big gun."
"What's he going to do, shoot me for using the phone?"
"Who the hell knows! This is a pretty strange place, and the way things are
going-"
"Either that," Vittoria said, "or we can spend the next five hours and
forty-eight minutes in Vatican Prison.
At least we'll have a front-row seat when the antimatter goes off."
Langdon paled. "But the guard will get Olivetti the second you pick up that
phone. Besides, there are
twenty buttons on there. And I don't see any identification. You going to try
them all and hope to get
lucky?"
"Nope," she said, striding to the phone. "Just one." Vittoria picked up the
phone and pressed the top button.
"Number one. I bet you one of those Illuminati U.S. dollars you have in your
pocket that this is the Pope's
office. What else would take primary importance for a Swiss Guard commander?"
Langdon did not have time to respond. The guard outside the door started rapping
on the glass with the butt
of his gun. He motioned for her to set down the phone.
Vittoria winked at him. The guard seemed to inflate with rage.
Langdon moved away from the door and turned back to Vittoria. "You damn well
better be right, 'cause
this guy does not look amused!"
"Damn!" she said, listening to the receiver. "A recording."
"Recording?" Langdon demanded. "The Pope has an answering machine?"
"It wasn't the Pope's office," Vittoria said, hanging up. "It was the damn
weekly menu for the Vatican
commissary."
Langdon offered a weak smile to the guard outside who was now glaring angrily
though the glass while he
hailed Olivetti on his walkie-talkie.
38
T he Vatican switchboard is located in the Ufficio di Communicazione behind the
Vatican post office. It
is a relatively small room containing an eight-line Corelco 141 switchboard. The
office handles over 2,000
calls a day, most routed automatically to the recording information system.
Tonight, the sole communications operator on duty sat quietly sipping a cup of
caffeinated tea. He felt
proud to be one of only a handful of employees still allowed inside Vatican City
tonight. Of course the
honor was tainted somewhat by the presence of the Swiss Guards hovering outside
his door. An escort to
the bathroom, the operator thought. Ah, the indignities we endure in the name of
Holy Conclave.
Fortunately, the calls this evening had been light. Or maybe it was not so
fortunate, he thought. World
interest in Vatican events seemed to have dwindled in the last few years. The
number of press calls had
thinned, and even the crazies weren't calling as often. The press office had
hoped tonight's event would
have more of a festive buzz about it. Sadly, though, despite St. Peter's Square
being filled with press trucks,
the vans looked to be mostly standard Italian and Euro press. Only a handful of
global cover-all networks
were there . . . no doubt having sent their giornalisti secundari.
The operator gripped his mug and wondered how long tonight would last. Midnight
or so, he guessed.
Nowadays, most insiders already knew who was favored to become Pope well before
conclave convened,
so the process was more of a three- or four-hour ritual than an actual election.
Of course, last-minute
dissension in the ranks could prolong the ceremony through dawn . . . or beyond.
The conclave of 1831 had
lasted fifty-four days. Not tonight, he told himself; rumor was this conclave
would be a "smoke-watch."
The operator's thoughts evaporated with the buzz of an inside line on his
switchboard. He looked at the
blinking red light and scratched his head. That's odd, he thought. The
zero-line. Who on the inside would be
calling operator information tonight? Who is even inside?
"Città del Vaticano, prego?" he said, picking up the phone.
The voice on the line spoke in rapid Italian. The operator vaguely recognized
the accent as that common to
Swiss Guards-fluent Italian tainted by the Franco-Swiss influence. This caller,
however, was most
definitely not Swiss Guard.
On hearing the woman's voice, the operator stood suddenly, almost spilling his
tea. He shot a look back
down at the line. He had not been mistaken. An internal extension. The call was
from the inside. There must
be some mistake! he thought. A woman inside Vatican City? Tonight?
The woman was speaking fast and furiously. The operator had spent enough years
on the phones to know
when he was dealing with a pazzo. This woman did not sound crazy. She was urgent
but rational. Calm and
efficient. He listened to her request, bewildered.
"Il camerlegno?" the operator said, still trying to figure out where the hell
the call was coming from. "I
cannot possibly connect . . . yes, I am aware he is in the Pope's office but . .
. who are you again? . . . and
you want to warn him of . . ." He listened, more and more unnerved. Everyone is
in danger? How? And
where are you calling from? "Perhaps I should contact the Swiss . . ." The
operator stopped short. "You say
you're where? Where?"
He listened in shock, then made a decision. "Hold, please," he said, putting the
woman on hold before she
could respond. Then he called Commander Olivetti's direct line. There is no way
that woman is really-
The line picked up instantly.
"Per l'amore di Dio!" a familiar woman's voice shouted at him. "Place the damn
call!"
The door of the Swiss Guards' security center hissed open. The guards parted as
Commander Olivetti
entered the room like a rocket. Turning the corner to his office, Olivetti
confirmed what his guard on the
walkie-talkie had just told him; Vittoria Vetra was standing at his desk talking
on the commander's private
telephone.
Che coglioni che ha questa! he thought. The balls on this one!
Livid, he strode to the door and rammed the key into the lock. He pulled open
the door and demanded,
"What are you doing!"
Vittoria ignored him. "Yes," she was saying into the phone. "And I must warn-"
Olivetti ripped the receiver from her hand, and raised it to his ear. "Who the
hell is this!"
For the tiniest of an instant, Olivetti's inelastic posture slumped. "Yes,
camerlegno . . ." he said. "Correct,
signore . . . but questions of security demand . . . of course not . . . I am
holding her here for . . . certainly,
but . . ." He listened. "Yes, sir," he said finally. "I will bring them up
immediately."
39
T he Apostolic Palace is a conglomeration of buildings located near the Sistine
Chapel in the northeast
corner of Vatican City. With a commanding view of St. Peter's Square, the palace
houses both the Papal
Apartments and the Office of the Pope.
Vittoria and Langdon followed in silence as Commander Olivetti led them down a
long rococo corridor, the
muscles in his neck pulsing with rage. After climbing three sets of stairs, they
entered a wide, dimly lit
hallway.
Langdon could not believe the artwork on the walls-mint-condition busts,
tapestries, friezes-works worth
hundreds of thousands of dollars. Two-thirds of the way down the hall they
passed an alabaster fountain.
Olivetti turned left into an alcove and strode to one of the largest doors
Langdon had ever seen.
"Ufficio di Papa," the commander declared, giving Vittoria an acrimonious scowl.
Vittoria didn't flinch.
She reached over Olivetti and knocked loudly on the door.
Office of the Pope, Langdon thought, having difficulty fathoming that he was
standing outside one of the
most sacred rooms in all of world religion.
"Avanti!" someone called from within.
When the door opened, Langdon had to shield his eyes. The sunlight was blinding.
Slowly, the image
before him came into focus.
The Office of the Pope seemed more of a ballroom than an office. Red marble
floors sprawled out in all
directions to walls adorned with vivid frescoes. A colossal chandelier hung
overhead, beyond which a bank
of arched windows offered a stunning panorama of the sun-drenched St. Peter's
Square.
My God, Langdon thought. This is a room with a view.
At the far end of the hall, at a carved desk, a man sat writing furiously.
"Avanti," he called out again,
setting down his pen and waving them over.
Olivetti led the way, his gait military. "Signore," he said apologetically. "No
ho potuto-"
The man cut him off. He stood and studied his two visitors.
The camerlegno was nothing like the images of frail, beatific old men Langdon
usually imagined roaming
the Vatican. He wore no rosary beads or pendants. No heavy robes. He was dressed
instead in a simple
black cassock that seemed to amplify the solidity of his substantial frame. He
looked to be in his latethirties,
indeed a child by Vatican standards. He had a surprisingly handsome
face, a swirl of coarse brown
hair, and almost radiant green eyes that shone as if they were somehow fueled by
the mysteries of the
universe. As the man drew nearer, though, Langdon saw in his eyes a profound
exhaustion-like a soul who
had been through the toughest fifteen days of his life.
"I am Carlo Ventresca," he said, his English perfect. "The late Pope's
camerlegno." His voice was
unpretentious and kind, with only the slightest hint of Italian inflection.
"Vittoria Vetra," she said, stepping forward and offering her hand. "Thank you
for seeing us."
Olivetti twitched as the camerlegno shook Vittoria's hand.
"This is Robert Langdon," Vittoria said. "A religious historian from Harvard
University."
"Padre," Langdon said, in his best Italian accent. He bowed his head as he
extended his hand.
"No, no," the camerlegno insisted, lifting Langdon back up. "His Holiness's
office does not make me holy.
I am merely a priest-a chamberlain serving in a time of need."
Langdon stood upright.
"Please," the camerlegno said, "everyone sit." He arranged some chairs around
his desk. Langdon and
Vittoria sat. Olivetti apparently preferred to stand.
The camerlegno seated himself at the desk, folded his hands, sighed, and eyed
his visitors.
"Signore," Olivetti said. "The woman's attire is my fault. I-"
"Her attire is not what concerns me," the camerlegno replied, sounding too
exhausted to be bothered.
"When the Vatican operator calls me a half hour before I begin conclave to tell
me a woman is calling from
your private office to warn me of some sort of major security threat of which I
have not been informed, that
concerns me."
Olivetti stood rigid, his back arched like a soldier under intense inspection.
Langdon felt hypnotized by the camerlegno's presence. Young and wearied as he
was, the priest had the air
of some mythical hero-radiating charisma and authority.
"Signore," Olivetti said, his tone apologetic but still unyielding. "You should
not concern yourself with
matters of security. You have other responsibilities."
"I am well aware of my other responsibilities. I am also aware that as direttore
intermediario, I have a
responsibility for the safety and well-being of everyone at this conclave. What
is going on here?"
"I have the situation under control."
"Apparently not."
"Father," Langdon interrupted, taking out the crumpled fax and handing it to the
camerlegno, "please."
Commander Olivetti stepped forward, trying to intervene. "Father, please do not
trouble your thoughts
with-"
The camerlegno took the fax, ignoring Olivetti for a long moment. He looked at
the image of the murdered
Leonardo Vetra and drew a startled breath. "What is this?"
"That is my father," Vittoria said, her voice wavering. "He was a priest and a
man of science. He was
murdered last night."
The camerlegno's face softened instantly. He looked up at her. "My dear child.
I'm so sorry." He crossed
himself and looked again at the fax, his eyes seeming to pool with waves of
abhorrence. "Who would . . .
and this burn on his . . ." The camerlegno paused, squinting closer at the
image.
"It says Illuminati," Langdon said. "No doubt you are familiar with the name."
An odd look came across the camerlegno's face. "I have heard the name, yes, but
. . ."
"The Illuminati murdered Leonardo Vetra so they could steal a new technology he
was-"
"Signore," Olivetti interjected. "This is absurd. The Illuminati? This is
clearly some sort of elaborate hoax."
The camerlegno seemed to ponder Olivetti's words. Then he turned and
contemplated Langdon so fully
that Langdon felt the air leave his lungs. "Mr. Langdon, I have spent my life in
the Catholic Church. I am
familiar with the Illuminati lore . . . and the legend of the brandings. And yet
I must warn you, I am a man
of the present tense. Christianity has enough real enemies without resurrecting
ghosts."
"The symbol is authentic," Langdon said, a little too defensively he thought. He
reached over and rotated
the fax for the camerlegno.
The camerlegno fell silent when he saw the symmetry.
"Even modern computers," Langdon added, "have been unable to forge a symmetrical
ambigram of this
word."
The camerlegno folded his hands and said nothing for a long time. "The
Illuminati are dead," he finally
said. "Long ago. That is historical fact."
Langdon nodded. "Yesterday, I would have agreed with you."
"Yesterday?"
"Before today's chain of events. I believe the Illuminati have resurfaced to
make good on an ancient pact."
"Forgive me. My history is rusty. What ancient pact is this?"
Langdon took a deep breath. "The destruction of Vatican City."
"Destroy Vatican City?" The camerlegno looked less frightened than confused.
"But that would be
impossible."
Vittoria shook her head. "I'm afraid we have some more bad news."
40
I s this true?" the camerlegno demanded, looking amazed as he turned from
Vittoria to Olivetti.
"Signore," Olivetti assured, "I'll admit there is some sort of device here. It
is visible on one of our security
monitors, but as for Ms. Vetra's claims as to the power of this substance, I
cannot possibly-"
"Wait a minute," the camerlegno said. "You can see this thing?"
"Yes, signore. On wireless camera #86."
"Then why haven't you recovered it?" The camerlegno's voice echoed anger now.
"Very difficult, signore." Olivetti stood straight as he explained the
situation.
The camerlegno listened, and Vittoria sensed his growing concern. "Are you
certain it is inside Vatican
City?" the camerlegno asked. "Maybe someone took the camera out and is
transmitting from somewhere
else."
"Impossible," Olivetti said. "Our external walls are shielded electronically to
protect our internal
communications. This signal can only be coming from the inside or we would not
be receiving it."
"And I assume," he said, "that you are now looking for this missing camera with
all available resources?"
Olivetti shook his head. "No, signore. Locating that camera could take hundreds
of man hours. We have a
number of other security concerns at the moment, and with all due respect to Ms.
Vetra, this droplet she
talks about is very small. It could not possibly be as explosive as she claims."
Vittoria's patience evaporated. "That droplet is enough to level Vatican City!
Did you even listen to a word
I told you?"
"Ma'am," Olivetti said, his voice like steel, "my experience with explosives is
extensive."
"Your experience is obsolete," she fired back, equally tough. "Despite my
attire, which I realize you find
troublesome, I am a senior level physicist at the world's most advanced
subatomic research facility. I
personally designed the antimatter trap that is keeping that sample from
annihilating right now. And I am
warning you that unless you find that canister in the next six hours, your
guards will have nothing to protect
for the next century but a big hole in the ground."
Olivetti wheeled to the camerlegno, his insect eyes flashing rage. "Signore, I
cannot in good conscience
allow this to go any further. Your time is being wasted by pranksters. The
Illuminati? A droplet that will
destroy us all?"
"Basta," the camerlegno declared. He spoke the word quietly and yet it seemed to
echo across the
chamber. Then there was silence. He continued in a whisper. "Dangerous or not,
Illuminati or no Illuminati,
whatever this thing is, it most certainly should not be inside Vatican City . .
. no less on the eve of the
conclave. I want it found and removed. Organize a search immediately."
Olivetti persisted. "Signore, even if we used all the guards to search the
complex, it could take days to find
this camera. Also, after speaking to Ms. Vetra, I had one of my guards consult
our most advanced ballistics
guide for any mention of this substance called antimatter. I found no mention of
it anywhere. Nothing."
Pompous ass, Vittoria thought. A ballistics guide? Did you try an encyclopedia?
Under A!
Olivetti was still talking. "Signore, if you are suggesting we make a naked-eye
search of the entirety of
Vatican City then I must object."
"Commander." The camerlegno's voice simmered with rage. "May I remind you that
when you address
me, you are addressing this office. I realize you do not take my position
seriously-nonetheless, by law, I am
in charge. If I am not mistaken, the cardinals are now safely within the Sistine
Chapel, and your security
concerns are at a minimum until the conclave breaks. I do not understand why you
are hesitant to look for
this device. If I did not know better it would appear that you are causing this
conclave intentional danger."
Olivetti looked scornful. "How dare you! I have served your Pope for twelve
years! And the Pope before
that for fourteen years! Since 1438 the Swiss Guard have-"
The walkie-talkie on Olivetti's belt squawked loudly, cutting him off.
"Comandante?"
Olivetti snatched it up and pressed the transmitter. "Sto ocupato! Cosa voi!!"
"Scusi," the Swiss Guard on the radio said. "Communications here. I thought you
would want to be
informed that we have received a bomb threat."
Olivetti could not have looked less interested. "So handle it! Run the usual
trace, and write it up."
"We did, sir, but the caller . . ." The guard paused. "I would not trouble you,
commander, except that he
mentioned the substance you just asked me to research. Antimatter."
Everyone in the room exchanged stunned looks.
"He mentioned what?" Olivetti stammered.
"Antimatter, sir. While we were trying to run a trace, I did some additional
research on his claim. The
information on antimatter is . . . well, frankly, it's quite troubling."
"I thought you said the ballistics guide showed no mention of it."
"I found it on-line."
Alleluia, Vittoria thought.
"The substance appears to be quite explosive," the guard said. "It's hard to
imagine this information is
accurate but it says here that pound for pound antimatter carries about a
hundred times more payload than a
nuclear warhead."
Olivetti slumped. It was like watching a mountain crumble. Vittoria's feeling of
triumph was erased by the
look of horror on the camerlegno's face.
"Did you trace the call?" Olivetti stammered.
"No luck. Cellular with heavy encryption. The SAT lines are interfused, so
triangulation is out. The IF
signature suggests he's somewhere in Rome, but there's really no way to trace
him."
"Did he make demands?" Olivetti said, his voice quiet.
"No, sir. Just warned us that there is antimatter hidden inside the complex. He
seemed surprised I didn't
know. Asked me if I'd seen it yet. You'd asked me about antimatter, so I decided
to advise you."
"You did the right thing," Olivetti said. "I'll be down in a minute. Alert me
immediately if he calls back."
There was a moment of silence on the walkie-talkie. "The caller is still on the
line, sir."
Olivetti looked like he'd just been electrocuted. "The line is open?"
"Yes, sir. We've been trying to trace him for ten minutes, getting nothing but
splayed ferreting. He must
know we can't touch him because he refuses to hang up until he speaks to the
camerlegno."
"Patch him through," the camerlegno commanded. "Now!"
Olivetti wheeled. "Father, no. A trained Swiss Guard negotiator is much better
suited to handle this."
"Now!"
Olivetti gave the order.
A moment later, the phone on Camerlegno Ventresca's desk began to ring. The
camerlegno rammed his
finger down on the speaker-phone button. "Who in the name of God do you think
you are?"
41
T he voice emanating from the camerlegno's speaker phone was metallic and cold,
laced with arrogance.
Everyone in the room listened.
Langdon tried to place the accent. Middle Eastern, perhaps?
"I am a messenger of an ancient brotherhood," the voice announced in an alien
cadence. "A brotherhood
you have wronged for centuries. I am a messenger of the Illuminati."
Langdon felt his muscles tighten, the last shreds of doubt withering away. For
an instant he felt the familiar
collision of thrill, privilege, and dead fear that he had experienced when he
first saw the ambigram this
morning.
"What do you want?" the camerlegno demanded.
"I represent men of science. Men who like yourselves are searching for the
answers. Answers to man's
destiny, his purpose, his creator."
"Whoever you are," the camerlegno said, "I-"
"Silenzio. You will do better to listen. For two millennia your church has
dominated the quest for truth.
You have crushed your opposition with lies and prophesies of doom. You have
manipulated the truth to
serve your needs, murdering those whose discoveries did not serve your politics.
Are you surprised you are
the target of enlightened men from around the globe?"
"Enlightened men do not resort to blackmail to further their causes."
"Blackmail?" The caller laughed. "This is not blackmail. We have no demands. The
abolition of the
Vatican is nonnegotiable. We have waited four hundred years for this day. At
midnight, your city will be
destroyed. There is nothing you can do."
Olivetti stormed toward the speaker phone. "Access to this city is impossible!
You could not possibly have
planted explosives in here!"
"You speak with the ignorant devotion of a Swiss Guard. Perhaps even an officer?
Surely you are aware
that for centuries the Illuminati have infiltrated elitist organizations across
the globe. Do you really believe
the Vatican is immune?"
Jesus, Langdon thought, they've got someone on the inside. It was no secret that
infiltration was the
Illuminati trademark of power. They had infiltrated the Masons, major banking
networks, government
bodies. In fact, Churchill had once told reporters that if English spies had
infiltrated the Nazis to the degree
the Illuminati had infiltrated English Parliament, the war would have been over
in one month.
"A transparent bluff," Olivetti snapped. "Your influence cannot possibly extend
so far."
"Why? Because your Swiss Guards are vigilant? Because they watch every corner of
your private world?
How about the Swiss Guards themselves? Are they not men? Do you truly believe
they stake their lives on
a fable about a man who walks on water? Ask yourself how else the canister could
have entered your city.
Or how four of your most precious assets could have disappeared this afternoon."
"Our assets?" Olivetti scowled. "What do you mean?"
"One, two, three, four. You haven't missed them by now?"
"What the hell are you talk-" Olivetti stopped short, his eyes rocketing wide as
though he'd just been
punched in the gut.
"Light dawns," the caller said. "Shall I read their names?"
"What's going on?" the camerlegno said, looking bewildered.
The caller laughed. "Your officer has not yet informed you? How sinful. No
surprise. Such pride. I imagine
the disgrace of telling you the truth . . . that four cardinals he had sworn to
protect seem to have
disappeared . . ."
Olivetti erupted. "Where did you get this information!"
"Camerlegno," the caller gloated, "ask your commander if all your cardinals are
present in the Sistine
Chapel."
The camerlegno turned to Olivetti, his green eyes demanding an explanation.
"Signore," Olivetti whispered in the camerlegno's ear, "it is true that four of
our cardinals have not yet
reported to the Sistine Chapel, but there is no need for alarm. Every one of
them checked into the residence
hall this morning, so we know they are safely inside Vatican City. You yourself
had tea with them only
hours ago. They are simply late for the fellowship preceding conclave. We are
searching, but I'm sure they
just lost track of time and are still out enjoying the grounds."
"Enjoying the grounds?" The calm departed from the camerlegno's voice. "They
were due in the chapel
over an hour ago!"
Langdon shot Vittoria a look of amazement. Missing cardinals? So that's what
they were looking for
downstairs?
"Our inventory," the caller said, "you will find quite convincing. There is
Cardinal Lamassé from Paris,
Cardinal Guidera from Barcelona, Cardinal Ebner from Frankfurt . . ."
Olivetti seemed to shrink smaller and smaller after each name was read.
The caller paused, as though taking special pleasure in the final name. "And
from Italy . . . Cardinal
Baggia."
The camerlegno loosened like a tall ship that had just run sheets first into a
dead calm. His frock billowed,
and he collapsed in his chair. "I preferiti," he whispered. "The four favorites
. . . including Baggia . . . the
most likely successor as Supreme Pontiff . . . how is it possible?"
Langdon had read enough about modern papal elections to understand the look of
desperation on the
camerlegno's face. Although technically any cardinal under eighty years old
could become Pope, only a
very few had the respect necessary to command a two-thirds majority in the
ferociously partisan balloting
procedure. They were known as the preferiti. And they were all gone.
Sweat dripped from the camerlegno's brow. "What do you intend with these men?"
"What do you think I intend? I am a descendant of the Hassassin."
Langdon felt a shiver. He knew the name well. The church had made some deadly
enemies through the
years-the Hassassin, the Knights Templar, armies that had been either hunted by
the Vatican or betrayed by
them.
"Let the cardinals go," the camerlegno said. "Isn't threatening to destroy the
City of God enough?"
"Forget your four cardinals. They are lost to you. Be assured their deaths will
be remembered though . . . by
millions. Every martyr's dream. I will make them media luminaries. One by one.
By midnight the
Illuminati will have everyone's attention. Why change the world if the world is
not watching? Public
killings have an intoxicating horror about them, don't they? You proved that
long ago . . . the inquisition,
the torture of the Knights Templar, the Crusades." He paused. "And of course, la
purga."
The camerlegno was silent.
"Do you not recall la purga?" the caller asked. "Of course not, you are a child.
Priests are poor historians,
anyway. Perhaps because their history shames them?"
"La purga," Langdon heard himself say. "Sixteen sixty-eight. The church branded
four Illuminati scientists
with the symbol of the cross. To purge their sins."
"Who is speaking?" the voice demanded, sounding more intrigued than concerned.
"Who else is there?"
Langdon felt shaky. "My name is not important," he said, trying to keep his
voice from wavering. Speaking
to a living Illuminatus was disorienting for him . . . like speaking to George
Washington. "I am an
academic who has studied the history of your brotherhood."
"Superb," the voice replied. "I am pleased there are still those alive who
remember the crimes against us."
"Most of us think you are dead."
"A misconception the brotherhood has worked hard to promote. What else do you
know of la purga?"
Langdon hesitated. What else do I know? That this whole situation is insanity,
that's what I know! "After
the brandings, the scientists were murdered, and their bodies were dropped in
public locations around
Rome as a warning to other scientists not to join the Illuminati."
"Yes. So we shall do the same. Quid pro quo. Consider it symbolic retribution
for our slain brothers. Your
four cardinals will die, one every hour starting at eight. By midnight the whole
world will be enthralled."
Langdon moved toward the phone. "You actually intend to brand and kill these
four men?"
"History repeats itself, does it not? Of course, we will be more elegant and
bold than the church was. They
killed privately, dropping bodies when no one was looking. It seems so
cowardly."
"What are you saying?" Langdon asked. "That you are going to brand and kill
these men in public?"
"Very good. Although it depends what you consider public. I realize not many
people go to church
anymore."
Langdon did a double take. "You're going to kill them in churches?"
"A gesture of kindness. Enabling God to command their souls to heaven more
expeditiously. It seems only
right. Of course the press will enjoy it too, I imagine."
"You're bluffing," Olivetti said, the cool back in his voice. "You cannot kill a
man in a church and expect
to get away with it."
"Bluffing? We move among your Swiss Guard like ghosts, remove four of your
cardinals from within your
walls, plant a deadly explosive at the heart of your most sacred shrine, and you
think this is a bluff? As the
killings occur and the victims are found, the media will swarm. By midnight the
world will know the
Illuminati cause."
"And if we stake guards in every church?" Olivetti said.
The caller laughed. "I fear the prolific nature of your religion will make that
a trying task. Have you not
counted lately? There are over four hundred Catholic churches in Rome.
Cathedrals, chapels, tabernacles,
abbeys, monasteries, convents, parochial schools . . ."
Olivetti's face remained hard.
"In ninety minutes it begins," the caller said with a note of finality. "One an
hour. A mathematical
progression of death. Now I must go."
"Wait!" Langdon demanded. "Tell me about the brands you intend to use on these
men."
The killer sounded amused. "I suspect you know what the brands will be already.
Or perhaps you are a
skeptic? You will see them soon enough. Proof the ancient legends are true."
Langdon felt light-headed. He knew exactly what the man was claiming. Langdon
pictured the brand on
Leonardo Vetra's chest. Illuminati folklore spoke of five brands in all. Four
brands are left, Langdon
thought, and four missing cardinals.
"I am sworn," the camerlegno said, "to bring a new Pope tonight. Sworn by God."
"Camerlegno," the caller said, "the world does not need a new Pope. After
midnight he will have nothing to
rule over but a pile of rubble. The Catholic Church is finished. Your run on
earth is done."
Silence hung.
The camerlegno looked sincerely sad. "You are misguided. A church is more than
mortar and stone. You
cannot simply erase two thousand years of faith . . . any faith. You cannot
crush faith simply by removing
its earthly manifestations. The Catholic Church will continue with or without
Vatican City."
"A noble lie. But a lie all the same. We both know the truth. Tell me, why is
Vatican City a walled
citadel?"
"Men of God live in a dangerous world," the camerlegno said.
"How young are you? The Vatican is a fortress because the Catholic Church holds
half of its equity inside
its walls-rare paintings, sculpture, devalued jewels, priceless books . . . then
there is the gold bullion and
the real estate deeds inside the Vatican Bank vaults. Inside estimates put the
raw value of Vatican City at
48.5 billion dollars. Quite a nest egg you're sitting on. Tomorrow it will be
ash. Liquidated assets as it
were. You will be bankrupt. Not even men of cloth can work for nothing."
The accuracy of the statement seemed to be reflected in Olivetti's and the
camerlegno's shell-shocked
looks. Langdon wasn't sure what was more amazing, that the Catholic Church had
that kind of money, or
that the Illuminati somehow knew about it.
The camerlegno sighed heavily. "Faith, not money, is the backbone of this
church."
"More lies," the caller said. "Last year you spent 183 million dollars trying to
support your struggling
dioceses worldwide. Church attendance is at an all-time low-down forty-six
percent in the last decade.
Donations are half what they were only seven years ago. Fewer and fewer men are
entering the seminary.
Although you will not admit it, your church is dying. Consider this a chance to
go out with a bang."
Olivetti stepped forward. He seemed less combative now, as if he now sensed the
reality facing him. He
looked like a man searching for an out. Any out. "And what if some of that
bullion went to fund your
cause?"
"Do not insult us both."
"We have money."
"As do we. More than you can fathom."
Langdon flashed on the alleged Illuminati fortunes, the ancient wealth of the
Bavarian stone masons, the
Rothschilds, the Bilderbergers, the legendary Illuminati Diamond.
"I preferiti," the camerlegno said, changing the subject. His voice was
pleading. "Spare them. They are
old. They-"
"They are virgin sacrifices." The caller laughed. "Tell me, do you think they
are really virgins? Will the
little lambs squeal when they die? Sacrifici vergini nell' altare di scienza."
The camerlegno was silent for a long time. "They are men of faith," he finally
said. "They do not fear
death."
The caller sneered. "Leonardo Vetra was a man of faith, and yet I saw fear in
his eyes last night. A fear I
removed."
Vittoria, who had been silent, was suddenly airborne, her body taut with hatred.
"Asino! He was my
father!"
A cackle echoed from the speaker. "Your father? What is this? Vetra has a
daughter? You should know
your father whimpered like a child at the end. Pitiful really. A pathetic man."
Vittoria reeled as if knocked backward by the words. Langdon reached for her,
but she regained her balance
and fixed her dark eyes on the phone. "I swear on my life, before this night is
over, I will find you." Her
voice sharpened like a laser. "And when I do . . ."
The caller laughed coarsely. "A woman of spirit. I am aroused. Perhaps before
this night is over, I will find
you. And when I do . . ."
The words hung like a blade. Then he was gone.
42
C ardinal Mortati was sweating now in his black robe. Not only was the Sistine
Chapel starting to feel
like a sauna, but conclave was scheduled to begin in twenty minutes, and there
was still no word on the
four missing cardinals. In their absence, the initial whispers of confusion
among the other cardinals had
turned to outspoken anxiety.
Mortati could not imagine where the truant men could be. With the camerlegno
perhaps? He knew the
camerlegno had held the traditional private tea for the four preferiti earlier
that afternoon, but that had been
hours ago. Were they ill? Something they ate? Mortati doubted it. Even on the
verge of death the preferiti
would be here. It was once in a lifetime, usually never, that a cardinal had the
chance to be elected Supreme
Pontiff, and by Vatican Law the cardinal had to be inside the Sistine Chapel
when the vote took place.
Otherwise, he was ineligible.
Although there were four preferiti, few cardinals had any doubt who the next
Pope would be. The past
fifteen days had seen a blizzard of faxes and phone calls discussing potential
candidates. As was the
custom, four names had been chosen as preferiti, each of them fulfilling the
unspoken requisites for
becoming Pope:
Multilingual in Italian, Spanish, and English.
No skeletons in his closet.
Between sixty-five and eighty years old.
As usual, one of the preferiti had risen above the others as the man the college
proposed to elect. Tonight
that man was Cardinal Aldo Baggia from Milan. Baggia's untainted record of
service, combined with
unparalleled language skills and the ability to communicate the essence of
spirituality, had made him the
clear favorite.
So where the devil is he? Mortati wondered.
Mortati was particularly unnerved by the missing cardinals because the task of
supervising this conclave
had fallen to him. A week ago, the College of Cardinals had unanimously chosen
Mortati for the office
known as The Great Elector-the conclave's internal master of ceremonies. Even
though the camerlegno
was the church's ranking official, the camerlegno was only a priest and had
little familiarity with the
complex election process, so one cardinal was selected to oversee the ceremony
from within the Sistine
Chapel.
Cardinals often joked that being appointed The Great Elector was the cruelest
honor in Christendom. The
appointment made one ineligible as a candidate during the election, and it also
required one spend many
days prior to conclave poring over the pages of the Universi Dominici Gregis
reviewing the subtleties of
conclave's arcane rituals to ensure the election was properly administered.
Mortati held no grudge, though. He knew he was the logical choice. Not only was
he the senior cardinal,
but he had also been a confidant of the late Pope, a fact that elevated his
esteem. Although Mortati was
technically still within the legal age window for election, he was getting a bit
old to be a serious candidate.
At seventy-nine years old he had crossed the unspoken threshold beyond which the
college no longer
trusted one's health to withstand the rigorous schedule of the papacy. A Pope
usually worked fourteen-hour
days, seven days a week, and died of exhaustion in an average of 6.3 years. The
inside joke was that
accepting the papacy was a cardinal's "fastest route to heaven."
Mortati, many believed, could have been Pope in his younger days had he not been
so broad-minded. When
it came to pursuing the papacy, there was a Holy Trinity-Conservative.
Conservative. Conservative.
Mortati had always found it pleasantly ironic that the late Pope, God rest his
soul, had revealed himself as
surprisingly liberal once he had taken office. Perhaps sensing the modern world
progressing away from the
church, the Pope had made overtures, softening the church's position on the
sciences, even donating money
to selective scientific causes. Sadly, it had been political suicide.
Conservative Catholics declared the Pope
"senile," while scientific purists accused him of trying to spread the church's
influence where it did not
belong.
"So where are they?"
Mortati turned.
One of the cardinals was tapping him nervously on the shoulder. "You know where
they are, don't you?"
Mortati tried not to show too much concern. "Perhaps still with the camerlegno."
"At this hour? That would be highly unorthodox!" The cardinal frowned
mistrustingly. "Perhaps the
camerlegno lost track of time?"
Mortati sincerely doubted it, but he said nothing. He was well aware that most
cardinals did not much care
for the camerlegno, feeling he was too young to serve the Pope so closely.
Mortati suspected much of the
cardinals' dislike was jealousy, and Mortati actually admired the young man,
secretly applauding the late
Pope's selection for chamberlain. Mortati saw only conviction when he looked in
the camerlegno's eyes,
and unlike many of the cardinals, the camerlegno put church and faith before
petty politics. He was truly a
man of God.
Throughout his tenure, the camerlegno's steadfast devotion had become legendary.
Many attributed it to
the miraculous event in his childhood . . . an event that would have left a
permanent impression on any
man's heart. The miracle and wonder of it, Mortati thought, often wishing his
own childhood had presented
an event that fostered that kind of doubtless faith.
Unfortunately for the church, Mortati knew, the camerlegno would never become
Pope in his elder years.
Attaining the papacy required a certain amount of political ambition, something
the young camerlegno
apparently lacked; he had refused his Pope's offers for higher clerical stations
many times, saying he
preferred to serve the church as a simple man.
"What next?" The cardinal tapped Mortati, waiting.
Mortati looked up. "I'm sorry?"
"They're late! What shall we do!"
"What can we do?" Mortati replied. "We wait. And have faith."
Looking entirely unsatisfied with Mortati's response, the cardinal shrunk back
into the shadows.
Mortati stood a moment, dabbing his temples and trying to clear his mind.
Indeed, what shall we do? He
gazed past the altar up to Michelangelo's renowned fresco, "The Last Judgment."
The painting did nothing
to soothe his anxiety. It was a horrifying, fifty-foot-tall depiction of Jesus
Christ separating mankind into
the righteous and sinners, casting the sinners into hell. There was flayed
flesh, burning bodies, and even
one of Michelangelo's rivals sitting in hell wearing ass's ears. Guy de
Maupassant had once written that the
painting looked like something painted for a carnival wrestling booth by an
ignorant coal heaver.
Cardinal Mortati had to agree.
43
L angdon stood motionless at the Pope's bulletproof window and gazed down at the
bustle of media
trailers in St. Peter's Square. The eerie phone conversation had left him
feeling turgid . . . distended
somehow. Not himself.
The Illuminati, like a serpent from the forgotten depths of history, had risen
and wrapped themselves
around an ancient foe. No demands. No negotiation. Just retribution. Demonically
simple. Squeezing. A