Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
stood in the raging wind, gazing down at the lights of Rome below. Thirty-two
seconds.
And then he made the choice.
The unbelievable choice . . .
With no parachute, Robert Langdon had jumped out the door. As the night
swallowed his tumbling body,
the helicopter seemed to rocket off above him, the sound of its rotors
evaporating in the deafening rush of
his own free fall.
As he plummeted toward earth, Robert Langdon felt something he had not
experienced since his years on
the high dive-the inexorable pull of gravity during a dead drop. The faster he
fell, the harder the earth
seemed to pull, sucking him down. This time, however, the drop was not fifty
feet into a pool. The drop
was thousands of feet into a city-an endless expanse of pavement and concrete.
Somewhere in the torrent of wind and desperation, Kohler's voice echoed from the
grave . . . words he had
spoken earlier this morning standing at CERN's free-fall tube. One square yard
of drag will slow a falling
body almost twenty percent. Twenty percent, Langdon now realized, was not even
close to what one would
need to survive a fall like this. Nonetheless, more out of paralysis than hope,
he clenched in his hands the
sole object he had grabbed from the chopper on his way out the door. It was an
odd memento, but it was
one that for a fleeting instant had given him hope.
The windshield tarp had been lying in the back of the helicopter. It was a
concave rectangle-about four
yards by two-like a huge fitted sheet . . . the crudest approximation of a
parachute imaginable. It had no
harness, only bungie loops at either end for fastening it to the curvature of
the windshield. Langdon had
grabbed it, slid his hands through the loops, held on, and leapt out into the
void.
His last great act of youthful defiance.
No illusions of life beyond this moment.
Langdon fell like a rock. Feet first. Arms raised. His hands gripping the loops.
The tarp billowed like a
mushroom overhead. The wind tore past him violently.
As he plummeted toward earth, there was a deep explosion somewhere above him. It
seemed farther off
than he had expected. Almost instantly, the shock wave hit. He felt the breath
crushed from his lungs.
There was a sudden warmth in the air all around him. He fought to hold on. A
wall of heat raced down
from above. The top of the tarp began to smolder . . . but held.
Langdon rocketed downward, on the edge of a billowing shroud of light, feeling
like a surfer trying to
outrun a thousand-foot tidal wave. Then suddenly, the heat receded.
He was falling again through the dark coolness.
For an instant, Langdon felt hope. A moment later, though, that hope faded like
the withdrawing heat
above. Despite his straining arms assuring him that the tarp was slowing his
fall, the wind still tore past his
body with deafening velocity. Langdon had no doubt he was still moving too fast
to survive the fall. He
would be crushed when he hit the ground.
Mathematical figures tumbled through his brain, but he was too numb to make
sense of them . . . one
square yard of drag . . . 20 percent reduction of speed. All Langdon could
figure was that the tarp over his
head was big enough to slow him more than 20 percent. Unfortunately, though, he
could tell from the wind
whipping past him that whatever good the tarp was doing was not enough. He was
still falling fast . . . there
would be no surviving the impact on the waiting sea of concrete.
Beneath him, the lights of Rome spread out in all directions. The city looked
like an enormous starlit sky
that Langdon was falling into. The perfect expanse of stars was marred only by a
dark strip that split the
city in two-a wide, unlit ribbon that wound through the dots of light like a fat
snake. Langdon stared down
at the meandering swatch of black.
Suddenly, like the surging crest of an unexpected wave, hope filled him again.
With almost maniacal vigor, Langdon yanked down hard with his right hand on the
canopy. The tarp
suddenly flapped louder, billowing, cutting right to find the path of least
resistance. Langdon felt himself
drifting sideways. He pulled again, harder, ignoring the pain in his palm. The
tarp flared, and Langdon
sensed his body sliding laterally. Not much. But some! He looked beneath him
again, to the sinuous serpent
of black. It was off to the right, but he was still pretty high. Had he waited
too long? He pulled with all his
might and accepted somehow that it was now in the hands of God. He focused hard
on the widest part of
the serpent and . . . for the first time in his life, prayed for a miracle.
The rest was a blur.
The darkness rushing up beneath him . . . the diving instincts coming back . . .
the reflexive locking of his
spine and pointing of the toes . . . the inflating of his lungs to protect his
vital organs . . . the flexing of his
legs into a battering ram . . . and finally . . . the thankfulness that the
winding Tiber River was raging . . .
making its waters frothy and air-filled . . . and three times softer than
standing water.
Then there was impact . . . and blackness.
It had been the thundering sound of the flapping canopy that drew the group's
eyes away from the fireball
in the sky. The sky above Rome had been filled with sights tonight . . . a
skyrocketing helicopter, an
enormous explosion, and now this strange object that had plummeted into the
churning waters of the Tiber
River, directly off the shore of the river's tiny island, Isola Tiberina.
Ever since the island had been used to quarantine the sick during the Roman
plague of A.D. 1656, it had
been thought to have mystic healing properties. For this reason, the island had
later become the site for
Rome's Hospital Tiberina.
The body was battered when they pulled it onto shore. The man still had a faint
pulse, which was amazing,
they thought. They wondered if it was Isola Tiberina's mythical reputation for
healing that had somehow
kept his heart pumping. Minutes later, when the man began coughing and slowly
regained consciousness,
the group decided the island must indeed be magical.
126
C ardinal Mortati knew there were no words in any language that could have added
to the mystery of
this moment. The silence of the vision over St. Peter's Square sang louder than
any chorus of angels.
As he stared up at Camerlegno Ventresca, Mortati felt the paralyzing collision
of his heart and mind. The
vision seemed real, tangible. And yet . . . how could it be? Everyone had seen
the camerlegno get in the
helicopter. They had all witnessed the ball of light in the sky. And now,
somehow, the camerlegno stood
high above them on the rooftop terrace. Transported by angels? Reincarnated by
the hand of God?
This is impossible . . .
Mortati's heart wanted nothing more than to believe, but his mind cried out for
reason. And yet all around
him, the cardinals stared up, obviously seeing what he was seeing, paralyzed
with wonder.
It was the camerlegno. There was no doubt. But he looked different somehow.
Divine. As if he had been
purified. A spirit? A man? His white flesh shone in the spotlights with an
incorporeal weightlessness.
In the square there was crying, cheering, spontaneous applause. A group of nuns
fell to their knees and
wailed saetas. A pulsing grew from in the crowd. Suddenly, the entire square was
chanting the
camerlegno's name. The cardinals, some with tears rolling down their faces,
joined in. Mortati looked
around him and tried to comprehend. Is this really happening?
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca stood on the rooftop terrace of St. Peter's Basilica
and looked down over the
multitudes of people staring up at him. Was he awake or dreaming? He felt
transformed, otherworldly. He
wondered if it was his body or just his spirit that had floated down from heaven
toward the soft, darkened
expanse of the Vatican City Gardens . . . alighting like a silent angel on the
deserted lawns, his black
parachute shrouded from the madness by the towering shadow of St. Peter's
Basilica. He wondered if it
was his body or his spirit that had possessed the strength to climb the ancient
Stairway of Medallions to the
rooftop terrace where he now stood.
He felt as light as a ghost.
Although the people below were chanting his name, he knew it was not him they
were cheering. They were
cheering from impulsive joy, the same kind of joy he felt every day of his life
as he pondered the Almighty.
They were experiencing what each of them had always longed for . . . an
assurance of the beyond . . . a
substantiation of the power of the Creator.
Camerlegno Ventresca had prayed all his life for this moment, and still, even he
could not fathom that God
had found a way to make it manifest. He wanted to cry out to them. Your God is a
living God! Behold the
miracles all around you!
He stood there a while, numb and yet feeling more than he had ever felt. When,
at last, the spirit moved
him, he bowed his head and stepped back from the edge.
Alone now, he knelt on the roof, and prayed.
127
T he images around him blurred, drifting in and out. Langdon's eyes slowly began
to focus. His legs
ached, and his body felt like it had been run over by a truck. He was lying on
his side on the ground.
Something stunk, like bile. He could still hear the incessant sound of lapping
water. It no longer sounded
peaceful to him. There were other sounds too-talking close around him. He saw
blurry white forms. Were
they all wearing white? Langdon decided he was either in an asylum or heaven.
From the burning in his
throat, Langdon decided it could not be heaven.
"He's finished vomiting," one man said in Italian. "Turn him." The voice was
firm and professional.
Langdon felt hands slowly rolling him onto his back. His head swam. He tried to
sit up, but the hands
gently forced him back down. His body submitted. Then Langdon felt someone going
through his pockets,
removing items.
Then he passed out cold.
Dr. Jacobus was not a religious man; the science of medicine had bred that from
him long ago. And yet, the
events in Vatican City tonight had put his systematic logic to the test. Now
bodies are falling from the sky?
Dr. Jacobus felt the pulse of the bedraggled man they had just pulled from the
Tiber River. The doctor
decided that God himself had hand-delivered this one to safety. The concussion
of hitting the water had
knocked the victim unconscious, and if it had not been for Jacobus and his crew
standing out on the shore
watching the spectacle in the sky, this falling soul would surely have gone
unnoticed and drowned.
"É Americano," a nurse said, going through the man's wallet after they pulled
him to dry land.
American? Romans often joked that Americans had gotten so abundant in Rome that
hamburgers should
become the official Italian food. But Americans falling from the sky? Jacobus
flicked a penlight in the
man's eyes, testing his dilation. "Sir? Can you hear me? Do you know where you
are?"
The man was unconscious again. Jacobus was not surprised. The man had vomited a
lot of water after
Jacobus had performed CPR.
"Si chiama Robert Langdon," the nurse said, reading the man's driver's license.
The group assembled on the dock all stopped short.
"Impossibile!" Jacobus declared. Robert Langdon was the man from the
television-the American professor
who had been helping the Vatican. Jacobus had seen Mr. Langdon, only minutes
ago, getting into a
helicopter in St. Peter's Square and flying miles up into the air. Jacobus and
the others had run out to the
dock to witness the antimatter explosion-a tremendous sphere of light like
nothing any of them had ever
seen. How could this be the same man!
"It's him!" the nurse exclaimed, brushing his soaked hair back. "And I recognize
his tweed coat!"
Suddenly someone was yelling from the hospital entryway. It was one of the
patients. She was screaming,
going mad, holding her portable radio to the sky and praising God. Apparently
Camerlegno Ventresca had
just miraculously appeared on the roof of the Vatican.
Dr. Jacobus decided, when his shift got off at 8 A.M., he was going straight to
church.
The lights over Langdon's head were brighter now, sterile. He was on some kind
of examination table. He
smelled astringents, strange chemicals. Someone had just given him an injection,
and they had removed his
clothes.
Definitely not gypsies, he decided in his semiconscious delirium. Aliens,
perhaps? Yes, he had heard about
things like this. Fortunately these beings would not harm him. All they wanted
were his-
"Not on your life!" Langdon sat bolt upright, eyes flying open.
"Attento!" one of the creatures yelled, steadying him. His badge read Dr.
Jacobus. He looked remarkably
human.
Langdon stammered, "I . . . thought . . ."
"Easy, Mr. Langdon. You're in a hospital."
The fog began to lift. Langdon felt a wave of relief. He hated hospitals, but
they certainly beat aliens
harvesting his testicles.
"My name is Dr. Jacobus," the man said. He explained what had just happened.
"You are very lucky to be
alive."
Langdon did not feel lucky. He could barely make sense of his own memories . . .
the helicopter . . . the
camerlegno. His body ached everywhere. They gave him some water, and he rinsed
out his mouth. They
placed a new gauze on his palm.
"Where are my clothes?" Langdon asked. He was wearing a paper robe.
One of the nurses motioned to a dripping wad of shredded khaki and tweed on the
counter. "They were
soaked. We had to cut them off you."
Langdon looked at his shredded Harris tweed and frowned.
"You had some Kleenex in your pocket," the nurse said.
It was then that Langdon saw the ravaged shreds of parchment clinging all over
the lining of his jacket. The
folio from Galileo's Diagramma. The last copy on earth had just dissolved. He
was too numb to know how
to react. He just stared.
"We saved your personal items." She held up a plastic bin. "Wallet, camcorder,
and pen. I dried the
camcorder off the best I could."
"I don't own a camcorder."
The nurse frowned and held out the bin. Langdon looked at the contents. Along
with his wallet and pen was
a tiny Sony RUVI camcorder. He recalled it now. Kohler had handed it to him and
asked him to give it to
the media.
"We found it in your pocket. I think you'll need a new one, though." The nurse
flipped open the two-inch
screen on the back. "Your viewer is cracked." Then she brightened. "The sound
still works, though.
Barely." She held the device up to her ear. "Keeps playing something over and
over." She listened a
moment and then scowled, handing it to Langdon. "Two guys arguing, I think."
Puzzled, Langdon took the camcorder and held it to his ear. The voices were
pinched and metallic, but they
were discernible. One close. One far away. Langdon recognized them both.
Sitting there in his paper gown, Langdon listened in amazement to the
conversation. Although he couldn't
see what was happening, when he heard the shocking finale, he was thankful he
had been spared the visual.
My God!
As the conversation began playing again from the beginning, Langdon lowered the
camcorder from his ear
and sat in appalled mystification. The antimatter . . . the helicopter . . .
Langdon's mind now kicked into
gear.
But that means . . .
He wanted to vomit again. With a rising fury of disorientation and rage, Langdon
got off the table and
stood on shaky legs.
"Mr. Langdon!" the doctor said, trying to stop him.
"I need some clothes," Langdon demanded, feeling the draft on his rear from the
backless gown.
"But, you need to rest."
"I'm checking out. Now. I need some clothes."
"But, sir, you-"
"Now!"
Everyone exchanged bewildered looks. "We have no clothes," the doctor said.
"Perhaps tomorrow a friend
could bring you some."
Langdon drew a slow patient breath and locked eyes with the doctor. "Dr.
Jacobus, I am walking out your
door right now. I need clothes. I am going to Vatican City. One does not go to
Vatican City with one's ass
hanging out. Do I make myself clear?"
Dr. Jacobus swallowed hard. "Get this man something to wear."
When Langdon limped out of Hospital Tiberina, he felt like an overgrown Cub
Scout. He was wearing a
blue paramedic's jumpsuit that zipped up the front and was adorned with cloth
badges that apparently
depicted his numerous qualifications.
The woman accompanying him was heavyset and wore a similar suit. The doctor had
assured Langdon she
would get him to the Vatican in record time.
"Molto traffico," Langdon said, reminding her that the area around the Vatican
was packed with cars and
people.
The woman looked unconcerned. She pointed proudly to one of her patches. "Sono
conducente di
ambulanza."
Seite
"Ambulanza?" That explained it. Langdon felt like he could use an ambulance
ride.
The woman led him around the side of the building. On an outcropping over the
water was a cement deck
where her vehicle sat waiting. When Langdon saw the vehicle he stopped in his
tracks. It was an aging
medevac chopper. The hull read Aero-Ambulanza.
He hung his head.
The woman smiled. "Fly Vatican City. Very fast."
128
T he College of Cardinals bristled with ebullience and electricity as they
streamed back into the Sistine
Chapel. In contrast, Mortati felt in himself a rising confusion he thought might
lift him off the floor and
carry him away. He believed in the ancient miracles of the Scriptures, and yet
what he had just witnessed in
person was something he could not possibly comprehend. After a lifetime of
devotion, seventy-nine years,
Mortati knew these events should ignite in him a pious exuberance . . . a
fervent and living faith. And yet
all he felt was a growing spectral unease. Something did not feel right.
"Signore Mortati!" a Swiss Guard yelled, running down the hall. "We have gone to
the roof as you asked.
The camerlegno is . . . flesh! He is a true man! He is not a spirit! He is
exactly as we knew him!"
"Did he speak to you?"
"He kneels in silent prayer! We are afraid to touch him!"
Mortati was at a loss. "Tell him . . . his cardinals await."
"Signore, because he is a man . . ." the guard hesitated.
"What is it?"
"His chest . . . he is burned. Should we bind his wounds? He must be in pain."
Mortati considered it. Nothing in his lifetime of service to the church had
prepared him for this situation.
"He is a man, so serve him as a man. Bathe him. Bind his wounds. Dress him in
fresh robes. We await his
arrival in the Sistine Chapel."
The guard ran off.
Mortati headed for the chapel. The rest of the cardinals were inside now. As he
walked down the hall, he
saw Vittoria Vetra slumped alone on a bench at the foot of the Royal Staircase.
He could see the pain and
loneliness of her loss and wanted to go to her, but he knew it would have to
wait. He had work to do . . .
although he had no idea what that work could possibly be.
Mortati entered the chapel. There was a riotous excitement. He closed the door.
God help me.
Hospital Tiberina's twin-rotor Aero-Ambulanza circled in behind Vatican City,
and Langdon clenched his
teeth, swearing to God this was the very last helicopter ride of his life.
After convincing the pilot that the rules governing Vatican airspace were the
least of the Vatican's concerns
right now, he guided her in, unseen, over the rear wall, and landed them on the
Vatican's helipad.
"Grazie," he said, lowering himself painfully onto the ground. She blew him a
kiss and quickly took off,
disappearing back over the wall and into the night.
Langdon exhaled, trying to clear his head, hoping to make sense of what he was
about to do. With the
camcorder in hand, he boarded the same golf cart he had ridden earlier that day.
It had not been charged,
and the battery-meter registered close to empty. Langdon drove without
headlights to conserve power.
He also preferred no one see him coming.
At the back of the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati stood in a daze as he
watched the pandemonium before
him.
"It was a miracle!" one of the cardinals shouted. "The work of God!"
"Yes!" others exclaimed. "God has made His will manifest!"
"The camerlegno will be our Pope!" another shouted. "He is not a cardinal, but
God has sent a miraculous
sign!"
"Yes!" someone agreed. "The laws of conclave are man's laws. God's will is
before us! I call for a
balloting immediately!"
"A balloting?" Mortati demanded, moving toward them. "I believe that is my job."
Everyone turned.
Mortati could sense the cardinals studying him. They seemed distant, at a loss,
offended by his sobriety.
Mortati longed to feel his heart swept up in the miraculous exultation he saw in
the faces around him. But
he was not. He felt an inexplicable pain in his soul . . . an aching sadness he
could not explain. He had
vowed to guide these proceedings with purity of soul, and this hesitancy was
something he could not deny.
"My friends," Mortati said, stepping to the altar. His voice did not seem his
own. "I suspect I will struggle
for the rest of my days with the meaning of what I have witnessed tonight. And
yet, what you are
suggesting regarding the camerlegno . . . it cannot possibly be God's will."
The room fell silent.
"How . . . can you say that?" one of the cardinals finally demanded. "The
camerlegno saved the church.
God spoke to the camerlegno directly! The man survived death itself! What sign
do we need!"
"The camerlegno is coming to us now," Mortati said. "Let us wait. Let us hear
him before we have a
balloting. There may be an explanation."
"An explanation?"
"As your Great Elector, I have vowed to uphold the laws of conclave. You are no
doubt aware that by Holy
Law the camerlegno is ineligible for election to the papacy. He is not a
cardinal. He is a priest . . . a
chamberlain. There is also the question of his inadequate age." Mortati felt the
stares hardening. "By even
allowing a balloting, I would be requesting that you endorse a man who Vatican
Law proclaims ineligible. I
would be asking each of you to break a sacred oath."
"But what happened here tonight," someone stammered, "it certainly transcends
our laws!"
"Does it?" Mortati boomed, not even knowing now where his words were coming
from. "Is it God's will
that we discard the rules of the church? Is it God's will that we abandon reason
and give ourselves over to
frenzy?"
"But did you not see what we saw?" another challenged angrily. "How can you
presume to question that
kind of power!"
Mortati's voice bellowed now with a resonance he had never known. "I am not
questioning God's power! It
is God who gave us reason and circumspection! It is God we serve by exercising
prudence!"
129
I n the hallway outside the Sistine Chapel, Vittoria Vetra sat benumbed on a
bench at the foot of the
Royal Staircase. When she saw the figure coming through the rear door, she
wondered if she were seeing
another spirit. He was bandaged, limping, and wearing some kind of medical suit.
She stood . . . unable to believe the vision. "Ro . . . bert?"
He never answered. He strode directly to her and wrapped her in his arms. When
he pressed his lips to hers,
it was an impulsive, longing kiss filled with thankfulness.
Vittoria felt the tears coming. "Oh, God . . . oh, thank God . . ."
He kissed her again, more passionately, and she pressed against him, losing
herself in his embrace. Their
bodies locked, as if they had known each other for years. She forgot the fear
and pain. She closed her eyes,
weightless in the moment.
"It is God's will!" someone was yelling, his voice echoing in the Sistine
Chapel. "Who but the chosen one
could have survived that diabolical explosion?"
"Me," a voice reverberated from the back of the chapel.
Mortati and the others turned in wonder at the bedraggled form coming up the
center aisle. "Mr. . . .
Langdon?"
Without a word, Langdon walked slowly to the front of the chapel. Vittoria Vetra
entered too. Then two
guards hurried in, pushing a cart with a large television on it. Langdon waited
while they plugged it in,
facing the cardinals. Then Langdon motioned for the guards to leave. They did,
closing the door behind
them.
Now it was only Langdon, Vittoria, and the cardinals. Langdon plugged the Sony
RUVI's output into the
television. Then he pressed PLAY.
The television blared to life.
The scene that materialized before the cardinals revealed the Pope's office. The
video had been awkwardly
filmed, as if by hidden camera. Off center on the screen the camerlegno stood in
the dimness, in front of a
fire. Although he appeared to be talking directly to the camera, it quickly
became evident that he was
speaking to someone else-whoever was making this video. Langdon told them the
video was filmed by
Maximilian Kohler, the director of CERN. Only an hour ago Kohler had secretly
recorded his meeting with
the camerlegno by using a tiny camcorder covertly mounted under the arm of his
wheelchair.
Mortati and the cardinals watched in bewilderment. Although the conversation was
already in progress,
Langdon did not bother to rewind. Apparently, whatever Langdon wanted the
cardinals to see was coming
up . . .
"Leonardo Vetra kept diaries?" the camerlegno was saying. "I suppose that is
good news for CERN. If the
diaries contain his processes for creating antimatter-"
"They don't," Kohler said. "You will be relieved to know those processes died
with Leonardo. However,
his diaries spoke of something else. You."
The camerlegno looked troubled. "I don't understand."
"They described a meeting Leonardo had last month. With you."
The camerlegno hesitated, then looked toward the door. "Rocher should not have
granted you access
without consulting me. How did you get in here?"
"Rocher knows the truth. I called earlier and told him what you have done."
"What I have done? Whatever story you told him, Rocher is a Swiss Guard and far
too faithful to this
church to believe a bitter scientist over his camerlegno."
"Actually, he is too faithful not to believe. He is so faithful that despite the
evidence that one of his loyal
guards had betrayed the church, he refused to accept it. All day long he has
been searching for another
explanation."
"So you gave him one."
"The truth. Shocking as it was."
"If Rocher believed you, he would have arrested me."
"No. I wouldn't let him. I offered him my silence in exchange for this meeting."
The camerlegno let out an odd laugh. "You plan to blackmail the church with a
story that no one will
possibly believe?"
"I have no need of blackmail. I simply want to hear the truth from your lips.
Leonardo Vetra was a friend."
The camerlegno said nothing. He simply stared down at Kohler.
"Try this," Kohler snapped. "About a month ago, Leonardo Vetra contacted you
requesting an urgent
audience with the Pope-an audience you granted because the Pope was an admirer
of Leonardo's work and
because Leonardo said it was an emergency."
The camerlegno turned to the fire. He said nothing.
"Leonardo came to the Vatican in great secrecy. He was betraying his daughter's
confidence by coming
here, a fact that troubled him deeply, but he felt he had no choice. His
research had left him deeply
conflicted and in need of spiritual guidance from the church. In a private
meeting, he told you and the Pope
that he had made a scientific discovery with profound religious implications. He
had proved Genesis was
physically possible, and that intense sources of energy-what Vetra called
God-could duplicate the moment
of Creation."
Silence.
"The Pope was stunned," Kohler continued. "He wanted Leonardo to go public. His
Holiness thought this
discovery might begin to bridge the gap between science and religion-one of the
Pope's life dreams. Then
Leonardo explained to you the downside-the reason he required the church's
guidance. It seemed his
Creation experiment, exactly as your Bible predicts, produced everything in
pairs. Opposites. Light and
dark. Vetra found himself, in addition to creating matter, creating antimatter.
Shall I go on?"
The camerlegno was silent. He bent down and stoked the coals.
"After Leonardo Vetra came here," Kohler said, "you came to CERN to see his
work. Leonardo's diaries
said you made a personal trip to his lab."
The camerlegno looked up.
Kohler went on. "The Pope could not travel without attracting media attention,
so he sent you. Leonardo
gave you a secret tour of his lab. He showed you an antimatter annihilation-the
Big Bang-the power of
Creation. He also showed you a large specimen he kept locked away as proof that
his new process could
produce antimatter on a large scale. You were in awe. You returned to Vatican
City to report to the Pope
what you had witnessed."
The camerlegno sighed. "And what is it that troubles you? That I would respect
Leonardo's confidentiality
by pretending before the world tonight that I knew nothing of antimatter?"
"No! It troubles me that Leonardo Vetra practically proved the existence of your
God, and you had him
murdered!"
The camerlegno turned now, his face revealing nothing.
The only sound was the crackle of the fire.
Suddenly, the camera jiggled, and Kohler's arm appeared in the frame. He leaned
forward, seeming to
struggle with something affixed beneath his wheelchair. When he sat back down,
he held a pistol out before
him. The camera angle was a chilling one . . . looking from behind . . . down
the length of the outstretched
gun . . . directly at the camerlegno.
Kohler said, "Confess your sins, Father. Now."
The camerlegno looked startled. "You will never get out of here alive."
"Death would be a welcome relief from the misery your faith has put me through
since I was a boy."
Kohler held the gun with both hands now. "I am giving you a choice. Confess your
sins . . . or die right
now."
The camerlegno glanced toward the door.
"Rocher is outside," Kohler challenged. "He too is prepared to kill you."
"Rocher is a sworn protector of th-"
"Rocher let me in here. Armed. He is sickened by your lies. You have a single
option. Confess to me. I
have to hear it from your very lips."
The camerlegno hesitated.
Kohler cocked his gun. "Do you really doubt I will kill you?"
"No matter what I tell you," the camerlegno said, "a man like you will never
understand."
"Try me."
The camerlegno stood still for a moment, a dominant silhouette in the dim light
of the fire. When he spoke,
his words echoed with a dignity more suited to the glorious recounting of
altruism than that of a confession.
"Since the beginning of time," the camerlegno said, "this church has fought the
enemies of God.
Sometimes with words. Sometimes with swords. And we have always survived."
The camerlegno radiated conviction.
"But the demons of the past," he continued, "were demons of fire and abomination
. . . they were enemies
we could fight-enemies who inspired fear. Yet Satan is shrewd. As time passed,
he cast off his diabolical
countenance for a new face . . . the face of pure reason. Transparent and
insidious, but soulless all the
same." The camerlegno's voice flashed sudden anger-an almost maniacal
transition. "Tell me, Mr. Kohler!
How can the church condemn that which makes logical sense to our minds! How can
we decry that which
is now the very foundation of our society! Each time the church raises its voice
in warning, you shout back,
calling us ignorant. Paranoid. Controlling! And so your evil grows. Shrouded in
a veil of self-righteous
intellectualism. It spreads like a cancer. Sanctified by the miracles of its own
technology. Deifying itself!
Until we no longer suspect you are anything but pure goodness. Science has come
to save us from our
sickness, hunger, and pain! Behold science-the new God of endless miracles,
omnipotent and benevolent!
Ignore the weapons and the chaos. Forget the fractured loneliness and endless
peril. Science is here!" The
camerlegno stepped toward the gun. "But I have seen Satan's face lurking . . . I
have seen the peril . . ."
"What are you talking about! Vetra's science practically proved the existence of
your God! He was your
ally!"
"Ally? Science and religion are not in this together! We do not seek the same
God, you and I! Who is your
God? One of protons, masses, and particle charges? How does your God inspire?
How does your God
reach into the hearts of man and remind him he is accountable to a greater
power! Remind him that he is
accountable to his fellow man! Vetra was misguided. His work was not religious,
it was sacrilegious! Man
cannot put God's Creation in a test tube and wave it around for the world to
see! This does not glorify God,
it demeans God!" The camerlegno was clawing at his body now, his voice manic.
"And so you had Leonardo Vetra killed!"
"For the church! For all mankind! The madness of it! Man is not ready to hold
the power of Creation in his
hands. God in a test tube? A droplet of liquid that can vaporize an entire city?
He had to be stopped!" The
camerlegno fell abruptly silent. He looked away, back toward the fire. He seemed
to be contemplating his
options.
Kohler's hands leveled the gun. "You have confessed. You have no escape."
The camerlegno laughed sadly. "Don't you see. Confessing your sins is the
escape." He looked toward the
door. "When God is on your side, you have options a man like you could never
comprehend." With his
words still hanging in the air, the camerlegno grabbed the neck of his cassock
and violently tore it open,
revealing his bare chest.
Kohler jolted, obviously startled. "What are you doing!"
The camerlegno did not reply. He stepped backward, toward the fireplace, and
removed an object from the
glowing embers.
"Stop!" Kohler demanded, his gun still leveled. "What are you doing!"
When the camerlegno turned, he was holding a red-hot brand. The Illuminati
Diamond. The man's eyes
looked wild suddenly. "I had intended to do this all alone." His voice seethed
with a feral intensity. "But
now . . . I see God meant for you to be here. You are my salvation."
Before Kohler could react, the camerlegno closed his eyes, arched his back, and
rammed the red hot brand
into the center of his own chest. His flesh hissed. "Mother Mary! Blessed Mother
. . . Behold your son!" He
screamed out in agony.
Kohler lurched into the frame now . . . standing awkwardly on his feet, gun
wavering wildly before him.
The camerlegno screamed louder, teetering in shock. He threw the brand at
Kohler's feet. Then the priest
collapsed on the floor, writhing in agony.
What happened next was a blur.
There was a great flurry onscreen as the Swiss Guard burst into the room. The
soundtrack exploded with
gunfire. Kohler clutched his chest, blown backward, bleeding, falling into his
wheelchair.
"No!" Rocher called, trying to stop his guards from firing on Kohler.
The camerlegno, still writhing on the floor, rolled and pointed frantically at
Rocher. "Illuminatus!"
"You bastard," Rocher yelled, running at him. "You sanctimonious bas-"
Chartrand cut him down with three bullets. Rocher slid dead across the floor.
Then the guards ran to the wounded camerlegno, gathering around him. As they
huddled, the video caught
the face of a dazed Robert Langdon, kneeling beside the wheelchair, looking at
the brand. Then, the entire
frame began lurching wildly. Kohler had regained consciousness and was detaching
the tiny camcorder
from its holder under the arm of the wheelchair. Then he tried to hand the
camcorder to Langdon.
"G-give . . ." Kohler gasped. "G-give this to the m-media."
Then the screen went blank.
130
T he camerlegno began to feel the fog of wonder and adrenaline dissipating. As
the Swiss Guard helped
him down the Royal Staircase toward the Sistine Chapel, the camerlegno heard
singing in St. Peter's
Square and he knew that mountains had been moved.
Grazie Dio.
He had prayed for strength, and God had given it to him. At moments when he had
doubted, God had
spoken. Yours is a Holy mission, God had said. I will give you strength. Even
with God's strength, the
camerlegno had felt fear, questioning the righteousness of his path.
If not you, God had challenged, then WHO?
If not now, then WHEN?
If not this way, then HOW?
Jesus, God reminded him, had saved them all . . . saved them from their own
apathy. With two deeds, Jesus
had opened their eyes. Horror and Hope. The crucifixion and the resurrection. He
had changed the world.
But that was millennia ago. Time had eroded the miracle. People had forgotten.
They had turned to false
idols-techno-deities and miracles of the mind. What about miracles of the heart!
The camerlegno had often prayed to God to show him how to make the people
believe again. But God had
been silent. It was not until the camerlegno's moment of deepest darkness that
God had come to him. Oh,
the horror of that night!
The camerlegno could still remember lying on the floor in tattered nightclothes,
clawing at his own flesh,
trying to purge his soul of the pain brought on by a vile truth he had just
learned. It cannot be! he had
screamed. And yet he knew it was. The deception tore at him like the fires of
hell. The bishop who had
taken him in, the man who had been like a father to him, the clergyman whom the
camerlegno had stood
beside while he rose to the papacy . . . was a fraud. A common sinner. Lying to
the world about a deed so
traitorous at its core that the camerlegno doubted even God could forgive it.
"Your vow!" the camerlegno
had screamed at the Pope. "You broke your vow to God! You, of all men!"
The Pope had tried to explain himself, but the camerlegno could not listen. He
had run out, staggering
blindly through the hallways, vomiting, tearing at his own skin, until he found
himself bloody and alone,
lying on the cold earthen floor before St. Peter's tomb. Mother Mary, what do I
do? It was in that moment
of pain and betrayal, as the camerlegno lay devastated in the Necropolis,
praying for God to take him from
this faithless world, that God had come.
The voice in his head resounded like peals of thunder. "Did you vow to serve
your God?"
"Yes!" the camerlegno cried out.
"Would you die for your God?"
"Yes! Take me now!"
"Would you die for your church?"
"Yes! Please deliver me!"
"But would you die for . . . mankind?"
It was in the silence that followed that the camerlegno felt himself falling
into the abyss. He tumbled
farther, faster, out of control. And yet he knew the answer. He had always
known.
"Yes!" he shouted into the madness. "I would die for man! Like your son, I would
die for them!"
Hours later, the camerlegno still lay shivering on his floor. He saw his
mother's face. God has plans for
you, she was saying. The camerlegno plunged deeper into madness. It was then God
had spoken again. This
time with silence. But the camerlegno understood. Restore their faith.
If not me . . . then who?
If not now . . . then when?
As the guards unbolted the door of the Sistine Chapel, Camerlegno Carlo
Ventresca felt the power moving
in his veins . . . exactly as it had when he was a boy. God had chosen him. Long
ago.
His will be done.
The camerlegno felt reborn. The Swiss Guard had bandaged his chest, bathed him,
and dressed him in a
fresh white linen robe. They had also given him an injection of morphine for the
burn. The camerlegno
wished they had not given him painkillers. Jesus endured his pain for three days
on the cross! He could
already feel the drug uprooting his senses . . . a dizzying undertow.
As he walked into the chapel, he was not at all surprised to see the cardinals
staring at him in wonder. They
are in awe of God, he reminded himself. Not of me, but how God works THROUGH me.
As he moved up
the center aisle, he saw bewilderment in every face. And yet, with each new face
he passed, he sensed
something else in their eyes. What was it? The camerlegno had tried to imagine
how they would receive
him tonight. Joyfully? Reverently? He tried to read their eyes and saw neither
emotion.
It was then the camerlegno looked at the altar and saw Robert Langdon.
131
C amerlegno Carlo Ventresca stood in the aisle of the Sistine Chapel. The
cardinals were all standing
near the front of the church, turned, staring at him. Robert Langdon was on the
altar beside a television that
was on endless loop, playing a scene the camerlegno recognized but could not
imagine how it had come to
be. Vittoria Vetra stood beside him, her face drawn.
The camerlegno closed his eyes for a moment, hoping the morphine was making him
hallucinate and that
when he opened them the scene might be different. But it was not.
They knew.
Oddly, he felt no fear. Show me the way, Father. Give me the words that I can
make them see Your vision.
But the camerlegno heard no reply.
Father, We have come too far together to fail now.
Silence.
They do not understand what We have done.
The camerlegno did not know whose voice he heard in his own mind, but the
message was stark.
And the truth shall set you free . . .
And so it was that Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca held his head high as he walked
toward the front of the
Sistine Chapel. As he moved toward the cardinals, not even the diffused light of
the candles could soften
the eyes boring into him. Explain yourself, the faces said. Make sense of this
madness. Tell us our fears are
wrong!
Truth, the camerlegno told himself. Only truth. There were too many secrets in
these walls . . . one so dark
it had driven him to madness. But from the madness had come the light.
"If you could give your own soul to save millions," the camerlegno said, as he
moved down the aisle,
"would you?"
The faces in the chapel simply stared. No one moved. No one spoke. Beyond the
walls, the joyous strains
of song could be heard in the square.
The camerlegno walked toward them. "Which is the greater sin? Killing one's
enemy? Or standing idle
while your true love is strangled?" They are singing in St. Peter's Square! The
camerlegno stopped for a
moment and gazed up at the ceiling of the Sistine. Michelangelo's God was
staring down from the
darkened vault . . . and He seemed pleased.
"I could no longer stand by," the camerlegno said. Still, as he drew nearer, he
saw no flicker of
understanding in anyone's eyes. Didn't they see the radiant simplicity of his
deeds? Didn't they see the
utter necessity!
It had been so pure.
The Illuminati. Science and Satan as one.
Resurrect the ancient fear. Then crush it.
Horror and Hope. Make them believe again.
Tonight, the power of the Illuminati had been unleashed anew . . . and with
glorious consequence. The
apathy had evaporated. The fear had shot out across the world like a bolt of
lightning, uniting the people.
And then God's majesty had vanquished the darkness.
I could not stand idly by!
The inspiration had been God's own-appearing like a beacon in the camerlegno's
night of agony. Oh, this
faithless world! Someone must deliver them. You. If not you, who? You have been
saved for a reason. Show
them the old demons. Remind them of their fear. Apathy is death. Without
darkness, there is no light.
Without evil, there is no good. Make them choose. Dark or light. Where is the
fear? Where are the heroes?
If not now, when?
The camerlegno walked up the center aisle directly toward the crowd of standing
cardinals. He felt like
Moses as the sea of red sashes and caps parted before him, allowing him to pass.
On the altar, Robert
Langdon switched off the television, took Vittoria's hand, and relinquished the
altar. The fact that Robert
Langdon had survived, the camerlegno knew, could only have been God's will. God
had saved Robert
Langdon. The camerlegno wondered why.
The voice that broke the silence was the voice of the only woman in the Sistine
Chapel. "You killed my
father?" she said, stepping forward.
When the camerlegno turned to Vittoria Vetra, the look on her face was one he
could not quite understandpain
yes, but anger? Certainly she must understand. Her father's genius was
deadly. He had to be stopped.
For the good of Mankind.
"He was doing God's work," Vittoria said.
"God's work is not done in a lab. It is done in the heart."
"My father's heart was pure! And his research proved-"
"His research proved yet again that man's mind is progressing faster than his
soul!" The camerlegno's
voice was sharper than he had expected. He lowered his voice. "If a man as
spiritual as your father could
create a weapon like the one we saw tonight, imagine what an ordinary man will
do with his technology."
"A man like you?"
The camerlegno took a deep breath. Did she not see? Man's morality was not
advancing as fast as man's
science. Mankind was not spiritually evolved enough for the powers he possessed.
We have never created a
weapon we have not used! And yet he knew that antimatter was nothing-another
weapon in man's already
burgeoning arsenal. Man could already destroy. Man learned to kill long ago. And
his mother's blood
rained down. Leonardo Vetra's genius was dangerous for another reason.
"For centuries," the camerlegno said, "the church has stood by while science
picked away at religion bit by
bit. Debunking miracles. Training the mind to overcome the heart. Condemning
religion as the opiate of the
masses. They denounce God as a hallucination-a delusional crutch for those too
weak to accept that life is
meaningless. I could not stand by while science presumed to harness the power of
God himself! Proof, you
say? Yes, proof of science's ignorance! What is wrong with the admission that
something exists beyond our
understanding? The day science substantiates God in a lab is the day people stop
needing faith!"
"You mean the day they stop needing the church," Vittoria challenged, moving
toward him. "Doubt is your
last shred of control. It is doubt that brings souls to you. Our need to know
that life has meaning. Man's
insecurity and need for an enlightened soul assuring him everything is part of a
master plan. But the church
is not the only enlightened soul on the planet! We all seek God in different
ways. What are you afraid of?
That God will show himself somewhere other than inside these walls? That people
will find him in their
own lives and leave your antiquated rituals behind? Religions evolve! The mind
finds answers, the heart
grapples with new truths. My father was on your quest! A parallel path! Why
couldn't you see that? God is
not some omnipotent authority looking down from above, threatening to throw us
into a pit of fire if we
disobey. God is the energy that flows through the synapses of our nervous system
and the chambers of our
hearts! God is in all things!"
"Except science," the camerlegno fired back, his eyes showing only pity.
"Science, by definition, is
soulless. Divorced from the heart. Intellectual miracles like antimatter arrive
in this world with no ethical
instructions attached. This in itself is perilous! But when science heralds its
Godless pursuits as the
enlightened path? Promising answers to questions whose beauty is that they have
no answers?" He shook
his head. "No."
There was a moment of silence. The camerlegno felt suddenly tired as he returned
Vittoria's unbending
stare. This was not how it was supposed to be. Is this God's final test?
It was Mortati who broke the spell. "The preferiti," he said in a horrified
whisper. "Baggia and the others.
Please tell me you did not . . ."
The camerlegno turned to him, surprised by the pain in his voice. Certainly
Mortati could understand.
Headlines carried science's miracles every day. How long had it been for
religion? Centuries? Religion
needed a miracle! Something to awaken a sleeping world. Bring them back to the
path of righteousness.
Restore faith. The preferiti were not leaders anyway, they were
transformers-liberals prepared to embrace
the new world and abandon the old ways! This was the only way. A new leader.
Young. Powerful. Vibrant.
Miraculous. The preferiti served the church far more effectively in death than
they ever could alive. Horror
and Hope. Offer four souls to save millions. The world would remember them
forever as martyrs. The
church would raise glorious tribute to their names. How many thousands have died
for the glory of God?
They are only four.
"The preferiti," Mortati repeated.
"I shared their pain," the camerlegno defended, motioning to his chest. "And I
too would die for God, but
my work is only just begun. They are singing in St. Peter's Square!"
The camerlegno saw the horror in Mortati's eyes and again felt confused. Was it
the morphine? Mortati
was looking at him as if the camerlegno himself had killed these men with his
bare hands. I would do even
that for God, the camerlegno thought, and yet he had not. The deeds had been
carried out by the Hassassina
heathen soul tricked into thinking he was doing the work of the Illuminati. I
am Janus, the camerlegno
had told him. I will prove my power. And he had. The Hassassin's hatred had made
him God's pawn.
"Listen to the singing," the camerlegno said, smiling, his own heart rejoicing.
"Nothing unites hearts like
the presence of evil. Burn a church and the community rises up, holding hands,
singing hymns of defiance
as they rebuild. Look how they flock tonight. Fear has brought them home. Forge
modern demons for
modern man. Apathy is dead. Show them the face of evil-Satanists lurking among
us-running our
governments, our banks, our schools, threatening to obliterate the very House of
God with their misguided
science. Depravity runs deep. Man must be vigilant. Seek the goodness. Become
the goodness!"
In the silence, the camerlegno hoped they now understood. The Illuminati had not
resurfaced. The
Illuminati were long deceased. Only their myth was alive. The camerlegno had
resurrected the Illuminati as
a reminder. Those who knew the Illuminati history relived their evil. Those who
did not, had learned of it
and were amazed how blind they had been. The ancient demons had been resurrected
to awaken an
indifferent world.
"But . . . the brands?" Mortati's voice was stiff with outrage.
The camerlegno did not answer. Mortati had no way of knowing, but the brands had
been confiscated by
the Vatican over a century ago. They had been locked away, forgotten and dust
covered, in the Papal Vaultthe
Pope's private reliquary, deep within his Borgia apartments. The Papal Vault
contained those items the
church deemed too dangerous for anyone's eyes except the Pope's.
Why did they hide that which inspired fear? Fear brought people to God!
The vault's key was passed down from Pope to Pope. Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca
had purloined the key
and ventured inside; the myth of what the vault contained was bewitching-the
original manuscript for the
fourteen unpublished books of the Bible known as the Apocrypha, the third
prophecy of Fatima, the first
two having come true and the third so terrifying the church would never reveal
it. In addition to these, the
camerlegno had found the Illuminati Collection-all the secrets the church had
uncovered after banishing the
group from Rome . . . their contemptible Path of Illumination . . . the cunning
deceit of the Vatican's head
artist, Bernini . . . Europe's top scientists mocking religion as they secretly
assembled in the Vatican's own
Castle St. Angelo. The collection included a pentagon box containing iron
brands, one of them the mythical
Illuminati Diamond. This was a part of Vatican history the ancients thought best
forgotten. The
camerlegno, however, had disagreed.
"But the antimatter . . ." Vittoria demanded. "You risked destroying the
Vatican!"
"There is no risk when God is at your side," the camerlegno said. "This cause
was His."
"You're insane!" she seethed.
"Millions were saved."
"People were killed!"
"Souls were saved."
"Tell that to my father and Max Kohler!"
"CERN's arrogance needed to be revealed. A droplet of liquid that can vaporize a
half mile? And you call
me mad?" The camerlegno felt a rage rising in him. Did they think his was a
simple charge? "Those who
believe undergo great tests for God! God asked Abraham to sacrifice his child!
God commanded Jesus to
endure crucifixion! And so we hang the symbol of the crucifix before our
eyes-bloody, painful, agonizingto
remind us of evil's power! To keep our hearts vigilant! The scars on Jesus'
body are a living reminder of
the powers of darkness! My scars are a living reminder! Evil lives, but the
power of God will overcome!"
His shouts echoed off the back wall of the Sistine Chapel and then a profound
silence fell. Time seemed to
stop. Michelangelo's Last Judgment rose ominously behind him . . . Jesus casting
sinners into hell. Tears
brimmed in Mortati's eyes.
"What have you done, Carlo?" Mortati asked in a whisper. He closed his eyes, and
a tear rolled. "His
Holiness?"
A collective sigh of pain went up, as if everyone in the room had forgotten
until that very moment. The
Pope. Poisoned.
"A vile liar," the camerlegno said.
Mortati looked shattered. "What do you mean? He was honest! He . . . loved you."
"And I him." Oh, how I loved him! But the deceit! The broken vows to God!
The camerlegno knew they did not understand right now, but they would. When he
told them, they would
see! His Holiness was the most nefarious deceiver the church had ever seen. The
camerlegno still
remembered that terrible night. He had returned from his trip to CERN with news
of Vetra's Genesis and of
antimatter's horrific power. The camerlegno was certain the Pope would see the
perils, but the Holy Father
saw only hope in Vetra's breakthrough. He even suggested the Vatican fund
Vetra's work as a gesture of
goodwill toward spiritually based scientific research.
Madness! The church investing in research that threatened to make the church
obsolete? Work that
spawned weapons of mass destruction? The bomb that had killed his mother . . .
"But . . . you can't!" the camerlegno had exclaimed.
"I owe a deep debt to science," the Pope had replied. "Something I have hidden
my entire life. Science
gave me a gift when I was a young man. A gift I have never forgotten."
"I don't understand. What does science have to offer a man of God?"
"It is complicated," the Pope had said. "I will need time to make you
understand. But first, there is a simple
fact about me that you must know. I have kept it hidden all these years. I
believe it is time I told you."
Then the Pope had told him the astonishing truth.
132
T he camerlegno lay curled in a ball on the dirt floor in front of St. Peter's
tomb. The Necropolis was
cold, but it helped clot the blood flowing from the wounds he had torn at his
own flesh. His Holiness would
not find him here. Nobody would find him here . . .
"It is complicated," the Pope's voice echoed in his mind. "I will need time to
make you understand . . ."
But the camerlegno knew no amount of time could make him understand.
Liar! I believed in you! GOD believed in you!
With a single sentence, the Pope had brought the camerlegno's world crashing
down around him.
Everything the camerlegno had ever believed about his mentor was shattered
before his eyes. The truth
drilled into the camerlegno's heart with such force that he staggered backward
out of the Pope's office and
vomited in the hallway.
"Wait!" the Pope had cried, chasing after him. "Please let me explain!"
But the camerlegno ran off. How could His Holiness expect him to endure any
more? Oh, the wretched
depravity of it! What if someone else found out? Imagine the desecration to the
church! Did the Pope's
holy vows mean nothing?
The madness came quickly, screaming in his ears, until he awoke before St.
Peter's tomb. It was then that
God came to him with an awesome fierceness.
YOURS IS A VENGEFUL GOD!
Together, they made their plans. Together they would protect the church.
Together they would restore faith
to this faithless world. Evil was everywhere. And yet the world had become
immune! Together they would
unveil the darkness for the world to see . . . and God would overcome! Horror
and Hope. Then the world
would believe!
God's first test had been less horrible than the camerlegno imagined. Sneaking
into the Papal bed chambers
. . . filling his syringe . . . covering the deceiver's mouth as his body
spasmed into death. In the moonlight,
the camerlegno could see in the Pope's wild eyes there was something he wanted
to say.
But it was too late.
The Pope had said enough.
133
T he Pope fathered a child."
Inside the Sistine Chapel, the camerlegno stood unwavering as he spoke. Five
solitary words of astonishing
disclosure. The entire assembly seemed to recoil in unison. The cardinals'
accusing miens evaporated into
aghast stares, as if every soul in the room were praying the camerlegno was
wrong.
The Pope fathered a child.
Langdon felt the shock wave hit him too. Vittoria's hand, tight in his, jolted,
while Langdon's mind,
already numb with unanswered questions, wrestled to find a center of gravity.
The camerlegno's utterance seemed like it would hang forever in the air above
them. Even in the
camerlegno's frenzied eyes, Langdon could see pure conviction. Langdon wanted to
disengage, tell himself
he was lost in some grotesque nightmare, soon to wake up in a world that made
sense.
"This must be a lie!" one of the cardinals yelled.
"I will not believe it!" another protested. "His Holiness was as devout a man as
ever lived!"
It was Mortati who spoke next, his voice thin with devastation. "My friends.
What the camerlegno says is
true." Every cardinal in the chapel spun as though Mortati had just shouted an
obscenity. "The Pope indeed
fathered a child."
The cardinals blanched with dread.
The camerlegno looked stunned. "You knew? But . . . how could you possibly know
this?"
Mortati sighed. "When His Holiness was elected . . . I was the Devil's
Advocate."
There was a communal gasp.
Langdon understood. This meant the information was probably true. The infamous
"Devil's Advocate" was
the authority when it came to scandalous information inside the Vatican.
Skeletons in a Pope's closet were
dangerous, and prior to elections, secret inquiries into a candidate's
background were carried out by a lone
cardinal who served as the "Devil's Advocate"-that individual responsible for
unearthing reasons why the
eligible cardinals should not become Pope. The Devil's Advocate was appointed in
advance by the reigning
Pope in preparation for his own death. The Devil's Advocate was never supposed
to reveal his identity.
Ever.
"I was the Devil's Advocate," Mortati repeated. "That is how I found out."
Mouths dropped. Apparently tonight was a night when all the rules were going out
the window.
The camerlegno felt his heart filling with rage. "And you . . . told no one?"
"I confronted His Holiness," Mortati said. "And he confessed. He explained the
entire story and asked only
that I let my heart guide my decision as to whether or not to reveal his
secret."
"And your heart told you to bury the information?"
"He was the runaway favorite for the papacy. People loved him. The scandal would
have hurt the church
deeply."
"But he fathered a child! He broke his sacred vow of celibacy!" The camerlegno
was screaming now. He
could hear his mother's voice. A promise to God is the most important promise of
all. Never break a
promise to God. "The Pope broke his vow!"
Mortati looked delirious with angst. "Carlo, his love . . . was chaste. He had
broken no vow. He didn't
explain it to you?"
"Explain what?" The camerlegno remembered running out of the Pope's office while
the Pope was calling
to him. Let me explain!
Slowly, sadly, Mortati let the tale unfold. Many years ago, the Pope, when he
was still just a priest, had
fallen in love with a young nun. Both of them had taken vows of celibacy and
never even considered
breaking their covenant with God. Still, as they fell deeper in love, although
they could resist the
temptations of the flesh, they both found themselves longing for something they
never expected-to
participate in God's ultimate miracle of creation-a child. Their child. The
yearning, especially in her,
became overwhelming. Still, God came first. A year later, when the frustration
had reached almost
unbearable proportions, she came to him in a whirl of excitement. She had just
read an article about a new
miracle of science-a process by which two people, without ever having sexual
relations, could have a child.
She sensed this was a sign from God. The priest could see the happiness in her
eyes and agreed. A year
later she had a child through the miracle of artificial insemination . . .
"This cannot . . . be true," the camerlegno said, panicked, hoping it was the
morphine washing over his
senses. Certainly he was hearing things.
Mortati now had tears in his eyes. "Carlo, this is why His Holiness has always
had an affection for the
sciences. He felt he owed a debt to science. Science let him experience the joys
of fatherhood without
breaking his vow of celibacy. His Holiness told me he had no regrets except
one-that his advancing stature
in the church prohibited him from being with the woman he loved and seeing his
infant grow up."
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca felt the madness setting in again. He wanted to claw
at his flesh. How could I
have known?
"The Pope committed no sin, Carlo. He was chaste."
"But . . ." The camerlegno searched his anguished mind for any kind of
rationale. "Think of the jeopardy . .
. of his deeds." His voice felt weak. "What if this whore of his came forward?
Or, heaven forbid, his child?
Imagine the shame the church would endure."
Mortati's voice was tremulous. "The child has already come forward."
Everything stopped.
"Carlo . . . ?" Mortati crumbled. "His Holiness's child . . . is you."
At that moment, the camerlegno could feel the fire of faith dim in his heart. He
stood trembling on the altar,
framed by Michelangelo's towering Last Judgment. He knew he had just glimpsed
hell itself. He opened
his mouth to speak, but his lips wavered, soundless.
"Don't you see?" Mortati choked. "That is why His Holiness came to you in the
hospital in Palermo when
you were a boy. That is why he took you in and raised you. The nun he loved was
Maria . . . your mother.
She left the nunnery to raise you, but she never abandoned her strict devotion
to God. When the Pope heard
she had died in an explosion and that you, his son, had miraculously survived .
. . he swore to God he
would never leave you alone again. Carlo, your parents were both virgins. They
kept their vows to God.
And still they found a way to bring you into the world. You were their
miraculous child."
The camerlegno covered his ears, trying to block out the words. He stood
paralyzed on the altar. Then, with
his world yanked from beneath him, he fell violently to his knees and let out a
wail of anguish.
Seconds. Minutes. Hours.
Time seemed to have lost all meaning inside the four walls of the chapel.
Vittoria felt herself slowly
breaking free of the paralysis that seemed to have gripped them all. She let go
of Langdon's hand and
began moving through the crowd of cardinals. The chapel door seemed miles away,
and she felt like she
was moving underwater . . . slow motion.
As she maneuvered through the robes, her motion seemed to pull others from their
trance. Some of the
cardinals began to pray. Others wept. Some turned to watch her go, their blank
expressions turning slowly
to a foreboding cognition as she moved toward the door. She had almost reached
the back of the crowd
when a hand caught her arm. The touch was frail but resolute. She turned, face
to face with a wizened
cardinal. His visage was clouded by fear.
"No," the man whispered. "You cannot."
Vittoria stared, incredulous.
Another cardinal was at her side now. "We must think before we act."
And another. "The pain this could cause . . ."
Vittoria was surrounded. She looked at them all, stunned. "But these deeds here
today, tonight . . . certainly
the world should know the truth."
"My heart agrees," the wizened cardinal said, still holding her arm, "and yet it
is a path from which there is
no return. We must consider the shattered hopes. The cynicism. How could the
people ever trust again?"
Suddenly, more cardinals seemed to be blocking her way. There was a wall of
black robes before her.
"Listen to the people in the square," one said. "What will this do to their
hearts? We must exercise
prudence."
"We need time to think and pray," another said. "We must act with foresight. The
repercussions of this . . ."
"He killed my father!" Vittoria said. "He killed his own father!"
"I'm certain he will pay for his sins," the cardinal holding her arm said sadly.
Vittoria was certain too, and she intended to ensure he paid. She tried to push
toward the door again, but
the cardinals huddled closer, their faces frightened.
"What are you going to do?" she exclaimed. "Kill me?"
The old men blanched, and Vittoria immediately regretted her words. She could
see these men were gentle
souls. They had seen enough violence tonight. They meant no threat. They were
simply trapped. Scared.
Trying to get their bearings.
"I want . . ." the wizened cardinal said, ". . . to do what is right."
"Then you will let her out," a deep voice declared behind her. The words were
calm but absolute. Robert
Langdon arrived at her side, and she felt his hand take hers. "Ms. Vetra and I
are leaving this chapel. Right
now."
Faltering, hesitant, the cardinals began to step aside.
"Wait!" It was Mortati. He moved toward them now, down the center aisle, leaving
the camerlegno alone
and defeated on the altar. Mortati looked older all of a sudden, wearied beyond
his years. His motion was
burdened with shame. He arrived, putting a hand on Langdon's shoulder and one on
Vittoria's as well.
Vittoria felt sincerity in his touch. The man's eyes were more tearful now.
"Of course you are free to go," Mortati said. "Of course." The man paused, his
grief almost tangible. "I ask
only this . . ." He stared down at his feet a long moment then back up at
Vittoria and Langdon. "Let me do
it. I will go into the square right now and find a way. I will tell them. I
don't know how . . . but I will find a
way. The church's confession should come from within. Our failures should be our
own to expose."
Mortati turned sadly back toward the altar. "Carlo, you have brought this church
to a disastrous juncture."
He paused, looking around. The altar was bare.
There was a rustle of cloth down the side aisle, and the door clicked shut.
The camerlegno was gone.
134
C amerlegno Ventresca's white robe billowed as he moved down the hallway away
from the Sistine
Chapel. The Swiss Guards had seemed perplexed when he emerged all alone from the
chapel and told them
he needed a moment of solitude. But they had obeyed, letting him go.
Now as he rounded the corner and left their sight, the camerlegno felt a
maelstrom of emotions like nothing
he thought possible in human experience. He had poisoned the man he called "Holy
Father," the man who
addressed him as "my son." The camerlegno had always believed the words "father"
and "son" were
religious tradition, but now he knew the diabolical truth-the words had been
literal.
Like that fateful night weeks ago, the camerlegno now felt himself reeling madly
through the darkness.
It was raining the morning the Vatican staff banged on the camerlegno's door,
awakening him from a fitful
sleep. The Pope, they said, was not answering his door or his phone. The clergy
were frightened. The
camerlegno was the only one who could enter the Pope's chambers unannounced.
The camerlegno entered alone to find the Pope, as he was the night before,
twisted and dead in his bed. His
Holiness's face looked like that of Satan. His tongue black like death. The
Devil himself had been sleeping
in the Pope's bed.
The camerlegno felt no remorse. God had spoken.
Nobody would see the treachery . . . not yet. That would come later.
He announced the terrible news-His Holiness was dead of a stroke. Then the
camerlegno prepared for
conclave.
Mother Maria's voice was whispering in his ear. "Never break a promise to God."
"I hear you, Mother," he replied. "It is a faithless world. They need to be
brought back to the path of
righteousness. Horror and Hope. It is the only way."
"Yes," she said. "If not you . . . then who? Who will lead the church out of
darkness?"
Certainly not one of the preferiti. They were old . . . walking death . . .
liberals who would follow the Pope,
endorsing science in his memory, seeking modern followers by abandoning the
ancient ways. Old men
desperately behind the times, pathetically pretending they were not. They would
fail, of course. The
church's strength was its tradition, not its transience. The whole world was
transitory. The church did not
need to change, it simply needed to remind the world it was relevant! Evil
lives! God will overcome!
The church needed a leader. Old men do not inspire! Jesus inspired! Young,
vibrant, powerful . . .
MIRACULOUS.
"Enjoy your tea," the camerlegno told the four preferiti, leaving them in the
Pope's private library before
conclave. "Your guide will be here soon."
The preferiti thanked him, all abuzz that they had been offered a chance to
enter the famed Passetto. Most
uncommon! The camerlegno, before leaving them, had unlocked the door to the
Passetto, and exactly on
schedule, the door had opened, and a foreign-looking priest with a torch had
ushered the excited preferiti
in.
The men had never come out.
They will be the Horror. I will be the Hope.
No . . . I am the horror.
The camerlegno staggered now through the darkness of St. Peter's Basilica.
Somehow, through the insanity
and guilt, through the images of his father, through the pain and revelation,
even through the pull of the
morphine . . . he had found a brilliant clarity. A sense of destiny. I know my
purpose, he thought, awed by
the lucidity of it.
From the beginning, nothing tonight had gone exactly as he had planned.
Unforeseen obstacles had
presented themselves, but the camerlegno had adapted, making bold adjustments.
Still, he had never
imagined tonight would end this way, and yet now he saw the preordained majesty
of it.
It could end no other way.
Oh, what terror he had felt in the Sistine Chapel, wondering if God had forsaken
him! Oh, what deeds He
had ordained! He had fallen to his knees, awash with doubt, his ears straining
for the voice of God but
hearing only silence. He had begged for a sign. Guidance. Direction. Was this
God's will? The church
destroyed by scandal and abomination? No! God was the one who had willed the
camerlegno to act! Hadn't
He?
Then he had seen it. Sitting on the altar. A sign. Divine
communication-something ordinary seen in an
extraordinary light. The crucifix. Humble, wooden. Jesus on the cross. In that
moment, it had all come clear
. . . the camerlegno was not alone. He would never be alone.
This was His will . . . His meaning.
God had always asked great sacrifice of those he loved most. Why had the
camerlegno been so slow to
understand? Was he too fearful? Too humble? It made no difference. God had found
a way. The
camerlegno even understood now why Robert Langdon had been saved. It was to
bring the truth. To
compel this ending.
This was the sole path to the church's salvation!
The camerlegno felt like he was floating as he descended into the Niche of the
Palliums. The surge of
morphine seemed relentless now, but he knew God was guiding him.
In the distance, he could hear the cardinals clamoring in confusion as they
poured from the chapel, yelling
commands to the Swiss Guard.
But they would never find him. Not in time.
The camerlegno felt himself drawn . . . faster . . . descending the stairs into
the sunken area where the
ninety-nine oil lamps shone brightly. God was returning him to Holy Ground. The
camerlegno moved
toward the grate covering the hole that led down to the Necropolis. The
Necropolis is where this night
would end. In the sacred darkness below. He lifted an oil lamp, preparing to
descend.
But as he moved across the Niche, the camerlegno paused. Something about this
felt wrong. How did this
serve God? A solitary and silent end? Jesus had suffered before the eyes of the
entire world. Surely this
could not be God's will! The camerlegno listened for the voice of his God, but
heard only the blurring buzz
of drugs.
"Carlo." It was his mother. "God has plans for you."
Bewildered, the camerlegno kept moving.
Then, without warning, God arrived.
The camerlegno stopped short, staring. The light of the ninety-nine oil lanterns
had thrown the
camerlegno's shadow on the marble wall beside him. Giant and fearful. A hazy
form surrounded by golden
light. With flames flickering all around him, the camerlegno looked like an
angel ascending to heaven. He
stood a moment, raising his arms to his sides, watching his own image. Then he
turned, looking back up the
stairs.
God's meaning was clear.
Three minutes had passed in the chaotic hallways outside the Sistine Chapel, and
still nobody could locate
the camerlegno. It was as if the man had been swallowed up by the night. Mortati
was about to demand a
full-scale search of Vatican City when a roar of jubilation erupted outside in
St. Peter's Square. The
spontaneous celebration of the crowd was tumultuous. The cardinals all exchanged
startled looks.
Mortati closed his eyes. "God help us."
For the second time that evening, the College of Cardinals flooded onto St.
Peter's Square. Langdon and
Vittoria were swept up in the jostling crowd of cardinals, and they too emerged
into the night air. The
media lights and cameras were all pivoted toward the basilica. And there, having
just stepped onto the
sacred Papal Balcony located in the exact center of the towering façade,
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca stood
with his arms raised to the heavens. Even far away, he looked like purity
incarnate. A figurine. Dressed in
white. Flooded with light.
The energy in the square seemed to grow like a cresting wave, and all at once
the Swiss Guard barriers
gave way. The masses streamed toward the basilica in a euphoric torrent of
humanity. The onslaught
rushed forward-people crying, singing, media cameras flashing. Pandemonium. As
the people flooded in
around the front of the basilica, the chaos intensified, until it seemed nothing
could stop it.
And then something did.
High above, the camerlegno made the smallest of gestures. He folded his hands
before him. Then he bowed
his head in silent prayer. One by one, then dozens by dozens, then hundreds by
hundreds, the people bowed
their heads along with him.
The square fell silent . . . as if a spell had been cast.
In his mind, swirling and distant now, the camerlegno's prayers were a torrent
of hopes and sorrows . . .
forgive me, Father . . . Mother . . . full of grace . . . you are the church . .
. may you understand this
sacrifice of your only begotten son.
Oh, my Jesus . . . save us from the fires of hell . . . take all souls to
heaven, especially, those most in need of
thy mercy . . .
The camerlegno did not open his eyes to see the throngs below him, the
television cameras, the whole
world watching. He could feel it in his soul. Even in his anguish, the unity of
the moment was intoxicating.
It was as if a connective web had shot out in all directions around the globe.
In front of televisions, at
home, and in cars, the world prayed as one. Like synapses of a giant heart all
firing in tandem, the people
reached for God, in dozens of languages, in hundreds of countries. The words
they whispered were
newborn and yet as familiar to them as their own voices . . . ancient truths . .
. imprinted on the soul.
The consonance felt eternal.
As the silence lifted, the joyous strains of singing began to rise again.
He knew the moment had come.
Most Holy Trinity, I offer Thee the most precious Body, Blood, Soul . . . in
reparation for the outrages,
sacrileges, and indifferences . . .
The camerlegno already felt the physical pain setting in. It was spreading
across his skin like a plague,
making him want to claw at his flesh like he had weeks ago when God had first
come to him. Do not forget
what pain Jesus endured. He could taste the fumes now in his throat. Not even
the morphine could dull the
bite.
My work here is done.
The Horror was his. The Hope was theirs.
In the Niche of the Palliums, the camerlegno had followed God's will and
anointed his body. His hair. His
face. His linen robe. His flesh. He was soaking now with the sacred, vitreous
oils from the lamps. They
smelled sweet like his mother, but they burned. His would be a merciful
ascension. Miraculous and swift.
And he would leave behind not scandal . . . but a new strength and wonder.
He slipped his hand into the pocket of his robe and fingered the small, golden
lighter he had brought with
him from the Pallium incendiario.
He whispered a verse from Judgments. And when the flame went up toward heaven,
the angel of the Lord
ascended in the flame.
He positioned his thumb.
They were singing in St. Peter's Square . . .
The vision the world witnessed no one would ever forget.
High above on the balcony, like a soul tearing free of its corporeal restrains,
a luminous pyre of flame
erupted from the camerlegno's center. The fire shot upward, engulfing his entire
body instantly. He did not
scream. He raised his arms over his head and looked toward heaven. The
conflagration roared around him,
entirely shrouding his body in a column of light. It raged for what seemed like
an eternity, the whole world
bearing witness. The light flared brighter and brighter. Then, gradually, the
flames dissipated. The
camerlegno was gone. Whether he had collapsed behind the balustrade or
evaporated into thin air was
impossible to tell. All that was left was a cloud of smoke spiraling skyward
over Vatican City.
135
D awn came late to Rome.
An early rainstorm had washed the crowds from St. Peter's Square. The media
stayed on, huddling under
umbrellas and in vans, commentating on the evening's events. Across the world,
churches overflowed. It
was a time of reflection and discussion . . . in all religions. Questions
abounded, and yet the answers
seemed only to bring deeper questions. Thus far, the Vatican had remained
silent, issuing no statement
whatsoever.
Deep in the Vatican Grottoes, Cardinal Mortati knelt alone before the open
sarcophagus. He reached in and
closed the old man's blackened mouth. His Holiness looked peaceful now. In quiet
repose for eternity.
At Mortati's feet was a golden urn, heavy with ashes. Mortati had gathered the
ashes himself and brought
them here. "A chance for forgiveness," he said to His Holiness, laying the urn
inside the sarcophagus at the
Pope's side. "No love is greater than that of a father for His son." Mortati
tucked the urn out of sight
beneath the papal robes. He knew this sacred grotto was reserved exclusively for
the relics of Popes, but
somehow Mortati sensed this was appropriate.
"Signore?" someone said, entering the grottoes. It was Lieutenant Chartrand. He
was accompanied by three
Swiss Guards. "They are ready for you in conclave."
Mortati nodded. "In a moment." He gazed one last time into the sarcophagus
before him, and then stood up.
He turned to the guards. "It is time for His Holiness to have the peace he has
earned."
The guards came forward and with enormous effort slid the lid of the Pope's
sarcophagus back into place.
It thundered shut with finality.
Mortati was alone as he crossed the Borgia Courtyard toward the Sistine Chapel.
A damp breeze tossed his
robe. A fellow cardinal emerged from the Apostolic Palace and strode beside him.
"May I have the honor of escorting you to conclave, signore?"
"The honor is mine."
"Signore," the cardinal said, looking troubled. "The college owes you an apology
for last night. We were
blinded by-"
"Please," Mortati replied. "Our minds sometimes see what our hearts wish were
true."
The cardinal was silent a long time. Finally he spoke. "Have you been told? You
are no longer our Great
Elector."
Mortati smiled. "Yes. I thank God for small blessings."
"The college insisted you be eligible."
"It seems charity is not dead in the church."
"You are a wise man. You would lead us well."
"I am an old man. I would lead you briefly."
They both laughed.
As they reached the end of the Borgia Courtyard, the cardinal hesitated. He
turned to Mortati with a
troubled mystification, as if the precarious awe of the night before had slipped
back into his heart.
"Were you aware," the cardinal whispered, "that we found no remains on the
balcony?"
Mortati smiled. "Perhaps the rain washed them away."
The man looked to the stormy heavens. "Yes, perhaps . . ."
136
T he midmorning sky still hung heavy with clouds as the Sistine Chapel's chimney
gave up its first faint
puffs of white smoke. The pearly wisps curled upward toward the firmament and
slowly dissipated.
Far below, in St. Peter's Square, reporter Gunther Glick watched in reflective
silence. The final chapter . . .
Chinita Macri approached him from behind and hoisted her camera onto her
shoulder. "It's time," she said.
Glick nodded dolefully. He turned toward her, smoothed his hair, and took a deep
breath. My last
transmission, he thought. A small crowd had gathered around them to watch.
"Live in sixty seconds," Macri announced.
Glick glanced over his shoulder at the roof of the Sistine Chapel behind him.
"Can you get the smoke?"
Macri patiently nodded. "I know how to frame a shot, Gunther."
Glick felt dumb. Of course she did. Macri's performance behind the camera last
night had probably won
her the Pulitzer. His performance, on the other hand . . . he didn't want to
think about it. He was sure the
BBC would let him go; no doubt they would have legal troubles from numerous
powerful entities . . .
CERN and George Bush among them.
"You look good," Chinita patronized, looking out from behind her camera now with
a hint of concern. "I
wonder if I might offer you . . ." She hesitated, holding her tongue.
"Some advice?"
Macri sighed. "I was only going to say that there's no need to go out with a
bang."
"I know," he said. "You want a straight wrap."
"The straightest in history. I'm trusting you."
Glick smiled. A straight wrap? Is she crazy? A story like last night's deserved
so much more. A twist. A
final bombshell. An unforeseen revelation of shocking truth.
Fortunately, Glick had just the ticket waiting in the wings . . .
* * *
"You're on in . . . five . . . four . . . three . . ."
As Chinita Macri looked through her camera, she sensed a sly glint in Glick's
eye. I was insane to let him
do this, she thought. What was I thinking?
But the moment for second thoughts had passed. They were on.
"Live from Vatican City," Glick announced on cue, "this is Gunther Glick
reporting." He gave the camera
a solemn stare as the white smoke rose behind him from the Sistine Chapel.
"Ladies and gentlemen, it is
now official. Cardinal Saverio Mortati, a seventy-nine-year-old progressive, has
just been elected the next
Pope of Vatican City. Although an unlikely candidate, Mortati was chosen by an
unprecedented unanimous
vote by the College of Cardinals."
As Macri watched him, she began to breathe easier. Glick seemed surprisingly
professional today. Even
austere. For the first time in his life, Glick actually looked and sounded
somewhat like a newsman.
"And as we reported earlier," Glick added, his voice intensifying perfectly,
"the Vatican has yet to offer
any statement whatsoever regarding the miraculous events of last night."
Good. Chinita's nervousness waned some more. So far, so good.
Glick's expression grew sorrowful now. "And though last night was a night of
wonder, it was also a night
of tragedy. Four cardinals perished in yesterday's conflict, along with
Commander Olivetti and Captain
Rocher of the Swiss Guard, both in the line of duty. Other casualties include
Leonardo Vetra, the renowned
CERN physicist and pioneer of antimatter technology, as well as Maximilian
Kohler, the director of CERN,
who apparently came to Vatican City in an effort to help but reportedly passed
away in the process. No
official report has been issued yet on Mr. Kohler's death, but conjecture is
that he died due to
complications brought on by a long-time illness."
Macri nodded. The report was going perfectly. Just as they discussed.
"And in the wake of the explosion in the sky over the Vatican last night, CERN's
antimatter technology has
become the hot topic among scientists, sparking excitement and controversy. A
statement read by Mr.
Kohler's assistant in Geneva, Sylvie Baudeloque, announced this morning that
CERN's board of directors,
although enthusiastic about antimatter's potential, are suspending all research
and licensing until further
inquiries into its safety can be examined."
Excellent, Macri thought. Home stretch.
"Notably absent from our screens tonight," Glick reported, "is the face of
Robert Langdon, the Harvard
professor who came to Vatican City yesterday to lend his expertise during this
Illuminati crisis. Although
originally thought to have perished in the antimatter blast, we now have reports
that Langdon was spotted
in St. Peter's Square after the explosion. How he got there is still
speculation, although a spokesman from
Hospital Tiberina claims that Mr. Langdon fell out of the sky into the Tiber
River shortly after midnight,
was treated, and released." Glick arched his eyebrows at the camera. "And if
that is true . . . it was indeed a
night of miracles."
Perfect ending! Macri felt herself smiling broadly. Flawless wrap! Now sign off!
But Glick did not sign off. Instead, he paused a moment and then stepped toward
the camera. He had a
mysterious smile. "But before we sign off . . ."
No!
". . . I would like to invite a guest to join me."
Chinita's hands froze on the camera. A guest? What the hell is he doing? What
guest! Sign off! But she
knew it was too late. Glick had committed.
"The man I am about to introduce," Glick said, "is an American . . . a renowned
scholar."
Chinita hesitated. She held her breath as Glick turned to the small crowd around
them and motioned for his
guest to step forward. Macri said a silent prayer. Please tell me he somehow
located Robert Langdon . . .
and not some Illuminati-conspiracy nutcase.
But as Glick's guest stepped out, Macri's heart sank. It was not Robert Langdon
at all. It was a bald man in
blue jeans and a flannel shirt. He had a cane and thick glasses. Macri felt
terror. Nutcase!
"May I introduce," Glick announced, "the renowned Vatican scholar from De Paul
University in Chicago.
Dr. Joseph Vanek."
Macri now hesitated as the man joined Glick on camera. This was no conspiracy
buff; Macri had actually
heard of this guy.
"Dr. Vanek," Glick said. "You have some rather startling information to share
with us regarding last night's
conclave."
"I do indeed," Vanek said. "After a night of such surprises, it is hard to
imagine there are any surprises left .
. . and yet . . ." He paused.
Glick smiled. "And yet, there is a strange twist to all this."
Vanek nodded. "Yes. As perplexing as this will sound, I believe the College of
Cardinals unknowingly
elected two Popes this weekend."
Macri almost dropped the camera.
Glick gave a shrewd smile. "Two Popes, you say?"
The scholar nodded. "Yes. I should first say that I have spent my life studying
the laws of papal election.
Conclave judicature is extremely complex, and much of it is now forgotten or
ignored as obsolete. Even the
Great Elector is probably not aware of what I am about to reveal. Nonetheless .
. . according to the ancient
forgotten laws put forth in the Romano Pontifici Eligendo, Numero 63 . . .
balloting is not the only method
by which a Pope can be elected. There is another, more divine method. It is
called 'Acclamation by
Adoration.' " He paused. "And it happened last night."
Glick gave his guest a riveted look. "Please, go on."
"As you may recall," the scholar continued, "last night, when Camerlegno Carlo
Ventresca was standing on
the roof of the basilica, all of the cardinals below began calling out his name
in unison."
"Yes, I recall."
"With that image in mind, allow me to read verbatim from the ancient electoral
laws." The man pulled
some papers from his pocket, cleared his throat, and began to read. " 'Election
by Adoration occurs when . .
. all the cardinals, as if by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, freely and
spontaneously, unanimously and aloud,
proclaim one individual's name.' "
Glick smiled. "So you're saying that last night, when the cardinals chanted
Carlo Ventresca's name
together, they actually elected him Pope?"
"They did indeed. Furthermore, the law states that Election by Adoration
supercedes the cardinal eligibility
requirement and permits any clergyman-ordained priest, bishop, or cardinal-to be
elected. So, as you can
see, the camerlegno was perfectly qualified for papal election by this
procedure." Dr. Vanek looked directly
into the camera now. "The facts are these . . . Carlo Ventresca was elected Pope
last night. He reigned for
just under seventeen minutes. And had he not ascended miraculously into a pillar
of fire, he would now be
buried in the Vatican Grottoes along with the other Popes."
"Thank you, doctor." Glick turned to Macri with a mischievous wink. "Most
illuminating . . ."
137
H igh atop the steps of the Roman Coliseum, Vittoria laughed and called down to
him. "Robert, hurry
up! I knew I should have married a younger man!" Her smile was magic.
He struggled to keep up, but his legs felt like stone. "Wait," he begged.
"Please . . ."
There was a pounding in his head.
Robert Langdon awoke with a start.
Darkness.
He lay still for a long time in the foreign softness of the bed, unable to
figure out where he was. The
pillows were goose down, oversized and wonderful. The air smelled of potpourri.
Across the room, two
glass doors stood open to a lavish balcony, where a light breeze played beneath
a glistening cloud-swept
moon. Langdon tried to remember how he had gotten here . . . and where here was.
Surreal wisps of memory sifted back into his consciousness . . .
A pyre of mystical fire . . . an angel materializing from out of the crowd . . .
her soft hand taking his and
leading him into the night . . . guiding his exhausted, battered body through
the streets . . . leading him here
. . . to this suite . . . propping him half-sleeping in a scalding hot shower .
. . leading him to this bed . . . and
watching over him as he fell asleep like the dead.
In the dimness now, Langdon could see a second bed. The sheets were tousled, but
the bed was empty.
From one of the adjoining rooms, he could hear the faint, steady stream of a
shower.
As he gazed at Vittoria's bed, he saw a boldly embroidered seal on her
pillowcase. It read: HOTEL
BERNINI. Langdon had to smile. Vittoria had chosen well. Old World luxury
overlooking Bernini's Triton
Fountain . . . there was no more fitting hotel in all of Rome.
As Langdon lay there, he heard a pounding and realized what had awoken him.
Someone was knocking at
the door. It grew louder.
Confused, Langdon got up. Nobody knows we're here, he thought, feeling a trace
of uneasiness. Donning a
luxuriant Hotel Bernini robe, he walked out of the bedroom into the suite's
foyer. He stood a moment at the
heavy oak door, and then pulled it open.
A powerful man adorned in lavish purple and yellow regalia stared down at him.
"I am Lieutenant
Chartrand," the man said. "Vatican Swiss Guard."
Langdon knew full well who he was. "How . . . how did you find us?"
"I saw you leave the square last night. I followed you. I'm relieved you're
still here."
Langdon felt a sudden anxiety, wondering if the cardinals had sent Chartrand to
escort Langdon and
Vittoria back to Vatican City. After all, the two of them were the only two
people beyond the College of
Cardinals who knew the truth. They were a liability.
"His Holiness asked me to give this to you," Chartrand said, handing over an
envelope sealed with the
Vatican signet. Langdon opened the envelope and read the handwritten note.
Mr. Langdon and Ms. Vetra,
Although it is my profound desire to request your discretion in the matters of
the past 24 hours, I cannot
possibly presume to ask more of you than you have already given. I therefore
humbly retreat hoping only
that you let your hearts guide you in this matter. The world seems a better
place today . . . maybe the
questions are more powerful than the answers.
My door is always open,
His Holiness, Saverio Mortati
Langdon read the message twice. The College of Cardinals had obviously chosen a
noble and munificent
leader.
Before Langdon could say anything, Chartrand produced a small package. "A token
of thanks from His
Holiness."
Langdon took the package. It was heavy, wrapped in brown paper.
"By his decree," Chartrand said, "this artifact is on indefinite loan to you
from the sacred Papal Vault. His
Holiness asks only that in your last will and testament you ensure it finds its
way home."
Langdon opened the package and was struck speechless. It was the brand. The
Illuminati Diamond.
Chartrand smiled. "May peace be with you." He turned to go.
"Thank . . . you," Langdon managed, his hands trembling around the precious
gift.
The guard hesitated in the hall. "Mr. Langdon, may I ask you something?"
"Of course."
"My fellow guards and I are curious. Those last few minutes . . . what happened
up there in the
helicopter?"
Langdon felt a rush of anxiety. He knew this moment was coming-the moment of
truth. He and Vittoria had
talked about it last night as they stole away from St. Peter's Square. And they
had made their decision.
Even before the Pope's note.
Vittoria's father had dreamed his antimatter discovery would bring about a
spiritual awakening. Last
night's events were no doubt not what he had intended, but the undeniable fact
remained . . . at this
moment, around the world, people were considering God in ways they never had
before. How long the
magic would last, Langdon and Vittoria had no idea, but they knew they could
never shatter the
wonderment with scandal and doubt. The Lord works in strange ways, Langdon told
himself, wondering
wryly if maybe . . . just maybe . . . yesterday had been God's will after all.
"Mr. Langdon?" Chartrand repeated. "I was asking about the helicopter?"
Langdon gave a sad smile. "Yes, I know . . ." He felt the words flow not from
his mind but from his heart.
"Perhaps it was the shock of the fall . . . but my memory . . . it seems . . .
it's all a blur . . ."
Chartrand slumped. "You remember nothing?"
Langdon sighed. "I fear it will remain a mystery forever."
When Robert Langdon returned to the bedroom, the vision awaiting him stopped him
in his tracks. Vittoria
stood on the balcony, her back to the railing, her eyes gazing deeply at him.
She looked like a heavenly
apparition . . . a radiant silhouette with the moon behind her. She could have
been a Roman goddess,
enshrouded in her white terrycloth robe, the drawstring cinched tight,
accentuating her slender curves.
Behind her, a pale mist hung like a halo over Bernini's Triton Fountain.
Langdon felt wildly drawn to her . . . more than to any woman in his life.
Quietly, he lay the Illuminati
Diamond and the Pope's letter on his bedside table. There would be time to
explain all of that later. He
went to her on the balcony.
Vittoria looked happy to see him. "You're awake," she said, in a coy whisper.
"Finally."
Langdon smiled. "Long day."
She ran a hand through her luxuriant hair, the neck of her robe falling open
slightly. "And now . . . I
suppose you want your reward."
The comment took Langdon off guard. "I'm . . . sorry?"
"We're adults, Robert. You can admit it. You feel a longing. I see it in your
eyes. A deep, carnal hunger."
She smiled. "I feel it too. And that craving is about to be satisfied."
"It is?" He felt emboldened and took a step toward her.
"Completely." She held up a room-service menu. "I ordered everything they've
got."
The feast was sumptuous. They dined together by moonlight . . . sitting on their
balcony . . . savoring frisée,
truffles, and risotto. They sipped Dolcetto wine and talked late into the night.
Langdon did not need to be a symbologist to read the signs Vittoria was sending
him. During dessert of
boysenberry cream with savoiardi and steaming Romcaffé, Vittoria pressed her
bare legs against his
beneath the table and fixed him with a sultry stare. She seemed to be willing
him to set down his fork and
carry her off in his arms.
But Langdon did nothing. He remained the perfect gentleman. Two can play at this
game, he thought,
hiding a roguish smile.
When all the food was eaten, Langdon retired to the edge of his bed where he sat
alone, turning the
Illuminati Diamond over and over in his hands, making repeated comments about
the miracle of its
symmetry. Vittoria stared at him, her confusion growing to an obvious
frustration.
"You find that ambigram terribly interesting, don't you?" she demanded.
Langdon nodded. "Mesmerizing."
"Would you say it's the most interesting thing in this room?"
Langdon scratched his head, making a show of pondering it. "Well, there is one
thing that interests me
more."
She smiled and took a step toward him. "That being?"
"How you disproved that Einstein theory using tuna fish."
Vittoria threw up her hands. "Dio mìo! Enough with the tuna fish! Don't play
with me, I'm warning you."
Langdon grinned. "Maybe for your next experiment, you could study flounders and
prove the earth is flat."
Vittoria was steaming now, but the first faint hints of an exasperated smile
appeared on her lips. "For your
information, professor, my next experiment will make scientific history. I plan
to prove neutrinos have
mass."
"Neutrinos have mass?" Langdon shot her a stunned look. "I didn't even know they
were Catholic!"
With one fluid motion, she was on him, pinning him down. "I hope you believe in
life after death, Robert
Langdon." Vittoria was laughing as she straddled him, her hands holding him
down, her eyes ablaze with a
mischievous fire.
"Actually," he choked, laughing harder now, "I've always had trouble picturing
anything beyond this
world."
"Really? So you've never had a religious experience? A perfect moment of
glorious rapture?"
Langdon shook his head. "No, and I seriously doubt I'm the kind of man who could
ever have a religious
experience."
Vittoria slipped off her robe. "You've never been to bed with a yoga master,
have you?"
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
DAN BROWN is the bestselling author of Digital Fortress. He is a graduate of
Phillips Exeter Academy,
where he has taught English and creative writing. He lives in New England with
his wife.

