Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
revenge 400 years in the making. It seemed that after centuries of persecution,
science had bitten back.
The camerlegno stood at his desk, staring blankly at the phone. Olivetti was the
first to break the silence.
"Carlo," he said, using the camerlegno's first name and sounding more like a
weary friend than an officer.
"For twenty-six years, I have sworn my life to the protection of this office. It
seems tonight I am
dishonored."
The camerlegno shook his head. "You and I serve God in different capacities, but
service always brings
honor."
"These events . . . I can't imagine how . . . this situation . . ." Olivetti
looked overwhelmed.
"You realize we have only one possible course of action. I have a responsibility
for the safety of the
College of Cardinals."
"I fear that responsibility was mine, signore."
"Then your men will oversee the immediate evacuation."
"Signore?"
"Other options can be exercised later-a search for this device, a manhunt for
the missing cardinals and their
captors. But first the cardinals must be taken to safety. The sanctity of human
life weighs above all. Those
men are the foundation of this church."
"You suggest we cancel conclave right now?"
"Do I have a choice?"
"What about your charge to bring a new Pope?"
The young chamberlain sighed and turned to the window, his eyes drifting out
onto the sprawl of Rome
below. "His Holiness once told me that a Pope is a man torn between two worlds .
. . the real world and the
divine. He warned that any church that ignored reality would not survive to
enjoy the divine." His voice
sounded suddenly wise for its years. "The real world is upon us tonight. We
would be vain to ignore it.
Pride and precedent cannot overshadow reason."
Olivetti nodded, looking impressed. "I have underestimated you, signore."
The camerlegno did not seem to hear. His gaze was distant on the window.
"I will speak openly, signore. The real world is my world. I immerse myself in
its ugliness every day such
that others are unencumbered to seek something more pure. Let me advise you on
the present situation. It is
what I am trained for. Your instincts, though worthy . . . could be disastrous."
The camerlegno turned.
Olivetti sighed. "The evacuation of the College of Cardinals from the Sistine
Chapel is the worst possible
thing you could do right now."
The camerlegno did not look indignant, only at a loss. "What do you suggest?"
"Say nothing to the cardinals. Seal conclave. It will buy us time to try other
options."
The camerlegno looked troubled. "Are you suggesting I lock the entire College of
Cardinals on top of a
time bomb?"
"Yes, signore. For now. Later, if need be, we can arrange evacuation."
The camerlegno shook his head. "Postponing the ceremony before it starts is
grounds alone for an inquiry,
but after the doors are sealed nothing intervenes. Conclave procedure
obligates-"
"Real world, signore. You're in it tonight. Listen closely." Olivetti spoke now
with the efficient rattle of a
field officer. "Marching one hundred sixty-five cardinals unprepared and
unprotected into Rome would be
reckless. It would cause confusion and panic in some very old men, and frankly,
one fatal stroke this month
is enough."
One fatal stroke. The commander's words recalled the headlines Langdon had read
over dinner with some
students in the Harvard Commons: POPE SUFFERS STROKE. DIES IN SLEEP.
"In addition," Olivetti said, "the Sistine Chapel is a fortress. Although we
don't advertise the fact, the
structure is heavily reinforced and can repel any attack short of missiles. As
preparation we searched every
inch of the chapel this afternoon, scanning for bugs and other surveillance
equipment. The chapel is clean,
a safe haven, and I am confident the antimatter is not inside. There is no safer
place those men can be right
now. We can always discuss emergency evacuation later if it comes to that."
Langdon was impressed. Olivetti's cold, smart logic reminded him of Kohler.
"Commander," Vittoria said, her voice tense, "there are other concerns. Nobody
has ever created this much
antimatter. The blast radius, I can only estimate. Some of surrounding Rome may
be in danger. If the
canister is in one of your central buildings or underground, the effect outside
these walls may be minimal,
but if the canister is near the perimeter . . . in this building for example . .
." She glanced warily out the
window at the crowd in St. Peter's Square.
"I am well aware of my responsibilities to the outside world," Olivetti replied,
"and it makes this situation
no more grave. The protection of this sanctuary has been my sole charge for over
two decades. I have no
intention of allowing this weapon to detonate."
Camerlegno Ventresca looked up. "You think you can find it?"
"Let me discuss our options with some of my surveillance specialists. There is a
possibility, if we kill
power to Vatican City, that we can eliminate the background RF and create a
clean enough environment to
get a reading on that canister's magnetic field."
Vittoria looked surprised, and then impressed. "You want to black out Vatican
City?"
"Possibly. I don't yet know if it's possible, but it is one option I want to
explore."
"The cardinals would certainly wonder what happened," Vittoria remarked.
Olivetti shook his head. "Conclaves are held by candlelight. The cardinals would
never know. After
conclave is sealed, I could pull all except a few of my perimeter guards and
begin a search. A hundred men
could cover a lot of ground in five hours."
"Four hours," Vittoria corrected. "I need to fly the canister back to CERN.
Detonation is unavoidable
without recharging the batteries."
"There's no way to recharge here?"
Vittoria shook her head. "The interface is complex. I'd have brought it if I
could."
"Four hours then," Olivetti said, frowning. "Still time enough. Panic serves no
one. Signore, you have ten
minutes. Go to the chapel, seal conclave. Give my men some time to do their job.
As we get closer to the
critical hour, we will make the critical decisions."
Langdon wondered how close to "the critical hour" Olivetti would let things get.
The camerlegno looked troubled. "But the college will ask about the preferiti .
. . especially about Baggia . .
. where they are."
"Then you will have to think of something, signore. Tell them you served the
four cardinals something at
tea that disagreed with them."
The camerlegno looked riled. "Stand on the altar of the Sistine Chapel and lie
to the College of Cardinals?"
"For their own safety. Una bugia veniale. A white lie. Your job will be to keep
the peace." Olivetti headed
for the door. "Now if you will excuse me, I need to get started."
"Comandante," the camerlegno urged, "we cannot simply turn our backs on missing
cardinals."
Olivetti stopped in the doorway. "Baggia and the others are currently outside
our sphere of influence. We
must let them go . . . for the good of the whole. The military calls it triage."
"Don't you mean abandonment?"
His voice hardened. "If there were any way, signore . . . any way in heaven to
locate those four cardinals, I
would lay down my life to do it. And yet . . ." He pointed across the room at
the window where the early
evening sun glinted off an endless sea of Roman rooftops. "Searching a city of
five million is not within my
power. I will not waste precious time to appease my conscience in a futile
exercise. I'm sorry."
Vittoria spoke suddenly. "But if we caught the killer, couldn't you make him
talk?"
Olivetti frowned at her. "Soldiers cannot afford to be saints, Ms. Vetra.
Believe me, I empathize with your
personal incentive to catch this man."
"It's not only personal," she said. "The killer knows where the antimatter is .
. . and the missing cardinals.
If we could somehow find him . . ."
"Play into their hands?" Olivetti said. "Believe me, removing all protection
from Vatican City in order to
stake out hundreds of churches is what the Illuminati hope we will do . . .
wasting precious time and
manpower when we should be searching . . . or worse yet, leaving the Vatican
Bank totally unprotected.
Not to mention the remaining cardinals."
The point hit home.
"How about the Roman Police?" the camerlegno asked. "We could alert citywide
enforcement of the crisis.
Enlist their help in finding the cardinals' captor."
"Another mistake," Olivetti said. "You know how the Roman Carbonieri feel about
us. We'd get a halfhearted
effort of a few men in exchange for their selling our crisis to the
global media. Exactly what our
enemies want. We'll have to deal with the media soon enough as it is."
I will make your cardinals media luminaries, Langdon thought, recalling the
killer's words. The first
cardinal's body appears at eight o'clock. Then one every hour. The press will
love it.
The camerlegno was talking again, a trace of anger in his voice. "Commander, we
cannot in good
conscience do nothing about the missing cardinals!"
Olivetti looked the camerlegno dead in the eye. "The prayer of St. Francis,
signore. Do you recall it?"
The young priest spoke the single line with pain in his voice. "God, grant me
strength to accept those things
I cannot change."
"Trust me," Olivetti said. "This is one of those things." Then he was gone.
44
T he central office of the British Broadcast Corporation (BBC) is in London just
west of Piccadilly
Circus. The switchboard phone rang, and a junior content editor picked up.
"BBC," she said, stubbing out her Dunhill cigarette.
The voice on the line was raspy, with a Mid-East accent. "I have a breaking
story your network might be
interested in."
The editor took out a pen and a standard Lead Sheet. "Regarding?"
"The papal election."
She frowned wearily. The BBC had run a preliminary story yesterday to mediocre
response. The public, it
seemed, had little interest in Vatican City. "What's the angle?"
"Do you have a TV reporter in Rome covering the election?"
"I believe so."
"I need to speak to him directly."
"I'm sorry, but I cannot give you that number without some idea-"
"There is a threat to the conclave. That is all I can tell you."
The editor took notes. "Your name?"
"My name is immaterial."
The editor was not surprised. "And you have proof of this claim?"
"I do."
"I would be happy to take the information, but it is not our policy to give out
our reporters' numbers unless-
"
"I understand. I will call another network. Thank you for your time. Good-b-"
"Just a moment," she said. "Can you hold?"
The editor put the caller on hold and stretched her neck. The art of screening
out potential crank calls was
by no means a perfect science, but this caller had just passed the BBC's two
tacit tests for authenticity of a
phone source. He had refused to give his name, and he was eager to get off the
phone. Hacks and glory
hounds usually whined and pleaded.
Fortunately for her, reporters lived in eternal fear of missing the big story,
so they seldom chastised her for
passing along the occasional delusional psychotic. Wasting five minutes of a
reporter's time was
forgivable. Missing a headline was not.
Yawning, she looked at her computer and typed in the keywords "Vatican City."
When she saw the name
of the field reporter covering the papal election, she chuckled to herself. He
was a new guy the BBC had
just brought up from some trashy London tabloid to handle some of the BBC's more
mundane coverage.
Editorial had obviously started him at the bottom rung.
He was probably bored out of his mind, waiting all night to record his live
ten-second video spot. He would
most likely be grateful for a break in the monotony.
The BBC content editor copied down the reporter's satellite extension in Vatican
City. Then, lighting
another cigarette, she gave the anonymous caller the reporter's number.
45
I t won't work," Vittoria said, pacing the Pope's office. She looked up at the
camerlegno. "Even if a
Swiss Guard team can filter electronic interference, they will have to be
practically on top of the canister
before they detect any signal. And that's if the canister is even accessible . .
. unenclosed by other barriers.
What if it's buried in a metal box somewhere on your grounds? Or up in a metal
ventilating duct. There's
no way they'll trace it. And what if the Swiss Guards have been infiltrated?
Who's to say the search will be
clean?"
The camerlegno looked drained. "What are you proposing, Ms. Vetra?"
Vittoria felt flustered. Isn't it obvious! "I am proposing, sir, that you take
other precautions immediately.
We can hope against all hope that the commander's search is successful. At the
same time, look out the
window. Do you see those people? Those buildings across the piazza? Those media
vans? The tourists?
They are quite possibly within range of the blast. You need to act now."
The camerlegno nodded vacantly.
Vittoria felt frustrated. Olivetti had convinced everyone there was plenty of
time. But Vittoria knew if news
of the Vatican predicament leaked out, the entire area could fill with onlookers
in a matter of minutes. She
had seen it once outside the Swiss Parliament building. During a hostage
situation involving a bomb,
thousands had congregated outside the building to witness the outcome. Despite
police warnings that they
were in danger, the crowd packed in closer and closer. Nothing captured human
interest like human
tragedy.
"Signore," Vittoria urged, "the man who killed my father is out there somewhere.
Every cell in this body
wants to run from here and hunt him down. But I am standing in your office . . .
because I have a
responsibility to you. To you and others. Lives are in danger, signore. Do you
hear me?"
The camerlegno did not answer.
Vittoria could hear her own heart racing. Why couldn't the Swiss Guard trace
that damn caller? The
Illuminati assassin is the key! He knows where the antimatter is . . . hell, he
knows where the cardinals are!
Catch the killer, and everything is solved.
Vittoria sensed she was starting to come unhinged, an alien distress she
recalled only faintly from
childhood, the orphanage years, frustration with no tools to handle it. You have
tools, she told herself, you
always have tools. But it was no use. Her thoughts intruded, strangling her. She
was a researcher and
problem solver. But this was a problem with no solution. What data do you
require? What do you want?
She told herself to breathe deeply, but for the first time in her life, she
could not. She was suffocating.
Langdon's head ached, and he felt like he was skirting the edges of rationality.
He watched Vittoria and the
camerlegno, but his vision was blurred by hideous images: explosions, press
swarming, cameras rolling,
four branded humans.
Shaitan . . . Lucifer . . . Bringer of light . . . Satan . . .
He shook the fiendish images from his mind. Calculated terrorism, he reminded
himself, grasping at
reality. Planned chaos. He thought back to a Radcliffe seminar he had once
audited while researching
praetorian symbolism. He had never seen terrorists the same way since.
"Terrorism," the professor had lectured, "has a singular goal. What is it?"
"Killing innocent people?" a student ventured.
"Incorrect. Death is only a byproduct of terrorism."
"A show of strength?"
"No. A weaker persuasion does not exist."
"To cause terror?"
"Concisely put. Quite simply, the goal of terrorism is to create terror and
fear. Fear undermines faith in the
establishment. It weakens the enemy from within . . . causing unrest in the
masses. Write this down.
Terrorism is not an expression of rage. Terrorism is a political weapon. Remove
a government's façade of
infallibility, and you remove its people's faith."
Loss of faith . . .
Is that what this was all about? Langdon wondered how Christians of the world
would react to cardinals
being laid out like mutilated dogs. If the faith of a canonized priest did not
protect him from the evils of
Satan, what hope was there for the rest of us? Langdon's head was pounding
louder now . . . tiny voices
playing tug of war.
Faith does not protect you. Medicine and airbags . . . those are things that
protect you. God does not
protect you. Intelligence protects you. Enlightenment. Put your faith in
something with tangible results.
How long has it been since someone walked on water? Modern miracles belong to
science . . . computers,
vaccines, space stations . . . even the divine miracle of creation. Matter from
nothing . . . in a lab. Who
needs God? No! Science is God.
The killer's voice resonated in Langdon's mind. Midnight . . . mathematical
progression of death . . .
sacrifici vergini nell' altare di scienza."
Then suddenly, like a crowd dispersed by a single gunshot, the voices were gone.
Robert Langdon bolted to his feet. His chair fell backward and crashed on the
marble floor.
Vittoria and the camerlegno jumped.
"I missed it," Langdon whispered, spellbound. "It was right in front of me . .
."
"Missed what?" Vittoria demanded.
Langdon turned to the priest. "Father, for three years I have petitioned this
office for access to the Vatican
Archives. I have been denied seven times."
"Mr. Langdon, I am sorry, but this hardly seems the moment to raise such
complaints."
"I need access immediately. The four missing cardinals. I may be able to figure
out where they're going to
be killed."
Vittoria stared, looking certain she had misunderstood.
The camerlegno looked troubled, as if he were the brunt of a cruel joke. "You
expect me to believe this
information is in our archives?"
"I can't promise I can locate it in time, but if you let me in . . ."
"Mr. Langdon, I am due in the Sistine Chapel in four minutes. The archives are
across Vatican City."
"You're serious aren't you?" Vittoria interrupted, staring deep into Langdon's
eyes, seeming to sense his
earnestness.
"Hardly a joking time," Langdon said.
"Father," Vittoria said, turning to the camerlegno, "if there's a chance . . .
any at all of finding where these
killings are going to happen, we could stake out the locations and-"
"But the archives?" the camerlegno insisted. "How could they possibly contain
any clue?"
"Explaining it," Langdon said, "will take longer than you've got. But if I'm
right, we can use the
information to catch the Hassassin."
The camerlegno looked as though he wanted to believe but somehow could not.
"Christianity's most sacred
codices are in that archive. Treasures I myself am not privileged enough to
see."
"I am aware of that."
"Access is permitted only by written decree of the curator and the Board of
Vatican Librarians."
"Or," Langdon declared, "by papal mandate. It says so in every rejection letter
your curator ever sent me."
The camerlegno nodded.
"Not to be rude," Langdon urged, "but if I'm not mistaken a papal mandate comes
from this office. As far
as I can tell, tonight you hold the trust of his station. Considering the
circumstances . . ."
The camerlegno pulled a pocket watch from his cassock and looked at it. "Mr.
Langdon, I am prepared to
give my life tonight, quite literally, to save this church."
Langdon sensed nothing but truth in the man's eyes.
"This document," the camerlegno said, "do you truly believe it is here? And that
it can help us locate these
four churches?"
"I would not have made countless solicitations for access if I were not
convinced. Italy is a bit far to come
on a lark when you make a teacher's salary. The document you have is an
ancient-"
"Please," the camerlegno interrupted. "Forgive me. My mind cannot process any
more details at the
moment. Do you know where the secret archives are located?"
Langdon felt a rush of excitement. "Just behind the Santa Ana Gate."
"Impressive. Most scholars believe it is through the secret door behind St.
Peter's Throne."
"No. That would be the Archivio della Reverenda di Fabbrica di S. Pietro. A
common misconception."
"A librarian docent accompanies every entrant at all times. Tonight, the docents
are gone. What you are
requesting is carte blanche access. Not even our cardinals enter alone."
"I will treat your treasures with the utmost respect and care. Your librarians
will find not a trace that I was
there."
Overhead the bells of St. Peter's began to toll. The camerlegno checked his
pocket watch. "I must go." He
paused a taut moment and looked up at Langdon. "I will have a Swiss Guard meet
you at the archives. I am
giving you my trust, Mr. Langdon. Go now."
Langdon was speechless.
The young priest now seemed to possess an eerie poise. Reaching over, he
squeezed Langdon's shoulder
with surprising strength. "I want you to find what you are looking for. And find
it quickly."
46
T he Secret Vatican Archives are located at the far end of the Borgia Courtyard
directly up a hill from
the Gate of Santa Ana. They contain over 20,000 volumes and are rumored to hold
such treasures as
Leonardo da Vinci's missing diaries and even unpublished books of the Holy
Bible.
Langdon strode powerfully up the deserted Via della Fondamenta toward the
archives, his mind barely able
to accept that he was about to be granted access. Vittoria was at his side,
keeping pace effortlessly. Her
almond-scented hair tossed lightly in the breeze, and Langdon breathed it in. He
felt his thoughts straying
and reeled himself back.
Vittoria said, "You going to tell me what we're looking for?"
"A little book written by a guy named Galileo."
She sounded surprised. "You don't mess around. What's in it?"
"It is supposed to contain something called il segno."
"The sign?"
"Sign, clue, signal . . . depends on your translation."
"Sign to what?"
Langdon picked up the pace. "A secret location. Galileo's Illuminati needed to
protect themselves from the
Vatican, so they founded an ultrasecret Illuminati meeting place here in Rome.
They called it The Church
of Illumination."
"Pretty bold calling a satanic lair a church."
Langdon shook his head. "Galileo's Illuminati were not the least bit satanic.
They were scientists who
revered enlightenment. Their meeting place was simply where they could safely
congregate and discuss
topics forbidden by the Vatican. Although we know the secret lair existed, to
this day nobody has ever
located it."
"Sounds like the Illuminati know how to keep a secret."
"Absolutely. In fact, they never revealed the location of their hideaway to
anyone outside the brotherhood.
This secrecy protected them, but it also posed a problem when it came to
recruiting new members."
"They couldn't grow if they couldn't advertise," Vittoria said, her legs and
mind keeping perfect pace.
"Exactly. Word of Galileo's brotherhood started to spread in the 1630s, and
scientists from around the
world made secret pilgrimages to Rome hoping to join the Illuminati . . . eager
for a chance to look through
Galileo's telescope and hear the master's ideas. Unfortunately, though, because
of the Illuminati's secrecy,
scientists arriving in Rome never knew where to go for the meetings or to whom
they could safely speak.
The Illuminati wanted new blood, but they could not afford to risk their secrecy
by making their
whereabouts known."
Vittoria frowned. "Sounds like a situazione senza soluzione."
"Exactly. A catch-22, as we would say."
"So what did they do?"
"They were scientists. They examined the problem and found a solution. A
brilliant one, actually. The
Illuminati created a kind of ingenious map directing scientists to their
sanctuary."
Vittoria looked suddenly skeptical and slowed. "A map? Sounds careless. If a
copy fell into the wrong
hands . . ."
"It couldn't," Langdon said.
was enormous. A blazed trail of sorts across the city."
Vittoria slowed even further. "Arrows painted on sidewalks?"
"In a sense, yes, but much more subtle. The map consisted of a series of
carefully concealed symbolic
markers placed in public locations around the city. One marker led to the next .
. . and the next . . . a trail . .
. eventually leading to the Illuminati lair."
Vittoria eyed him askance. "Sounds like a treasure hunt."
Langdon chuckled. "In a manner of speaking, it is. The Illuminati called their
string of markers 'The Path
of Illumination,' and anyone who wanted to join the brotherhood had to follow it
all the way to the end. A
kind of test."
"But if the Vatican wanted to find the Illuminati," Vittoria argued, "couldn't
they simply follow the
markers?"
"No. The path was hidden. A puzzle, constructed in such a way that only certain
people would have the
ability to track the markers and figure out where the Illuminati church was
hidden. The Illuminati intended
it as a kind of initiation, functioning not only as a security measure but also
as a screening process to ensure
that only the brightest scientists arrived at their door."
"I don't buy it. In the 1600s the clergy were some of the most educated men in
the world. If these markers
were in public locations, certainly there existed members of the Vatican who
could have figured it out."
"Sure," Langdon said, "if they had known about the markers. But they didn't. And
they never noticed them
because the Illuminati designed them in such a way that clerics would never
suspect what they were. They
used a method known in symbology as dissimulation."
"Camouflage."
Langdon was impressed. "You know the term."
"Dissimulacione," she said. "Nature's best defense. Try spotting a trumpet fish
floating vertically in
seagrass."
"Okay," Langdon said. "The Illuminati used the same concept. They created
markers that faded into the
backdrop of ancient Rome. They couldn't use ambigrams or scientific symbology
because it would be far
too conspicuous, so they called on an Illuminati artist-the same anonymous
prodigy who had created their
ambigrammatic symbol 'Illuminati'-and they commissioned him to carve four
sculptures."
"Illuminati sculptures?"
"Yes, sculptures with two strict guidelines. First, the sculptures had to look
like the rest of the artwork in
Rome . . . artwork that the Vatican would never suspect belonged to the
Illuminati."
"Religious art."
Langdon nodded, feeling a tinge of excitement, talking faster now. "And the
second guideline was that the
four sculptures had to have very specific themes. Each piece needed to be a
subtle tribute to one of the four
elements of science."
"Four elements?" Vittoria said. "There are over a hundred."
"Not in the 1600s," Langdon reminded her. "Early alchemists believed the entire
universe was made up of
only four substances: Earth, Air, Fire, and Water."
The early cross, Langdon knew, was the most common symbol of the four
elements-four arms representing
Earth, Air, Fire, and Water. Beyond that, though, there existed literally dozens
of symbolic occurrences of
Earth, Air, Fire, and Water throughout history-the Pythagorean cycles of life,
the Chinese Hong-Fan, the
Jungian male and female rudiments, the quadrants of the Zodiac, even the Muslims
revered the four ancient
elements . . . although in Islam they were known as "squares, clouds, lightning,
and waves." For Langdon,
though, it was a more modern usage that always gave him chills-the Mason's four
mystic grades of
Absolute Initiation: Earth, Air, Fire, and Water.
Vittoria seemed mystified. "So this Illuminati artist created four pieces of art
that looked religious, but were
actually tributes to Earth, Air, Fire, and Water?"
"Exactly," Langdon said, quickly turning up Via Sentinel toward the archives.
"The pieces blended into the
sea of religious artwork all over Rome. By donating the artwork anonymously to
specific churches and then
using their political influence, the brotherhood facilitated placement of these
four pieces in carefully chosen
churches in Rome. Each piece of course was a marker . . . subtly pointing to the
next church . . . where the
next marker awaited. It functioned as a trail of clues disguised as religious
art. If an Illuminati candidate
could find the first church and the marker for Earth, he could follow it to Air
. . . and then to Fire . . . and
then to Water . . . and finally to the Church of Illumination."
Vittoria was looking less and less clear. "And this has something to do with
catching the Illuminati
assassin?"
Langdon smiled as he played his ace. "Oh, yes. The Illuminati called these four
churches by a very special
name. The Altars of Science."
Vittoria frowned. "I'm sorry, that means noth-" She stopped short. "L'altare di
scienza?" she exclaimed.
"The Illuminati assassin. He warned that the cardinals would be virgin
sacrifices on the altars of science!"
Langdon gave her a smile. "Four cardinals. Four churches. The four altars of
science."
She looked stunned. "You're saying the four churches where the cardinals will be
sacrificed are the same
four churches that mark the ancient Path of Illumination?"
"I believe so, yes."
"But why would the killer have given us that clue?"
"Why not?" Langdon replied. "Very few historians know about these sculptures.
Even fewer believe they
exist. And their locations have remained secret for four hundred years. No doubt
the Illuminati trusted the
secret for another five hours. Besides, the Illuminati don't need their Path of
Illumination anymore. Their
secret lair is probably long gone anyway. They live in the modern world. They
meet in bank boardrooms,
eating clubs, private golf courses. Tonight they want to make their secrets
public. This is their moment.
Their grand unveiling."
Langdon feared the Illuminati unveiling would have a special symmetry to it that
he had not yet mentioned.
The four brands. The killer had sworn each cardinal would be branded with a
different symbol. Proof the
ancient legends are true, the killer had said. The legend of the four
ambigrammatic brands was as old as the
Illuminati itself: earth, air, fire, water-four words crafted in perfect
symmetry. Just like the word Illuminati.
Each cardinal was to be branded with one of the ancient elements of science. The
rumor that the four
brands were in English rather than Italian remained a point of debate among
historians. English seemed a
random deviation from their natural tongue . . . and the Illuminati did nothing
randomly.
Langdon turned up the brick pathway before the archive building. Ghastly images
thrashed in his mind.
The overall Illuminati plot was starting to reveal its patient grandeur. The
brotherhood had vowed to stay
silent as long as it took, amassing enough influence and power that they could
resurface without fear, make
their stand, fight their cause in broad daylight. The Illuminati were no longer
about hiding. They were
about flaunting their power, confirming the conspiratorial myths as fact.
Tonight was a global publicity
stunt.
Vittoria said, "Here comes our escort." Langdon looked up to see a Swiss Guard
hurrying across an
adjacent lawn toward the front door.
When the guard saw them, he stopped in his tracks. He stared at them, as though
he thought he was
hallucinating. Without a word he turned away and pulled out his walkie-talkie.
Apparently incredulous at
what he was being asked to do, the guard spoke urgently to the person on the
other end. The angry bark
coming back was indecipherable to Langdon, but its message was clear. The guard
slumped, put away the
walkie-talkie, and turned to them with a look of discontent.
Not a word was spoken as the guard guided them into the building. They passed
through four steel doors,
two passkey entries, down a long stairwell, and into a foyer with two
combination keypads. Passing
through a high-tech series of electronic gates, they arrived at the end of a
long hallway outside a set of wide
oak double doors. The guard stopped, looked them over again and, mumbling under
his breath, walked to a
metal box on the wall. He unlocked it, reached inside, and pressed a code. The
doors before them buzzed,
and the deadbolt fell open.
The guard turned, speaking to them for the first time. "The archives are beyond
that door. I have been
instructed to escort you this far and return for briefing on another matter."
"You're leaving?" Vittoria demanded.
"Swiss Guards are not cleared for access to the Secret Archives. You are here
only because my commander
received a direct order from the camerlegno."
"But how do we get out?"
"Monodirectional security. You will have no difficulties." That being the
entirety of the conversation, the
guard spun on his heel and marched off down the hall.
Vittoria made some comment, but Langdon did not hear. His mind was fixed on the
double doors before
him, wondering what mysteries lay beyond.
47
A lthough he knew time was short, Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca walked slowly. He
needed the time
alone to gather his thoughts before facing opening prayer. So much was
happening. As he moved in dim
solitude down the Northern Wing, the challenge of the past fifteen days weighed
heavy in his bones.
He had followed his holy duties to the letter.
As was Vatican tradition, following the Pope's death the camerlegno had
personally confirmed expiration
by placing his fingers on the Pope's carotid artery, listening for breath, and
then calling the Pope's name
three times. By law there was no autopsy. Then he had sealed the Pope's bedroom,
destroyed the papal
fisherman's ring, shattered the die used to make lead seals, and arranged for
the funeral. That done, he
began preparations for the conclave.
Conclave, he thought. The final hurdle. It was one of the oldest traditions in
Christendom. Nowadays,
because the outcome of conclave was usually known before it began, the process
was criticized as obsoletemore
of a burlesque than an election. The camerlegno knew, however, this was
only a lack of
understanding. Conclave was not an election. It was an ancient, mystic
transference of power. The tradition
was timeless . . . the secrecy, the folded slips of paper, the burning of the
ballots, the mixing of ancient
chemicals, the smoke signals.
As the camerlegno approached through the Loggias of Gregory XIII, he wondered if
Cardinal Mortati was
in a panic yet. Certainly Mortati had noticed the preferiti were missing.
Without them, the voting would go
on all night. Mortati's appointment as the Great Elector, the camerlegno assured
himself, was a good one.
The man was a freethinker and could speak his mind. The conclave would need a
leader tonight more than
ever.
As the camerlegno arrived at the top of the Royal Staircase, he felt as though
he were standing on the
precipice of his life. Even from up here he could hear the rumble of activity in
the Sistine Chapel below-the
uneasy chatter of 165 cardinals.
One hundred sixty-one cardinals, he corrected.
For an instant the camerlegno was falling, plummeting toward hell, people
screaming, flames engulfing
him, stones and blood raining from the sky.
And then silence.
When the child awoke, he was in heaven. Everything around him was white. The
light was blinding and
pure. Although some would say a ten year old could not possibly understand
heaven, the young Carlo
Ventresca understood heaven very well. He was in heaven right now. Where else
would he be? Even in his
short decade on earth Carlo had felt the majesty of God-the thundering pipe
organs, the towering domes,
the voices raised in song, the stained glass, shimmering bronze and gold.
Carlo's mother, Maria, brought
him to Mass every day. The church was Carlo's home.
"Why do we come to Mass every single day?" Carlo asked, not that he minded at
all.
"Because I promised God I would," she replied. "And a promise to God is the most
important promise of
all. Never break a promise to God."
Carlo promised her he would never break a promise to God. He loved his mother
more than anything in the
world. She was his holy angel. Sometimes he called her Maria benedetta-the
Blessed Mary-although she
did not like that at all. He knelt with her as she prayed, smelling the sweet
scent of her flesh and listening to
the murmur of her voice as she counted the rosary. Hail Mary, Mother of God . .
. pray for us sinners . . .
now and at the hour of our death.
"Where is my father?" Carlo asked, already knowing his father had died before he
was born.
"God is your father, now," she would always reply. "You are a child of the
church."
Carlo loved that.
"Whenever you feel frightened," she said, "remember that God is your father now.
He will watch over you
and protect you forever. God has big plans for you, Carlo." The boy knew she was
right. He could already
feel God in his blood.
Blood . . .
Blood raining from the sky!
Silence. Then heaven.
His heaven, Carlo learned as the blinding lights were turned off, was actually
the Intensive Care Unit in
Santa Clara Hospital outside of Palermo. Carlo had been the sole survivor of a
terrorist bombing that had
collapsed a chapel where he and his mother had been attending Mass while on
vacation. Thirty-seven
people had died, including Carlo's mother. The papers called Carlo's survival
The Miracle of St. Francis.
Carlo had, for some unknown reason, only moments before the blast, left his
mother's side and ventured
into a protected alcove to ponder a tapestry depicting the story of St. Francis.
God called me there, he decided. He wanted to save me.
Carlo was delirious with pain. He could still see his mother, kneeling at the
pew, blowing him a kiss, and
then with a concussive roar, her sweet-smelling flesh was torn apart. He could
still taste man's evil. Blood
showered down. His mother's blood! The blessed Maria!
God will watch over you and protect you forever, his mother had told him.
But where was God now!
Then, like a worldly manifestation of his mother's truth, a clergyman had come
to the hospital. He was not
any clergyman. He was a bishop. He prayed over Carlo. The Miracle of St.
Francis. When Carlo recovered,
the bishop arranged for him to live in a small monastery attached to the
cathedral over which the bishop
presided. Carlo lived and tutored with the monks. He even became an altar boy
for his new protector. The
bishop suggested Carlo enter public school, but Carlo refused. He could not have
been more happy with his
new home. He now truly lived in the house of God.
Every night Carlo prayed for his mother.
God saved me for a reason, he thought. What is the reason?
When Carlo turned sixteen, he was obliged by Italian law to serve two years of
reserve military training.
The bishop told Carlo that if he entered seminary he would be exempt from this
duty. Carlo told the priest
that he planned to enter seminary but that first he needed to understand evil.
The bishop did not understand.
Carlo told him that if he was going to spend his life in the church fighting
evil, first he had to understand it.
He could not think of any better place to understand evil than in the army. The
army used guns and bombs.
A bomb killed my Blessed mother!
The bishop tried to dissuade him, but Carlo's mind was made up.
"Be careful, my son," the bishop had said. "And remember the church awaits you
when you return."
Carlo's two years of military service had been dreadful. Carlo's youth had been
one of silence and
reflection. But in the army there was no quiet for reflection. Endless noise.
Huge machines everywhere.
Not a moment of peace. Although the soldiers went to Mass once a week at the
barracks, Carlo did not
sense God's presence in any of his fellow soldiers. Their minds were too filled
with chaos to see God.
Carlo hated his new life and wanted to go home. But he was determined to stick
it out. He had yet to
understand evil. He refused to fire a gun, so the military taught him how to fly
a medical helicopter. Carlo
hated the noise and the smell, but at least it let him fly up in the sky and be
closer to his mother in heaven.
When he was informed his pilot's training included learning how to parachute,
Carlo was terrified. Still, he
had no choice.
God will protect me, he told himself.
Carlo's first parachute jump was the most exhilarating physical experience of
his life. It was like flying
with God. Carlo could not get enough . . . the silence . . . the floating . . .
seeing his mother's face in the
billowing white clouds as he soared to earth. God has plans for you, Carlo. When
he returned from the
military, Carlo entered the seminary.
That had been twenty-three years ago.
Now, as Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca descended the Royal Staircase, he tried to
comprehend the chain of
events that had delivered him to this extraordinary crossroads.
Abandon all fear, he told himself, and give this night over to God.
He could see the great bronze door of the Sistine Chapel now, dutifully
protected by four Swiss Guards.
The guards unbolted the door and pulled it open. Inside, every head turned. The
camerlegno gazed out at
the black robes and red sashes before him. He understood what God's plans for
him were. The fate of the
church had been placed in his hands.
The camerlegno crossed himself and stepped over the threshold.
48
B BC journalist Gunther Glick sat sweating in the BBC network van parked on the
eastern edge of St.
Peter's Square and cursed his assignment editor. Although Glick's first monthly
review had come back
filled with superlatives-resourceful, sharp, dependable-here he was in Vatican
City on "Pope-Watch." He
reminded himself that reporting for the BBC carried a hell of a lot more
credibility than fabricating fodder
for the British Tattler, but still, this was not his idea of reporting.
Glick's assignment was simple. Insultingly simple. He was to sit here waiting
for a bunch of old farts to
elect their next chief old fart, then he was to step outside and record a
fifteen-second "live" spot with the
Vatican as a backdrop.
Brilliant.
Glick couldn't believe the BBC still sent reporters into the field to cover this
schlock. You don't see the
American networks here tonight. Hell no! That was because the big boys did it
right. They watched CNN,
synopsized it, and then filmed their "live" report in front of a blue screen,
superimposing stock video for a
realistic backdrop. MSNBC even used in-studio wind and rain machines to give
that on-the-scene
authenticity. Viewers didn't want truth anymore; they wanted entertainment.
Glick gazed out through the windshield and felt more and more depressed by the
minute. The imperial
mountain of Vatican City rose before him as a dismal reminder of what men could
accomplish when they
put their minds to it.
"What have I accomplished in my life?" he wondered aloud. "Nothing."
"So give up," a woman's voice said from behind him.
Glick jumped. He had almost forgotten he was not alone. He turned to the back
seat, where his
camerawoman, Chinita Macri, sat silently polishing her glasses. She was always
polishing her glasses.
Chinita was black, although she preferred African American, a little heavy, and
smart as hell. She wouldn't
let you forget it either. She was an odd bird, but Glick liked her. And Glick
could sure as hell use the
company.
"What's the problem, Gunth?" Chinita asked.
"What are we doing here?"
She kept polishing. "Witnessing an exciting event."
"Old men locked in the dark is exciting?"
"You do know you're going to hell, don't you?"
"Already there."
"Talk to me." She sounded like his mother.
"I just feel like I want to leave my mark."
"You wrote for the British Tattler."
"Yeah, but nothing with any resonance."
"Oh, come on, I heard you did a groundbreaking article on the queen's secret sex
life with aliens."
"Thanks."
"Hey, things are looking up. Tonight you make your first fifteen seconds of TV
history."
Glick groaned. He could hear the news anchor already. "Thanks Gunther, great
report." Then the anchor
would roll his eyes and move on to the weather. "I should have tried for an
anchor spot."
Macri laughed. "With no experience? And that beard? Forget it."
Glick ran his hands through the reddish gob of hair on his chin. "I think it
makes me look clever."
The van's cell phone rang, mercifully interrupting yet another one of Glick's
failures. "Maybe that's
editorial," he said, suddenly hopeful. "You think they want a live update?"
"On this story?" Macri laughed. "You keep dreaming."
Glick answered the phone in his best anchorman voice. "Gunther Glick, BBC, Live
in Vatican City."
The man on the line had a thick Arabic accent. "Listen carefully," he said. "I
am about to change your life."
49
L angdon and Vittoria stood alone now outside the double doors that led to the
inner sanctum of the
Secret Archives. The decor in the colonnade was an incongruous mix of
wall-to-wall carpets over marble
floors and wireless security cameras gazing down from beside carved cherubs in
the ceiling. Langdon
dubbed it Sterile Renaissance. Beside the arched ingress hung a small bronze
plaque.
ARCHIVIO VATICANO
Curatore, Padre Jaqui Tomaso
Father Jaqui Tomaso. Langdon recognized the curator's name from the rejection
letters at home in his
desk. Dear Mr. Langdon, It is with regret that I am writing to deny . . .
Regret. Bullshit. Since Jaqui Tomaso's reign had begun, Langdon had never met a
single non-Catholic
American scholar who had been given access to the Secret Vatican Archives. Il
gaurdiano, historians called
him. Jaqui Tomaso was the toughest librarian on earth.
As Langdon pushed the doors open and stepped through the vaulted portal into the
inner sanctum, he half
expected to see Father Jaqui in full military fatigues and helmet standing guard
with a bazooka. The space,
however, was deserted.
Silence. Soft lighting.
Archivio Vaticano. One of his life dreams.
As Langdon's eyes took in the sacred chamber, his first reaction was one of
embarrassment. He realized
what a callow romantic he was. The images he had held for so many years of this
room could not have been
more inaccurate. He had imagined dusty bookshelves piled high with tattered
volumes, priests cataloging
by the light of candles and stained-glass windows, monks poring over scrolls . .
.
Not even close.
At first glance the room appeared to be a darkened airline hangar in which
someone had built a dozen freestanding
racquetball courts. Langdon knew of course what the glass-walled
enclosures were. He was not
surprised to see them; humidity and heat eroded ancient vellums and parchments,
and proper preservation
required hermitic vaults like these-airtight cubicles that kept out humidity and
natural acids in the air.
Langdon had been inside hermetic vaults many times, but it was always an
unsettling experience . . .
something about entering an airtight container where the oxygen was regulated by
a reference librarian.
The vaults were dark, ghostly even, faintly outlined by tiny dome lights at the
end of each stack. In the
blackness of each cell, Langdon sensed the phantom giants, row upon row of
towering stacks, laden with
history. This was one hell of a collection.
Vittoria also seemed dazzled. She stood beside him staring mutely at the giant
transparent cubes.
Time was short, and Langdon wasted none of it scanning the dimly lit room for a
book catalog-a bound
encyclopedia that cataloged the library's collection. All he saw was the glow of
a handful of computer
terminals dotting the room. "Looks like they've got a Biblion. Their index is
computerized."
Vittoria looked hopeful. "That should speed things up."
Langdon wished he shared her enthusiasm, but he sensed this was bad news. He
walked to a terminal and
began typing. His fears were instantly confirmed. "The old-fashioned method
would have been better."
"Why?"
He stepped back from the monitor. "Because real books don't have password
protection. I don't suppose
physicists are natural born hackers?"
Vittoria shook her head. "I can open oysters, that's about it."
Langdon took a deep breath and turned to face the eerie collection of diaphanous
vaults. He walked to the
nearest one and squinted into the dim interior. Inside the glass were amorphous
shapes Langdon recognized
as the usual bookshelves, parchment bins, and examination tables. He looked up
at the indicator tabs
glowing at the end of each stack. As in all libraries, the tabs indicated the
contents of that row. He read the
headings as he moved down the transparent barrier.
PIETRO IL ERIMITO . . . LE CROCIATE . . . URBANO II . . . LEVANT . . .
"They're labeled," he said, still walking. "But it's not alpha-author." He
wasn't surprised. Ancient archives
were almost never cataloged alphabetically because so many of the authors were
unknown. Titles didn't
work either because many historical documents were untitled letters or parchment
fragments. Most
cataloging was done chronologically. Disconcertingly, however, this arrangement
did not appear to be
chronological.
Langdon felt precious time already slipping away. "Looks like the Vatican has
its own system."
"What a surprise."
He examined the labels again. The documents spanned centuries, but all the
keywords, he realized, were
interrelated. "I think it's a thematic classification."
"Thematic?" Vittoria said, sounding like a disapproving scientist. "Sounds
inefficient."
Actually . . . Langdon thought, considering it more closely. This may be the
shrewdest cataloging I've ever
seen. He had always urged his students to understand the overall tones and
motifs of an artistic period
rather than getting lost in the minutia of dates and specific works. The Vatican
Archives, it seemed, were
cataloged on a similar philosophy. Broad strokes . . .
"Everything in this vault," Langdon said, feeling more confident now, "centuries
of material, has to do with
the Crusades. That's this vault's theme." It was all here, he realized.
Historical accounts, letters, artwork,
socio-political data, modern analyses. All in one place . . . encouraging a
deeper understanding of a topic.
Brilliant.
Vittoria frowned. "But data can relate to multiple themes simultaneously."
"Which is why they cross-reference with proxy markers." Langdon pointed through
the glass to the colorful
plastic tabs inserted among the documents. "Those indicate secondary documents
located elsewhere with
their primary themes."
"Sure," she said, apparently letting it go. She put her hands on her hips and
surveyed the enormous space.
Then she looked at Langdon. "So, Professor, what's the name of this Galileo
thing we're looking for?"
Langdon couldn't help but smile. He still couldn't fathom that he was standing
in this room. It's in here, he
thought. Somewhere in the dark, it's waiting.
"Follow me," Langdon said. He started briskly down the first aisle, examining
the indicator tabs of each
vault. "Remember how I told you about the Path of Illumination? How the
Illuminati recruited new
members using an elaborate test?"
"The treasure hunt," Vittoria said, following closely.
"The challenge the Illuminati had was that after they placed the markers, they
needed some way to tell the
scientific community the path existed."
"Logical," Vittoria said. "Otherwise nobody would know to look for it."
"Yes, and even if they knew the path existed, scientists would have no way of
knowing where the path
began. Rome is huge."
"Okay."
Langdon proceeded down the next aisle, scanning the tabs as he talked. "About
fifteen years ago, some
historians at the Sorbonne and I uncovered a series of Illuminati letters filled
with references to the segno."
"The sign. The announcement about the path and where it began."
"Yes. And since then, plenty of Illuminati academics, myself included, have
uncovered other references to
the segno. It is accepted theory now that the clue exists and that Galileo mass
distributed it to the scientific
community without the Vatican ever knowing."
"How?"
"We're not sure, but most likely printed publications. He published many books
and newsletters over the
years."
"That the Vatican no doubt saw. Sounds dangerous."
"True. Nonetheless the segno was distributed."
"But nobody has ever actually found it?"
"No. Oddly though, wherever allusions to the segno appear-Masonic diaries,
ancient scientific journals,
Illuminati letters-it is often referred to by a number."
"666?"
Langdon smiled. "Actually it's 503."
"Meaning?"
"None of us could ever figure it out. I became fascinated with 503, trying
everything to find meaning in the
number-numerology, map references, latitudes." Langdon reached the end of the
aisle, turned the corner,
and hurried to scan the next row of tabs as he spoke. "For many years the only
clue seemed to be that 503
began with the number five . . . one of the sacred Illuminati digits." He
paused.
"Something tells me you recently figured it out, and that's why we're here."
"Correct," Langdon said, allowing himself a rare moment of pride in his work.
"Are you familiar with a
book by Galileo called Diàlogo?"
"Of course. Famous among scientists as the ultimate scientific sellout."
Sellout wasn't quite the word Langdon would have used, but he knew what Vittoria
meant. In the early
1630s, Galileo had wanted to publish a book endorsing the Copernican
heliocentric model of the solar
system, but the Vatican would not permit the book's release unless Galileo
included equally persuasive
evidence for the church's geocentric model-a model Galileo knew to be dead
wrong. Galileo had no choice
but to acquiesce to the church's demands and publish a book giving equal time to
both the accurate and
inaccurate models.
"As you probably know," Langdon said, "despite Galileo's compromise, Diàlogo was
still seen as
heretical, and the Vatican placed him under house arrest."
"No good deed goes unpunished."
Langdon smiled. "So true. And yet Galileo was persistent. While under house
arrest, he secretly wrote a
lesser-known manuscript that scholars often confuse with Diàlogo. That book is
called Discorsi."
Vittoria nodded. "I've heard of it. Discourses on the Tides."
Langdon stopped short, amazed she had heard of the obscure publication about
planetary motion and its
effect on the tides.
"Hey," she said, "you're talking to an Italian marine physicist whose father
worshiped Galileo."
Langdon laughed. Discorsi however was not what they were looking for. Langdon
explained that Discorsi
had not been Galileo's only work while under house arrest. Historians believed
he had also written an
obscure booklet called Diagramma.
"Diagramma della Verità," Langdon said. "Diagram of Truth."
"Never heard of it."
"I'm not surprised. Diagramma was Galileo's most secretive work-supposedly some
sort of treatise on
scientific facts he held to be true but was not allowed to share. Like some of
Galileo's previous
manuscripts, Diagramma was smuggled out of Rome by a friend and quietly
published in Holland. The
booklet became wildly popular in the European scientific underground. Then the
Vatican caught wind of it
and went on a book-burning campaign."
Vittoria now looked intrigued. "And you think Diagramma contained the clue? The
segno. The information
about the Path of Illumination."
"Diagramma is how Galileo got the word out. That I'm sure of." Langdon entered
the third row of vaults
and continued surveying the indicator tabs. "Archivists have been looking for a
copy of Diagramma for
years. But between the Vatican burnings and the booklet's low permanence rating,
the booklet has
disappeared off the face of the earth."
"Permanence rating?"
"Durability. Archivists rate documents one through ten for their structural
integrity. Diagramma was
printed on sedge papyrus. It's like tissue paper. Life span of no more than a
century."
"Why not something stronger?"
"Galileo's behest. To protect his followers. This way any scientists caught with
a copy could simply drop it
in water and the booklet would dissolve. It was great for destruction of
evidence, but terrible for archivists.
It is believed that only one copy of Diagramma survived beyond the eighteenth
century."
"One?" Vittoria looked momentarily starstruck as she glanced around the room.
"And it's here?"
"Confiscated from the Netherlands by the Vatican shortly after Galileo's death.
I've been petitioning to see
it for years now. Ever since I realized what was in it."
As if reading Langdon's mind, Vittoria moved across the aisle and began scanning
the adjacent bay of
vaults, doubling their pace.
"Thanks," he said. "Look for reference tabs that have anything to do with
Galileo, science, scientists.
You'll know it when you see it."
"Okay, but you still haven't told me how you figured out Diagramma contained the
clue. It had something
to do with the number you kept seeing in Illuminati letters? 503?"
Langdon smiled. "Yes. It took some time, but I finally figured out that 503 is a
simple code. It clearly
points to Diagramma."
For an instant Langdon relived his moment of unexpected revelation: August 16.
Two years ago. He was
standing lakeside at the wedding of the son of a colleague. Bagpipes droned on
the water as the wedding
party made their unique entrance . . . across the lake on a barge. The craft was
festooned with flowers and
wreaths. It carried a Roman numeral painted proudly on the hull-DCII.
Puzzled by the marking Langdon asked the father of the bride, "What's with 602?"
"602?"
Langdon pointed to the barge. "DCII is the Roman numeral for 602."
The man laughed. "That's not a Roman numeral. That's the name of the barge."
"The DCII?"
The man nodded. "The Dick and Connie II."
Langdon felt sheepish. Dick and Connie were the wedding couple. The barge
obviously had been named in
their honor. "What happened to the DCI?"
The man groaned. "It sank yesterday during the rehearsal luncheon."
Langdon laughed. "Sorry to hear that." He looked back out at the barge. The
DCII, he thought. Like a
miniature QEII. A second later, it had hit him.
Now Langdon turned to Vittoria. "503," he said, "as I mentioned, is a code. It's
an Illuminati trick for
concealing what was actually intended as a Roman numeral. The number 503 in
Roman numerals is-"
"DIII."
Langdon glanced up. "That was fast. Please don't tell me you're an Illuminata."
She laughed. "I use Roman numerals to codify pelagic strata."
Of course, Langdon thought. Don't we all.
Vittoria looked over. "So what is the meaning of DIII?"
"DI and DII and DIII are very old abbreviations. They were used by ancient
scientists to distinguish
between the three Galilean documents most commonly confused.
Vittoria drew a quick breath. "Diàlogo . . . Discorsi . . . Diagramma."
"D-one. D-two. D-three. All scientific. All controversial. 503 is DIII.
Diagramma. The third of his books."
Vittoria looked troubled. "But one thing still doesn't make sense. If this
segno, this clue, this advertisement
about the Path of Illumination was really in Galileo's Diagramma, why didn't the
Vatican see it when they
repossessed all the copies?"
"They may have seen it and not noticed. Remember the Illuminati markers? Hiding
things in plain view?
Dissimulation? The segno apparently was hidden the same way-in plain view.
Invisible to those who were
not looking for it. And also invisible to those who didn't understand it."
"Meaning?"
"Meaning Galileo hid it well. According to historic record, the segno was
revealed in a mode the Illuminati
called lingua pura."
"The pure language?"
"Yes."
"Mathematics?"
"That's my guess. Seems pretty obvious. Galileo was a scientist after all, and
he was writing for scientists.
Math would be a logical language in which to lay out the clue. The booklet is
called Diagramma, so
mathematical diagrams may also be part of the code."
Vittoria sounded only slightly more hopeful. "I suppose Galileo could have
created some sort of
mathematical code that went unnoticed by the clergy."
"You don't sound sold," Langdon said, moving down the row.
"I'm not. Mainly because you aren't. If you were so sure about DIII, why didn't
you publish? Then
someone who did have access to the Vatican Archives could have come in here and
checked out
Diagramma a long time ago."
"I didn't want to publish," Langdon said. "I had worked hard to find the
information and-" He stopped
himself, embarrassed.
"You wanted the glory."
Langdon felt himself flush. "In a manner of speaking. It's just that-"
"Don't look so embarrassed. You're talking to a scientist. Publish or perish. At
CERN we call it
'Substantiate or suffocate.' "
"It wasn't only wanting to be the first. I was also concerned that if the wrong
people found out about the
information in Diagramma, it might disappear."
"The wrong people being the Vatican?"
"Not that they are wrong, per se, but the church has always downplayed the
Illuminati threat. In the early
1900s the Vatican went so far as to say the Illuminati were a figment of
overactive imaginations. The
clergy felt, and perhaps rightly so, that the last thing Christians needed to
know was that there was a very
powerful anti-Christian movement infiltrating their banks, politics, and
universities." Present tense, Robert,
he reminded himself. There IS a powerful anti-Christian force infiltrating their
banks, politics, and
universities.
"So you think the Vatican would have buried any evidence corroborating the
Illuminati threat?"
"Quite possibly. Any threat, real or imagined, weakens faith in the church's
power."
"One more question." Vittoria stopped short and looked at him like he was an
alien. "Are you serious?"
Langdon stopped. "What do you mean?"
"I mean is this really your plan to save the day?"
Langdon wasn't sure whether he saw amused pity or sheer terror in her eyes. "You
mean finding
Diagramma?"
"No, I mean finding Diagramma, locating a four-hundred-year-old segno,
deciphering some mathematical
code, and following an ancient trail of art that only the most brilliant
scientists in history have ever been
able to follow . . . all in the next four hours."
Langdon shrugged. "I'm open to other suggestions."
50
R obert Langdon stood outside Archive Vault 9 and read the labels on the stacks.
BRAHE . . . CLAVIUS . . . COPERNICUS . . . KEPLER . . . NEWTON . . .
As he read the names again, he felt a sudden uneasiness. Here are the scientists
. . . but where is Galileo?
He turned to Vittoria, who was checking the contents of a nearby vault. "I found
the right theme, but
Galileo's missing."
"No he isn't," she said, frowning as she motioned to the next vault. "He's over
here. But I hope you
brought your reading glasses, because this entire vault is his."
Langdon ran over. Vittoria was right. Every indictor tab in Vault 10 carried the
same keyword.
IL PROCESO GALILEANO
Langdon let out a low whistle, now realizing why Galileo had his own vault. "The
Galileo Affair," he
marveled, peering through the glass at the dark outlines of the stacks. "The
longest and most expensive
legal proceeding in Vatican history. Fourteen years and six hundred million
lire. It's all here."
"Have a few legal documents."
"I guess lawyers haven't evolved much over the centuries."
"Neither have sharks."
Langdon strode to a large yellow button on the side of the vault. He pressed it,
and a bank of overhead
lights hummed on inside. The lights were deep red, turning the cube into a
glowing crimson cell . . . a maze
of towering shelves.
"My God," Vittoria said, looking spooked. "Are we tanning or working?"
"Parchment and vellum fades, so vault lighting is always done with dark lights."
"You could go mad in here."
Or worse, Langdon thought, moving toward the vault's sole entrance. "A quick
word of warning. Oxygen
is an oxidant, so hermetic vaults contain very little of it. It's a partial
vacuum inside. Your breathing will
feel strained."
"Hey, if old cardinals can survive it."
True, Langdon thought. May we be as lucky.
The vault entrance was a single electronic revolving door. Langdon noted the
common arrangement of four
access buttons on the door's inner shaft, one accessible from each compartment.
When a button was
pressed, the motorized door would kick into gear and make the conventional half
rotation before grinding
to a halt-a standard procedure to preserve the integrity of the inner
atmosphere.
"After I'm in," Langdon said, "just press the button and follow me through.
There's only eight percent
humidity inside, so be prepared to feel some dry mouth."
Langdon stepped into the rotating compartment and pressed the button. The door
buzzed loudly and began
to rotate. As he followed its motion, Langdon prepared his body for the physical
shock that always
accompanied the first few seconds in a hermetic vault. Entering a sealed archive
was like going from sea
level to 20,000 feet in an instant. Nausea and light-headedness were not
uncommon. Double vision, double
over, he reminded himself, quoting the archivist's mantra. Langdon felt his ears
pop. There was a hiss of
air, and the door spun to a stop.
He was in.
Langdon's first realization was that the air inside was thinner than he had
anticipated. The Vatican, it
seemed, took their archives a bit more seriously than most. Langdon fought the
gag reflex and relaxed his
chest while his pulmonary capillaries dilated. The tightness passed quickly.
Enter the Dolphin, he mused,
gratified his fifty laps a day were good for something. Breathing more normally
now, he looked around the
vault. Despite the transparent outer walls, he felt a familiar anxiety. I'm in a
box, he thought. A blood red
box.
The door buzzed behind him, and Langdon turned to watch Vittoria enter. When she
arrived inside, her
eyes immediately began watering, and she started breathing heavily.
"Give it a minute," Langdon said. "If you get light-headed, bend over."
"I . . . feel . . ." Vittoria choked, "like I'm . . . scuba diving . . . with
the wrong . . . mixture."
Langdon waited for her to acclimatize. He knew she would be fine. Vittoria Vetra
was obviously in terrific
shape, nothing like the doddering ancient Radcliffe alumnae Langdon had once
squired through Widener
Library's hermetic vault. The tour had ended with Langdon giving mouth-to-mouth
to an old woman who'd
almost aspirated her false teeth.
"Feeling better?" he asked.
Vittoria nodded.
"I rode your damn space plane, so I thought I owed you."
This brought a smile. "Touché."
Langdon reached into the box beside the door and extracted some white cotton
gloves.
"Formal affair?" Vittoria asked.
"Finger acid. We can't handle the documents without them. You'll need a pair."
Vittoria donned some gloves. "How long do we have?"
Langdon checked his Mickey Mouse watch. "It's just past seven."
"We have to find this thing within the hour."
"Actually," Langdon said, "we don't have that kind of time." He pointed overhead
to a filtered duct.
"Normally the curator would turn on a reoxygenation system when someone is
inside the vault. Not today.
Twenty minutes, we'll both be sucking wind."
Vittoria blanched noticeably in the reddish glow.
Langdon smiled and smoothed his gloves. "Substantiate or suffocate, Ms. Vetra.
Mickey's ticking."
51
B BC reporter Gunther Glick stared at the cell phone in his hand for ten seconds
before he finally hung
up.
Chinita Macri studied him from the back of the van. "What happened? Who was
that?"
Glick turned, feeling like a child who had just received a Christmas gift he
feared was not really for him. "I
just got a tip. Something's going on inside the Vatican."
"It's called conclave," Chinita said. "Helluva tip."
"No, something else." Something big. He wondered if the story the caller had
just told him could possibly
be true. Glick felt ashamed when he realized he was praying it was. "What if I
told you four cardinals have
been kidnapped and are going to be murdered at different churches tonight."
"I'd say you're being hazed by someone at the office with a sick sense of
humor."
"What if I told you we were going to be given the exact location of the first
murder?"
"I'd want to know who the hell you just talked to."
"He didn't say."
"Perhaps because he's full of shit?"
Glick had come to expect Macri's cynicism, but what she was forgetting was that
liars and lunatics had
been Glick's business for almost a decade at the British Tattler. This caller
had been neither. This man had
been coldly sane. Logical. I will call you just before eight, the man had said,
and tell you where the first
killing will occur. The images you record will make you famous. When Glick had
demanded why the caller
was giving him this information, the answer had been as icy as the man's
Mideastern accent. The media is
the right arm of anarchy.
"He told me something else too," Glick said.
"What? That Elvis Presley was just elected Pope?"
"Dial into the BBC database, will you?" Glick's adrenaline was pumping now. "I
want to see what other
stories we've run on these guys."
"What guys?"
"Indulge me."
Macri sighed and pulled up the connection to the BBC database. "This'll take a
minute."
Glick's mind was swimming. "The caller was very intent to know if I had a
cameraman."
"Videographer."
"And if we could transmit live."
"One point five three seven megahertz. What is this about?" The database beeped.
"Okay, we're in. Who is
it you're looking for?"
Glick gave her the keyword.
Macri turned and stared. "I sure as hell hope you're kidding."
52
T he internal organization of Archival Vault 10 was not as intuitive as Langdon
had hoped, and the
Diagramma manuscript did not appear to be located with other similar Galilean
publications. Without
access to the computerized Biblion and a reference locator, Langdon and Vittoria
were stuck.
"You're sure Diagramma is in here?" Vittoria asked.
"Positive. It's a confirmed listing in both the Uficcio della Propaganda delle
Fede-"
"Fine. As long as you're sure." She headed left, while he went right.
Langdon began his manual search. He needed every bit of self-restraint not to
stop and read every treasure
he passed. The collection was staggering. The Assayer . . . The Starry Messenger
. . . The Sunspot Letters . .
. Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina . . . Apologia pro Galileo . . . On and
on.
It was Vittoria who finally struck gold near the back of the vault. Her throaty
voice called out,
"Diagramma della Verità!"
Langdon dashed through the crimson haze to join her. "Where?"
Vittoria pointed, and Langdon immediately realized why they had not found it
earlier. The manuscript was
in a folio bin, not on the shelves. Folio bins were a common means of storing
unbound pages. The label on
the front of the container left no doubt about the contents.
DIAGRAMMA DELLA VERITA
Galileo Galilei, 1639
Langdon dropped to his knees, his heart pounding. "Diagramma." He gave her a
grin. "Nice work. Help
me pull out this bin."
Vittoria knelt beside him, and they heaved. The metal tray on which the bin was
sitting rolled toward them
on castors, revealing the top of the container.
"No lock?" Vittoria said, sounding surprised at the simple latch.
"Never. Documents sometimes need to be evacuated quickly. Floods and fires."
"So open it."
Langdon didn't need any encouragement. With his academic life's dream right in
front of him and the
thinning air in the chamber, he was in no mood to dawdle. He unsnapped the latch
and lifted the lid. Inside,
flat on the floor of the bin, lay a black, duck-cloth pouch. The cloth's
breathability was critical to the
preservation of its contents. Reaching in with both hands and keeping the pouch
horizontal, Langdon lifted
it out of the bin.
"I expected a treasure chest," Vittoria said. "Looks more like a pillowcase."
"Follow me," he said. Holding the bag before him like a sacred offering, Langdon
walked to the center of
the vault where he found the customary glass-topped archival exam table.
Although the central location
was intended to minimize in-vault travel of documents, researchers appreciated
the privacy the surrounding
stacks afforded. Career-making discoveries were uncovered in the top vaults of
the world, and most
academics did not like rivals peering through the glass as they worked.
Langdon lay the pouch on the table and unbuttoned the opening. Vittoria stood
by. Rummaging through a
tray of archivist tools, Langdon found the felt-pad pincers archivists called
finger cymbals-oversized
tweezers with flattened disks on each arm. As his excitement mounted, Langdon
feared at any moment he
might awake back in Cambridge with a pile of test papers to grade. Inhaling
deeply, he opened the bag.
Fingers trembling in their cotton gloves, he reached in with his tongs.
"Relax," Vittoria said. "It's paper, not plutonium."
Langdon slid the tongs around the stack of documents inside and was careful to
apply even pressure. Then,
rather than pulling out the documents, he held them in place while he slid off
the bag-an archivist's
procedure for minimizing torque on the artifact. Not until the bag was removed
and Langdon had turned on
the exam darklight beneath the table did he begin breathing again.
Vittoria looked like a specter now, lit from below by the lamp beneath the
glass. "Small sheets," she said,
her voice reverent.
Langdon nodded. The stack of folios before them looked like loose pages from a
small paperback novel.
Langdon could see that the top sheet was an ornate pen and ink cover sheet with
the title, the date, and
Galileo's name in his own hand.
In that instant, Langdon forgot the cramped quarters, forgot his exhaustion,
forgot the horrifying situation
that had brought him here. He simply stared in wonder. Close encounters with
history always left Langdon
numbed with reverence . . . like seeing the brushstrokes on the Mona Lisa.
The muted, yellow papyrus left no doubt in Langdon's mind as to its age and
authenticity, but excluding
the inevitable fading, the document was in superb condition. Slight bleaching of
the pigment. Minor
sundering and cohesion of the papyrus. But all in all . . . in damn fine
condition. He studied the ornate hand
etching of the cover, his vision blurring in the lack of humidity. Vittoria was
silent.
"Hand me a spatula, please." Langdon motioned beside Vittoria to a tray filled
with stainless-steel archival
tools. She handed it to him. Langdon took the tool in his hand. It was a good
one. He ran his fingers across
the face to remove any static charge and then, ever so carefully, slid the blade
beneath the cover. Then,
lifting the spatula, he turned over the cover sheet.
The first page was written in longhand, the tiny, stylized calligraphy almost
impossible to read. Langdon
immediately noticed that there were no diagrams or numbers on the page. It was
an essay.
"Heliocentricity," Vittoria said, translating the heading on folio one. She
scanned the text. "Looks like
Galileo renouncing the geocentric model once and for all. Ancient Italian,
though, so no promises on the
translation."
"Forget it," Langdon said. "We're looking for math. The pure language." He used
the spatula tool to flip
the next page. Another essay. No math or diagrams. Langdon's hands began to
sweat inside his gloves.
"Movement of the Planets," Vittoria said, translating the title.
Langdon frowned. On any other day, he would have been fascinated to read it;
incredibly NASA's current
model of planetary orbits, observed through high-powered telescopes, was
supposedly almost identical to
Galileo's original predictions.
"No math," Vittoria said. "He's talking about retrograde motions and elliptical
orbits or something."
Elliptical orbits. Langdon recalled that much of Galileo's legal trouble had
begun when he described
planetary motion as elliptical. The Vatican exalted the perfection of the circle
and insisted heavenly motion
must be only circular. Galileo's Illuminati, however, saw perfection in the
ellipse as well, revering the
mathematical duality of its twin foci. The Illuminati's ellipse was prominent
even today in modern Masonic
tracing boards and footing inlays.
"Next," Vittoria said.
Langdon flipped.
"Lunar phases and tidal motion," she said. "No numbers. No diagrams."
Langdon flipped again. Nothing. He kept flipping through a dozen or so pages.
Nothing. Nothing. Nothing.
"I thought this guy was a mathematician," Vittoria said. "This is all text."
Langdon felt the air in his lungs beginning to thin. His hopes were thinning
too. The pile was waning.
"Nothing here," Vittoria said. "No math. A few dates, a few standard figures,
but nothing that looks like it
could be a clue."
Langdon flipped over the last folio and sighed. It, too, was an essay.
"Short book," Vittoria said, frowning.
Langdon nodded.
"Merda, as we say in Rome."
Shit is right, Langdon thought. His reflection in the glass seemed mocking, like
the image staring back at
him this morning from his bay window. An aging ghost. "There's got to be
something," he said, the hoarse
desperation in his voice surprising him. "The segno is here somewhere. I know
it!"
"Maybe you were wrong about DIII?"
Langdon turned and stared at her.
"Okay," she agreed, "DIII makes perfect sense. But maybe the clue isn't
mathematical?"
"Lingua pura. What else would it be?"
"Art?"
"Except there are no diagrams or pictures in the book."
"All I know is that lingua pura refers to something other than Italian. Math
just seems logical."
"I agree."
Langdon refused to accept defeat so quickly. "The numbers must be written
longhand. The math must be in
words rather than equations."
"It'll take some time to read all the pages."
"Time's something we don't have. We'll have to split the work." Langdon flipped
the stack back over to
the beginning. "I know enough Italian to spot numbers." Using his spatula, he
cut the stack like a deck of
cards and lay the first half-dozen pages in front of Vittoria. "It's in here
somewhere. I'm sure."
Vittoria reached down and flipped her first page by hand.
"Spatula!" Langdon said, grabbing her an extra tool from the tray. "Use the
spatula."
"I'm wearing gloves," she grumbled. "How much damage could I cause?"
"Just use it."
Vittoria picked up the spatula. "You feeling what I'm feeling?"
"Tense?"
"No. Short of breath."
Langdon was definitely starting to feel it too. The air was thinning faster than
he had imagined. He knew
they had to hurry. Archival conundrums were nothing new for him, but usually he
had more than a few
minutes to work them out. Without another word, Langdon bowed his head and began
translating the first
page in his stack.
Show yourself, damn it! Show yourself!
53
S omewhere beneath Rome the dark figure prowled down a stone ramp into the
underground tunnel. The
ancient passageway was lit only by torches, making the air hot and thick. Up
ahead the frightened voices of
grown men called out in vain, echoing in the cramped spaces.
As he rounded the corner he saw them, exactly as he had left them-four old men,
terrified, sealed behind
rusted iron bars in a stone cubicle.
"Qui êtes-vous?" one of the men demanded in French. "What do you want with us?"
"Hilfe!" another said in German. "Let us go!"
"Are you aware who we are?" one asked in English, his accent Spanish.
"Silence," the raspy voice commanded. There was a finality about the word.
The fourth prisoner, an Italian, quiet and thoughtful, looked into the inky void
of his captor's eyes and
swore he saw hell itself. God help us, he thought.
The killer checked his watch and then returned his gaze to the prisoners. "Now
then," he said. "Who will be
first?"
54
I nside Archive Vault 10 Robert Langdon recited Italian numbers as he scanned
the calligraphy before
him. Mille . . . centi . . . uno, duo, tre . . . cincuanta. I need a numerical
reference! Anything, damnit!
When he reached the end of his current folio, he lifted the spatula to flip the
page. As he aligned the blade
with the next page, he fumbled, having difficulty holding the tool steady.
Minutes later, he looked down
and realized he had abandoned his spatula and was turning pages by hand. Oops,
he thought, feeling
vaguely criminal. The lack of oxygen was affecting his inhibitions. Looks like
I'll burn in archivist's hell.
"About damn time," Vittoria choked when she saw Langdon turning pages by hand.
She dropped her
spatula and followed suit.
"Any luck?"
Vittoria shook her head. "Nothing that looks purely mathematical. I'm skimming .
. . but none of this reads
like a clue."
Langdon continued translating his folios with increasing difficulty. His Italian
skills were rocky at best, and
the tiny penmanship and archaic language was making it slow going. Vittoria
reached the end of her stack
before Langdon and looked disheartened as she flipped the pages back over. She
hunkered down for
another more intense inspection.
When Langdon finished his final page, he cursed under his breath and looked over
at Vittoria. She was
scowling, squinting at something on one of her folios. "What is it?" he asked.
Vittoria did not look up. "Did you have any footnotes on your pages?"
"Not that I noticed. Why?"
"This page has a footnote. It's obscured in a crease."
Langdon tried to see what she was looking at, but all he could make out was the
page number in the upper
right-hand corner of the sheet. Folio 5. It took a moment for the coincidence to
register, and even when it
did the connection seemed vague. Folio Five. Five, Pythagoras, pentagrams,
Illuminati. Langdon
wondered if the Illuminati would have chosen page five on which to hide their
clue. Through the reddish
fog surrounding them, Langdon sensed a tiny ray of hope. "Is the footnote
mathematical?"
Vittoria shook her head. "Text. One line. Very small printing. Almost
illegible."
His hopes faded. "It's supposed to be math. Lingua pura."
"Yeah, I know." She hesitated. "I think you'll want to hear this, though."
Langdon sensed excitement in her
voice.
"Go ahead."
Squinting at the folio, Vittoria read the line. "The path of light is laid, the
sacred test."
The words were nothing like what Langdon had imagined. "I'm sorry?"
Vittoria repeated the line. "The path of light is laid, the sacred test."
"Path of light?" Langdon felt his posture straightening.
"That's what it says. Path of light."
As the words sank in, Langdon felt his delirium pierced by an instant of
clarity. The path of light is laid, the
sacred test. He had no idea how it helped them, but the line was as direct a
reference to the Path of
Illumination as he could imagine. Path of light. Sacred test. His head felt like
an engine revving on bad
fuel. "Are you sure of the translation?"
Vittoria hesitated. "Actually . . ." She glanced over at him with a strange
look. "It's not technically a
translation. The line is written in English."
For an instant, Langdon thought the acoustics in the chamber had affected his
hearing. "English?"
Vittoria pushed the document over to him, and Langdon read the minuscule
printing at the bottom of the
page. "The path of light is laid, the sacred test. English? What is English
doing in an Italian book?"
Vittoria shrugged. She too was looking tipsy. "Maybe English is what they meant
by the lingua pura? It's
considered the international language of science. It's all we speak at CERN."
"But this was in the 1600s," Langdon argued. "Nobody spoke English in Italy, not
even-" He stopped short,
realizing what he was about to say. "Not even . . . the clergy." Langdon's
academic mind hummed in high
gear. "In the 1600s," he said, talking faster now, "English was one language the
Vatican had not yet
embraced. They dealt in Italian, Latin, German, even Spanish and French, but
English was totally foreign
inside the Vatican. They considered English a polluted, free-thinkers language
for profane men like
Chaucer and Shakespeare." Langdon flashed suddenly on the Illuminati brands of
Earth, Air, Fire, Water.
The legend that the brands were in English now made a bizarre kind of sense.
"So you're saying maybe Galileo considered English la lingua pura because it was
the one language the
Vatican did not control?"
"Yes. Or maybe by putting the clue in English, Galileo was subtly restricting
the readership away from the
Vatican."
"But it's not even a clue," Vittoria argued. "The path of light is laid, the
sacred test? What the hell does
that mean?"
She's right, Langdon thought. The line didn't help in any way. But as he spoke
the phrase again in his
mind, a strange fact hit him. Now that's odd, he thought. What are the chances
of that?
"We need to get out of here," Vittoria said, sounding hoarse.
Langdon wasn't listening. The path of light is laid, the sacred test. "It's a
damn line of iambic pentameter,"
he said suddenly, counting the syllables again. "Five couplets of alternating
stressed and unstressed
syllables."
Vittoria looked lost. "Iambic who?"
For an instant Langdon was back at Phillips Exeter Academy sitting in a Saturday
morning English class.
Hell on earth. The school baseball star, Peter Greer, was having trouble
remembering the number of
couplets necessary for a line of Shakespearean iambic pentameter. Their
professor, an animated
schoolmaster named Bissell, leapt onto the table and bellowed, "Penta-meter,
Greer! Think of home plate!
A penta-gon! Five sides! Penta! Penta! Penta! Jeeeesh!"
Five couplets, Langdon thought. Each couplet, by definition, having two
syllables. He could not believe in
his entire career he had never made the connection. Iambic pentameter was a
symmetrical meter based on
the sacred Illuminati numbers of 5 and 2!
You're reaching! Langdon told himself, trying to push it from his mind. A
meaningless coincidence! But
the thought stuck. Five . . . for Pythagoras and the pentagram. Two . . . for
the duality of all things.
A moment later, another realization sent a numbing sensation down his legs.
Iambic pentameter, on account
of its simplicity, was often called "pure verse" or "pure meter." La lingua
pura? Could this have been the
pure language the Illuminati had been referring to? The path of light is laid,
the sacred test . . .
"Uh oh," Vittoria said.
Langdon wheeled to see her rotating the folio upside down. He felt a knot in his
gut. Not again. "There's no
way that line is an ambigram!"
"No, it's not an ambigram . . . but it's . . ." She kept turning the document,
90 degrees at every turn.
"It's what?"
Vittoria looked up. "It's not the only line."
"There's another?"
"There's a different line on every margin. Top, bottom, left, and right. I think
it's a poem."
"Four lines?" Langdon bristled with excitement. Galileo was a poet? "Let me
see!"
Vittoria did not relinquish the page. She kept turning the page in quarter
turns. "I didn't see the lines before
because they're on the edges." She cocked her head over the last line. "Huh. You
know what? Galileo
didn't even write this."
"What!"
"The poem is signed John Milton."
"John Milton?" The influential English poet who wrote Paradise Lost was a
contemporary of Galileo's and
a savant who conspiracy buffs put at the top of their list of Illuminati
suspects. Milton's alleged affiliation
with Galileo's Illuminati was one legend Langdon suspected was true. Not only
had Milton made a welldocumented
1638 pilgrimage to Rome to "commune with enlightened men," but he had
held meetings with