Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
wanting to license the new discovery. "No such thing as bad press," Kohler would
always say.
Sylvie wondered if she should page Kohler, wherever the hell he was, and tell
him to turn on the news. Did
he care? Had he heard? Of course, he'd heard. He was probably videotaping the
entire report with his
freaky little camcorder, smiling for the first time in a year.
As Sylvie continued down the hall, she finally found a lounge where the mood was
subdued . . . almost
melancholy. Here the scientists watching the report were some of CERN's oldest
and most respected. They
did not even look up as Sylvie slipped in and took a seat.
On the other side of CERN, in Leonardo Vetra's frigid apartment, Maximilian
Kohler had finished reading
the leather-bound journal he'd taken from Vetra's bedside table. Now he was
watching the television
reports. After a few minutes, he replaced Vetra's journal, turned off the
television, and left the apartment.
Far away, in Vatican City, Cardinal Mortati carried another tray of ballots to
the Sistine Chapel chimney.
He burned them, and the smoke was black.
Two ballotings. No Pope.
83
F lashlights were no match for the voluminous blackness of St. Peter's Basilica.
The void overhead
pressed down like a starless night, and Vittoria felt the emptiness spread out
around her like a desolate
ocean. She stayed close as the Swiss Guards and the camerlegno pushed on. High
above, a dove cooed and
fluttered away.
As if sensing her discomfort, the camerlegno dropped back and lay a hand on her
shoulder. A tangible
strength transferred in the touch, as if the man were magically infusing her
with the calm she needed to do
what they were about to do.
What are we about to do? she thought. This is madness!
And yet, Vittoria knew, for all its impiety and inevitable horror, the task at
hand was inescapable. The
grave decisions facing the camerlegno required information . . . information
entombed in a sarcophagus in
the Vatican Grottoes. She wondered what they would find. Did the Illuminati
murder the Pope? Did their
power really reach so far? Am I really about to perform the first papal autopsy?
Vittoria found it ironic that she felt more apprehensive in this unlit church
than she would swimming at
night with barracuda. Nature was her refuge. She understood nature. But it was
matters of man and spirit
that left her mystified. Killer fish gathering in the dark conjured images of
the press gathering outside. TV
footage of branded bodies reminded her of her father's corpse . . . and the
killer's harsh laugh. The killer
was out there somewhere. Vittoria felt the anger drowning her fear.
As they circled past a pillar-thicker in girth than any redwood she could
imagine-Vittoria saw an orange
glow up ahead. The light seemed to emanate from beneath the floor in the center
of the basilica. As they
came closer, she realized what she was seeing. It was the famous sunken
sanctuary beneath the main altarthe
sumptuous underground chamber that held the Vatican's most sacred relics. As
they drew even with the
gate surrounding the hollow, Vittoria gazed down at the golden coffer surrounded
by scores of glowing oil
lamps.
"St. Peter's bones?" she asked, knowing full well that they were. Everyone who
came to St. Peter's knew
what was in the golden casket.
"Actually, no," the camerlegno said. "A common misconception. That's not a
reliquary. The box holds
palliums-woven sashes that the Pope gives to newly elected cardinals."
"But I thought-"
"As does everyone. The guidebooks label this as St. Peter's tomb, but his true
grave is two stories beneath
us, buried in the earth. The Vatican excavated it in the forties. Nobody is
allowed down there."
Vittoria was shocked. As they moved away from the glowing recession into the
darkness again, she thought
of the stories she'd heard of pilgrims traveling thousands of miles to look at
that golden box, thinking they
were in the presence of St. Peter. "Shouldn't the Vatican tell people?"
"We all benefit from a sense of contact with divinity . . . even if it is only
imagined."
Vittoria, as a scientist, could not argue the logic. She had read countless
studies of the placebo effectaspirins
curing cancer in people who believed they were using a miracle drug.
What was faith, after all?
"Change," the camerlegno said, "is not something we do well within Vatican City.
Admitting our past
faults, modernization, are things we historically eschew. His Holiness was
trying to change that." He
paused. "Reaching to the modern world. Searching for new paths to God."
Vittoria nodded in the dark. "Like science?"
"To be honest, science seems irrelevant."
"Irrelevant?" Vittoria could think of a lot of words to describe science, but in
the modern world "irrelevant"
did not seem like one of them.
"Science can heal, or science can kill. It depends on the soul of the man using
the science. It is the soul that
interests me."
"When did you hear your call?"
"Before I was born."
Vittoria looked at him.
"I'm sorry, that always seems like a strange question. What I mean is that I've
always known I would serve
God. From the moment I could first think. It wasn't until I was a young man,
though, in the military, that I
truly understood my purpose."
Vittoria was surprised. "You were in the military?"
"Two years. I refused to fire a weapon, so they made me fly instead. Medevac
helicopters. In fact, I still fly
from time to time."
Vittoria tried to picture the young priest flying a helicopter. Oddly, she could
see him perfectly behind the
controls. Camerlegno Ventresca possessed a grit that seemed to accentuate his
conviction rather than cloud
it. "Did you ever fly the Pope?"
"Heavens no. We left that precious cargo to the professionals. His Holiness let
me take the helicopter to our
retreat in Gandolfo sometimes." He paused, looking at her. "Ms. Vetra, thank you
for your help here today.
I am very sorry about your father. Truly."
"Thank you."
"I never knew my father. He died before I was born. I lost my mother when I was
ten."
Vittoria looked up. "You were orphaned?" She felt a sudden kinship.
"I survived an accident. An accident that took my mother."
"Who took care of you?"
"God," the camerlegno said. "He quite literally sent me another father. A bishop
from Palermo appeared at
my hospital bed and took me in. At the time I was not surprised. I had sensed
God's watchful hand over me
even as a boy. The bishop's appearance simply confirmed what I had already
suspected, that God had
somehow chosen me to serve him."
"You believed God chose you?"
"I did. And I do." There was no trace of conceit in the camerlegno's voice, only
gratitude. "I worked under
the bishop's tutelage for many years. He eventually became a cardinal. Still, he
never forgot me. He is the
father I remember." A beam of a flashlight caught the camerlegno's face, and
Vittoria sensed a loneliness
in his eyes.
The group arrived beneath a towering pillar, and their lights converged on an
opening in the floor. Vittoria
looked down at the staircase descending into the void and suddenly wanted to
turn back. The guards were
already helping the camerlegno onto the stairs. They helped her next.
"What became of him?" she asked, descending, trying to keep her voice steady.
"The cardinal who took
you in?"
"He left the College of Cardinals for another position."
Vittoria was surprised.
"And then, I'm sorry to say, he passed on."
"Le mie condoglianze," Vittoria said. "Recently?"
The camerlegno turned, shadows accentuating the pain on his face. "Exactly
fifteen days ago. We are going
to see him right now."
84
T he dark lights glowed hot inside the archival vault. This vault was much
smaller than the previous one
Langdon had been in. Less air. Less time. He wished he'd asked Olivetti to turn
on the recirculating fans.
Langdon quickly located the section of assets containing the ledgers cataloging
Belle Arti. The section was
impossible to miss. It occupied almost eight full stacks. The Catholic church
owned millions of individual
pieces worldwide.
Langdon scanned the shelves searching for Gianlorenzo Bernini. He began his
search about midway down
the first stack, at about the spot he thought the B's would begin. After a
moment of panic fearing the ledger
was missing, he realized, to his greater dismay, that the ledgers were not
arranged alphabetically. Why am I
not surprised?
It was not until Langdon circled back to the beginning of the collection and
climbed a rolling ladder to the
top shelf that he understood the vault's organization. Perched precariously on
the upper stacks he found the
fattest ledgers of all-those belonging to the masters of the
Renaissance-Michelangelo, Raphael, da Vinci,
Botticelli. Langdon now realized, appropriate to a vault called "Vatican
Assets," the ledgers were arranged
by the overall monetary value of each artist's collection. Sandwiched between
Raphael and Michelangelo,
Langdon found the ledger marked Bernini. It was over five inches thick.
Already short of breath and struggling with the cumbersome volume, Langdon
descended the ladder. Then,
like a kid with a comic book, he spread himself out on the floor and opened the
cover.
The book was cloth-bound and very solid. The ledger was handwritten in Italian.
Each page cataloged a
single work, including a short description, date, location, cost of materials,
and sometimes a rough sketch
of the piece. Langdon fanned through the pages . . . over eight hundred in all.
Bernini had been a busy man.
As a young student of art, Langdon had wondered how single artists could create
so much work in their
lifetimes. Later he learned, much to his disappointment, that famous artists
actually created very little of
their own work. They ran studios where they trained young artists to carry out
their designs. Sculptors like
Bernini created miniatures in clay and hired others to enlarge them into marble.
Langdon knew that if
Bernini had been required to personally complete all of his commissions, he
would still be working today.
"Index," he said aloud, trying to ward off the mental cobwebs. He flipped to the
back of the book, intending
to look under the letter F for titles containing the word fuòco-fire-but the F's
were not together. Langdon
swore under his breath. What the hell do these people have against
alphabetizing?
The entries had apparently been logged chronologically, one by one, as Bernini
created each new work.
Everything was listed by date. No help at all.
As Langdon stared at the list, another disheartening thought occurred to him.
The title of the sculpture he
was looking for might not even contain the word Fire. The previous two
works-Habakkuk and the Angel
and West Ponente-had not contained specific references to Earth or Air.
He spent a minute or two flipping randomly through the ledger in hopes that an
illustration might jump out
at him. Nothing did. He saw dozens of obscure works he had never heard of, but
he also saw plenty he
recognized . . . Daniel and the Lion, Apollo and Daphne, as well as a half dozen
fountains. When he saw
the fountains, his thoughts skipped momentarily ahead. Water. He wondered if the
fourth altar of science
was a fountain. A fountain seemed a perfect tribute to water. Langdon hoped they
could catch the killer
before he had to consider Water-Bernini had carved dozens of fountains in Rome,
most of them in front of
churches.
Langdon turned back to the matter at hand. Fire. As he looked through the book,
Vittoria's words
encouraged him. You were familiar with the first two sculptures . . . you
probably know this one too. As he
turned to the index again, he scanned for titles he knew. Some were familiar,
but none jumped out.
Langdon now realized he would never complete his search before passing out, so
he decided, against his
better judgment, that he would have to take the book outside the vault. It's
only a ledger, he told himself.
It's not like I'm removing an original Galilean folio. Langdon recalled the
folio in his breast pocket and
reminded himself to return it before leaving.
Hurrying now, he reached down to lift the volume, but as he did, he saw
something that gave him pause.
Although there were numerous notations throughout the index, the one that had
just caught his eye seemed
odd.
The note indicated that the famous Bernini sculpture, The Ecstasy of St. Teresa,
shortly after its unveiling,
had been moved from its original location inside the Vatican. This in itself was
not what had caught
Langdon's eye. He was already familiar with the sculpture's checkered past.
Though some thought it a
masterpiece, Pope Urban VIII had rejected The Ecstasy of St. Teresa as too
sexually explicit for the
Vatican. He had banished it to some obscure chapel across town. What had caught
Langdon's eye was that
the work had apparently been placed in one of the five churches on his list.
What was more, the note
indicated it had been moved there per suggerimento del artista.
By suggestion of the artist? Langdon was confused. It made no sense that Bernini
had suggested his
masterpiece be hidden in some obscure location. All artists wanted their work
displayed prominently, not in
some remote-
Langdon hesitated. Unless . . .
He was fearful even to entertain the notion. Was it possible? Had Bernini
intentionally created a work so
explicit that it forced the Vatican to hide it in some out-of-the-way spot? A
location perhaps that Bernini
himself could suggest? Maybe a remote church on a direct line with West
Ponente's breath?
As Langdon's excitement mounted, his vague familiarity with the statue
intervened, insisting the work had
nothing to do with fire. The sculpture, as anyone who had seen it could attest,
was anything but scientificpornographic
maybe, but certainly not scientific. An English critic had once
condemned The Ecstasy of St.
Teresa as "the most unfit ornament ever to be placed in a Christian Church."
Langdon certainly understood
the controversy. Though brilliantly rendered, the statue depicted St. Teresa on
her back in the throes of a
toe-curling orgasm. Hardly Vatican fare.
Langdon hurriedly flipped to the ledger's description of the work. When he saw
the sketch, he felt an
instantaneous and unexpected tingle of hope. In the sketch, St. Teresa did
indeed appear to be enjoying
herself, but there was another figure in the statue who Langdon had forgotten
was there.
An angel.
The sordid legend suddenly came back . . .
St. Teresa was a nun sainted after she claimed an angel had paid her a blissful
visit in her sleep. Critics later
decided her encounter had probably been more sexual than spiritual. Scrawled at
the bottom of the ledger,
Langdon saw a familiar excerpt. St. Teresa's own words left little to the
imagination:
. . . his great golden spear . . . filled with fire . . . plunged into me
several times . . . penetrated to my entrails
. . . a sweetness so extreme that one could not possibly wish it to stop.
Langdon smiled. If that's not a metaphor for some serious sex, I don't know what
is. He was smiling also
because of the ledger's description of the work. Although the paragraph was in
Italian, the word fuòco
appeared a half dozen times:
. . . angel's spear tipped with point of fire . . .
. . . angel's head emanating rays of fire . . .
. . . woman inflamed by passion's fire . . .
Langdon was not entirely convinced until he glanced up at the sketch again. The
angel's fiery spear was
raised like a beacon, pointing the way. Let angels guide you on your lofty
quest. Even the type of angel
Bernini had selected seemed significant. It's a seraphim, Langdon realized.
Seraphim literally means "the
fiery one."
Robert Langdon was not a man who had ever looked for confirmation from above,
but when he read the
name of the church where the sculpture now resided, he decided he might become a
believer after all.
Santa Maria della Vittoria.
Vittoria, he thought, grinning. Perfect.
Staggering to his feet, Langdon felt a rush of dizziness. He glanced up the
ladder, wondering if he should
replace the book. The hell with it, he thought. Father Jaqui can do it. He
closed the book and left it neatly
at the bottom of the shelf.
As he made his way toward the glowing button on the vault's electronic exit, he
was breathing in shallow
gasps. Nonetheless, he felt rejuvenated by his good fortune.
His good fortune, however, ran out before he reached the exit.
Without warning, the vault let out a pained sigh. The lights dimmed, and the
exit button went dead. Then,
like an enormous expiring beast, the archival complex went totally black.
Someone had just killed power.
85
T he Holy Vatican Grottoes are located beneath the main floor of St. Peter's
Basilica. They are the burial
place of deceased Popes.
Vittoria reached the bottom of the spiral staircase and entered the grotto. The
darkened tunnel reminded her
of CERN's Large Hadron Collider-black and cold. Lit now only by the flashlights
of the Swiss Guards, the
tunnel carried a distinctly incorporeal feel. On both sides, hollow niches lined
the walls. Recessed in the
alcoves, as far as the lights let them see, the hulking shadows of sarcophagi
loomed.
An iciness raked her flesh. It's the cold, she told herself, knowing that was
only partially true. She had the
sense they were being watched, not by anyone in the flesh, but by specters in
the dark. On top of each
tomb, in full papal vestments, lay life-sized semblances of each Pope, shown in
death, arms folded across
their chests. The prostrate bodies seemed to emerge from within the tombs,
pressing upward against the
marble lids as if trying to escape their mortal restraints. The flashlight
procession moved on, and the papal
silhouettes rose and fell against the walls, stretching and vanishing in a
macabre shadowbox dance.
A silence had fallen across the group, and Vittoria couldn't tell whether it was
one of respect or
apprehension. She sensed both. The camerlegno moved with his eyes closed, as if
he knew every step by
heart. Vittoria suspected he had made this eerie promenade many times since the
Pope's death . . . perhaps
to pray at his tomb for guidance.
I worked under the cardinal's tutelage for many years, the camerlegno had said.
He was like a father to me.
Vittoria recalled the camerlegno speaking those words in reference to the
cardinal who had "saved" him
from the army. Now, however, Vittoria understood the rest of the story. That
very cardinal who had taken
the camerlegno under his wing had apparently later risen to the papacy and
brought with him his young
protégé to serve as chamberlain.
That explains a lot, Vittoria thought. She had always possessed a well-tuned
perception for others' inner
emotions, and something about the camerlegno had been nagging her all day. Since
meeting him, she had
sensed an anguish more soulful and private than the overwhelming crisis he now
faced. Behind his pious
calm, she saw a man tormented by personal demons. Now she knew her instincts had
been correct. Not
only was he facing the most devastating threat in Vatican history, but he was
doing it without his mentor
and friend . . . flying solo.
The guards slowed now, as if unsure where exactly in the darkness the most
recent Pope was buried. The
camerlegno continued assuredly and stopped before a marble tomb that seemed to
glisten brighter than the
others. Lying atop was a carved figure of the late Pope. When Vittoria
recognized his face from television,
a shot of fear gripped her. What are we doing?
"I realize we do not have much time," the camerlegno said. "I still ask we take
a moment of prayer."
The Swiss Guard all bowed their heads where they were standing. Vittoria
followed suit, her heart
pounding in the silence. The camerlegno knelt before the tomb and prayed in
Italian. As Vittoria listened to
his words, an unexpected grief surfaced as tears . . . tears for her own mentor
. . . her own holy father. The
camerlegno's words seemed as appropriate for her father as they did for the
Pope.
"Supreme father, counselor, friend." The camerlegno's voice echoed dully around
the ring. "You told me
when I was young that the voice in my heart was that of God. You told me I must
follow it no matter what
painful places it leads. I hear that voice now, asking of me impossible tasks.
Give me strength. Bestow on
me forgiveness. What I do . . . I do in the name of everything you believe.
Amen."
"Amen," the guards whispered.
Amen, Father. Vittoria wiped her eyes.
The camerlegno stood slowly and stepped away from the tomb. "Push the covering
aside."
The Swiss Guards hesitated. "Signore," one said, "by law we are at your
command." He paused. "We will
do as you say . . ."
The camerlegno seemed to read the young man's mind. "Someday I will ask your
forgiveness for placing
you in this position. Today I ask for your obedience. Vatican laws are
established to protect this church. It
is in that very spirit that I command you to break them now."
There was a moment of silence and then the lead guard gave the order. The three
men set down their
flashlights on the floor, and their shadows leapt overhead. Lit now from
beneath, the men advanced toward
the tomb. Bracing their hands against the marble covering near the head of the
tomb, they planted their feet
and prepared to push. On signal, they all thrust, straining against the enormous
slab. When the lid did not
move at all, Vittoria found herself almost hoping it was too heavy. She was
suddenly fearful of what they
would find inside.
The men pushed harder, and still the stone did not move.
"Ancora," the camerlegno said, rolling up the sleeves of his cassock and
preparing to push along with
them. "Ora!" Everyone heaved.
Vittoria was about to offer her own help, but just then, the lid began to slide.
The men dug in again, and
with an almost primal growl of stone on stone, the lid rotated off the top of
the tomb and came to rest at an
angle-the Pope's carved head now pushed back into the niche and his feet
extended out into the hallway.
Everyone stepped back.
Tentatively, a guard bent and retrieved his flashlight. Then he aimed it into
the tomb. The beam seemed to
tremble a moment, and then the guard held it steady. The other guards gathered
one by one. Even in the
darkness Vittoria sensed them recoil. In succession, they crossed themselves.
The camerlegno shuddered when he looked into the tomb, his shoulders dropping
like weights. He stood a
long moment before turning away.
Vittoria had feared the corpse's mouth might be clenched tight with rigor mortis
and that she would have to
suggest breaking the jaw to see the tongue. She now saw it would be unnecessary.
The cheeks had
collapsed, and the Pope's mouth gaped wide.
His tongue was black as death.
86
N o light. No sound.
The Secret Archives were black.
Fear, Langdon now realized, was an intense motivator. Short of breath, he
fumbled through the blackness
toward the revolving door. He found the button on the wall and rammed his palm
against it. Nothing
happened. He tried again. The door was dead.
Spinning blind, he called out, but his voice emerged strangled. The peril of his
predicament suddenly
closed in around him. His lungs strained for oxygen as the adrenaline doubled
his heart rate. He felt like
someone had just punched him in the gut.
When he threw his weight into the door, for an instant he thought he felt the
door start to turn. He pushed
again, seeing stars. Now he realized it was the entire room turning, not the
door. Staggering away, Langdon
tripped over the base of a rolling ladder and fell hard. He tore his knee
against the edge of a book stack.
Swearing, he got up and groped for the ladder.
He found it. He had hoped it would be heavy wood or iron, but it was aluminum.
He grabbed the ladder and
held it like a battering ram. Then he ran through the dark at the glass wall. It
was closer than he thought.
The ladder hit head-on, bouncing off. From the feeble sound of the collision,
Langdon knew he was going
to need a hell of a lot more than an aluminum ladder to break this glass.
When he flashed on the semiautomatic, his hopes surged and then instantly fell.
The weapon was gone.
Olivetti had relieved him of it in the Pope's office, saying he did not want
loaded weapons around with the
camerlegno present. It made sense at the time.
Langdon called out again, making less sound than the last time.
Next he remembered the walkie-talkie the guard had left on the table outside the
vault. Why the hell didn't I
bring it in! As the purple stars began to dance before his eyes, Langdon forced
himself to think. You've
been trapped before, he told himself. You survived worse. You were just a kid
and you figured it out. The
crushing darkness came flooding in. Think!
Langdon lowered himself onto the floor. He rolled over on his back and laid his
hands at his sides. The first
step was to gain control.
Relax. Conserve.
No longer fighting gravity to pump blood, Langdon's heart began to slow. It was
a trick swimmers used to
re-oxygenate their blood between tightly scheduled races.
There is plenty of air in here, he told himself. Plenty. Now think. He waited,
half-expecting the lights to
come back on at any moment. They did not. As he lay there, able to breathe
better now, an eerie resignation
came across him. He felt peaceful. He fought it.
You will move, damn it! But where . . .
On Langdon's wrist, Mickey Mouse glowed happily as if enjoying the dark: 9:33
P.M. Half an hour until
Fire. Langdon thought it felt a whole hell of a lot later. His mind, instead of
coming up with a plan for
escape, was suddenly demanding an explanation. Who turned off the power? Was
Rocher expanding his
search? Wouldn't Olivetti have warned Rocher that I'm in here! Langdon knew at
this point it made no
difference.
Opening his mouth wide and tipping back his head, Langdon pulled the deepest
breaths he could manage.
Each breath burned a little less than the last. His head cleared. He reeled his
thoughts in and forced the
gears into motion.
Glass walls, he told himself. But damn thick glass.
He wondered if any of the books in here were stored in heavy, steel, fireproof
file cabinets. Langdon had
seen them from time to time in other archives but had seen none here. Besides,
finding one in the dark
could prove time-consuming. Not that he could lift one anyway, particularly in
his present state.
How about the examination table? Langdon knew this vault, like the other, had an
examination table in the
center of the stacks. So what! He knew he couldn't lift it. Not to mention, even
if he could drag it, he
wouldn't get it far. The stacks were closely packed, the aisles between them far
too narrow.
The aisles are too narrow . . .
Suddenly, Langdon knew.
With a burst of confidence, he jumped to his feet far too fast. Swaying in the
fog of a head rush, he reached
out in the dark for support. His hand found a stack. Waiting a moment, he forced
himself to conserve. He
would need all of his strength to do this.
Positioning himself against the book stack like a football player against a
training sled, he planted his feet
and pushed. If I can somehow tip the shelf. But it barely moved. He realigned
and pushed again. His feet
slipped backward on the floor. The stack creaked but did not move.
He needed leverage.
Finding the glass wall again, he placed one hand on it to guide him as he raced
in the dark toward the far
end of the vault. The back wall loomed suddenly, and he collided with it,
crushing his shoulder. Cursing,
Langdon circled the shelf and grabbed the stack at about eye level. Then,
propping one leg on the glass
behind him and another on the lower shelves, he started to climb. Books fell
around him, fluttering into the
darkness. He didn't care. Instinct for survival had long since overridden
archival decorum. He sensed his
equilibrium was hampered by the total darkness and closed his eyes, coaxing his
brain to ignore visual
input. He moved faster now. The air felt leaner the higher he went. He scrambled
toward the upper shelves,
stepping on books, trying to gain purchase, heaving himself upward. Then, like a
rock climber conquering a
rock face, Langdon grasped the top shelf. Stretching his legs out behind him, he
walked his feet up the
glass wall until he was almost horizontal.
Now or never, Robert, a voice urged. Just like the leg press in the Harvard gym.
With dizzying exertion, he planted his feet against the wall behind him, braced
his arms and chest against
the stack, and pushed. Nothing happened.
Fighting for air, he repositioned and tried again, extending his legs. Ever so
slightly, the stack moved. He
pushed again, and the stack rocked forward an inch or so and then back. Langdon
took advantage of the
motion, inhaling what felt like an oxygenless breath and heaving again. The
shelf rocked farther.
Like a swing set, he told himself. Keep the rhythm. A little more.
Langdon rocked the shelf, extending his legs farther with each push. His
quadriceps burned now, and he
blocked the pain. The pendulum was in motion. Three more pushes, he urged
himself.
It only took two.
There was an instant of weightless uncertainty. Then, with a thundering of books
sliding off the shelves,
Langdon and the shelf were falling forward.
Halfway to the ground, the shelf hit the stack next to it. Langdon hung on,
throwing his weight forward,
urging the second shelf to topple. There was a moment of motionless panic, and
then, creaking under the
weight, the second stack began to tip. Langdon was falling again.
Like enormous dominoes, the stacks began to topple, one after another. Metal on
metal, books tumbling
everywhere. Langdon held on as his inclined stack bounced downward like a
ratchet on a jack. He
wondered how many stacks there were in all. How much would they weigh? The glass
at the far end was
thick . . .
Langdon's stack had fallen almost to the horizontal when he heard what he was
waiting for-a different kind
of collision. Far off. At the end of the vault. The sharp smack of metal on
glass. The vault around him
shook, and Langdon knew the final stack, weighted down by the others, had hit
the glass hard. The sound
that followed was the most unwelcome sound Langdon had ever heard.
Silence.
There was no crashing of glass, only the resounding thud as the wall accepted
the weight of the stacks now
propped against it. He lay wide-eyed on the pile of books. Somewhere in the
distance there was a creaking.
Langdon would have held his breath to listen, but he had none left to hold.
One second. Two . . .
Then, as he teetered on the brink of unconsciousness, Langdon heard a distant
yielding . . . a ripple
spidering outward through the glass. Suddenly, like a cannon, the glass
exploded. The stack beneath
Langdon collapsed to the floor.
Like welcome rain on a desert, shards of glass tinkled downward in the dark.
With a great sucking hiss, the
air gushed in.
Thirty seconds later, in the Vatican Grottoes, Vittoria was standing before a
corpse when the electronic
squawk of a walkie-talkie broke the silence. The voice blaring out sounded short
of breath. "This is Robert
Langdon! Can anyone hear me?"
Vittoria looked up. Robert! She could not believe how much she suddenly wished
he were there.
The guards exchanged puzzled looks. One took a radio off his belt. "Mr. Langdon?
You are on channel
three. The commander is waiting to hear from you on channel one."
"I know he's on channel one, damn it! I don't want to speak to him. I want the
camerlegno. Now!
Somebody find him for me."
In the obscurity of the Secret Archives, Langdon stood amidst shattered glass
and tried to catch his breath.
He felt a warm liquid on his left hand and knew he was bleeding. The
camerlegno's voice spoke at once,
startling Langdon.
"This is Camerlegno Ventresca. What's going on?"
Langdon pressed the button, his heart still pounding. "I think somebody just
tried to kill me!"
There was a silence on the line.
Langdon tried to calm himself. "I also know where the next killing is going to
be."
The voice that came back was not the camerlegno's. It was Commander Olivetti's:
"Mr. Langdon. Do not
speak another word."
87
L angdon's watch, now smeared with blood, read 9:41 P.M. as he ran across the
Courtyard of the
Belvedere and approached the fountain outside the Swiss Guard security center.
His hand had stopped
bleeding and now felt worse than it looked. As he arrived, it seemed everyone
convened at once-Olivetti,
Rocher, the camerlegno, Vittoria, and a handful of guards.
Vittoria hurried toward him immediately. "Robert, you're hurt."
Before Langdon could answer, Olivetti was before him. "Mr. Langdon, I'm relieved
you're okay. I'm sorry
about the crossed signals in the archives."
"Crossed signals?" Langdon demanded. "You knew damn well-"
"It was my fault," Rocher said, stepping forward, sounding contrite. "I had no
idea you were in the
archives. Portions of our white zones are cross-wired with that building. We
were extending our search. I'm
the one who killed power. If I had known . . ."
"Robert," Vittoria said, taking his wounded hand in hers and looking it over,
"the Pope was poisoned. The
Illuminati killed him."
Langdon heard the words, but they barely registered. He was saturated. All he
could feel was the warmth of
Vittoria's hands.
The camerlegno pulled a silk handkerchief from his cassock and handed it to
Langdon so he could clean
himself. The man said nothing. His green eyes seemed filled with a new fire.
"Robert," Vittoria pressed, "you said you found where the next cardinal is going
to be killed?"
Langdon felt flighty. "I do, it's at the-"
"No," Olivetti interrupted. "Mr. Langdon, when I asked you not to speak another
word on the walkie-talkie,
it was for a reason." He turned to the handful of assembled Swiss Guards.
"Excuse us, gentlemen."
The soldiers disappeared into the security center. No indignity. Only
compliance.
Olivetti turned back to the remaining group. "As much as it pains me to say
this, the murder of our Pope is
an act that could only have been accomplished with help from within these walls.
For the good of all, we
can trust no one. Including our guards." He seemed to be suffering as he spoke
the words.
Rocher looked anxious. "Inside collusion implies-"
"Yes," Olivetti said. "The integrity of your search is compromised. And yet it
is a gamble we must take.
Keep looking."
Rocher looked like he was about to say something, thought better of it, and
left.
The camerlegno inhaled deeply. He had not said a word yet, and Langdon sensed a
new rigor in the man, as
if a turning point had been reached.
"Commander?" The camerlegno's tone was impermeable. "I am going to break
conclave."
Olivetti pursed his lips, looking dour. "I advise against it. We still have two
hours and twenty minutes."
"A heartbeat."
Olivetti's tone was now challenging "What do you intend to do? Evacuate the
cardinals single-handedly?"
"I intend to save this church with whatever power God has given me. How I
proceed is no longer your
concern."
Olivetti straightened. "Whatever you intend to do . . ." He paused. "I do not
have the authority to restrain
you. Particularly in light of my apparent failure as head of security. I ask
only that you wait. Wait twenty
minutes . . . until after ten o'clock. If Mr. Langdon's information is correct,
I may still have a chance to
catch this assassin. There is still a chance to preserve protocol and decorum."
"Decorum?" The camerlegno let out a choked laugh. "We have long since passed
propriety, commander. In
case you hadn't noticed, this is war."
A guard emerged from the security center and called out to the camerlegno,
"Signore, I just got word we
have detained the BBC reporter, Mr. Glick."
The camerlegno nodded. "Have both he and his camerawoman meet me outside the
Sistine Chapel."
Olivetti's eyes widened. "What are you doing?"
"Twenty minutes, commander. That's all I'm giving you." Then he was gone.
When Olivetti's Alpha Romeo tore out of Vatican City, this time there was no
line of unmarked cars
following him. In the back seat, Vittoria bandaged Langdon's hand with a
first-aid kit she'd found in the
glove box.
Olivetti stared straight ahead. "Okay, Mr. Langdon. Where are we going?"
88
E ven with its siren now affixed and blaring, Olivetti's Alpha Romeo seemed to
go unnoticed as it
rocketed across the bridge into the heart of old Rome. All the traffic was
moving in the other direction,
toward the Vatican, as if the Holy See had suddenly become the hottest
entertainment in Rome.
Langdon sat in the backseat, the questions whipping through his mind. He
wondered about the killer, if
they would catch him this time, if he would tell them what they needed to know,
if it was already too late.
How long before the camerlegno told the crowd in St. Peter's Square they were in
danger? The incident in
the vault still nagged. A mistake.
Olivetti never touched the brakes as he snaked the howling Alpha Romeo toward
the Church of Santa
Maria della Vittoria. Langdon knew on any other day his knuckles would have been
white. At the moment,
however, he felt anesthetized. Only the throbbing in his hand reminded him where
he was.
Overhead, the siren wailed. Nothing like telling him we're coming, Langdon
thought. And yet they were
making incredible time. He guessed Olivetti would kill the siren as they drew
nearer.
Now with a moment to sit and reflect, Langdon felt a tinge of amazement as the
news of the Pope's murder
finally registered in his mind. The thought was inconceivable, and yet somehow
it seemed a perfectly
logical event. Infiltration had always been the Illuminati
powerbase-rearrangements of power from within.
And it was not as if Popes had never been murdered. Countless rumors of
treachery abounded, although
with no autopsy, none was ever confirmed. Until recently. Academics not long ago
had gotten permission
to X-ray the tomb of Pope Celestine V, who had allegedly died at the hands of
his overeager successor,
Boniface VIII. The researchers had hoped the X-ray might reveal some small hint
of foul play-a broken
bone perhaps. Incredibly, the X-ray had revealed a ten-inch nail driven into the
Pope's skull.
Langdon now recalled a series of news clippings fellow Illuminati buffs had sent
him years ago. At first he
had thought the clippings were a prank, so he'd gone to the Harvard microfiche
collection to confirm the
articles were authentic. Incredibly, they were. He now kept them on his bulletin
board as examples of how
even respectable news organizations sometimes got carried away with Illuminati
paranoia. Suddenly, the
media's suspicions seemed a lot less paranoid. Langdon could see the articles
clearly in his mind . . .
THE BRITISH BROADCASTING CORPORATION
June 14, 1998
Pope John Paul I, who died in 1978, fell victim to a plot by the P2 Masonic
Lodge . . . The secret society P2
decided to murder John Paul I when it saw he was determined to dismiss the
American Archbishop Paul
Marcinkus as President of the Vatican Bank. The Bank had been implicated in
shady financial deals with
the Masonic Lodge . . .
THE NEW YORK TIMES
August 24, 1998
Why was the late John Paul I wearing his day shirt in bed? Why was it torn? The
questions don't stop there.
No medical investigations were made. Cardinal Villot forbade an autopsy on the
grounds that no Pope was
ever given a postmortem. And John Paul's medicines mysteriously vanished from
his bedside, as did his
glasses, slippers and his last will and testament.
LONDON DAILY MAIL
August 27, 1998
. . . a plot including a powerful, ruthless and illegal Masonic lodge with
tentacles stretching into the
Vatican.
The cellular in Vittoria's pocket rang, thankfully erasing the memories from
Langdon's mind.
Vittoria answered, looking confused as to who might be calling her. Even from a
few feet away, Langdon
recognized the laserlike voice on the phone.
"Vittoria? This is Maximilian Kohler. Have you found the antimatter yet?"
"Max? You're okay?"
"I saw the news. There was no mention of CERN or the antimatter. This is good.
What is happening?"
"We haven't located the canister yet. The situation is complex. Robert Langdon
has been quite an asset. We
have a lead on catching the man assassinating cardinals. Right now we are
headed-"
"Ms. Vetra," Olivetti interrupted. "You've said enough."
She covered the receiver, clearly annoyed. "Commander, this is the president of
CERN. Certainly he has a
right to-"
"He has a right," Olivetti snapped, "to be here handling this situation. You're
on an open cellular line.
You've said enough."
Vittoria took a deep breath. "Max?"
"I may have some information for you," Max said. "About your father . . . I may
know who he told about
the antimatter."
Vittoria's expression clouded. "Max, my father said he told no one."
"I'm afraid, Vittoria, your father did tell someone. I need to check some
security records. I will be in touch
soon." The line went dead.
Vittoria looked waxen as she returned the phone to her pocket.
"You okay?" Langdon asked.
Vittoria nodded, her trembling fingers revealing the lie.
"The church is on Piazza Barberini," Olivetti said, killing the siren and
checking his watch. "We have nine
minutes."
When Langdon had first realized the location of the third marker, the position
of the church had rung some
distant bell for him. Piazza Barberini. Something about the name was familiar .
. . something he could not
place. Now Langdon realized what it was. The piazza was the sight of a
controversial subway stop. Twenty
years ago, construction of the subway terminal had created a stir among art
historians who feared digging
beneath Piazza Barberini might topple the multiton obelisk that stood in the
center. City planners had
removed the obelisk and replaced it with a small fountain called the Triton.
In Bernini's day, Langdon now realized, Piazza Barberini had contained an
obelisk! Whatever doubts
Langdon had felt that this was the location of the third marker now totally
evaporated.
A block from the piazza, Olivetti turned into an alley, gunned the car halfway
down, and skidded to a stop.
He pulled off his suit jacket, rolled up his sleeves, and loaded his weapon.
"We can't risk your being recognized," he said. "You two were on television. I
want you across the piazza,
out of sight, watching the front entrance. I'm going in the back." He produced a
familiar pistol and handed
it to Langdon. "Just in case."
Langdon frowned. It was the second time today he had been handed the gun. He
slid it into his breast
pocket. As he did, he realized he was still carrying the folio from Diagramma.
He couldn't believe he had
forgotten to leave it behind. He pictured the Vatican Curator collapsing in
spasms of outrage at the thought
of this priceless artifact being packed around Rome like some tourist map. Then
Langdon thought of the
mess of shattered glass and strewn documents that he'd left behind in the
archives. The curator had other
problems. If the archives even survive the night . . .
Olivetti got out of the car and motioned back up the alley. "The piazza is that
way. Keep your eyes open
and don't let yourselves be seen." He tapped the phone on his belt. "Ms. Vetra,
let's retest our auto dial."
Vittoria removed her phone and hit the auto dial number she and Olivetti had
programmed at the Pantheon.
Olivetti's phone vibrated in silent-ring mode on his belt.
The commander nodded. "Good. If you see anything, I want to know." He cocked his
weapon. "I'll be
inside waiting. This heathen is mine."
At that moment, very nearby, another cellular phone was ringing.
The Hassassin answered. "Speak."
"It is I," the voice said. "Janus."
The Hassassin smiled. "Hello, master."
"Your position may be known. Someone is coming to stop you."
"They are too late. I have already made the arrangements here."
"Good. Make sure you escape alive. There is work yet to be done."
"Those who stand in my way will die."
"Those who stand in your way are knowledgeable."
"You speak of an American scholar?"
"You are aware of him?"
The Hassassin chuckled. "Cool-tempered but naïve. He spoke to me on the phone
earlier. He is with a
female who seems quite the opposite." The killer felt a stirring of arousal as
he recalled the fiery
temperament of Leonardo Vetra's daughter.
There was a momentary silence on the line, the first hesitation the Hassassin
had ever sensed from his
Illuminati master. Finally, Janus spoke. "Eliminate them if need be."
The killer smiled. "Consider it done." He felt a warm anticipation spreading
through his body. Although the
woman I may keep as a prize.
89
W ar had broken out in St. Peter's Square.
The piazza had exploded into a frenzy of aggression. Media trucks skidded into
place like assault vehicles
claiming beachheads. Reporters unfurled high-tech electronics like soldiers
arming for battle. All around
the perimeter of the square, networks jockeyed for position as they raced to
erect the newest weapon in
media wars-flat-screen displays.
Flat-screen displays were enormous video screens that could be assembled on top
of trucks or portable
scaffolding. The screens served as a kind of billboard advertisement for the
network, broadcasting that
network's coverage and corporate logo like a drive-in movie. If a screen were
well-situated-in front of the
action, for example-a competing network could not shoot the story without
including an advertisement for
their competitor.
The square was quickly becoming not only a multimedia extravaganza, but a
frenzied public vigil.
Onlookers poured in from all directions. Open space in the usually limitless
square was fast becoming a
valuable commodity. People clustered around the towering flat-screen displays,
listening to live reports in
stunned excitement.
Only a hundred yards away, inside the thick walls of St. Peter's Basilica, the
world was serene. Lieutenant
Chartrand and three other guards moved through the darkness. Wearing their
infrared goggles, they fanned
out across the nave, swinging their detectors before them. The search of Vatican
City's public access areas
so far had yielded nothing.
"Better remove your goggles up here," the senior guard said.
Chartrand was already doing it. They were nearing the Niche of the Palliums-the
sunken area in the center
of the basilica. It was lit by ninety-nine oil lamps, and the amplified infrared
would have seared their eyes.
Chartrand enjoyed being out of the heavy goggles, and he stretched his neck as
they descended into the
sunken niche to scan the area. The room was beautiful . . . golden and glowing.
He had not been down here
yet.
It seemed every day since Chartrand had arrived in Vatican City he had learned
some new Vatican mystery.
These oil lamps were one of them. There were exactly ninety-nine lamps burning
at all times. It was
tradition. The clergy vigilantly refilled the lamps with sacred oils such that
no lamp ever burned out. It was
said they would burn until the end of time.
Or at least until midnight, Chartrand thought, feeling his mouth go dry again.
Chartrand swung his detector over the oil lamps. Nothing hidden in here. He was
not surprised; the
canister, according to the video feed, was hidden in a dark area.
As he moved across the niche, he came to a bulkhead grate covering a hole in the
floor. The hole led to a
steep and narrow stairway that went straight down. He had heard stories about
what lay down there.
Thankfully, they would not have to descend. Rocher's orders were clear. Search
only the public access
areas; ignore the white zones.
"What's that smell?" he asked, turning away from the grate. The niche smelled
intoxicatingly sweet.
"Fumes from the lamps," one of them replied.
Chartrand was surprised. "Smells more like cologne than kerosene."
"It's not kerosene. These lamps are close to the papal altar, so they take a
special, ambiental mixtureethanol,
sugar, butane, and perfume."
"Butane?" Chartrand eyed the lamps uneasily.
The guard nodded. "Don't spill any. Smells like heaven, but burns like hell."
The guards had completed searching the Niche of the Palliums and were moving
across the basilica again
when their walkie-talkies went off.
It was an update. The guards listened in shock.
Apparently there were troubling new developments, which could not be shared
on-air, but the camerlegno
had decided to break tradition and enter conclave to address the cardinals.
Never before in history had this
been done. Then again, Chartrand realized, never before in history had the
Vatican been sitting on what
amounted to some sort of neoteric nuclear warhead.
Chartrand felt comforted to know the camerlegno was taking control. The
camerlegno was the person
inside Vatican City for whom Chartrand held the most respect. Some of the guards
thought of the
camerlegno as a beato-a religious zealot whose love of God bordered on
obsession-but even they agreed . .
. when it came to fighting the enemies of God, the camerlegno was the one man
who would stand up and
play hardball.
The Swiss Guards had seen a lot of the camerlegno this week in preparation for
conclave, and everyone had
commented that the man seemed a bit rough around the edges, his verdant eyes a
bit more intense than
usual. Not surprisingly, they had all commented; not only was the camerlegno
responsible for planning the
sacred conclave, but he had to do it immediately on the heels of the loss of his
mentor, the Pope.
Chartrand had only been at the Vatican a few months when he heard the story of
the bomb that blew up the
camerlegno's mother before the kid's very eyes. A bomb in church . . . and now
it's happening all over
again. Sadly, the authorities never caught the bastards who planted the bomb . .
. probably some anti-
Christian hate group they said, and the case faded away. No wonder the
camerlegno despised apathy.
A couple months back, on a peaceful afternoon inside Vatican City, Chartrand had
bumped into the
camerlegno coming across the grounds. The camerlegno had apparently recognized
Chartrand as a new
guard and invited him to accompany him on a stroll. They had talked about
nothing in particular, and the
camerlegno made Chartrand feel immediately at home.
"Father," Chartrand said, "may I ask you a strange question?"
The camerlegno smiled. "Only if I may give you a strange answer."
Chartrand laughed. "I have asked every priest I know, and I still don't
understand."
"What troubles you?" The camerlegno led the way in short, quick strides, his
frock kicking out in front of
him as he walked. His black, crepe-sole shoess seemed befitting, Chartrand
thought, like reflections of the
man's essence . . . modern but humble, and showing signs of wear.
Chartrand took a deep breath. "I don't understand this omnipotent-benevolent
thing."
The camerlegno smiled. "You've been reading Scripture."
"I try."
"You are confused because the Bible describes God as an omnipotent and
benevolent deity."
"Exactly."
"Omnipotent-benevolent simply means that God is all-powerful and well-meaning."
"I understand the concept. It's just . . . there seems to be a contradiction."
"Yes. The contradiction is pain. Man's starvation, war, sickness . . ."
"Exactly!" Chartrand knew the camerlegno would understand. "Terrible things
happen in this world.
Human tragedy seems like proof that God could not possibly be both all-powerful
and well-meaning. If He
loves us and has the power to change our situation, He would prevent our pain,
wouldn't He?"
The camerlegno frowned. "Would He?"
Chartrand felt uneasy. Had he overstepped his bounds? Was this one of those
religious questions you just
didn't ask? "Well . . . if God loves us, and He can protect us, He would have
to. It seems He is either
omnipotent and uncaring, or benevolent and powerless to help."
"Do you have children, Lieutenant?"
Chartrand flushed. "No, signore."
"Imagine you had an eight-year-old son . . . would you love him?"
"Of course."
"Would you do everything in your power to prevent pain in his life?"
"Of course."
"Would you let him skateboard?"
Chartrand did a double take. The camerlegno always seemed oddly "in touch" for a
clergyman. "Yeah, I
guess," Chartrand said. "Sure, I'd let him skateboard, but I'd tell him to be
careful."
"So as this child's father, you would give him some basic, good advice and then
let him go off and make
his own mistakes?"
"I wouldn't run behind him and mollycoddle him if that's what you mean."
"But what if he fell and skinned his knee?"
"He would learn to be more careful."
The camerlegno smiled. "So although you have the power to interfere and prevent
your child's pain, you
would choose to show your love by letting him learn his own lessons?"
"Of course. Pain is part of growing up. It's how we learn."
The camerlegno nodded. "Exactly."
90
L angdon and Vittoria observed Piazza Barberini from the shadows of a small
alleyway on the western
corner. The church was opposite them, a hazy cupola emerging from a faint
cluster of buildings across the
square. The night had brought with it a welcome cool, and Langdon was surprised
to find the square
deserted. Above them, through open windows, blaring televisions reminded Langdon
where everyone had
disappeared to.
". . . no comment yet from the Vatican . . . Illuminati murders of two cardinals
. . . satanic presence in
Rome . . . speculation about further infiltration . . ."
The news had spread like Nero's fire. Rome sat riveted, as did the rest of the
world. Langdon wondered if
they would really be able to stop this runaway train. As he scanned the piazza
and waited, Langdon realized
that despite the encroachment of modern buildings, the piazza still looked
remarkably elliptical. High
above, like some sort of modern shrine to a bygone hero, an enormous neon sign
blinked on the roof of a
luxurious hotel. Vittoria had already pointed it out to Langdon. The sign seemed
eerily befitting.
HOTEL BERNINI
"Five of ten," Vittoria said, cat eyes darting around the square. No sooner had
she spoken the words than
she grabbed Langdon's arm and pulled him back into the shadows. She motioned
into the center of the
square.
Langdon followed her gaze. When he saw it, he stiffened.
Crossing in front of them, beneath a street lamp, two dark figures appeared.
Both were cloaked, their heads
covered with dark mantles, the traditional black covering of Catholic widows.
Langdon would have
guessed they were women, but he couldn't be sure in the dark. One looked elderly
and moved as if in pain,
hunched over. The other, larger and stronger, was helping.
"Give me the gun," Vittoria said.
"You can't just-"
Fluid as a cat, Vittoria was in and out of his pocket once again. The gun
glinted in her hand. Then, in
absolute silence, as if her feet never touched the cobblestone, she was circling
left in the shadows, arching
across the square to approach the couple from the rear. Langdon stood transfixed
as Vittoria disappeared.
Then, swearing to himself, he hurried after her.
The couple was moving slowly, and it was only a matter of half a minute before
Langdon and Vittoria were
positioned behind them, closing in from the rear. Vittoria concealed the gun
beneath casually crossed arms
in front of her, out of sight but accessible in a flash. She seemed to float
faster and faster as the gap
lessened, and Langdon battled to keep up. When his shoes scuffed a stone and
sent it skittering, Vittoria
shot him a sideways glare. But the couple did not seem to hear. They were
talking.
At thirty feet, Langdon could start to hear voices. No words. Just faint
murmurings. Beside him, Vittoria
moved faster with every step. Her arms loosened before her, the gun starting to
peek out. Twenty feet. The
voices were clearer-one much louder than the other. Angry. Ranting. Langdon
sensed it was the voice of an
old woman. Gruff. Androgynous. He strained to hear what she was saying, but
another voice cut the night.
"Mi scusi!" Vittoria's friendly tone lit the square like a torch.
Langdon tensed as the cloaked couple stopped short and began to turn. Vittoria
kept striding toward them,
even faster now, on a collision course. They would have no time to react.
Langdon realized his own feet
had stopped moving. From behind, he saw Vittoria's arms loosening, her hand
coming free, the gun
swinging forward. Then, over her shoulder, he saw a face, lit now in the street
lamp. The panic surged to
his legs, and he lunged forward. "Vittoria, no!"
Vittoria, however, seemed to exist a split second ahead of him. In a motion as
swift as it was casual,
Vittoria's arms were raised again, the gun disappearing as she clutched herself
like a woman on a chilly
night. Langdon stumbled to her side, almost colliding with the cloaked couple
before them.
"Buona sera," Vittoria blurted, her voice startled with retreat.
Langdon exhaled in relief. Two elderly women stood before them scowling out from
beneath their mantles.
One was so old she could barely stand. The other was helping her. Both clutched
rosaries. They seemed
confused by the sudden interruption.
Vittoria smiled, although she looked shaken. "Dov'è la chiesa Santa Maria della
Vittoria? Where is the
Church of-"
The two women motioned in unison to a bulky silhouette of a building on an
inclined street from the
direction they had come. "È là."
"Grazie," Langdon said, putting his hands on Vittoria's shoulders and gently
pulling her back. He couldn't
believe they'd almost attacked a pair of old ladies.
"Non si puó entrare," one woman warned. "È chiusa temprano."
"Closed early?" Vittoria looked surprised. "Perchè?"
Both women explained at once. They sounded irate. Langdon understood only parts
of the grumbling
Italian. Apparently, the women had been inside the church fifteen minutes ago
praying for the Vatican in its
time of need, when some man had appeared and told them the church was closing
early.
"Hanno conosciuto l'uomo?" Vittoria demanded, sounding tense. "Did you know the
man?"
The women shook their heads. The man was a straniero crudo, they explained, and
he had forcibly made
everyone inside leave, even the young priest and janitor, who said they were
calling the police. But the
intruder had only laughed, telling them to be sure the police brought cameras.
Cameras? Langdon wondered.
The women clucked angrily and called the man a bar-àrabo. Then, grumbling, they
continued on their way.
"Bar-àrabo?"Langdon asked Vittoria. "A barbarian?"
Vittoria looked suddenly taut. "Not quite. Bar-àrabo is derogatory wordplay. It
means Àrabo . . . Arab."
Langdon felt a shiver and turned toward the outline of the church. As he did,
his eyes glimpsed something
in the church's stained-glass windows. The image shot dread through his body.
Unaware, Vittoria removed her cell phone and pressed the auto dial. "I'm warning
Olivetti."
Speechless, Langdon reached out and touched her arm. With a tremulous hand, he
pointed to the church.
Vittoria let out a gasp.
Inside the building, glowing like evil eyes through the stained-glass windows .
. . shone the growing flash
of flames.
91
L angdon and Vittoria dashed to the main entrance of the church of Santa Maria
della Vittoria and found
the wooden door locked. Vittoria fired three shots from Olivetti's
semi-automatic into the ancient bolt, and
it shattered.
The church had no anteroom, so the entirety of the sanctuary spread out in one
gasping sweep as Langdon
and Vittoria threw open the main door. The scene before them was so unexpected,
so bizarre, that Langdon
had to close his eyes and reopen them before his mind could take it all in.
The church was lavish baroque . . . gilded walls and altars. Dead center of the
sanctuary, beneath the main
cupola, wooden pews had been stacked high and were now ablaze in some sort of
epic funeral pyre. A
bonfire shooting high into the dome. As Langdon's eyes followed the inferno
upward, the true horror of the
scene descended like a bird of prey.
High overhead, from the left and right sides of the ceiling, hung two incensor
cables-lines used for
swinging frankincense vessels above the congregation. These lines, however,
carried no incensors now.
Nor were they swinging. They had been used for something else . . .
Suspended from the cables was a human being. A naked man. Each wrist had been
connected to an
opposing cable, and he had been hoisted almost to the point of being torn apart.
His arms were outstretched
in a spread-eagle as if he were nailed to some sort of invisible crucifix
hovering within the house of God.
Langdon felt paralyzed as he stared upward. A moment later, he witnessed the
final abomination. The old
man was alive, and he raised his head. A pair of terrified eyes gazed down in a
silent plea for help. On the
man's chest was a scorched emblem. He had been branded. Langdon could not see it
clearly, but he had
little doubt what the marking said. As the flames climbed higher, lapping at the
man's feet, the victim let
out a cry of pain, his body trembling.
As if ignited by some unseen force, Langdon felt his body suddenly in motion,
dashing down the main aisle
toward the conflagration. His lungs filled with smoke as he closed in. Ten feet
from the inferno, at a full
sprint, Langdon hit a wall of heat. The skin on his face singed, and he fell
back, shielding his eyes and
landing hard on the marble floor. Staggering upright, he pressed forward again,
hands raised in protection.
Instantly he knew. The fire was far too hot.
Moving back again, he scanned the chapel walls. A heavy tapestry, he thought. If
I can somehow smother
the . . . But he knew a tapestry was not to be found. This is a baroque chapel,
Robert, not some damn
German castle! Think! He forced his eyes back to the suspended man.
High above, smoke and flames swirled in the cupola. The incensor cables
stretched outward from the man's
wrists, rising to the ceiling where they passed through pulleys, and descended
again to metal cleats on
either side of the church. Langdon looked over at one of the cleats. It was high
on the wall, but he knew if
he could get to it and loosen one of the lines, the tension would slacken and
the man would swing wide of
the fire.
A sudden surge of flames crackled higher, and Langdon heard a piercing scream
from above. The skin on
the man's feet was starting to blister. The cardinal was being roasted alive.
Langdon fixed his sights on the
cleat and ran for it.
In the rear of the church, Vittoria clutched the back of a pew, trying to gather
her senses. The image
overhead was horrid. She forced her eyes away. Do something! She wondered where
Olivetti was. Had he
seen the Hassassin? Had he caught him? Where were they now? Vittoria moved
forward to help Langdon,
but as she did, a sound stopped her.
The crackling of the flames was getting louder by the instant, but a second
sound also cut the air. A
metallic vibration. Nearby. The repetitive pulse seemed to emanate from the end
of the pews to her left. It
was a stark rattle, like the ringing of a phone, but stony and hard. She
clutched the gun firmly and moved
down the row of pews. The sound grew louder. On. Off. A recurrent vibration.
As she approached the end of the aisle, she sensed the sound was coming from the
floor just around the
corner at the end of the pews. As she moved forward, gun outstretched in her
right hand, she realized she
was also holding something in her left hand-her cell phone. In her panic she had
forgotten that outside she
had used it to dial the commander . . . setting off his phone's silent vibration
feature as a warning. Vittoria
raised her phone to her ear. It was still ringing. The commander had never
answered. Suddenly, with rising
fear, Vittoria sensed she knew what was making the sound. She stepped forward,
trembling.
The entire church seemed to sink beneath her feet as her eyes met the lifeless
form on the floor. No stream
of liquid flowed from the body. No signs of violence tattooed the flesh. There
was only the fearful
geometry of the commander's head . . . torqued backward, twisted 180 degrees in
the wrong direction.
Vittoria fought the images of her own father's mangled body.
The phone on the commander's belt lay against the floor, vibrating over and over
against the cold marble.
Vittoria hung up her own phone, and the ringing stopped. In the silence,
Vittoria heard a new sound. A
breathing in the dark directly behind her.
She started to spin, gun raised, but she knew she was too late. A laser beam of
heat screamed from the top
of her skull to the soles of her feet as the killer's elbow crashed down on the
back of her neck.
"Now you are mine," a voice said.
Then, everything went black.
Across the sanctuary, on the left lateral wall, Langdon balanced atop a pew and
scraped upward on the wall
trying to reach the cleat. The cable was still six feet above his head. Cleats
like these were common in
churches and were placed high to prevent tampering. Langdon knew priests used
wooden ladders called
piuòli to access the cleats. The killer had obviously used the church's ladder
to hoist his victim. So where
the hell is the ladder now! Langdon looked down, searching the floor around him.
He had a faint
recollection of seeing a ladder in here somewhere. But where? A moment later his
heart sank. He realized
where he had seen it. He turned toward the raging fire. Sure enough, the ladder
was high atop the blaze,
engulfed in flames.
Filled now with desperation, Langdon scanned the entire church from his raised
platform, looking for
anything at all that could help him reach the cleat. As his eyes probed the
church, he had a sudden
realization.
Where the hell is Vittoria? She had disappeared. Did she go for help? Langdon
screamed out her name, but
there was no response. And where is Olivetti!
There was a howl of pain from above, and Langdon sensed he was already too late.
As his eyes went
skyward again and saw the slowly roasting victim, Langdon had thoughts for only
one thing. Water. Lots of
it. Put out the fire. At least lower the flames. "I need water, damn it!" he
yelled out loud.
"That's next," a voice growled from the back of the church.
Langdon wheeled, almost falling off the pews.
Striding up the side aisle directly toward him came a dark monster of a man.
Even in the glow of the fire,
his eyes burned black. Langdon recognized the gun in his hand as the one from
his own jacket pocket . . .
the one Vittoria had been carrying when they came in.
The sudden wave of panic that rose in Langdon was a frenzy of disjunct fears.
His initial instinct was for
Vittoria. What had this animal done to her? Was she hurt? Or worse? In the same
instant, Langdon realized
the man overhead was screaming louder. The cardinal would die. Helping him now
was impossible. Then,
as the Hassassin leveled the gun at Langdon's chest, Langdon's panic turned
inward, his senses on
overload. He reacted on instinct as the shot went off. Launching off the bench,
Langdon sailed arms first
over the sea of church pews.
When he hit the pews, he hit harder than he had imagined, immediately rolling to
the floor. The marble
cushioned his fall with all the grace of cold steel. Footsteps closed to his
right. Langdon turned his body
toward the front of the church and began scrambling for his life beneath the
pews.
High above the chapel floor, Cardinal Guidera endured his last torturous moments
of consciousness. As he
looked down the length of his naked body, he saw the skin on his legs begin to
blister and peel away. I am
in hell, he decided. God, why hast thou forsaken me? He knew this must be hell
because he was looking at
the brand on his chest upside down . . . and yet, as if by the devil's magic,
the word made perfect sense.
92
T hree ballotings. No Pope.
Inside the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati had begun praying for a miracle.
Send us the candidates! The
delay had gone long enough. A single missing candidate, Mortati could
understand. But all four? It left no
options. Under these conditions, achieving a two-thirds majority would take an
act of God Himself.
When the bolts on the outer door began to grind open, Mortati and the entire
College of Cardinals wheeled
in unison toward the entrance. Mortati knew this unsealing could mean only one
thing. By law, the chapel
door could only be unsealed for two reasons-to remove the very ill, or to admit
late cardinals.
The preferiti are coming!
Mortati's heart soared. Conclave had been saved.
But when the door opened, the gasp that echoed through the chapel was not one of
joy. Mortati stared in
incredulous shock as the man walked in. For the first time in Vatican history, a
camerlegno had just crossed
the sacred threshold of conclave after sealing the doors.
What is he thinking!
The camerlegno strode to the altar and turned to address the thunderstruck
audience. "Signori," he said, "I
have waited as long as I can. There is something you have a right to know."
93
L angdon had no idea where he was going. Reflex was his only compass, driving
him away from danger.
His elbows and knees burned as he clambered beneath the pews. Still he clawed
on. Somewhere a voice
was telling him to move left. If you can get to the main aisle, you can dash for
the exit. He knew it was
impossible. There's a wall of flames blocking the main aisle! His mind hunting
for options, Langdon
scrambled blindly on. The footsteps closed faster now to his right.
When it happened, Langdon was unprepared. He had guessed he had another ten feet
of pews until he
reached the front of the church. He had guessed wrong. Without warning, the
cover above him ran out. He
froze for an instant, half exposed at the front of the church. Rising in the
recess to his left, gargantuan from
this vantage point, was the very thing that had brought him here. He had
entirely forgotten. Bernini's
Ecstasy of St. Teresa rose up like some sort of pornographic still life . . .
the saint on her back, arched in
pleasure, mouth open in a moan, and over her, an angel pointing his spear of
fire.
A bullet exploded in the pew over Langdon's head. He felt his body rise like a
sprinter out of a gate. Fueled
only by adrenaline, and barely conscious of his actions, he was suddenly
running, hunched, head down,
pounding across the front of the church to his right. As the bullets erupted
behind him, Langdon dove yet
again, sliding out of control across the marble floor before crashing in a heap
against the railing of a niche
on the right-hand wall.
It was then that he saw her. A crumpled heap near the back of the church.
Vittoria! Her bare legs were
twisted beneath her, but Langdon sensed somehow that she was breathing. He had
no time to help her.
Immediately, the killer rounded the pews on the far left of the church and bore
relentlessly down. Langdon
knew in a heartbeat it was over. The killer raised the weapon, and Langdon did
the only thing he could do.
He rolled his body over the banister into the niche. As he hit the floor on the
other side, the marble columns
of the balustrade exploded in a storm of bullets.
Langdon felt like a cornered animal as he scrambled deeper into the semicircular
niche. Rising before him,
the niche's sole contents seemed ironically apropos-a single sarcophagus. Mine
perhaps, Langdon thought.
Even the casket itself seemed fitting. It was a scàtola-a small, unadorned,
marble box. Burial on a budget.
The casket was raised off the floor on two marble blocks, and Langdon eyed the
opening beneath it,
wondering if he could slide through.
Footsteps echoed behind him.
With no other option in sight, Langdon pressed himself to the floor and
slithered toward the casket.
Grabbing the two marble supports, one with each hand, he pulled like a
breaststroker, dragging his torso
into the opening beneath the tomb. The gun went off.
Accompanying the roar of the gun, Langdon felt a sensation he had never felt in
his life . . . a bullet sailing
past his flesh. There was a hiss of wind, like the backlash of a whip, as the
bullet just missed him and
exploded in the marble with a puff of dust. Blood surging, Langdon heaved his
body the rest of the way
beneath the casket. Scrambling across the marble floor, he pulled himself out
from beneath the casket and
to the other side.
Dead end.
Langdon was now face to face with the rear wall of the niche. He had no doubt
that this tiny space behind
the tomb would become his grave. And soon, he realized, as he saw the barrel of
the gun appear in the
opening beneath the sarcophagus. The Hassassin held the weapon parallel with the
floor, pointing directly
at Langdon's midsection.
Impossible to miss.
Langdon felt a trace of self-preservation grip his unconscious mind. He twisted
his body onto his stomach,
parallel with the casket. Facedown, he planted his hands flat on the floor, the
glass cut from the archives
pinching open with a stab. Ignoring the pain, he pushed. Driving his body upward
in an awkward push-up,
Langdon arched his stomach off the floor just as the gun went off. He could feel
the shock wave of the
bullets as they sailed beneath him and pulverized the porous travertine behind.
Closing his eyes and
straining against exhaustion, Langdon prayed for the thunder to stop.
And then it did.
The roar of gunfire was replaced with the cold click of an empty chamber.
Langdon opened his eyes slowly, almost fearful his eyelids would make a sound.
Fighting the trembling
pain, he held his position, arched like a cat. He didn't even dare breathe. His
eardrums numbed by gunfire,
Langdon listened for any hint of the killer's departure. Silence. He thought of
Vittoria and ached to help
her.
The sound that followed was deafening. Barely human. A guttural bellow of
exertion.
The sarcophagus over Langdon's head suddenly seemed to rise on its side. Langdon
collapsed on the floor
as hundreds of pounds teetered toward him. Gravity overcame friction, and the
lid was the first to go,
sliding off the tomb and crashing to the floor beside him. The casket came next,
rolling off its supports and
toppling upside down toward Langdon.
As the box rolled, Langdon knew he would either be entombed in the hollow
beneath it or crushed by one
of the edges. Pulling in his legs and head, Langdon compacted his body and
yanked his arms to his sides.
Then he closed his eyes and awaited the sickening crush.
When it came, the entire floor shook beneath him. The upper rim landed only
millimeters from the top of
his head, rattling his teeth in their sockets. His right arm, which Langdon had
been certain would be
crushed, miraculously still felt intact. He opened his eyes to see a shaft of
light. The right rim of the casket
had not fallen all the way to the floor and was still propped partially on its
supports. Directly overhead,
though, Langdon found himself staring quite literally into the face of death.
The original occupant of the tomb was suspended above him, having adhered, as
decaying bodies often did,
to the bottom of the casket. The skeleton hovered a moment, like a tentative
lover, and then with a sticky
crackling, it succumbed to gravity and peeled away. The carcass rushed down to
embrace him, raining
putrid bones and dust into Langdon's eyes and mouth.
Before Langdon could react, a blind arm was slithering through the opening
beneath the casket, sifting
through the carcass like a hungry python. It groped until it found Langdon's
neck and clamped down.
Langdon tried to fight back against the iron fist now crushing his larynx, but
he found his left sleeve
pinched beneath the edge of the coffin. He had only one arm free, and the fight
was a losing battle.
Langdon's legs bent in the only open space he had, his feet searching for the
casket floor above him. He
found it. Coiling, he planted his feet. Then, as the hand around his neck
squeezed tighter, Langdon closed
his eyes and extended his legs like a ram. The casket shifted, ever so slightly,
but enough.
With a raw grinding, the sarcophagus slid off the supports and landed on the
floor. The casket rim crashed
onto the killer's arm, and there was a muffled scream of pain. The hand released
Langdon's neck, twisting
and jerking away into the dark. When the killer finally pulled his arm free, the
casket fell with a conclusive
thud against the flat marble floor.
Complete darkness. Again.
And silence.
There was no frustrated pounding outside the overturned sarcophagus. No prying
to get in. Nothing. As
Langdon lay in the dark amidst a pile of bones, he fought the closing darkness
and turned his thoughts to
her.
Vittoria. Are you alive?
If Langdon had known the truth-the horror to which Vittoria would soon awake-he
would have wished for
her sake that she were dead.
94
S itting in the Sistine Chapel among his stunned colleagues, Cardinal Mortati
tried to comprehend the
words he was hearing. Before him, lit only by the candlelight, the camerlegno
had just told a tale of such
hatred and treachery that Mortati found himself trembling. The camerlegno spoke
of kidnapped cardinals,
branded cardinals, murdered cardinals. He spoke of the ancient Illuminati-a name
that dredged up forgotten
fears-and of their resurgence and vow of revenge against the church. With pain
in his voice, the camerlegno
spoke of his late Pope . . . the victim of an Illuminati poisoning. And finally,
his words almost a whisper, he
spoke of a deadly new technology, antimatter, which in less than two hours
threatened to destroy all of
Vatican City.
When he was through, it was as if Satan himself had sucked the air from the
room. Nobody could move.
The camerlegno's words hung in the darkness.
The only sound Mortati could now hear was the anomalous hum of a television
camera in back-an
electronic presence no conclave in history had ever endured-but a presence
demanded by the camerlegno.
To the utter astonishment of the cardinals, the camerlegno had entered the
Sistine Chapel with two BBC
reporters-a man and a woman-and announced that they would be transmitting his
solemn statement, live to
the world.
Now, speaking directly to the camera, the camerlegno stepped forward. "To the
Illuminati," he said, his
voice deepening, "and to those of science, let me say this." He paused. "You
have won the war."
The silence spread now to the deepest corners of the chapel. Mortati could hear
the desperate thumping of
his own heart.
"The wheels have been in motion for a long time," the camerlegno said. "Your
victory has been inevitable.
Never before has it been as obvious as it is at this moment. Science is the new
God."
What is he saying! Mortati thought. Has he gone mad? The entire world is hearing
this!
"Medicine, electronic communications, space travel, genetic manipulation . . .
these are the miracles about
which we now tell our children. These are the miracles we herald as proof that
science will bring us the
answers. The ancient stories of immaculate conceptions, burning bushes, and
parting seas are no longer
relevant. God has become obsolete. Science has won the battle. We concede."
A rustle of confusion and bewilderment swept through the chapel.
"But science's victory," the camerlegno added, his voice intensifying, "has cost
every one of us. And it has
cost us deeply."
Silence.
"Science may have alleviated the miseries of disease and drudgery and provided
an array of gadgetry for
our entertainment and convenience, but it has left us in a world without wonder.
Our sunsets have been
reduced to wavelengths and frequencies. The complexities of the universe have
been shredded into
mathematical equations. Even our self-worth as human beings has been destroyed.
Science proclaims that
Planet Earth and its inhabitants are a meaningless speck in the grand scheme. A
cosmic accident." He
paused. "Even the technology that promises to unite us, divides us. Each of us
is now electronically
connected to the globe, and yet we feel utterly alone. We are bombarded with
violence, division, fracture,
and betrayal. Skepticism has become a virtue. Cynicism and demand for proof has
become enlightened
thought. Is it any wonder that humans now feel more depressed and defeated than
they have at any point in
human history? Does science hold anything sacred? Science looks for answers by
probing our unborn
fetuses. Science even presumes to rearrange our own DNA. It shatters God's world
into smaller and smaller
pieces in quest of meaning . . . and all it finds is more questions."
Mortati watched in awe. The camerlegno was almost hypnotic now. He had a
physical strength in his
movements and voice that Mortati had never witnessed on a Vatican altar. The
man's voice was wrought
with conviction and sadness.
"The ancient war between science and religion is over," the camerlegno said.
"You have won. But you
have not won fairly. You have not won by providing answers. You have won by so
radically reorienting
our society that the truths we once saw as signposts now seem inapplicable.
Religion cannot keep up.
Scientific growth is exponential. It feeds on itself like a virus. Every new
breakthrough opens doors for new
breakthroughs. Mankind took thousands of years to progress from the wheel to the
car. Yet only decades
from the car into space. Now we measure scientific progress in weeks. We are
spinning out of control. The
rift between us grows deeper and deeper, and as religion is left behind, people
find themselves in a spiritual
void. We cry out for meaning. And believe me, we do cry out. We see UFOs, engage
in channeling, spirit
contact, out-of-body experiences, mindquests-all these eccentric ideas have a
scientific veneer, but they are
unashamedly irrational. They are the desperate cry of the modern soul, lonely
and tormented, crippled by
its own enlightenment and its inability to accept meaning in anything removed
from technology."
Mortati could feel himself leaning forward in his seat. He and the other
cardinals and people around the
world were hanging on this priest's every utterance. The camerlegno spoke with
no rhetoric or vitriol. No
references to scripture or Jesus Christ. He spoke in modern terms, unadorned and
pure. Somehow, as
though the words were flowing from God himself, he spoke the modern language . .
. delivering the ancient
message. In that moment, Mortati saw one of the reasons the late Pope held this
young man so dear. In a
world of apathy, cynicism, and technological deification, men like the
camerlegno, realists who could
speak to our souls like this man just had, were the church's only hope.
The camerlegno was talking more forcefully now. "Science, you say, will save us.
Science, I say, has
destroyed us. Since the days of Galileo, the church has tried to slow the
relentless march of science,
sometimes with misguided means, but always with benevolent intention. Even so,
the temptations are too
great for man to resist. I warn you, look around yourselves. The promises of
science have not been kept.
Promises of efficiency and simplicity have bred nothing but pollution and chaos.
We are a fractured and
frantic species . . . moving down a path of destruction."
The camerlegno paused a long moment and then sharpened his eyes on the camera.
"Who is this God science? Who is the God who offers his people power but no
moral framework to tell you
how to use that power? What kind of God gives a child fire but does not warn the
child of its dangers? The
language of science comes with no signposts about good and bad. Science
textbooks tell us how to create a
nuclear reaction, and yet they contain no chapter asking us if it is a good or a
bad idea.
"To science, I say this. The church is tired. We are exhausted from trying to be
your signposts. Our
resources are drying up from our campaign to be the voice of balance as you plow
blindly on in your quest
for smaller chips and larger profits. We ask not why you will not govern
yourselves, but how can you?
Your world moves so fast that if you stop even for an instant to consider the
implications of your actions,
someone more efficient will whip past you in a blur. So you move on. You
proliferate weapons of mass
destruction, but it is the Pope who travels the world beseeching leaders to use
restraint. You clone living
creatures, but it is the church reminding us to consider the moral implications
of our actions. You
encourage people to interact on phones, video screens, and computers, but it is
the church who opens its
doors and reminds us to commune in person as we were meant to do. You even
murder unborn babies in
the name of research that will save lives. Again, it is the church who points
out the fallacy of this reasoning.
"And all the while, you proclaim the church is ignorant. But who is more
ignorant? The man who cannot
define lightning, or the man who does not respect its awesome power? This church
is reaching out to you.
Reaching out to everyone. And yet the more we reach, the more you push us away.
Show me proof there is
a God, you say. I say use your telescopes to look to the heavens, and tell me
how there could not be a
God!" The camerlegno had tears in his eyes now. "You ask what does God look
like. I say, where did that
question come from? The answers are one and the same. Do you not see God in your
science? How can you
miss Him! You proclaim that even the slightest change in the force of gravity or
the weight of an atom
would have rendered our universe a lifeless mist rather than our magnificent sea
of heavenly bodies, and
yet you fail to see God's hand in this? Is it really so much easier to believe
that we simply chose the right
card from a deck of billions? Have we become so spiritually bankrupt that we
would rather believe in
mathematical impossibility than in a power greater than us?
"Whether or not you believe in God," the camerlegno said, his voice deepening
with deliberation, "you
must believe this. When we as a species abandon our trust in the power greater
than us, we abandon our
sense of accountability. Faith . . . all faiths . . . are admonitions that there
is something we cannot
understand, something to which we are accountable . . . With faith we are
accountable to each other, to
ourselves, and to a higher truth. Religion is flawed, but only because man is
flawed. If the outside world
could see this church as I do . . . looking beyond the ritual of these walls . .
. they would see a modern
miracle . . . a brotherhood of imperfect, simple souls wanting only to be a
voice of compassion in a world
spinning out of control."
The camerlegno motioned out over the College of Cardinals, and the BBC
camerawoman instinctively
followed, panning the crowd.
"Are we obsolete?" the camerlegno asked. "Are these men dino-saurs? Am I? Does
the world really need a
voice for the poor, the weak, the oppressed, the unborn child? Do we really need
souls like these who,
though imperfect, spend their lives imploring each of us to read the signposts
of morality and not lose our
way?"
Mortati now realized that the camerlegno, whether consciously or not, was making
a brilliant move. By
showing the cardinals, he was personalizing the church. Vatican City was no
longer a building, it was
people-people like the camerlegno who had spent their lives in the service of
goodness.
"Tonight we are perched on a precipice," the camerlegno said. "None of us can
afford to be apathetic.
Whether you see this evil as Satan, corruption, or immorality . . . the dark
force is alive and growing every
day. Do not ignore it." The camerlegno lowered his voice to a whisper, and the
camera moved in. "The
