Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
a rainbow of colors on the
wall. "It's lovely," his father had said when he opened it, kissing Robert on
the forehead. "Let's find a safe
spot for it." Then his father had carefully placed the rose on a high dusty
shelf in the darkest corner of the
living room. A few days later, Langdon got a stool, retrieved the rose, and took
it back to the store. His
father never noticed it was gone.
The ping of an elevator pulled Langdon back to the present. Vittoria and Kohler
were in front of him,
boarding the lift. Langdon hesitated outside the open doors.
"Is something wrong?" Kohler asked, sounding more impatient than concerned.
"Not at all," Langdon said, forcing himself toward the cramped carriage. He only
used elevators when
absolutely necessary. He preferred the more open spaces of stairwells.
"Dr. Vetra's lab is subterranean," Kohler said.
Wonderful, Langdon thought as he stepped across the cleft, feeling an icy wind
churn up from the depths of
the shaft. The doors closed, and the car began to descend.
"Six stories," Kohler said blankly, like an analytical engine.
Langdon pictured the darkness of the empty shaft below them. He tried to block
it out by staring at the
numbered display of changing floors. Oddly, the elevator showed only two stops.
GROUND LEVEL and
LHC.
"What's LHC stand for?" Langdon asked, trying not to sound nervous.
"Large Hadron Collider," Kohler said. "A particle accelerator."
Particle accelerator? Langdon was vaguely familiar with the term. He had first
heard it over dinner with
some colleagues at Dunster House in Cambridge. A physicist friend of theirs, Bob
Brownell, had arrived
for dinner one night in a rage.
"The bastards canceled it!" Brownell cursed.
"Canceled what?" they all asked.
"The SSC!"
"The what?"
"The Superconducting Super Collider!"
Someone shrugged. "I didn't know Harvard was building one."
"Not Harvard!" he exclaimed. "The U.S.! It was going to be the world's most
powerful particle accelerator!
One of the most important scientific projects of the century! Two billion
dollars into it and the Senate sacks
the project! Damn Bible-Belt lobbyists!"
When Brownell finally calmed down, he explained that a particle accelerator was
a large, circular tube
through which subatomic particles were accelerated. Magnets in the tube turned
on and off in rapid
succession to "push" particles around and around until they reached tremendous
velocities. Fully
accelerated particles circled the tube at over 180,000 miles per second.
"But that's almost the speed of light," one of the professors exclaimed.
"Damn right," Brownell said. He went on to say that by accelerating two
particles in opposite directions
around the tube and then colliding them, scientists could shatter the particles
into their constituent parts and
get a glimpse of nature's most fundamental components. "Particle accelerators,"
Brownell declared, "are
critical to the future of science. Colliding particles is the key to
understanding the building blocks of the
universe."
Harvard's Poet in Residence, a quiet man named Charles Pratt, did not look
impressed. "It sounds to me,"
he said, "like a rather Neanderthal approach to science . . . akin to smashing
clocks together to discern their
internal workings."
Brownell dropped his fork and stormed out of the room.
So CERN has a particle accelerator? Langdon thought, as the elevator dropped. A
circular tube for 
smashing particles. He wondered why they had buried it underground.
When the elevator thumped to a stop, Langdon was relieved to feel terra firma
beneath his feet. But when
the doors slid open, his relief evaporated. Robert Langdon found himself
standing once again in a totally
alien world.
The passageway stretched out indefinitely in both directions, left and right. It
was a smooth cement tunnel,
wide enough to allow passage of an eighteen wheeler. Brightly lit where they
stood, the corridor turned
pitch black farther down. A damp wind rustled out of the darkness-an unsettling
reminder that they were
now deep in the earth. Langdon could almost sense the weight of the dirt and
stone now hanging above his
head. For an instant he was nine years old . . . the darkness forcing him back .
. . back to the five hours of
crushing blackness that haunted him still. Clenching his fists, he fought it
off.
Vittoria remained hushed as she exited the elevator and strode off without
hesitation into the darkness
without them. Overhead the flourescents flickered on to light her path. The
effect was unsettling, Langdon
thought, as if the tunnel were alive . . . anticipating her every move. Langdon
and Kohler followed, trailing
a distance behind. The lights extinguished automatically behind them.
"This particle accelerator," Langdon said quietly. "It's down this tunnel
someplace?"
"That's it there." Kohler motioned to his left where a polished, chrome tube ran
along the tunnel's inner
wall.
Langdon eyed the tube, confused. "That's the accelerator?" The device looked
nothing like he had
imagined. It was perfectly straight, about three feet in diameter, and extended
horizontally the visible
length of the tunnel before disappearing into the darkness. Looks more like a
high-tech sewer, Langdon
thought. "I thought particle accelerators were circular."
"This accelerator is a circle," Kohler said. "It appears straight, but that is
an optical illusion. The
circumference of this tunnel is so large that the curve is imperceptible-like
that of the earth."
Langdon was flabbergasted. This is a circle? "But . . . it must be enormous!"
"The LHC is the largest machine in the world."
Langdon did a double take. He remembered the CERN driver saying something about
a huge machine
buried in the earth. But-
"It is over eight kilometers in diameter . . . and twenty-seven kilometers
long."
Langdon's head whipped around. "Twenty-seven kilometers?" He stared at the
director and then turned and
looked into the darkened tunnel before him. "This tunnel is twenty-seven
kilometers long? That's . . . that's
over sixteen miles!"
Kohler nodded. "Bored in a perfect circle. It extends all the way into France
before curving back here to
this spot. Fully accelerated particles will circle the tube more than ten
thousand times in a single second
before they collide."
Langdon's legs felt rubbery as he stared down the gaping tunnel. "You're telling
me that CERN dug out
millions of tons of earth just to smash tiny particles?"
Kohler shrugged. "Sometimes to find truth, one must move mountains."
16
H undreds of miles from CERN, a voice crackled through a walkie-talkie. "Okay,
I'm in the hallway."
The technician monitoring the video screens pressed the button on his
transmitter. "You're looking for
camera #86. It's supposed to be at the far end."
There was a long silence on the radio. The waiting technician broke a light
sweat. Finally his radio clicked.
"The camera isn't here," the voice said. "I can see where it was mounted,
though. Somebody must have
removed it."
The technician exhaled heavily. "Thanks. Hold on a second, will you?"
Sighing, he redirected his attention to the bank of video screens in front of
him. Huge portions of the
complex were open to the public, and wireless cameras had gone missing before,
usually stolen by visiting
pranksters looking for souvenirs. But as soon as a camera left the facility and
was out of range, the signal
was lost, and the screen went blank. Perplexed, the technician gazed up at the
monitor. A crystal clear
image was still coming from camera #86.
If the camera was stolen, he wondered, why are we still getting a signal? He
knew, of course, there was
only one explanation. The camera was still inside the complex, and someone had
simply moved it. But
who? And why?
He studied the monitor a long moment. Finally he picked up his walkie-talkie.
"Are there any closets in that
stairwell? Any cupboards or dark alcoves?"
The voice replying sounded confused. "No. Why?"
The technician frowned. "Never mind. Thanks for your help." He turned off his
walkie-talkie and pursed
his lips.
Considering the small size of the video camera and the fact that it was
wireless, the technician knew that
camera #86 could be transmitting from just about anywhere within the heavily
guarded compound-a
densely packed collection of thirty-two separate buildings covering a half-mile
radius. The only clue was
that the camera seemed to have been placed somewhere dark. Of course, that
wasn't much help. The
complex contained endless dark locations-maintenance closets, heating ducts,
gardening sheds, bedroom
wardrobes, even a labyrinth of underground tunnels. Camera #86 could take weeks
to locate.
But that's the least of my problems, he thought.
Despite the dilemma posed by the camera's relocation, there was another far more
unsettling matter at
hand. The technician gazed up at the image the lost camera was transmitting. It
was a stationary object. A
modern-looking device like nothing the technician had ever seen. He studied the
blinking electronic display
at its base.
Although the guard had undergone rigorous training preparing him for tense
situations, he still sensed his
pulse rising. He told himself not to panic. There had to be an explanation. The
object appeared too small to
be of significant danger. Then again, its presence inside the complex was
troubling. Very troubling, indeed.
Today of all days, he thought.
Security was always a top priority for his employer, but today, more than any
other day in the past twelve
years, security was of the utmost importance. The technician stared at the
object for a long time and sensed
the rumblings of a distant gathering storm.
Then, sweating, he dialed his superior.
17
N ot many children could say they remembered the day they met their father, but
Vittoria Vetra could.
She was eight years old, living where she always had, Orfanotrofio di Siena, a
Catholic orphanage near
Florence, deserted by parents she never knew. It was raining that day. The nuns
had called for her twice to
come to dinner, but as always she pretended not to hear. She lay outside in the
courtyard, staring up at the
raindrops . . . feeling them hit her body . . . trying to guess where one would
land next. The nuns called
again, threatening that pneumonia might make an insufferably headstrong child a
lot less curious about
nature.
I can't hear you, Vittoria thought.
She was soaked to the bone when the young priest came out to get her. She didn't
know him. He was new
there. Vittoria waited for him to grab her and drag her back inside. But he
didn't. Instead, to her wonder, he
lay down beside her, soaking his robes in a puddle.
"They say you ask a lot of questions," the young man said.
Vittoria scowled. "Are questions bad?"
He laughed. "Guess they were right."
"What are you doing out here?"
"Same thing you're doing . . . wondering why raindrops fall."
"I'm not wondering why they fall! I already know!"
The priest gave her an astonished look. "You do?"
"Sister Francisca says raindrops are angels' tears coming down to wash away our
sins."
"Wow!" he said, sounding amazed. "So that explains it."
"No it doesn't!" the girl fired back. "Raindrops fall because everything falls!
Everything falls! Not just
rain!"
The priest scratched his head, looking perplexed. "You know, young lady, you're
right. Everything does
fall. It must be gravity."
"It must be what?"
He gave her an astonished look. "You haven't heard of gravity?"
"No."
The priest shrugged sadly. "Too bad. Gravity answers a lot of questions."
Vittoria sat up. "What's gravity?" she demanded. "Tell me!"
The priest gave her a wink. "What do you say I tell you over dinner."
The young priest was Leonardo Vetra. Although he had been an award-winning
physics student while in
university, he'd heard another call and gone into the seminary. Leonardo and
Vittoria became unlikely best
friends in the lonely world of nuns and regulations. Vittoria made Leonardo
laugh, and he took her under
his wing, teaching her that beautiful things like rainbows and the rivers had
many explanations. He told her
about light, planets, stars, and all of nature through the eyes of both God and
science. Vittoria's innate
intellect and curiosity made her a captivating student. Leonardo protected her
like a daughter.
Vittoria was happy too. She had never known the joy of having a father. When
every other adult answered
her questions with a slap on the wrist, Leonardo spent hours showing her books.
He even asked what her
ideas were. Vittoria prayed Leonardo would stay with her forever. Then one day,
her worst nightmare came
true. Father Leonardo told her he was leaving the orphanage.
"I'm moving to Switzerland," Leonardo said. "I have a grant to study physics at
the University of Geneva."
"Physics?" Vittoria cried. "I thought you loved God!"
"I do, very much. Which is why I want to study his divine rules. The laws of
physics are the canvas God
laid down on which to paint his masterpiece."
Vittoria was devastated. But Father Leonardo had some other news. He told
Vittoria he had spoken to his
superiors, and they said it was okay if Father Leonardo adopted her.
"Would you like me to adopt you?" Leonardo asked.
"What's adopt mean?" Vittoria said.
Father Leonardo told her.
Vittoria hugged him for five minutes, crying tears of joy. "Oh yes! Yes!"
Leonardo told her he had to leave for a while and get their new home settled in
Switzerland, but he
promised to send for her in six months. It was the longest wait of Vittoria's
life, but Leonardo kept his
word. Five days before her ninth birthday, Vittoria moved to Geneva. She
attended Geneva International
School during the day and learned from her father at night.
Three years later Leonardo Vetra was hired by CERN. Vittoria and Leonardo
relocated to a wonderland the
likes of which the young Vittoria had never imagined.
Vittoria Vetra's body felt numb as she strode down the LHC tunnel. She saw her
muted reflection in the
LHC and sensed her father's absence. Normally she existed in a state of deep
calm, in harmony with the
world around her. But now, very suddenly, nothing made sense. The last three
hours had been a blur.
It had been 10 A.M. in the Balearic Islands when Kohler's call came through.
Your father has been
murdered. Come home immediately. Despite the sweltering heat on the deck of the
dive boat, the words had
chilled her to the bone, Kohler's emotionless tone hurting as much as the news.
Now she had returned home. But home to what? CERN, her world since she was
twelve, seemed suddenly
foreign. Her father, the man who had made it magical, was gone.
Deep breaths, she told herself, but she couldn't calm her mind. The questions
circled faster and faster. Who
killed her father? And why? Who was this American "specialist"? Why was Kohler
insisting on seeing the
lab?
Kohler had said there was evidence that her father's murder was related to the
current project. What
evidence? Nobody knew what we were working on! And even if someone found out,
why would they kill
him?
As she moved down the LHC tunnel toward her father's lab, Vittoria realized she
was about to unveil her
father's greatest achievement without him there. She had pictured this moment
much differently. She had
imagined her father calling CERN's top scientists to his lab, showing them his
discovery, watching their
awestruck faces. Then he would beam with fatherly pride as he explained to them
how it had been one of
Vittoria's ideas that had helped him make the project a reality . . . that his
daughter had been integral in his
breakthrough. Vittoria felt a lump in her throat. My father and I were supposed
to share this moment
together. But here she was alone. No colleagues. No happy faces. Just an
American stranger and
Maximilian Kohler.
Maximilian Kohler. Der König.
Even as a child, Vittoria had disliked the man. Although she eventually came to
respect his potent intellect,
his icy demeanor always seemed inhuman, the exact antithesis of her father's
warmth. Kohler pursued
science for its immaculate logic . . . her father for its spiritual wonder. And
yet oddly there had always
seemed to be an unspoken respect between the two men. Genius, someone had once
explained to her,
accepts genius unconditionally.
Genius, she thought. My father . . . Dad. Dead.
The entry to Leonardo Vetra's lab was a long sterile hallway paved entirely in
white tile. Langdon felt like
he was entering some kind of underground insane asylum. Lining the corridor were
dozens of framed,
black-and-white images. Although Langdon had made a career of studying images,
these were entirely
alien to him. They looked like chaotic negatives of random streaks and spirals.
Modern art? he mused.
Jackson Pollock on amphetamines?
"Scatter plots," Vittoria said, apparently noting Langdon's interest. "Computer
representations of particle
collisions. That's the Z-particle," she said, pointing to a faint track that was
almost invisible in the
confusion. "My father discovered it five years ago. Pure energy-no mass at all.
It may well be the smallest
building block in nature. Matter is nothing but trapped energy."
Matter is energy? Langdon cocked his head. Sounds pretty Zen. He gazed at the
tiny streak in the
photograph and wondered what his buddies in the Harvard physics department would
say when he told
them he'd spent the weekend hanging out in a Large Hadron Collider admiring
Z-particles.
"Vittoria," Kohler said, as they approached the lab's imposing steel door, "I
should mention that I came
down here this morning looking for your father."
Vittoria flushed slightly. "You did?"
"Yes. And imagine my surprise when I discovered he had replaced CERN's standard
keypad security with
something else." Kohler motioned to an intricate electronic device mounted
beside the door.
"I apologize," she said. "You know how he was about privacy. He didn't want
anyone but the two of us to
have access."
Kohler said, "Fine. Open the door."
Vittoria stood a long moment. Then, pulling a deep breath, she walked to the
mechanism on the wall.
Langdon was in no way prepared for what happened next.
Vittoria stepped up to the device and carefully aligned her right eye with a
protruding lens that looked like
a telescope. Then she pressed a button. Inside the machine, something clicked. A
shaft of light oscillated
back and forth, scanning her eyeball like a copy machine.
"It's a retina scan," she said. "Infallible security. Authorized for two retina
patterns only. Mine and my
father's."
Robert Langdon stood in horrified revelation. The image of Leonardo Vetra came
back in grisly detail-the
bloody face, the solitary hazel eye staring back, and the empty eye socket. He
tried to reject the obvious
truth, but then he saw it . . . beneath the scanner on the white tile floor . .
. faint droplets of crimson. Dried
blood.
Vittoria, thankfully, did not notice.
The steel door slid open and she walked through.
Kohler fixed Langdon with an adamant stare. His message was clear: As I told you
. . . the missing eye
serves a higher purpose.
18
T he woman's hands were tied, her wrists now purple and swollen from chafing.
The mahogany-skinned
Hassassin lay beside her, spent, admiring his naked prize. He wondered if her
current slumber was just a
deception, a pathetic attempt to avoid further service to him.
He did not care. He had reaped sufficient reward. Sated, he sat up in bed.
In his country women were possessions. Weak. Tools of pleasure. Chattel to be
traded like livestock. And
they understood their place. But here, in Europe, women feigned a strength and
independence that both
amused and excited him. Forcing them into physical submission was a
gratification he always enjoyed.
Now, despite the contentment in his loins, the Hassassin sensed another appetite
growing within him. He
had killed last night, killed and mutilated, and for him killing was like heroin
. . . each encounter satisfying
only temporarily before increasing his longing for more. The exhilaration had
worn off. The craving had
returned.
He studied the sleeping woman beside him. Running his palm across her neck, he
felt aroused with the
knowledge that he could end her life in an instant. What would it matter? She
was subhuman, a vehicle
only of pleasure and service. His strong fingers encircled her throat, savoring
her delicate pulse. Then,
fighting desire, he removed his hand. There was work to do. Service to a higher
cause than his own desire.
As he got out of bed, he reveled in the honor of the job before him. He still
could not fathom the influence
of this man named Janus and the ancient brotherhood he commanded. Wondrously,
the brotherhood had
chosen him. Somehow they had learned of his loathing . . . and of his skills.
How, he would never know.
Their roots reach wide.
Now they had bestowed on him the ultimate honor. He would be their hands and
their voice. Their assassin
and their messenger. The one his people knew as Malak al-haq-the Angel of Truth.
19
V etra's lab was wildly futuristic.
Stark white and bounded on all sides by computers and specialized electronic
equipment, it looked like
some sort of operating room. Langdon wondered what secrets this place could
possibly hold to justify
cutting out someone's eye to gain entrance.
Kohler looked uneasy as they entered, his eyes seeming to dart about for signs
of an intruder. But the lab
was deserted. Vittoria moved slowly too . . . as if the lab felt unknown without
her father there.
Langdon's gaze landed immediately in the center of the room, where a series of
short pillars rose from the
floor. Like a miniature Stonehenge, a dozen or so columns of polished steel
stood in a circle in the middle
of the room. The pillars were about three feet tall, reminding Langdon of museum
displays for valuable
gems. These pillars, however, were clearly not for precious stones. Each
supported a thick, transparent
canister about the size of a tennis ball can. They appeared empty.
Kohler eyed the canisters, looking puzzled. He apparently decided to ignore them
for the time being. He
turned to Vittoria. "Has anything been stolen?"
"Stolen? How?" she argued. "The retina scan only allows entry to us."
"Just look around."
Vittoria sighed and surveyed the room for a few moments. She shrugged.
"Everything looks as my father
always leaves it. Ordered chaos."
Langdon sensed Kohler weighing his options, as if wondering how far to push
Vittoria . . . how much to tell
her. Apparently he decided to leave it for the moment. Moving his wheelchair
toward the center of the
room, he surveyed the mysterious cluster of seemingly empty canisters.
"Secrets," Kohler finally said, "are a luxury we can no longer afford."
Vittoria nodded in acquiescence, looking suddenly emotional, as if being here
brought with it a torrent of
memories.
Give her a minute, Langdon thought.
As though preparing for what she was about to reveal, Vittoria closed her eyes
and breathed. Then she
breathed again. And again. And again . . .
Langdon watched her, suddenly concerned. Is she okay? He glanced at Kohler, who
appeared unfazed,
apparently having seen this ritual before. Ten seconds passed before Vittoria
opened her eyes.
Langdon could not believe the metamorphosis. Vittoria Vetra had been
transformed. Her full lips were lax,
her shoulders down, and her eyes soft and assenting. It was as though she had
realigned every muscle in her
body to accept the situation. The resentful fire and personal anguish had been
quelled somehow beneath a
deeper, watery cool.
"Where to begin . . ." she said, her accent unruffled.
"At the beginning," Kohler said. "Tell us about your father's experiment."
"Rectifying science with religion has been my father's life dream," Vittoria
said. "He hoped to prove that
science and religion are two totally compatible fields-two different approaches
to finding the same truth."
She paused as if unable to believe what she was about to say. "And recently . .
. he conceived of a way to
do that."
Kohler said nothing.
"He devised an experiment, one he hoped would settle one of the most bitter
conflicts in the history of
science and religion."
Langdon wondered which conflict she could mean. There were so many.
"Creationism," Vittoria declared. "The battle over how the universe came to be."
Oh, Langdon thought. THE debate.
"The Bible, of course, states that God created the universe," she explained.
"God said, 'Let there be light,'
and everything we see appeared out of a vast emptiness. Unfortunately, one of
the fundamental laws of
physics states that matter cannot be created out of nothing."
Langdon had read about this stalemate. The idea that God allegedly created
"something from nothing" was
totally contrary to accepted laws of modern physics and therefore, scientists
claimed, Genesis was
scientifically absurd.
"Mr. Langdon," Vittoria said, turning, "I assume you are familiar with the Big
Bang Theory?"
Langdon shrugged. "More or less." The Big Bang, he knew, was the scientifically
accepted model for the
creation of the universe. He didn't really understand it, but according to the
theory, a single point of
intensely focused energy erupted in a cataclysmic explosion, expanding outward
to form the universe. Or
something like that.
Vittoria continued. "When the Catholic Church first proposed the Big Bang Theory
in 1927, the-"
"I'm sorry?" Langdon interrupted, before he could stop himself. "You say the Big
Bang was a Catholic
idea?"
Vittoria looked surprised by his question "Of course. Proposed by a Catholic
monk, Georges Lemaître in
1927."
"But, I thought . . ." he hesitated. "Wasn't the Big Bang proposed by Harvard
astronomer Edwin Hubble?"
Kohler glowered. "Again, American scientific arrogance. Hubble published in
1929, two years after
Lemaître."
Langdon scowled. It's called the Hubble Telescope, sir-I've never heard of any
Lemaître Telescope!
"Mr. Kohler is right," Vittoria said, "the idea belonged to Lemaître. Hubble
only confirmed it by gathering
the hard evidence that proved the Big Bang was scientifically probable."
"Oh," Langdon said, wondering if the Hubble-fanatics in the Harvard Astronomy
Department ever
mentioned Lemaître in their lectures.
"When Lemaître first proposed the Big Bang Theory," Vittoria continued,
"scientists claimed it was utterly
ridiculous. Matter, science said, could not be created out of nothing. So, when
Hubble shocked the world
by scientifically proving the Big Bang was accurate, the church claimed victory,
heralding this as proof that
the Bible was scientifically accurate. The divine truth."
Langdon nodded, focusing intently now.
"Of course scientists did not appreciate having their discoveries used by the
church to promote religion, so
they immediately mathematicized the Big Bang Theory, removed all religious
overtones, and claimed it as
their own. Unfortunately for science, however, their equations, even today, have
one serious deficiency that
the church likes to point out."
Kohler grunted. "The singularity." He spoke the word as if it were the bane of
his existence.
"Yes, the singularity," Vittoria said. "The exact moment of creation. Time
zero." She looked at Langdon.
"Even today, science cannot grasp the initial moment of creation. Our equations
explain the early universe
quite effectively, but as we move back in time, approaching time zero, suddenly
our mathematics
disintegrates, and everything becomes meaningless."
"Correct," Kohler said, his voice edgy, "and the church holds up this deficiency
as proof of God's
miraculous involvement. Come to your point."
Vittoria's expression became distant. "My point is that my father had always
believed in God's
involvement in the Big Bang. Even though science was unable to comprehend the
divine moment of
creation, he believed someday it would." She motioned sadly to a laser-printed
memo tacked over her
father's work area. "My dad used to wave that in my face every time I had
doubts."
Langdon read the message:
SCIENCE AND RELIGION ARE NOT AT ODDS.
SCIENCE IS SIMPLY TOO YOUNG TO UNDERSTAND.
"My dad wanted to bring science to a higher level," Vittoria said, "where
science supported the concept of
God." She ran a hand through her long hair, looking melancholy. "He set out to
do something no scientist
had ever thought to do. Something that no one has ever had the technology to
do." She paused, as though
uncertain how to speak the next words. "He designed an experiment to prove
Genesis was possible."
Prove Genesis? Langdon wondered. Let there be light? Matter from nothing?
Kohler's dead gaze bore across the room. "I beg your pardon?"
"My father created a universe . . . from nothing at all."
Kohler snapped his head around. "What!"
"Better said, he recreated the Big Bang."
Kohler looked ready to jump to his feet.
Langdon was officially lost. Creating a universe? Recreating the Big Bang?
"It was done on a much smaller scale, of course," Vittoria said, talking faster
now. "The process was
remarkably simple. He accelerated two ultrathin particle beams in opposite
directions around the
accelerator tube. The two beams collided head-on at enormous speeds, driving
into one another and
compressing all their energy into a single pinpoint. He achieved extreme energy
densities." She started
rattling off a stream of units, and the director's eyes grew wider.
Langdon tried to keep up. So Leonardo Vetra was simulating the compressed point
of energy from which
the universe supposedly sprang.
"The result," Vittoria said, "was nothing short of wondrous. When it is
published, it will shake the very
foundation of modern physics." She spoke slowly now, as though savoring the
immensity of her news.
"Without warning, inside the accelerator tube, at this point of highly focused
energy, particles of matter
began appearing out of nowhere."
Kohler made no reaction. He simply stared.
"Matter," Vittoria repeated. "Blossoming out of nothing. An incredible display
of subatomic fireworks. A
miniature universe springing to life. He proved not only that matter can be
created from nothing, but that
the Big Bang and Genesis can be explained simply by accepting the presence of an
enormous source of
energy."
"You mean God?" Kohler demanded.
"God, Buddha, The Force, Yahweh, the singularity, the unicity point-call it
whatever you like-the result is
the same. Science and religion support the same truth-pure energy is the father
of creation."
When Kohler finally spoke, his voice was somber. "Vittoria, you have me at a
loss. It sounds like you're
telling me your father created matter . . . out of nothing?"
"Yes." Vittoria motioned to the canisters. "And there is the proof. In those
canisters are specimens of the
matter he created."
Kohler coughed and moved toward the canisters like a wary animal circling
something he instinctively
sensed was wrong. "I've obviously missed something," he said. "How do you expect
anyone to believe
these canisters contain particles of matter your father actually created? They
could be particles from
anywhere at all."
"Actually," Vittoria said, sounding confident, "they couldn't. These particles
are unique. They are a type of
matter that does not exist anywhere on earth . . . hence they had to be
created."
Kohler's expression darkened. "Vittoria, what do you mean a certain type of
matter? There is only one type
of matter, and it-" Kohler stopped short.
Vittoria's expression was triumphant. "You've lectured on it yourself, director.
The universe contains two
kinds of matter. Scientific fact." Vittoria turned to Langdon. "Mr. Langdon,
what does the Bible say about
the Creation? What did God create?"
Langdon felt awkward, not sure what this had to do with anything. "Um, God
created . . . light and dark,
heaven and hell-"
"Exactly," Vittoria said. "He created everything in opposites. Symmetry. Perfect
balance." She turned back
to Kohler. "Director, science claims the same thing as religion, that the Big
Bang created everything in the
universe with an opposite."
"Including matter itself," Kohler whispered, as if to himself.
Vittoria nodded. "And when my father ran his experiment, sure enough, two kinds
of matter appeared."
Langdon wondered what this meant. Leonardo Vetra created matter's opposite?
Kohler looked angry. "The substance you're referring to only exists elsewhere in
the universe. Certainly
not on earth. And possibly not even in our galaxy!"
"Exactly," Vittoria replied, "which is proof that the particles in these
canisters had to be created."
Kohler's face hardened. "Vittoria, surely you can't be saying those canisters
contain actual specimens?"
"I am." She gazed proudly at the canisters. "Director, you are looking at the
world's first specimens of
antimatter."
20
P hase two, the Hassassin thought, striding into the darkened tunnel.
The torch in his hand was overkill. He knew that. But it was for effect. Effect
was everything. Fear, he had
learned, was his ally. Fear cripples faster than any implement of war.
There was no mirror in the passage to admire his disguise, but he could sense
from the shadow of his
billowing robe that he was perfect. Blending in was part of the plan . . . part
of the depravity of the plot. In
his wildest dreams he had never imagined playing this part.
Two weeks ago, he would have considered the task awaiting him at the far end of
this tunnel impossible. A
suicide mission. Walking naked into a lion's lair. But Janus had changed the
definition of impossible.
The secrets Janus had shared with the Hassassin in the last two weeks had been
numerous . . . this very
tunnel being one of them. Ancient, and yet still perfectly passable.
As he drew closer to his enemy, the Hassassin wondered if what awaited him
inside would be as easy as
Janus had promised. Janus had assured him someone on the inside would make the
necessary arrangements.
Someone on the inside. Incredible. The more he considered it, the more he
realized it was child's play.
Wahad . . . tintain . . . thalatha . . . arbaa, he said to himself in Arabic as
he neared the end. One . . . two . .
. three . . . four . . .
21
I sense you've heard of antimatter, Mr. Langdon?" Vittoria was studying him, her
dark skin in stark
contrast to the white lab.
Langdon looked up. He felt suddenly dumb. "Yes. Well . . . sort of."
A faint smile crossed her lips. "You watch Star Trek."
Langdon flushed. "Well, my students enjoy . . ." He frowned. "Isn't antimatter
what fuels the U.S.S.
Enterprise?"
She nodded. "Good science fiction has its roots in good science."
"So antimatter is real?"
"A fact of nature. Everything has an opposite. Protons have electrons. Up-quarks
have down-quarks. There
is a cosmic symmetry at the subatomic level. Antimatter is yin to matter's yang.
It balances the physical
equation."
Langdon thought of Galileo's belief of duality.
"Scientists have known since 1918," Vittoria said, "that two kinds of matter
were created in the Big Bang.
One matter is the kind we see here on earth, making up rocks, trees, people. The
other is its inverseidentical
to matter in all respects except that the charges of its particles are
reversed."
Kohler spoke as though emerging from a fog. His voice sounded suddenly
precarious. "But there are
enormous technological barriers to actually storing antimatter. What about
neutralization?"
"My father built a reverse polarity vacuum to pull the antimatter positrons out
of the accelerator before they
could decay."
Kohler scowled. "But a vacuum would pull out the matter also. There would be no
way to separate the
particles."
"He applied a magnetic field. Matter arced right, and antimatter arced left.
They are polar opposites."
At that instant, Kohler's wall of doubt seemed to crack. He looked up at
Vittoria in clear astonishment and
then without warning was overcome by a fit of coughing. "Incred . . . ible . .
." he said, wiping his mouth,
"and yet . . ." It seemed his logic was still resisting. "Yet even if the vacuum
worked, these canisters are
made of matter. Antimatter cannot be stored inside canisters made out of matter.
The antimatter would
instantly react with-"
"The specimen is not touching the canister," Vittoria said, apparently expecting
the question. "The
antimatter is suspended. The canisters are called 'antimatter traps' because
they literally trap the antimatter
in the center of the canister, suspending it at a safe distance from the sides
and bottom."
"Suspended? But . . . how?"
"Between two intersecting magnetic fields. Here, have a look."
Vittoria walked across the room and retrieved a large electronic apparatus. The
contraption reminded
Langdon of some sort of cartoon ray gun-a wide cannonlike barrel with a sighting
scope on top and a tangle
of electronics dangling below. Vittoria aligned the scope with one of the
canisters, peered into the eyepiece,
and calibrated some knobs. Then she stepped away, offering Kohler a look.
Kohler looked nonplussed. "You collected visible amounts?"
"Five thousand nanograms," Vittoria said. "A liquid plasma containing millions
of positrons."
"Millions? But a few particles is all anyone has ever detected . . . anywhere."
"Xenon," Vittoria said flatly. "He accelerated the particle beam through a jet
of xenon, stripping away the
electrons. He insisted on keeping the exact procedure a secret, but it involved
simultaneously injecting raw
electrons into the accelerator."
Langdon felt lost, wondering if their conversation was still in English.
Kohler paused, the lines in his brow deepening. Suddenly he drew a short breath.
He slumped like he'd
been hit with a bullet. "Technically that would leave . . ."
Vittoria nodded. "Yes. Lots of it."
Kohler returned his gaze to the canister before him. With a look of uncertainty,
he hoisted himself in his
chair and placed his eye to the viewer, peering inside. He stared a long time
without saying anything. When
he finally sat down, his forehead was covered with sweat. The lines on his face
had disappeared. His voice
was a whisper. "My God . . . you really did it."
Vittoria nodded. "My father did it."
"I . . . I don't know what to say."
Vittoria turned to Langdon. "Would you like a look?" She motioned to the viewing
device.
Uncertain what to expect, Langdon moved forward. From two feet away, the
canister appeared empty.
Whatever was inside was infinitesimal. Langdon placed his eye to the viewer. It
took a moment for the
image before him to come into focus.
Then he saw it.
The object was not on the bottom of the container as he expected, but rather it
was floating in the centersuspended
in midair-a shimmering globule of mercurylike liquid. Hovering as if
by magic, the liquid
tumbled in space. Metallic wavelets rippled across the droplet's surface. The
suspended fluid reminded
Langdon of a video he had once seen of a water droplet in zero G. Although he
knew the globule was
microscopic, he could see every changing gorge and undulation as the ball of
plasma rolled slowly in
suspension.
"It's . . . floating," he said.
"It had better be," Vittoria replied. "Antimatter is highly unstable.
Energetically speaking, antimatter is the
mirror image of matter, so the two instantly cancel each other out if they come
in contact. Keeping
antimatter isolated from matter is a challenge, of course, because everything on
earth is made of matter.
The samples have to be stored without ever touching anything at all-even air."
Langdon was amazed. Talk about working in a vacuum.
"These antimatter traps?" Kohler interrupted, looking amazed as he ran a pallid
finger around one's base.
"They are your father's design?"
"Actually," she said, "they are mine."
Kohler looked up.
Vittoria's voice was unassuming. "My father produced the first particles of
antimatter but was stymied by
how to store them. I suggested these. Airtight nanocomposite shells with
opposing electromagnets at each
end."
"It seems your father's genius has rubbed off."
"Not really. I borrowed the idea from nature. Portuguese man-o'-wars trap fish
between their tentacles
using nematocystic charges. Same principle here. Each canister has two
electromagnets, one at each end.
Their opposing magnetic fields intersect in the center of the canister and hold
the antimatter there,
suspended in midvacuum."
Langdon looked again at the canister. Antimatter floating in a vacuum, not
touching anything at all. Kohler
was right. It was genius.
"Where's the power source for the magnets?" Kohler asked.
Vittoria pointed. "In the pillar beneath the trap. The canisters are screwed
into a docking port that
continuously recharges them so the magnets never fail."
"And if the field fails?"
"The obvious. The antimatter falls out of suspension, hits the bottom of the
trap, and we see an
annihilation."
Langdon's ears pricked up. "Annihilation?" He didn't like the sound of it.
Vittoria looked unconcerned. "Yes. If antimatter and matter make contact, both
are destroyed instantly.
Physicists call the process 'annihilation.' "
Langdon nodded. "Oh."
"It is nature's simplest reaction. A particle of matter and a particle of
antimatter combine to release two
new particles-called photons. A photon is effectively a tiny puff of light."
Langdon had read about photons-light particles-the purest form of energy. He
decided to refrain from
asking about Captain Kirk's use of photon torpedoes against the Klingons. "So if
the antimatter falls, we
see a tiny puff of light?"
Vittoria shrugged. "Depends what you call tiny. Here, let me demonstrate." She
reached for the canister
and started to unscrew it from its charging podium.
Without warning, Kohler let out a cry of terror and lunged forward, knocking her
hands away. "Vittoria!
Are you insane!"
22
K ohler, incredibly, was standing for a moment, teetering on two withered legs.
His face was white with
fear. "Vittoria! You can't remove that trap!"
Langdon watched, bewildered by the director's sudden panic.
"Five hundred nanograms!" Kohler said. "If you break the magnetic field-"
"Director," Vittoria assured, "it's perfectly safe. Every trap has a failsafe-a
back-up battery in case it is
removed from its recharger. The specimen remains suspended even if I remove the
canister."
Kohler looked uncertain. Then, hesitantly, he settled back into his chair.
"The batteries activate automatically," Vittoria said, "when the trap is moved
from the recharger. They
work for twenty-four hours. Like a reserve tank of gas." She turned to Langdon,
as if sensing his
discomfort. "Antimatter has some astonishing characteristics, Mr. Langdon, which
make it quite dangerous.
A ten milligram sample-the volume of a grain of sand-is hypothesized to hold as
much energy as about two
hundred metric tons of conventional rocket fuel."
Langdon's head was spinning again.
"It is the energy source of tomorrow. A thousand times more powerful than
nuclear energy. One hundred
percent efficient. No byproducts. No radiation. No pollution. A few grams could
power a major city for a
week."
Grams? Langdon stepped uneasily back from the podium.
"Don't worry," Vittoria said. "These samples are minuscule fractions of a
gram-millionths. Relatively
harmless." She reached for the canister again and twisted it from its docking
platform.
Kohler twitched but did not interfere. As the trap came free, there was a sharp
beep, and a small LED
display activated near the base of the trap. The red digits blinked, counting
down from twenty-four hours.
24:00:00 . . .
23:59:59 . . .
23:59:58 . . .
Langdon studied the descending counter and decided it looked unsettlingly like a
time bomb.
"The battery," Vittoria explained, "will run for the full twenty-four hours
before dying. It can be recharged
by placing the trap back on the podium. It's designed as a safety measure, but
it's also convenient for
transport."
"Transport?" Kohler looked thunderstruck. "You take this stuff out of the lab?"
"Of course not," Vittoria said. "But the mobility allows us to study it."
Vittoria led Langdon and Kohler to the far end of the room. She pulled a curtain
aside to reveal a window,
beyond which was a large room. The walls, floors, and ceiling were entirely
plated in steel. The room
reminded Langdon of the holding tank of an oil freighter he had once taken to
Papua New Guinea to study
Hanta body graffiti.
"It's an annihilation tank," Vittoria declared.
Kohler looked up. "You actually observe annihilations?"
"My father was fascinated with the physics of the Big Bang-large amounts of
energy from minuscule
kernels of matter." Vittoria pulled open a steel drawer beneath the window. She
placed the trap inside the
drawer and closed it. Then she pulled a lever beside the drawer. A moment later,
the trap appeared on the
other side of the glass, rolling smoothly in a wide arc across the metal floor
until it came to a stop near the
center of the room.
Vittoria gave a tight smile. "You're about to witness your first
antimatter-matter annihilation. A few
millionths of a gram. A relatively minuscule specimen."
Langdon looked out at the antimatter trap sitting alone on the floor of the
enormous tank. Kohler also
turned toward the window, looking uncertain.
"Normally," Vittoria explained, "we'd have to wait the full twenty-four hours
until the batteries died, but
this chamber contains magnets beneath the floor that can override the trap,
pulling the antimatter out of
suspension. And when the matter and antimatter touch . . ."
"Annihilation," Kohler whispered.
"One more thing," Vittoria said. "Antimatter releases pure energy. A one hundred
percent conversion of
mass to photons. So don't look directly at the sample. Shield your eyes."
Langdon was wary, but he now sensed Vittoria was being overly dramatic. Don't
look directly at the
canister? The device was more than thirty yards away, behind an ultrathick wall
of tinted Plexiglas.
Moreover, the speck in the canister was invisible, microscopic. Shield my eyes?
Langdon thought. How
much energy could that speck possibly-
Vittoria pressed the button.
Instantly, Langdon was blinded. A brilliant point of light shone in the canister
and then exploded outward
in a shock wave of light that radiated in all directions, erupting against the
window before him with
thunderous force. He stumbled back as the detonation rocked the vault. The light
burned bright for a
moment, searing, and then, after an instant, it rushed back inward, absorbing in
on itself, and collapsing
into a tiny speck that disappeared to nothing. Langdon blinked in pain, slowly
recovering his eyesight. He
squinted into the smoldering chamber. The canister on the floor had entirely
disappeared. Vaporized. Not a
trace.
He stared in wonder. "G . . . God."
Vittoria nodded sadly. "That's precisely what my father said."
23
K ohler was staring into the annihilation chamber with a look of utter amazement
at the spectacle he had
just seen. Robert Langdon was beside him, looking even more dazed.
"I want to see my father," Vittoria demanded. "I showed you the lab. Now I want
to see my father."
Kohler turned slowly, apparently not hearing her. "Why did you wait so long,
Vittoria? You and your
father should have told me about this discovery immediately."
Vittoria stared at him. How many reasons do you want? "Director, we can argue
about this later. Right
now, I want to see my father."
"Do you know what this technology implies?"
"Sure," Vittoria shot back. "Revenue for CERN. A lot of it. Now I want-"
"Is that why you kept it secret?" Kohler demanded, clearly baiting her. "Because
you feared the board and I
would vote to license it out?"
"It should be licensed," Vittoria fired back, feeling herself dragged into the
argument. "Antimatter is
important technology. But it's also dangerous. My father and I wanted time to
refine the procedures and
make it safe."
"In other words, you didn't trust the board of directors to place prudent
science before financial greed."
Vittoria was surprised with the indifference in Kohler's tone. "There were other
issues as well," she said.
"My father wanted time to present antimatter in the appropriate light."
"Meaning?"
What do you think I mean? "Matter from energy? Something from nothing? It's
practically proof that
Genesis is a scientific possibility."
"So he didn't want the religious implications of his discovery lost in an
onslaught of commercialism?"
"In a manner of speaking."
"And you?"
Vittoria's concerns, ironically, were somewhat the opposite. Commercialism was
critical for the success of
any new energy source. Although antimatter technology had staggering potential
as an efficient and
nonpolluting energy source-if unveiled prematurely, antimatter ran the risk of
being vilified by the politics
and PR fiascoes that had killed nuclear and solar power. Nuclear had
proliferated before it was safe, and
there were accidents. Solar had proliferated before it was efficient, and people
lost money. Both
technologies got bad reputations and withered on the vine.
"My interests," Vittoria said, "were a bit less lofty than uniting science and
religion."
"The environment," Kohler ventured assuredly.
"Limitless energy. No strip mining. No pollution. No radiation. Antimatter
technology could save the
planet."
"Or destroy it," Kohler quipped. "Depending on who uses it for what." Vittoria
felt a chill emanating from
Kohler's crippled form. "Who else knew about this?" he asked.
"No one," Vittoria said. "I told you that."
"Then why do you think your father was killed?"
Vittoria's muscles tightened. "I have no idea. He had enemies here at CERN, you
know that, but it couldn't
have had anything to do with antimatter. We swore to each other to keep it
between us for another few
months, until we were ready."
"And you're certain your father kept his vow of silence?"
Now Vittoria was getting mad. "My father has kept tougher vows than that!"
"And you told no one?"
"Of course not!"
Kohler exhaled. He paused, as though choosing his next words carefully. "Suppose
someone did find out.
And suppose someone gained access to this lab. What do you imagine they would be
after? Did your father
have notes down here? Documentation of his processes?"
"Director, I've been patient. I need some answers now. You keep talking about a
break-in, but you saw the
retina scan. My father has been vigilant about secrecy and security."
"Humor me," Kohler snapped, startling her. "What would be missing?"
"I have no idea." Vittoria angrily scanned the lab. All the antimatter specimens
were accounted for. Her
father's work area looked in order. "Nobody came in here," she declared.
"Everything up here looks fine."
Kohler looked surprised. "Up here?"
Vittoria had said it instinctively. "Yes, here in the upper lab."
"You're using the lower lab too?"
"For storage."
Kohler rolled toward her, coughing again. "You're using the Haz-Mat chamber for
storage? Storage of
what?"
Hazardous material, what else! Vittoria was losing her patience. "Antimatter."
Kohler lifted himself on the arms of his chair. "There are other specimens? Why
the hell didn't you tell
me!"
"I just did," Vittoria fired back. "And you've barely given me a chance!"
"We need to check those specimens," Kohler said. "Now."
"Specimen," Vittoria corrected. "Singular. And it's fine. Nobody could ever-"
"Only one?" Kohler hesitated. "Why isn't it up here?"
"My father wanted it below the bedrock as a precaution. It's larger than the
others."
The look of alarm that shot between Kohler and Langdon was not lost on Vittoria.
Kohler rolled toward her
again. "You created a specimen larger than five hundred nanograms?"
"A necessity," Vittoria defended. "We had to prove the input/yield threshold
could be safely crossed." The
question with new fuel sources, she knew, was always one of input vs. yield-how
much money one had to
expend to harvest the fuel. Building an oil rig to yield a single barrel of oil
was a losing endeavor.
However, if that same rig, with minimal added expense, could deliver millions of
barrels, then you were in
business. Antimatter was the same way. Firing up sixteen miles of electromagnets
to create a tiny specimen
of antimatter expended more energy than the resulting antimatter contained. In
order to prove antimatter
efficient and viable, one had to create specimens of a larger magnitude.
Although Vittoria's father had been hesitant to create a large specimen,
Vittoria had pushed him hard. She
argued that in order for antimatter to be taken seriously, she and her father
had to prove two things. First,
that cost-effective amounts could be produced. And second, that the specimens
could be safely stored. In
the end she had won, and her father had acquiesced against his better judgment.
Not, however, without
some firm guidelines regarding secrecy and access. The antimatter, her father
had insisted, would be stored
in Haz-Mat-a small granite hollow, an additional seventy-five feet below ground.
The specimen would be
their secret. And only the two of them would have access.
"Vittoria?" Kohler insisted, his voice tense. "How large a specimen did you and
your father create?"
Vittoria felt a wry pleasure inside. She knew the amount would stun even the
great Maximilian Kohler. She
pictured the antimatter below. An incredible sight. Suspended inside the trap,
perfectly visible to the naked
eye, danced a tiny sphere of antimatter. This was no microscopic speck. This was
a droplet the size of a
BB.
Vittoria took a deep breath. "A full quarter of a gram."
The blood drained from Kohler's face. "What!" He broke into a fit of coughing.
"A quarter of a gram? That
converts to . . . almost five kilotons!"
Kilotons. Vittoria hated the word. It was one she and her father never used. A
kiloton was equal to 1,000
metric tons of TNT. Kilotons were for weaponry. Payload. Destructive power. She
and her father spoke in
electron volts and joules-constructive energy output.
"That much antimatter could literally liquidate everything in a half-mile
radius!" Kohler exclaimed.
"Yes, if annihilated all at once," Vittoria shot back, "which nobody would ever
do!"
"Except someone who didn't know better. Or if your power source failed!" Kohler
was already heading for
the elevator.
"Which is why my father kept it in Haz-Mat under a fail-safe power and a
redundant security system."
Kohler turned, looking hopeful. "You have additional security on Haz-Mat?"
"Yes. A second retina-scan."
Kohler spoke only two words. "Downstairs. Now."
The freight elevator dropped like a rock.
Another seventy-five feet into the earth.
Vittoria was certain she sensed fear in both men as the elevator fell deeper.
Kohler's usually emotionless
face was taut. I know, Vittoria thought, the sample is enormous, but the
precautions we've taken are-
They reached the bottom.
The elevator opened, and Vittoria led the way down the dimly lit corridor. Up
ahead the corridor deadended
at a huge steel door. HAZ-MAT. The retina scan device beside the door was
identical to the one
upstairs. She approached. Carefully, she aligned her eye with the lens.
She pulled back. Something was wrong. The usually spotless lens was spattered .
. . smeared with
something that looked like . . . blood? Confused she turned to the two men, but
her gaze met waxen faces.
Both Kohler and Langdon were white, their eyes fixed on the floor at her feet.
Vittoria followed their line of sight . . . down.
"No!" Langdon yelled, reaching for her. But it was too late.
Vittoria's vision locked on the object on the floor. It was both utterly foreign
and intimately familiar to her.
It took only an instant.
Then, with a reeling horror, she knew. Staring up at her from the floor,
discarded like a piece of trash, was
an eyeball. She would have recognized that shade of hazel anywhere.
24
T he security technician held his breath as his commander leaned over his
shoulder, studying the bank of
security monitors before them. A minute passed.
The commander's silence was to be expected, the technician told himself. The
commander was a man of
rigid protocol. He had not risen to command one of the world's most elite
security forces by talking first
and thinking second.
But what is he thinking?
The object they were pondering on the monitor was a canister of some sort-a
canister with transparent
sides. That much was easy. It was the rest that was difficult.
Inside the container, as if by some special effect, a small droplet of metallic
liquid seemed to be floating in
midair. The droplet appeared and disappeared in the robotic red blinking of a
digital LED descending
resolutely, making the technician's skin crawl.
"Can you lighten the contrast?" the commander asked, startling the technician.
The technician heeded the instruction, and the image lightened somewhat. The
commander leaned forward,
squinting closer at something that had just come visible on the base of the
container.
The technician followed his commander's gaze. Ever so faintly, printed next to
the LED was an acronym.
Four capital letters gleaming in the intermittent spurts of light.
"Stay here," the commander said. "Say nothing. I'll handle this."
25
H az-Mat. Fifty meters below ground.
Vittoria Vetra stumbled forward, almost falling into the retina scan. She sensed
the American rushing to
help her, holding her, supporting her weight. On the floor at her feet, her
father's eyeball stared up. She felt
the air crushed from her lungs. They cut out his eye! Her world twisted. Kohler
pressed close behind,
speaking. Langdon guided her. As if in a dream, she found herself gazing into
the retina scan. The
mechanism beeped.
The door slid open.
Even with the terror of her father's eye boring into her soul, Vittoria sensed
an additional horror awaited
inside. When she leveled her blurry gaze into the room, she confirmed the next
chapter of the nightmare.
Before her, the solitary recharging podium was empty.
The canister was gone. They had cut out her father's eye to steal it. The
implications came too fast for her
to fully comprehend. Everything had backfired. The specimen that was supposed to
prove antimatter was a
safe and viable energy source had been stolen. But nobody knew this specimen
even existed! The truth,
however, was undeniable. Someone had found out. Vittoria could not imagine who.
Even Kohler, whom
they said knew everything at CERN, clearly had no idea about the project.
Her father was dead. Murdered for his genius.
As the grief strafed her heart, a new emotion surged into Vittoria's conscious.
This one was far worse.
Crushing. Stabbing at her. The emotion was guilt. Uncontrollable, relentless
guilt. Vittoria knew it had
been she who convinced her father to create the specimen. Against his better
judgment. And he had been
killed for it.
A quarter of a gram . . .
Like any technology-fire, gunpowder, the combustion engine-in the wrong hands,
antimatter could be
deadly. Very deadly. Antimatter was a lethal weapon. Potent, and unstoppable.
Once removed from its
recharging platform at CERN, the canister would count down inexorably. A runaway
train.
And when time ran out . . .
A blinding light. The roar of thunder. Spontaneous incineration. Just the flash
. . . and an empty crater. A
big empty crater.
The image of her father's quiet genius being used as a tool of destruction was
like poison in her blood.
Antimatter was the ultimate terrorist weapon. It had no metallic parts to trip
metal detectors, no chemical
signature for dogs to trace, no fuse to deactivate if the authorities located
the canister. The countdown had
begun . . .
Langdon didn't know what else to do. He took his handkerchief and lay it on the
floor over Leonardo
Vetra's eyeball. Vittoria was standing now in the doorway of the empty Haz-Mat
chamber, her expression
wrought with grief and panic. Langdon moved toward her again, instinctively, but
Kohler intervened.
"Mr. Langdon?" Kohler's face was expressionless. He motioned Langdon out of
earshot. Langdon
reluctantly followed, leaving Vittoria to fend for herself. "You're the
specialist," Kohler said, his whisper
intense. "I want to know what these Illuminati bastards intend to do with this
antimatter."
Langdon tried to focus. Despite the madness around him, his first reaction was
logical. Academic rejection.
Kohler was still making assumptions. Impossible assumptions. "The Illuminati are
defunct, Mr. Kohler. I
stand by that. This crime could be anything-maybe even another CERN employee who
found out about Mr.
Vetra's breakthrough and thought the project was too dangerous to continue."
Kohler looked stunned. "You think this is a crime of conscience, Mr. Langdon?
Absurd. Whoever killed
Leonardo wanted one thing-the antimatter specimen. And no doubt they have plans
for it."
"You mean terrorism.""Plainly."
"But the Illuminati were not terrorists."
"Tell that to Leonardo Vetra."
Langdon felt a pang of truth in the statement. Leonardo Vetra had indeed been
branded with the Illuminati
symbol. Where had it come from? The sacred brand seemed too difficult a hoax for
someone trying to
cover his tracks by casting suspicion elsewhere. There had to be another
explanation.
Again, Langdon forced himself to consider the implausible. If the Illuminati
were still active, and if they
stole the antimatter, what would be their intention? What would be their target?
The answer furnished by
his brain was instantaneous. Langdon dismissed it just as fast. True, the
Illuminati had an obvious enemy,
but a wide-scale terrorist attack against that enemy was inconceivable. It was
entirely out of character. Yes,
the Illuminati had killed people, but individuals, carefully conscripted
targets. Mass destruction was
somehow heavy-handed. Langdon paused. Then again, he thought, there would be a
rather majestic
eloquence to it-antimatter, the ultimate scientific achievement, being used to
vaporize-
He refused to accept the preposterous thought. "There is," he said suddenly, "a
logical explanation other
than terrorism."
Kohler stared, obviously waiting.
Langdon tried to sort out the thought. The Illuminati had always wielded
tremendous power through
financial means. They controlled banks. They owned gold bullion. They were even
rumored to possess the
single most valuable gem on earth-the Illuminati Diamond, a flawless diamond of
enormous proportions.
"Money," Langdon said. "The antimatter could have been stolen for financial
gain."
Kohler looked incredulous. "Financial gain? Where does one sell a droplet of
antimatter?"
"Not the specimen," Langdon countered. "The technology. Antimatter technology
must be worth a mint.
Maybe someone stole the specimen to do analysis and R and D."
"Industrial espionage? But that canister has twenty-four hours before the
batteries die. The researchers
would blow themselves up before they learned anything at all."
"They could recharge it before it explodes. They could build a compatible
recharging podium like the ones
here at CERN."
"In twenty-four hours?" Kohler challenged. "Even if they stole the schematics, a
recharger like that would
take months to engineer, not hours!"
"He's right." Vittoria's voice was frail.
Both men turned. Vittoria was moving toward them, her gait as tremulous as her
words.
"He's right. Nobody could reverse engineer a recharger in time. The interface
alone would take weeks.
Flux filters, servo-coils, power conditioning alloys, all calibrated to the
specific energy grade of the locale."
Langdon frowned. The point was taken. An antimatter trap was not something one
could simply plug into a
wall socket. Once removed from CERN, the canister was on a one-way,
twenty-four-hour trip to oblivion.
Which left only one, very disturbing, conclusion.
"We need to call Interpol," Vittoria said. Even to herself, her voice sounded
distant. "We need to call the
proper authorities. Immediately."
Kohler shook his head. "Absolutely not."
The words stunned her. "No? What do you mean?"
"You and your father have put me in a very difficult position here."
"Director, we need help. We need to find that trap and get it back here before
someone gets hurt. We have a
responsibility!"
"We have a responsibility to think," Kohler said, his tone hardening. "This
situation could have very, very
serious repercussions for CERN."
"You're worried about CERN's reputation? Do you know what that canister could do
to an urban area? It
has a blast radius of a half mile! Nine city blocks!"
"Perhaps you and your father should have considered that before you created the
specimen."
Vittoria felt like she'd been stabbed. "But . . . we took every precaution."
"Apparently, it was not enough."
"But nobody knew about the antimatter." She realized, of course, it was an
absurd argument. Of course
somebody knew. Someone had found out.
Vittoria had told no one. That left only two explanations. Either her father had
taken someone into his
confidence without telling her, which made no sense because it was her father
who had sworn them both to
secrecy, or she and her father had been monitored. The cell phone maybe? She
knew they had spoken a few
times while Vittoria was traveling. Had they said too much? It was possible.
There was also their E-mail.
But they had been discreet, hadn't they? CERN's security system? Had they been
monitored somehow
without their knowledge? She knew none of that mattered anymore. What was done,
was done. My father is
dead.
The thought spurred her to action. She pulled her cell phone from her shorts
pocket.
Kohler accelerated toward her, coughing violently, eyes flashing anger. "Who . .
. are you calling?"
"CERN's switchboard. They can connect us to Interpol."
"Think!" Kohler choked, screeching to a halt in front of her. "Are you really so
naïve? That canister could
be anywhere in the world by now. No intelligence agency on earth could possibly
mobilize to find it in
time."
"So we do nothing?" Vittoria felt compunction challenging a man in such frail
health, but the director was
so far out of line she didn't even know him anymore.
"We do what is smart," Kohler said. "We don't risk CERN's reputation by
involving authorities who
cannot help anyway. Not yet. Not without thinking."
Vittoria knew there was logic somewhere in Kohler's argument, but she also knew
that logic, by definition,
was bereft of moral responsibility. Her father had lived for moral
responsibility-careful science,
accountability, faith in man's inherent goodness. Vittoria believed in those
things too, but she saw them in
terms of karma. Turning away from Kohler, she snapped open her phone.
"You can't do that," he said.
"Just try and stop me."
Kohler did not move.
An instant later, Vittoria realized why. This far underground, her cell phone
had no dial tone.
Fuming, she headed for the elevator.
26
T he Hassassin stood at the end of the stone tunnel. His torch still burned
bright, the smoke mixing with
the smell of moss and stale air. Silence surrounded him. The iron door blocking
his way looked as old as
the tunnel itself, rusted but still holding strong. He waited in the darkness,
trusting.
It was almost time.
Janus had promised someone on the inside would open the door. The Hassassin
marveled at the betrayal.
He would have waited all night at that door to carry out his task, but he sensed
it would not be necessary.
He was working for determined men.
Minutes later, exactly at the appointed hour, there was a loud clank of heavy
keys on the other side of the
door. Metal scraped on metal as multiple locks disengaged. One by one, three
huge deadbolts ground open.
The locks creaked as if they had not been used in centuries. Finally all three
were open.
Then there was silence.
The Hassassin waited patiently, five minutes, exactly as he had been told. Then,
with electricity in his
blood, he pushed. The great door swung open.
27
V ittoria, I will not allow it!" Kohler's breath was labored and getting worse
as the Haz-Mat elevator
ascended.
Vittoria blocked him out. She craved sanctuary, something familiar in this place
that no longer felt like
home. She knew it was not to be. Right now, she had to swallow the pain and act.
Get to a phone.
Robert Langdon was beside her, silent as usual. Vittoria had given up wondering
who the man was. A
specialist? Could Kohler be any less specific? Mr. Langdon can help us find your
father's killer. Langdon
was being no help at all. His warmth and kindness seemed genuine, but he was
clearly hiding something.
They both were.
Kohler was at her again. "As director of CERN, I have a responsibility to the
future of science. If you
amplify this into an international incident and CERN suffers-"
"Future of science?" Vittoria turned on him. "Do you really plan to escape
accountability by never
admitting this antimatter came from CERN? Do you plan to ignore the people's
lives we've put in danger?"
"Not we," Kohler countered. "You. You and your father."
Vittoria looked away.
"And as far as endangering lives," Kohler said, "life is exactly what this is
about. You know antimatter
technology has enormous implications for life on this planet. If CERN goes
bankrupt, destroyed by scandal,
everybody loses. Man's future is in the hands of places like CERN, scientists
like you and your father,
working to solve tomorrow's problems."
Vittoria had heard Kohler's Science-as-God lecture before, and she never bought
it. Science itself caused
half the problems it was trying to solve. "Progress" was Mother Earth's ultimate
malignancy.
"Scientific advancement carries risk," Kohler argued. "It always has. Space
programs, genetic research,
medicine-they all make mistakes. Science needs to survive its own blunders, at
any cost. For everyone's
sake."
Vittoria was amazed at Kohler's ability to weigh moral issues with scientific
detachment. His intellect
seemed to be the product of an icy divorce from his inner spirit. "You think
CERN is so critical to the
earth's future that we should be immune from moral responsibility?"
"Do not argue morals with me. You crossed a line when you made that specimen,
and you have put this
entire facility at risk. I'm trying to protect not only the jobs of the three
thousand scientists who work here,
but also your father's reputation. Think about him. A man like your father does
not deserve to be
remembered as the creator of a weapon of mass destruction."
Vittoria felt his spear hit home. I am the one who convinced my father to create
that specimen. This is my
fault!
When the door opened, Kohler was still talking. Vittoria stepped out of the
elevator, pulled out her phone,
and tried again.
Still no dial tone. Damn! She headed for the door.
"Vittoria, stop." The director sounded asthmatic now, as he accelerated after
her. "Slow down. We need to
talk."
"Basta di parlare!"
"Think of your father," Kohler urged. "What would he do?"
She kept going.
"Vittoria, I haven't been totally honest with you."
Vittoria felt her legs slow.
"I don't know what I was thinking," Kohler said. "I was just trying to protect
you. Just tell me what you
want. We need to work together here."
Vittoria came to a full stop halfway across the lab, but she did not turn. "I
want to find the antimatter. And I
want to know who killed my father." She waited.
Kohler sighed. "Vittoria, we already know who killed your father. I'm sorry."
Now Vittoria turned. "You what?"
"I didn't know how to tell you. It's a difficult-"
"You know who killed my father?"
"We have a very good idea, yes. The killer left somewhat of a calling card.
That's the reason I called Mr.
Langdon. The group claiming responsibility is his specialty."
"The group? A terrorist group?"
"Vittoria, they stole a quarter gram of antimatter."
Vittoria looked at Robert Langdon standing there across the room. Everything
began falling into place.
That explains some of the secrecy. She was amazed it hadn't occurred to her
earlier. Kohler had called the
authorities after all. The authorities. Now it seemed obvious. Robert Langdon
was American, clean-cut,
conservative, obviously very sharp. Who else could it be? Vittoria should have
guessed from the start. She
felt a newfound hope as she turned to him.
"Mr. Langdon, I want to know who killed my father. And I want to know if your
agency can find the
antimatter."
Langdon looked flustered. "My agency?"
"You're with U.S. Intelligence, I assume."
"Actually . . . no."
Kohler intervened. "Mr. Langdon is a professor of art history at Harvard
University."
Vittoria felt like she had been doused with ice water. "An art teacher?"
"He is a specialist in cult symbology." Kohler sighed. "Vittoria, we believe
your father was killed by a
satanic cult."
Vittoria heard the words in her mind, but she was unable to process them. A
satanic cult.
"The group claiming responsibility calls themselves the Illuminati."
Vittoria looked at Kohler and then at Langdon, wondering if this was some kind
of perverse joke. "The
Illuminati?" she demanded. "As in the Bavarian Illuminati?"
Kohler looked stunned. "You've heard of them?"
Vittoria felt the tears of frustration welling right below the surface.
"Bavarian Illuminati: New World
Order. Steve Jackson computer games. Half the techies here play it on the
Internet." Her voice cracked.
"But I don't understand . . ."
Kohler shot Langdon a confused look.
Langdon nodded. "Popular game. Ancient brotherhood takes over the world.
Semihistorical. I didn't know
it was in Europe too."
Vittoria was bewildered. "What are you talking about? The Illuminati? It's a
computer game!"
"Vittoria," Kohler said, "the Illuminati is the group claiming responsibility
for your father's death."
Vittoria mustered every bit of courage she could find to fight the tears. She
forced herself to hold on and
assess the situation logically. But the harder she focused, the less she
understood. Her father had been
murdered. CERN had suffered a major breach of security. There was a bomb
counting down somewhere
that she was responsible for. And the director had nominated an art teacher to
help them find a mythical
fraternity of Satanists.
Vittoria felt suddenly all alone. She turned to go, but Kohler cut her off. He
reached for something in his
pocket. He produced a crumpled piece of fax paper and handed it to her.
Vittoria swayed in horror as her eyes hit the image.
"They branded him," Kohler said. "They branded his goddamn chest."
28
S ecretary Sylvie Baudeloque was now in a panic. She paced outside the
director's empty office. Where
the hell is he? What do I do?
It had been a bizarre day. Of course, any day working for Maximilian Kohler had
the potential to be
strange, but Kohler had been in rare form today.
"Find me Leonardo Vetra!" he had demanded when Sylvie arrived this morning.
Dutifully, Sylvie paged, phoned, and E-mailed Leonardo Vetra.
Nothing.
So Kohler had left in a huff, apparently to go find Vetra himself. When he
rolled back in a few hours later,
Kohler looked decidedly not well . . . not that he ever actually looked well,
but he looked worse than usual.
He locked himself in his office, and she could hear him on his modem, his phone,
faxing, talking. Then
Kohler rolled out again. He hadn't been back since.
Sylvie had decided to ignore the antics as yet another Kohlerian melodrama, but
she began to get concerned
when Kohler failed to return at the proper time for his daily injections; the
director's physical condition
required regular treatment, and when he decided to push his luck, the results
were never pretty-respiratory
shock, coughing fits, and a mad dash by the infirmary personnel. Sometimes
Sylvie thought Maximilian
Kohler had a death wish.
She considered paging him to remind him, but she'd learned charity was something
Kohlers's pride
despised. Last week, he had become so enraged with a visiting scientist who had
shown him undue pity that
Kohler clambered to his feet and threw a clipboard at the man's head. King
Kohler could be surprisingly
agile when he was pissé.
At the moment, however, Sylvie's concern for the director's health was taking a
back burner . . . replaced
by a much more pressing dilemma. The CERN switchboard had phoned five minutes
ago in a frenzy to say
they had an urgent call for the director.
"He's not available," Sylvie had said.
Then the CERN operator told her who was calling.
Sylvie half laughed aloud. "You're kidding, right?" She listened, and her face
clouded with disbelief. "And
your caller ID confirms-" Sylvie was frowning. "I see. Okay. Can you ask what
the-" She sighed. "No.
That's fine. Tell him to hold. I'll locate the director right away. Yes, I
understand. I'll hurry."
But Sylvie had not been able to find the director. She had called his cell line
three times and each time
gotten the same message: "The mobile customer you are trying to reach is out of
range." Out of range?
How far could he go? So Sylvie had dialed Kohler's beeper. Twice. No response.
Most unlike him. She'd
even E-mailed his mobile computer. Nothing. It was like the man had disappeared
off the face of the earth.
So what do I do? she now wondered.
Short of searching CERN's entire complex herself, Sylvie knew there was only one
other way to get the
director's attention. He would not be pleased, but the man on the phone was not
someone the director
should keep waiting. Nor did it sound like the caller was in any mood to be told
the director was
unavailable.
Startled with her own boldness, Sylvie made her decision. She walked into
Kohler's office and went to the
metal box on his wall behind his desk. She opened the cover, stared at the
controls, and found the correct
button.
Then she took a deep breath and grabbed the microphone.
29
V ittoria did not remember how they had gotten to the main elevator, but they
were there. Ascending.
Kohler was behind her, his breathing labored now. Langdon's concerned gaze
passed through her like a
ghost. He had taken the fax from her hand and slipped it in his jacket pocket
away from her sight, but the
image was still burned into her memory.
As the elevator climbed, Vittoria's world swirled into darkness. Papa! In her
mind she reached for him. For
just a moment, in the oasis of her memory, Vittoria was with him. She was nine
years old, rolling down
hills of edelweiss flowers, the Swiss sky spinning overhead.
Papa! Papa!
Leonardo Vetra was laughing beside her, beaming. "What is it, angel?"
"Papa!" she giggled, nuzzling close to him. "Ask me what's the matter!"
"But you look happy, sweetie. Why would I ask you what's the matter?"
"Just ask me."
He shrugged. "What's the matter?"
She immediately started laughing. "What's the matter? Everything is the matter!
Rocks! Trees! Atoms!
Even anteaters! Everything is the matter!"
He laughed. "Did you make that up?"
"Pretty smart, huh?"
"My little Einstein."
She frowned. "He has stupid hair. I saw his picture."
"He's got a smart head, though. I told you what he proved, right?"
Her eyes widened with dread. "Dad! No! You promised!"
"E=MC2!" He tickled her playfully. "E=MC2!"
"No math! I told you! I hate it!"
"I'm glad you hate it. Because girls aren't even allowed to do math."
Vittoria stopped short. "They aren't?"
"Of course not. Everyone knows that. Girls play with dollies. Boys do math. No
math for girls. I'm not
even permitted to talk to little girls about math."
"What! But that's not fair!"
"Rules are rules. Absolutely no math for little girls."
Vittoria looked horrified. "But dolls are boring!"
"I'm sorry," her father said. "I could tell you about math, but if I got caught
. . ." He looked nervously
around the deserted hills.
Vittoria followed his gaze. "Okay," she whispered, "just tell me quietly."
The motion of the elevator startled her. Vittoria opened her eyes. He was gone.
Reality rushed in, wrapping a frosty grip around her. She looked to Langdon. The
earnest concern in his
gaze felt like the warmth of a guardian angel, especially in the aura of
Kohler's chill.
A single sentient thought began pounding at Vittoria with unrelenting force.
Where is the antimatter?
The horrifying answer was only a moment away.
30
M aximilian Kohler. Kindly call your office immediately."
Blazing sunbeams flooded Langdon's eyes as the elevator doors opened into the
main atrium. Before the
echo of the announcement on the intercom overhead faded, every electronic device
on Kohler's wheelchair
started beeping and buzzing simultaneously. His pager. His phone. His E-mail.
Kohler glanced down at the
blinking lights in apparent bewilderment. The director had resurfaced, and he
was back in range.
"Director Kohler. Please call your office."
The sound of his name on the PA seemed to startle Kohler.
He glanced up, looking angered and then almost immediately concerned. Langdon's
eyes met his, and
Vittoria's too. The three of them were motionless a moment, as if all the
tension between them had been
erased and replaced by a single, unifying foreboding.
Kohler took his cell phone from the armrest. He dialed an extension and fought
off another coughing fit.
Vittoria and Langdon waited.
"This is . . . Director Kohler," he said, wheezing. "Yes? I was subterranean,
out of range." He listened, his
gray eyes widening. "Who? Yes, patch it through." There was a pause. "Hello?
This is Maximilian Kohler.
I am the director of CERN. With whom am I speaking?"
Vittoria and Langdon watched in silence as Kohler listened.
"It would be unwise," Kohler finally said, "to speak of this by phone. I will be
there immediately." He was
coughing again. "Meet me . . . at Leonardo da Vinci Airport. Forty minutes."
Kohler's breath seemed to be
failing him now. He descended into a fit of coughing and barely managed to choke
out the words, "Locate
the canister immediately . . . I am coming." Then he clicked off his phone.
Vittoria ran to Kohler's side, but Kohler could no longer speak. Langdon watched
as Vittoria pulled out her
cell phone and paged CERN's infirmary. Langdon felt like a ship on the periphery
of a storm . . . tossed but
detached.
Meet me at Leonardo da Vinci Airport. Kohler's words echoed.
The uncertain shadows that had fogged Langdon's mind all morning, in a single
instant, solidified into a
vivid image. As he stood there in the swirl of confusion, he felt a door inside
him open . . . as if some
mystic threshold had just been breached. The ambigram. The murdered
priest/scientist. The antimatter. And
now . . . the target. Leonardo da Vinci Airport could only mean one thing. In a
moment of stark realization,
Langdon knew he had just crossed over. He had become a believer.
Five kilotons. Let there be light.
Two paramedics materialized, racing across the atrium in white smocks. They
knelt by Kohler, putting an
oxygen mask on his face. Scientists in the hall stopped and stood back.
Kohler took two long pulls, pushed the mask aside, and still gasping for air,
looked up at Vittoria and
Langdon. "Rome."
"Rome?" Vittoria demanded. "The antimatter is in Rome? Who called?"
Kohler's face was twisted, his gray eyes watering. "The Swiss . . ." He choked
on the words, and the
paramedics put the mask back over his face. As they prepared to take him away,
Kohler reached up and
grabbed Langdon's arm.
Langdon nodded. He knew.
"Go . . ." Kohler wheezed beneath his mask. "Go . . . call me . . ." Then the
paramedics were rolling him
away.
Vittoria stood riveted to the floor, watching him go. Then she turned to
Langdon. "Rome? But . . . what
was that about the Swiss?"
Langdon put a hand on her shoulder, barely whispering the words. "The Swiss
Guard," he said. "The sworn
sentinels of Vatican City."
31
T he X-33 space plane roared into the sky and arched south toward Rome. On
board, Langdon sat in
silence. The last fifteen minutes had been a blur. Now that he had finished
briefing Vittoria on the
Illuminati and their covenant against the Vatican, the scope of this situation
was starting to sink in.
What the hell am I doing? Langdon wondered. I should have gone home when I had
the chance! Deep
down, though, he knew he'd never had the chance.
Langdon's better judgment had screamed at him to return to Boston. Nonetheless,
academic astonishment
had somehow vetoed prudence. Everything he had ever believed about the demise of
the Illuminati was
suddenly looking like a brilliant sham. Part of him craved proof. Confirmation.
There was also a question
of conscience. With Kohler ailing and Vittoria on her own, Langdon knew that if
his knowledge of the
Illuminati could assist in any way, he had a moral obligation to be here.
There was more, though. Although Langdon was ashamed to admit it, his initial
horror on hearing about the
antimatter's location was not only the danger to human life in Vatican City, but
for something else as well.
Art.
The world's largest art collection was now sitting on a time bomb. The Vatican
Museum housed over
60,000 priceless pieces in 1,407 rooms-Michelangelo, da Vinci, Bernini,
Botticelli. Langdon wondered if
all of the art could possibly be evacuated if necessary. He knew it was
impossible. Many of the pieces were
sculptures weighing tons. Not to mention, the greatest treasures were
architectural-the Sistine Chapel, St.
Peter's Basilica, Michelangelo's famed spiral staircase leading to the Musèo
Vaticano-priceless testaments
to man's creative genius. Langdon wondered how much time was left on the
canister.
"Thanks for coming," Vittoria said, her voice quiet.
Langdon emerged from his daydream and looked up. Vittoria was sitting across the
aisle. Even in the stark
fluorescent light of the cabin, there was an aura of composure about her-an
almost magnetic radiance of
wholeness. Her breathing seemed deeper now, as if a spark of self-preservation
had ignited within her . . . a
craving for justice and retribution, fueled by a daughter's love.
Vittoria had not had time to change from her shorts and sleeveless top, and her
tawny legs were now goosebumped
in the cold of the plane. Instinctively Langdon removed his jacket and
offered it to her.
"American chivalry?" She accepted, her eyes thanking him silently.
The plane jostled across some turbulence, and Langdon felt a surge of danger.
The windowless cabin felt
cramped again, and he tried to imagine himself in an open field. The notion, he
realized, was ironic. He had
been in an open field when it had happened. Crushing darkness. He pushed the
memory from his mind.
Ancient history.
Vittoria was watching him. "Do you believe in God, Mr. Langdon?"
The question startled him. The earnestness in Vittoria's voice was even more
disarming than the inquiry.
Do I believe in God? He had hoped for a lighter topic of conversation to pass
the trip.
A spiritual conundrum, Langdon thought. That's what my friends call me. Although
he studied religion for
years, Langdon was not a religious man. He respected the power of faith, the
benevolence of churches, the
strength religion gave so many people . . . and yet, for him, the intellectual
suspension of disbelief that was
imperative if one were truly going to "believe" had always proved too big an
obstacle for his academic
mind. "I want to believe," he heard himself say.
Vittoria's reply carried no judgment or challenge. "So why don't you?"
He chuckled. "Well, it's not that easy. Having faith requires leaps of faith,
cerebral acceptance of miraclesimmaculate
conceptions and divine interventions. And then there are the codes of
conduct. The Bible, the