Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
force, though mighty, is not invincible. Goodness can prevail. Listen to your
hearts. Listen to God.
Together we can step back from this abyss."
Now Mortati understood. This was the reason. Conclave had been violated, but
this was the only way. It
was a dramatic and desperate plea for help. The camerlegno was speaking to both
his enemy and his friends
now. He was entreating anyone, friend or foe, to see the light and stop this
madness. Certainly someone
listening would realize the insanity of this plot and come forward.
The camerlegno knelt at the altar. "Pray with me."
The College of Cardinals dropped to their knees to join him in prayer. Outside
in St. Peter's Square and
around the globe . . . a stunned world knelt with them.
95
T he Hassassin lay his unconscious trophy in the rear of the van and took a
moment to admire her
sprawled body. She was not as beautiful as the women he bought, and yet she had
an animal strength that
excited him. Her body was radiant, dewy with perspiration. She smelled of musk.
As the Hassasin stood there savoring his prize, he ignored the throb in his arm.
The bruise from the falling
sarcophagus, although painful, was insignificant . . . well worth the
compensation that lay before him. He
took consolation in knowing the American who had done this to him was probably
dead by now.
Gazing down at his incapacitated prisoner, the Hassassin visualized what lay
ahead. He ran a palm up
beneath her shirt. Her breasts felt perfect beneath her bra. Yes, he smiled. You
are more than worthy.
Fighting the urge to take her right there, he closed the door and drove off into
the night.
There was no need to alert the press about this killing . . . the flames would
do that for him.
At CERN, Sylvie sat stunned by the camerlegno's address. Never before had she
felt so proud to be a
Catholic and so ashamed to work at CERN. As she left the recreational wing, the
mood in every single
viewing room was dazed and somber. When she got back to Kohler's office, all
seven phone lines were
ringing. Media inquiries were never routed to Kohler's office, so the incoming
calls could only be one
thing.
Geld. Money calls.
Antimatter technology already had some takers.
Inside the Vatican, Gunther Glick was walking on air as he followed the
camerlegno from the Sistine
Chapel. Glick and Macri had just made the live transmission of the decade. And
what a transmission it had
been. The camerlegno had been spellbinding.
Now out in the hallway, the camerlegno turned to Glick and Macri. "I have asked
the Swiss Guard to
assemble photos for you-photos of the branded cardinals as well as one of His
late Holiness. I must warn
you, these are not pleasant pictures. Ghastly burns. Blackened tongues. But I
would like you to broadcast
them to the world."
Glick decided it must be perpetual Christmas inside Vatican City. He wants me to
broadcast an exclusive
photo of the dead Pope? "Are you sure?" Glick asked, trying to keep the
excitement from his voice.
The camerlegno nodded. "The Swiss Guard will also provide you a live video feed
of the antimatter
canister as it counts down."
Glick stared. Christmas. Christmas. Christmas!
"The Illuminati are about to find out," the camerlegno declared, "that they have
grossly overplayed their
hand."
96
L ike a recurring theme in some demonic symphony, the suffocating darkness had
returned.
No light. No air. No exit.
Langdon lay trapped beneath the overturned sarcophagus and felt his mind
careening dangerously close to
the brink. Trying to drive his thoughts in any direction other than the crushing
space around him, Langdon
urged his mind toward some logical process . . . mathematics, music, anything.
But there was no room for
calming thoughts. I can't move! I can't breathe!
The pinched sleeve of his jacket had thankfully come free when the casket fell,
leaving Langdon now with
two mobile arms. Even so, as he pressed upward on the ceiling of his tiny cell,
he found it immovable.
Oddly, he wished his sleeve were still caught. At least it might create a crack
for some air.
As Langdon pushed against the roof above, his sleeve fell back to reveal the
faint glow of an old friend.
Mickey. The greenish cartoon face seemed mocking now.
Langdon probed the blackness for any other sign of light, but the casket rim was
flush against the floor.
Goddamn Italian perfectionists, he cursed, now imperiled by the same artistic
excellence he taught his
students to revere . . . impeccable edges, faultless parallels, and of course,
use only of the most seamless
and resilient Carrara marble.
Precision can be suffocating.
"Lift the damn thing," he said aloud, pressing harder through the tangle of
bones. The box shifted slightly.
Setting his jaw, he heaved again. The box felt like a boulder, but this time it
raised a quarter of an inch. A
fleeting glimmer of light surrounded him, and then the casket thudded back down.
Langdon lay panting in
the dark. He tried to use his legs to lift as he had before, but now that the
sarcophagus had fallen flat, there
was no room even to straighten his knees.
As the claustrophobic panic closed in, Langdon was overcome by images of the
sarcophagus shrinking
around him. Squeezed by delirium, he fought the illusion with every logical
shred of intellect he had.
"Sarcophagus," he stated aloud, with as much academic sterility as he could
muster. But even erudition
seemed to be his enemy today. Sarcophagus is from the Greek "sarx"meaning
"flesh," and "phagein"
meaning "to eat." I'm trapped in a box literally designed to "eat flesh."
Images of flesh eaten from bone only served as a grim reminder that Langdon lay
covered in human
remains. The notion brought nausea and chills. But it also brought an idea.
Fumbling blindly around the coffin, Langdon found a shard of bone. A rib maybe?
He didn't care. All he
wanted was a wedge. If he could lift the box, even a crack, and slide the bone
fragment beneath the rim,
then maybe enough air could . . .
Reaching across his body and wedging the tapered end of the bone into the crack
between the floor and the
coffin, Langdon reached up with his other hand and heaved skyward. The box did
not move. Not even
slightly. He tried again. For a moment, it seemed to tremble slightly, but that
was all.
With the fetid stench and lack of oxygen choking the strength from his body,
Langdon realized he only had
time for one more effort. He also knew he would need both arms.
Regrouping, he placed the tapered edge of the bone against the crack, and
shifting his body, he wedged the
bone against his shoulder, pinning it in place. Careful not to dislodge it, he
raised both hands above him. As
the stifling confine began to smother him, he felt a welling of intensified
panic. It was the second time
today he had been trapped with no air. Hollering aloud, Langdon thrust upward in
one explosive motion.
The casket jostled off the floor for an instant. But long enough. The bone shard
he had braced against his
shoulder slipped outward into the widening crack. When the casket fell again,
the bone shattered. But this
time Langdon could see the casket was propped up. A tiny slit of light showed
beneath the rim.
Exhausted, Langdon collapsed. Hoping the strangling sensation in his throat
would pass, he waited. But it
only worsened as the seconds passed. Whatever air was coming through the slit
seemed imperceptible.
Langdon wondered if it would be enough to keep him alive. And if so, for how
long? If he passed out, who
would know he was even in there?
With arms like lead, Langdon raised his watch again: 10:12 P.M. Fighting
trembling fingers, he fumbled
with the watch and made his final play. He twisted one of the tiny dials and
pressed a button.
As consciousness faded, and the walls squeezed closer, Langdon felt the old
fears sweep over him. He tried
to imagine, as he had so many times, that he was in an open field. The image he
conjured, however, was no
help. The nightmare that had haunted him since his youth came crashing back . .
.
The flowers here are like paintings, the child thought, laughing as he ran
across the meadow. He wished
his parents had come along. But his parents were busy pitching camp.
"Don't explore too far," his mother had said.
He had pretended not to hear as he bounded off into the woods.
Now, traversing this glorious field, the boy came across a pile of fieldstones.
He figured it must be the
foundation of an old homestead. He would not go near it. He knew better.
Besides, his eyes had been drawn
to something else-a brilliant lady's slipper-the rarest and most beautiful
flower in New Hampshire. He had
only ever seen them in books.
Excited, the boy moved toward the flower. He knelt down. The ground beneath him
felt mulchy and hollow.
He realized his flower had found an extra-fertile spot. It was growing from a
patch of rotting wood.
Thrilled by the thought of taking home his prize, the boy reached out . . .
fingers extending toward the stem.
He never reached it.
With a sickening crack, the earth gave way.
In the three seconds of dizzying terror as he fell, the boy knew he would die.
Plummeting downward, he
braced for the bone-crushing collision. When it came, there was no pain. Only
softness.
And cold.
He hit the deep liquid face first, plunging into a narrow blackness. Spinning
disoriented somersaults, he
groped the sheer walls that enclosed him on all sides. Somehow, as if by
instinct, he sputtered to the
surface.
Light.
Faint. Above him. Miles above him, it seemed.
His arms clawed at the water, searching the walls of the hollow for something to
grab onto. Only smooth
stone. He had fallen through an abandoned well covering. He screamed for help,
but his cries reverberated
in the tight shaft. He called out again and again. Above him, the tattered hole
grew dim.
Night fell.
Time seemed to contort in the darkness. Numbness set in as he treaded water in
the depths of the chasm,
calling, crying out. He was tormented by visions of the walls collapsing in,
burying him alive. His arms
ached with fatigue. A few times he thought he heard voices. He shouted out, but
his own voice was muted . .
. like a dream.
As the night wore on, the shaft deepened. The walls inched quietly inward. The
boy pressed out against the
enclosure, pushing it away. Exhausted, he wanted to give up. And yet he felt the
water buoy him, cooling
his burning fears until he was numb.
When the rescue team arrived, they found the boy barely conscious. He had been
treading water for five
hours. Two days later, the Boston Globe ran a front-page story called "The
Little Swimmer That Could."
97
T he Hassassin smiled as he pulled his van into the mammoth stone structure
overlooking the Tiber
River. He carried his prize up and up . . . spiraling higher in the stone
tunnel, grateful his load was slender.
He arrived at the door.
The Church of Illumination, he gloated. The ancient Illuminati meeting room. Who
would have imagined it
to be here?
Inside, he lay her on a plush divan. Then he expertly bound her arms behind her
back and tied her feet. He
knew that what he longed for would have to wait until his final task was
finished. Water.
Still, he thought, he had a moment for indulgence. Kneeling beside her, he ran
his hand along her thigh. It
was smooth. Higher. His dark fingers snaked beneath the cuff of her shorts.
Higher.
He stopped. Patience, he told himself, feeling aroused. There is work to be
done.
He walked for a moment out onto the chamber's high stone balcony. The evening
breeze slowly cooled his
ardor. Far below the Tiber raged. He raised his eyes to the dome of St. Peter's,
three quarters of a mile
away, naked under the glare of hundreds of press lights.
"Your final hour," he said aloud, picturing the thousands of Muslims slaughtered
during the Crusades. "At
midnight you will meet your God."
Behind him, the woman stirred. The Hassassin turned. He considered letting her
wake up. Seeing terror in a
woman's eyes was his ultimate aphrodisiac.
He opted for prudence. It would be better if she remained unconscious while he
was gone. Although she
was tied and would never escape, the Hassassin did not want to return and find
her exhausted from
struggling. I want your strength preserved . . . for me.
Lifting her head slightly, he placed his palm beneath her neck and found the
hollow directly beneath her
skull. The crown/meridian pressure point was one he had used countless times.
With crushing force, he
drove his thumb into the soft cartilage and felt it depress. The woman slumped
instantly.Twenty minutes, he
thought. She would be a tantalizing end to a perfect day. After she had served
him and died doing it, he
would stand on the balcony and watch the midnight Vatican fireworks.
Leaving his prize unconscious on the couch, the Hassassin went downstairs into a
torchlit dungeon. The
final task. He walked to the table and revered the sacred, metal forms that had
been left there for him.
Water. It was his last.
Removing a torch from the wall as he had done three times already, he began
heating the end. When the
end of the object was white hot, he carried it to the cell.
Inside, a single man stood in silence. Old and alone.
"Cardinal Baggia," the killer hissed. "Have you prayed yet?"
The Italian's eyes were fearless. "Only for your soul."
98
T he six pompieri firemen who responded to the fire at the Church of Santa Maria
Della Vittoria
extinguished the bonfire with blasts of Halon gas. Water was cheaper, but the
steam it created would have
ruined the frescoes in the chapel, and the Vatican paid Roman pompieri a healthy
stipend for swift and
prudent service in all Vatican-owned buildings.
Pompieri, by the nature of their work, witnessed tragedy almost daily, but the
execution in this church was
something none of them would ever forget. Part crucifixion, part hanging, part
burning at the stake, the
scene was something dredged from a Gothic nightmare.
Unfortunately, the press, as usual, had arrived before the fire department.
They'd shot plenty of video
before the pompieri cleared the church. When the firemen finally cut the victim
down and lay him on the
floor, there was no doubt who the man was.
"Cardinale Guidera," one whispered. "Di Barcellona."
The victim was nude. The lower half of his body was crimson-black, blood oozing
through gaping cracks in
his thighs. His shinbones were exposed. One fireman vomited. Another went
outside to breathe.
The true horror, though, was the symbol seared on the cardinal's chest. The
squad chief circled the corpse
in awestruck dread. Lavoro del diavolo, he said to himself. Satan himself did
this. He crossed himself for
the first time since childhood.
"Un' altro corpo!" someone yelled. One of the firemen had found another body.
The second victim was a man the chief recognized immediately. The austere
commander of the Swiss
Guard was a man for whom few public law enforcement officials had any affection.
The chief called the
Vatican, but all the circuits were busy. He knew it didn't matter. The Swiss
Guard would hear about this on
television in a matter of minutes.
As the chief surveyed the damage, trying to recreate what possibly could have
gone on here, he saw a niche
riddled with bullet holes. A coffin had been rolled off its supports and fallen
upside down in an apparent
struggle. It was a mess. That's for the police and Holy See to deal with, the
chief thought, turning away.
As he turned, though, he stopped. Coming from the coffin he heard a sound. It
was not a sound any fireman
ever liked to hear.
"Bomba!" he cried out. "Tutti fuori!"
When the bomb squad rolled the coffin over, they discovered the source of the
electronic beeping. They
stared, confused.
"Mèdico!" one finally screamed. "Mèdico!"
99
A ny word from Olivetti?" the camerlegno asked, looking drained as Rocher
escorted him back from the
Sistine Chapel to the Pope's office.
"No, signore. I am fearing the worst."
When they reached the Pope's office, the camerlegno's voice was heavy. "Captain,
there is nothing more I
can do here tonight. I fear I have done too much already. I am going into this
office to pray. I do not wish to
be disturbed. The rest is in God's hands."
"Yes, signore."
"The hour is late, Captain. Find that canister."
"Our search continues." Rocher hesitated. "The weapon proves to be too well
hidden."
The camerlegno winced, as if he could not think of it. "Yes. At exactly 11:15
P.M., if the church is still in
peril, I want you to evacuate the cardinals. I am putting their safety in your
hands. I ask only one thing. Let
these men proceed from this place with dignity. Let them exit into St. Peter's
Square and stand side by side
with the rest of the world. I do not want the last image of this church to be
frightened old men sneaking out
a back door."
"Very good, signore. And you? Shall I come for you at 11:15 as well?"
"There will be no need."
"Signore?"
"I will leave when the spirit moves me."
Rocher wondered if the camerlegno intended to go down with the ship.
The camerlegno opened the door to the Pope's office and entered. "Actually . .
." he said, turning. "There is
one thing."
"Signore?"
"There seems to be a chill in this office tonight. I am trembling."
"The electric heat is out. Let me lay you a fire."
The camerlegno smiled tiredly. "Thank you. Thank you, very much."
Rocher exited the Pope's office where he had left the camerlegno praying by
firelight in front of a small
statue of the Blessed Mother Mary. It was an eerie sight. A black shadow
kneeling in the flickering glow.
As Rocher headed down the hall, a guard appeared, running toward him. Even by
candlelight Rocher
recognized Lieutenant Chartrand. Young, green, and eager.
"Captain," Chartrand called, holding out a cellular phone. "I think the
camerlegno's address may have
worked. We've got a caller here who says he has information that can help us. He
phoned on one of the
Vatican's private extensions. I have no idea how he got the number."
Rocher stopped. "What?"
"He will only speak to the ranking officer."
"Any word from Olivetti?"
"No, sir."
He took the receiver. "This is Captain Rocher. I am ranking officer here."
"Rocher," the voice said. "I will explain to you who I am. Then I will tell you
what you are going to do
next."
When the caller stopped talking and hung up, Rocher stood stunned. He now knew
from whom he was
taking orders.
Back at CERN, Sylvie Baudeloque was frantically trying to keep track of all the
licensing inquiries coming
in on Kohler's voice mail. When the private line on the director's desk began to
ring, Sylvie jumped.
Nobody had that number. She answered.
"Yes?"
"Ms. Baudeloque? This is Director Kohler. Contact my pilot. My jet is to be
ready in five minutes."
100
R obert Langdon had no idea where he was or how long he had been unconscious
when he opened his
eyes and found himself staring up at the underside of a baroque, frescoed
cupola. Smoke drifted overhead.
Something was covering his mouth. An oxygen mask. He pulled it off. There was a
terrible smell in the
room-like burning flesh.
Langdon winced at the pounding in his head. He tried to sit up. A man in white
was kneeling beside him.
"Riposati!" the man said, easing Langdon onto his back again. "Sono il
paramédico."
Langdon succumbed, his head spiraling like the smoke overhead. What the hell
happened? Wispy feelings
of panic sifted through his mind.
"Sórcio salvatore," the paramedic said. "Mouse . . . savior."
Langdon felt even more lost. Mouse savior?
The man motioned to the Mickey Mouse watch on Langdon's wrist. Langdon's
thoughts began to clear. He
remembered setting the alarm. As he stared absently at the watch face, Langdon
also noted the hour. 10:28
P.M.
He sat bolt upright.
Then, it all came back.
Langdon stood near the main altar with the fire chief and a few of his men. They
had been rattling him with
questions. Langdon wasn't listening. He had questions of his own. His whole body
ached, but he knew he
needed to act immediately.
A pompiero approached Langdon across the church. "I checked again, sir. The only
bodies we found are
Cardinal Guidera and the Swiss Guard commander. There's no sign of a woman
here."
"Grazie," Langdon said, unsure whether he was relieved or horrified. He knew he
had seen Vittoria
unconscious on the floor. Now she was gone. The only explanation he came up with
was not a comforting
one. The killer had not been subtle on the phone. A woman of spirit. I am
aroused. Perhaps before this
night is over, I will find you. And when I do . . ."
Langdon looked around. "Where is the Swiss Guard?"
"Still no contact. Vatican lines are jammed."
Langdon felt overwhelmed and alone. Olivetti was dead. The cardinal was dead.
Vittoria was missing. A
half hour of his life had disappeared in a blink.
Outside, Langdon could hear the press swarming. He suspected footage of the
third cardinal's horrific death
would no doubt air soon, if it hadn't already. Langdon hoped the camerlegno had
long since assumed the
worst and taken action. Evacuate the damn Vatican! Enough games! We lose!
Langdon suddenly realized that all of the catalysts that had been driving
him-helping to save Vatican City,
rescuing the four cardinals, coming face to face with the brotherhood he had
studied for years-all of these
things had evaporated from his mind. The war was lost. A new compulsion had
ignited within him. It was
simple. Stark. Primal.
Find Vittoria.
He felt an unexpected emptiness inside. Langdon had often heard that intense
situations could unite two
people in ways that decades together often did not. He now believed it. In
Vittoria's absence he felt
something he had not felt in years. Loneliness. The pain gave him strength.
Pushing all else from his mind, Langdon mustered his concentration. He prayed
that the Hassassin would
take care of business before pleasure. Otherwise, Langdon knew he was already
too late. No, he told
himself, you have time. Vittoria's captor still had work to do. He had to
surface one last time before
disappearing forever.
The last altar of science, Langdon thought. The killer had one final task.
Earth. Air. Fire. Water.
He looked at his watch. Thirty minutes. Langdon moved past the firemen toward
Bernini's Ecstasy of St.
Teresa. This time, as he stared at Bernini's marker, Langdon had no doubt what
he was looking for.
Let angels guide you on your lofty quest . . .
Directly over the recumbent saint, against a backdrop of gilded flame, hovered
Bernini's angel. The angel's
hand clutched a pointed spear of fire. Langdon's eyes followed the direction of
the shaft, arching toward
the right side of the church. His eyes hit the wall. He scanned the spot where
the spear was pointing. There
was nothing there. Langdon knew, of course, the spear was pointing far beyond
the wall, into the night,
somewhere across Rome.
"What direction is that?" Langdon asked, turning and addressing the chief with a
newfound determination.
"Direction?" The chief glanced where Langdon was pointing. He sounded confused.
"I don't know . . .
west, I think."
"What churches are in that direction?"
The chief's puzzlement seemed to deepen. "Dozens. Why?"
Langdon frowned. Of course there were dozens. "I need a city map. Right away."
The chief sent someone running out to the fire truck for a map. Langdon turned
back to the statue. Earth . .
. Air . . . Fire . . . VITTORIA.
The final marker is Water, he told himself. Bernini's Water. It was in a church
out there somewhere. A
needle in a haystack. He spurred his mind through all the Bernini works he could
recall. I need a tribute to
Water!
Langdon flashed on Bernini's statue of Triton-the Greek God of the sea. Then he
realized it was located in
the square outside this very church, in entirely the wrong direction. He forced
himself to think. What figure
would Bernini have carved as a glorification of water? Neptune and Apollo?
Unfortunately that statue was
in London's Victoria & Albert Museum.
"Signore?" A fireman ran in with a map.
Langdon thanked him and spread it out on the altar. He immediately realized he
had asked the right people;
the fire department's map of Rome was as detailed as any Langdon had ever seen.
"Where are we now?"
The man pointed. "Next to Piazza Barberini."
Langdon looked at the angel's spear again to get his bearings. The chief had
estimated correctly. According
to the map, the spear was pointing west. Langdon traced a line from his current
location west across the
map. Almost instantly his hopes began to sink. It seemed that with every inch
his finger traveled, he passed
yet another building marked by a tiny black cross. Churches. The city was
riddled with them. Finally,
Langdon's finger ran out of churches and trailed off into the suburbs of Rome.
He exhaled and stepped
back from the map. Damn.
Surveying the whole of Rome, Langdon's eyes touched down on the three churches
where the first three
cardinals had been killed. The Chigi Chapel . . . St. Peter's . . . here . . .
Seeing them all laid out before him now, Langdon noted an oddity in their
locations. Somehow he had
imagined the churches would be scattered randomly across Rome. But they most
definitely were not.
Improbably, the three churches seemed to be separated systematically, in an
enormous city-wide triangle.
Langdon double-checked. He was not imagining things. "Penna," he said suddenly,
without looking up.
Someone handed him a ballpoint pen.
Langdon circled the three churches. His pulse quickened. He triple-checked his
markings. A symmetrical
triangle!
Langdon's first thought was for the Great Seal on the one-dollar bill-the
triangle containing the all-seeing
eye. But it didn't make sense. He had marked only three points. There were
supposed to be four in all.
So where the hell is Water? Langdon knew that anywhere he placed the fourth
point, the triangle would be
destroyed. The only option to retain the symmetry was to place the fourth marker
inside the triangle, at the
center. He looked at the spot on the map. Nothing. The idea bothered him anyway.
The four elements of
science were considered equal. Water was not special; Water would not be at the
center of the others.
Still, his instinct told him the systematic arrangement could not possibly be
accidental. I'm not yet seeing
the whole picture. There was only one alternative. The four points did not make
a triangle; they made some
other shape.
Langdon looked at the map. A square, perhaps? Although a square made no symbolic
sense, squares were
symmetrical at least. Langdon put his finger on the map at one of the points
that would turn the triangle into
a square. He saw immediately that a perfect square was impossible. The angles of
the original triangle were
oblique and created more of a distorted quadrilateral.
As he studied the other possible points around the triangle, something
unexpected happened. He noticed
that the line he had drawn earlier to indicate the direction of the angel's
spear passed perfectly through one
of the possibilities. Stupefied, Langdon circled that point. He was now looking
at four ink marks on the
map, arranged in somewhat of an awkward, kitelike diamond.
He frowned. Diamonds were not an Illuminati symbol either. He paused. Then again
. . .
For an instant Langdon flashed on the famed Illuminati Diamond. The thought, of
course, was ridiculous.
He dismissed it. Besides, this diamond was oblong-like a kite-hardly an example
of the flawless symmetry
for which the Illuminati Diamond was revered.
When he leaned in to examine where he had placed the final mark, Langdon was
surprised to find that the
fourth point lay dead center of Rome's famed Piazza Navona. He knew the piazza
contained a major
church, but he had already traced his finger through that piazza and considered
the church there. To the best
of his knowledge it contained no Bernini works. The church was called Saint
Agnes in Agony, named for
St. Agnes, a ravishing teenage virgin banished to a life of sexual slavery for
refusing to renounce her faith.
There must be something in that church! Langdon racked his brain, picturing the
inside of the church. He
could think of no Bernini works at all inside, much less anything to do with
water. The arrangement on the
map was bothering him too. A diamond. It was far too accurate to be coincidence,
but it was not accurate
enough to make any sense. A kite? Langdon wondered if he had chosen the wrong
point. What am I
missing!
The answer took another thirty seconds to hit him, but when it did, Langdon felt
an exhilaration like
nothing he had ever experienced in his academic career.
The Illuminati genius, it seemed, would never cease.
The shape he was looking at was not intended as a diamond at all. The four
points only formed a diamond
because Langdon had connected adjacent points. The Illuminati believe in
opposites! Connecting opposite
vertices with his pen, Langdon's fingers were trembling. There before him on the
map was a giant
cruciform. It's a cross! The four elements of science unfolded before his eyes .
. . sprawled across Rome in
an enormous, city-wide cross.
As he stared in wonder, a line of poetry rang in his mind . . . like an old
friend with a new face.
'Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold . . .
'Cross Rome . . .
The fog began to clear. Langdon saw that the answer had been in front of him all
night! The Illuminati
poem had been telling him how the altars were laid out. A cross!
'Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold!
It was cunning wordplay. Langdon had originally read the word 'Cross as an
abbreviation of Across. He
assumed it was poetic license intended to retain the meter of the poem. But it
was so much more than that!
Another hidden clue.
The cruciform on the map, Langdon realized, was the ultimate Illuminati duality.
It was a religious symbol
formed by elements of science. Galileo's path of Illumination was a tribute to
both science and God!
The rest of the puzzle fell into place almost immediately.
Piazza Navona.
Dead center of Piazza Navona, outside the church of St. Agnes in Agony, Bernini
had forged one of his
most celebrated sculptures. Everyone who came to Rome went to see it.
The Fountain of the Four Rivers!
A flawless tribute to water, Bernini's Fountain of the Four Rivers glorified the
four major rivers of the Old
World-The Nile, Ganges, Danube, and Rio Plata.
Water, Langdon thought. The final marker. It was perfect.
And even more perfect, Langdon realized, the cherry on the cake, was that high
atop Bernini's fountain
stood a towering obelisk.
Leaving confused firemen in his wake, Langdon ran across the church in the
direction of Olivetti's lifeless
body.
10:31 P.M., he thought. Plenty of time. It was the first instant all day that
Langdon felt ahead of the game.
Kneeling beside Olivetti, out of sight behind some pews, Langdon discreetly took
possession of the
commander's semiautomatic and walkie-talkie. Langdon knew he would call for
help, but this was not the
place to do it. The final altar of science needed to remain a secret for now.
The media and fire department
racing with sirens blaring to Piazza Navona would be no help at all.
Without a word, Langdon slipped out the door and skirted the press, who were now
entering the church in
droves. He crossed Piazza Barberini. In the shadows he turned on the
walkie-talkie. He tried to hail Vatican
City but heard nothing but static. He was either out of range or the transmitter
needed some kind of
authorization code. Langdon adjusted the complex dials and buttons to no avail.
Abruptly, he realized his
plan to get help was not going to work. He spun, looking for a pay phone. None.
Vatican circuits were
jammed anyway.
He was alone.
Feeling his initial surge of confidence decay, Langdon stood a moment and took
stock of his pitiful statecovered
in bone dust, cut, deliriously exhausted, and hungry.
Langdon glanced back at the church. Smoke spiraled over the cupola, lit by the
media lights and fire trucks.
He wondered if he should go back and get help. Instinct warned him however that
extra help, especially
untrained help, would be nothing but a liability. If the Hassassin sees us
coming . . . He thought of Vittoria
and knew this would be his final chance to face her captor.
Piazza Navona, he thought, knowing he could get there in plenty of time and
stake it out. He scanned the
area for a taxi, but the streets were almost entirely deserted. Even the taxi
drivers, it seemed, had dropped
everything to find a television. Piazza Navona was only about a mile away, but
Langdon had no intention
of wasting precious energy on foot. He glanced back at the church, wondering if
he could borrow a vehicle
from someone.
A fire truck? A press van? Be serious.
Sensing options and minutes slipping away, Langdon made his decision. Pulling
the gun from his pocket,
he committed an act so out of character that he suspected his soul must now be
possessed. Running over to
a lone Citroën sedan idling at a stoplight, Langdon pointed the weapon through
the driver's open window.
"Fuori!" he yelled.
The trembling man got out.
Langdon jumped behind the wheel and hit the gas.
101
G unther Glick sat on a bench in a holding tank inside the office of the Swiss
Guard. He prayed to every
god he could think of. Please let this NOT be a dream. It had been the scoop of
his life. The scoop of
anyone's life. Every reporter on earth wished he were Glick right now. You are
awake, he told himself. And
you are a star. Dan Rather is crying right now.
Macri was beside him, looking a little bit stunned. Glick didn't blame her. In
addition to exclusively
broadcasting the camerlegno's address, she and Glick had provided the world with
gruesome photos of the
cardinals and of the Pope-that tongue!-as well as a live video feed of the
antimatter canister counting down.
Incredible!
Of course, all of that had all been at the camerlegno's behest, so that was not
the reason Glick and Macri
were now locked in a Swiss Guard holding tank. It had been Glick's daring
addendum to their coverage
that the guards had not appreciated. Glick knew the conversation on which he had
just reported was not
intended for his ears, but this was his moment in the sun. Another Glick scoop!
"The 11th Hour Samaritan?" Macri groaned on the bench beside him, clearly
unimpressed.
Glick smiled. "Brilliant, wasn't it?"
"Brilliantly dumb."
She's just jealous, Glick knew. Shortly after the camerlegno's address, Glick
had again, by chance, been in
the right place at the right time. He'd overheard Rocher giving new orders to
his men. Apparently Rocher
had received a phone call from a mysterious individual who Rocher claimed had
critical information
regarding the current crisis. Rocher was talking as if this man could help them
and was advising his guards
to prepare for the guest's arrival.
Although the information was clearly private, Glick had acted as any dedicated
reporter would-without
honor. He'd found a dark corner, ordered Macri to fire up her remote camera, and
he'd reported the news.
"Shocking new developments in God's city," he had announced, squinting his eyes
for added intensity.
Then he'd gone on to say that a mystery guest was coming to Vatican City to save
the day. The 11th Hour
Samaritan, Glick had called him-a perfect name for the faceless man appearing at
the last moment to do a
good deed. The other networks had picked up the catchy sound bite, and Glick was
yet again immortalized.
I'm brilliant, he mused. Peter Jennings just jumped off a bridge.
Of course Glick had not stopped there. While he had the world's attention, he
had thrown in a little of his
own conspiracy theory for good measure.
Brilliant. Utterly brilliant.
"You screwed us," Macri said. "You totally blew it."
"What do you mean? I was great!"
Macri stared disbelievingly. "Former President George Bush? An Illuminatus?"
Glick smiled. How much more obvious could it be? George Bush was a
well-documented, 33rd-degree
Mason, and he was the head of the CIA when the agency closed their Illuminati
investigation for lack of
evidence. And all those speeches about "a thousand points of light" and a "New
World Order" . . . Bush
was obviously Illuminati.
"And that bit about CERN?" Macri chided. "You are going to have a very big line
of lawyers outside your
door tomorrow."
"CERN? Oh come on! It's so obvious! Think about it! The Illuminati disappear off
the face of the earth in
the 1950s at about the same time CERN is founded. CERN is a haven for the most
enlightened people on
earth. Tons of private funding. They build a weapon that can destroy the church,
Seite
and oops! . . . they lose
it!"
"So you tell the world that CERN is the new home base of the Illuminati?"
"Obviously! Brotherhoods don't just disappear. The Illuminati had to go
somewhere. CERN is a perfect
place for them to hide. I'm not saying everyone at CERN is Illuminati. It's
probably like a huge Masonic
lodge, where most people are innocent, but the upper echelons-"
"Have you ever heard of slander, Glick? Liability?"
"Have you ever heard of real journalism!"
"Journalism? You were pulling bullshit out of thin air! I should have turned off
the camera! And what the
hell was that crap about CERN's corporate logo? Satanic symbology? Have you lost
your mind?"
Glick smiled. Macri's jealousy was definitely showing. The CERN logo had been
the most brilliant coup of
all. Ever since the camerlegno's address, all the networks were talking about
CERN and antimatter. Some
stations were showing the CERN corporate logo as a backdrop. The logo seemed
standard enough-two
intersecting circles representing two particle accelerators, and five tangential
lines representing particle
injection tubes. The whole world was staring at this logo, but it had been
Glick, a bit of a symbologist
himself, who had first seen the Illuminati symbology hidden in it.
"You're not a symbologist," Macri chided, "you're just one lucky-ass reporter.
You should have left the
symbology to the Harvard guy."
"The Harvard guy missed it," Glick said.
The Illuminati significance in this logo is so obvious!
He was beaming inside. Although CERN had lots of accelerators, their logo showed
only two. Two is the
Illuminati number of duality. Although most accelerators had only one injection
tube, the logo showed five.
Five is the number of the Illuminati pentagram. Then had come the coup-the most
brilliant point of all.
Glick pointed out that the logo contained a large numeral "6-clearly formed by
one of the lines and circlesand
when the logo was rotated, another six appeared . . . and then another. The
logo contained three sixes!
666! The devil's number! The mark of the beast!
Glick was a genius.
Macri looked ready to slug him.
The jealousy would pass, Glick knew, his mind now wandering to another thought.
If CERN was Illuminati
headquarters, was CERN where the Illuminati kept their infamous Illuminati
Diamond? Glick had read
about it on the Internet-"a flawless diamond, born of the ancient elements with
such perfection that all
those who saw it could only stand in wonder."
Glick wondered if the secret whereabouts of the Illuminati Diamond might be yet
another mystery he could
unveil tonight.
102
P iazza Navona. Fountain of the Four Rivers.
Nights in Rome, like those in the desert, can be surprisingly cool, even after a
warm day. Langdon was
huddled now on the fringes of Piazza Navona, pulling his jacket around him. Like
the distant white noise of
traffic, a cacophony of news reports echoed across the city. He checked his
watch. Fifteen minutes. He was
grateful for a few moments of rest.
The piazza was deserted. Bernini's masterful fountain sizzled before him with a
fearful sorcery. The
foaming pool sent a magical mist upward, lit from beneath by underwater
floodlights. Langdon sensed a
cool electricity in the air.
The fountain's most arresting quality was its height. The central core alone was
over twenty feet tall-a
rugged mountain of travertine marble riddled with caves and grottoes through
which the water churned.
The entire mound was draped with pagan figures. Atop this stood an obelisk that
climbed another forty feet.
Langdon let his eyes climb. On the obelisk's tip, a faint shadow blotted the
sky, a lone pigeon perched
silently.
A cross, Langdon thought, still amazed by the arrangement of the markers across
Rome. Bernini's Fountain
of the Four Rivers was the last altar of science. Only hours ago Langdon had
been standing in the Pantheon
convinced the Path of Illumination had been broken and he would never get this
far. It had been a foolish
blunder. In fact, the entire path was intact. Earth, Air, Fire, Water. And
Langdon had followed it . . . from
beginning to end.
Not quite to the end, he reminded himself. The path had five stops, not four.
This fourth marker fountain
somehow pointed to the ultimate destiny-the Illuminati's sacred lair-the Church
of Illumination. Langdon
wondered if the lair were still standing. He wondered if that was where the
Hassassin had taken Vittoria.
Langdon found his eyes probing the figures in the fountain, looking for any clue
as to the direction of the
lair. Let angels guide you on your lofty quest. Almost immediately, though, he
was overcome by an
unsettling awareness. This fountain contained no angels whatsoever. It certainly
contained none Langdon
could see from where he was standing . . . and none he had ever seen in the
past. The Fountain of the Four
Rivers was a pagan work. The carvings were all profane-humans, animals, even an
awkward armadillo. An
angel here would stick out like a sore thumb.
Is this the wrong place? He considered the cruciform arrangement of the four
obelisks. He clenched his
fists. This fountain is perfect.
It was only 10:46 P.M. when a black van emerged from the alleyway on the far
side of the piazza. Langdon
would not have given it a second look except that the van drove with no
headlights. Like a shark patrolling
a moonlit bay, the vehicle circled the perimeter of the piazza.
Langdon hunkered lower, crouched in the shadows beside the huge stairway leading
up to the Church of St.
Agnes in Agony. He gazed out at the piazza, his pulse climbing.
After making two complete circuits, the van banked inward toward Bernini's
fountain. It pulled abreast of
the basin, moving laterally along the rim until its side was flush with the
fountain. Then it parked, its
sliding door positioned only inches above the churning water.
Mist billowed.
Langdon felt an uneasy premonition. Had the Hassassin arrived early? Had he come
in a van? Langdon had
imagined the killer escorting his last victim across the piazza on foot, like he
had at St. Peter's, giving
Langdon an open shot. But if the Hassassin had arrived in a van, the rules had
just changed.
Suddenly, the van's side door slid open.
On the floor of the van, contorted in agony, lay a naked man. The man was
wrapped in yards of heavy
chains. He thrashed against the iron links, but the chains were too heavy. One
of the links bisected the
man's mouth like a horse's bit, stifling his cries for help. It was then that
Langdon saw the second figure,
moving around behind the prisoner in the dark, as though making final
preparations.
Langdon knew he had only seconds to act.
Taking the gun, he slipped off his jacket and dropped it on the ground. He
didn't want the added
encumbrance of a tweed jacket, nor did he have any intention of taking Galileo's
Diagramma anywhere
near the water. The document would stay here where it was safe and dry.
Langdon scrambled to his right. Circling the perimeter of the fountain, he
positioned himself directly
opposite the van. The fountain's massive centerpiece obscured his view.
Standing, he ran directly toward
the basin. He hoped the thundering water was drowning his footsteps. When he
reached the fountain, he
climbed over the rim and dropped into the foaming pool.
The water was waist deep and like ice. Langdon grit his teeth and plowed through
the water. The bottom
was slippery, made doubly treacherous by a stratum of coins thrown for good
luck. Langdon sensed he
would need more than good luck. As the mist rose all around him, he wondered if
it was the cold or the fear
that was causing the gun in his hand to shake.
He reached the interior of the fountain and circled back to his left. He waded
hard, clinging to the cover of
the marble forms. Hiding himself behind the huge carved form of a horse, Langdon
peered out. The van
was only fifteen feet away. The Hassassin was crouched on the floor of the van,
hands planted on the
cardinal's chain-clad body, preparing to roll him out the open door into the
fountain.
Waist-deep in water, Robert Langdon raised his gun and stepped out of the mist,
feeling like some sort of
aquatic cowboy making a final stand. "Don't move." His voice was steadier than
the gun.
The Hassassin looked up. For a moment he seemed confused, as though he had seen
a ghost. Then his lips
curled into an evil smile. He raised his arms in submission. "And so it goes."
"Get out of the van."
"You look wet."
"You're early."
"I am eager to return to my prize."
Langdon leveled the gun. "I won't hesitate to shoot."
"You've already hesitated."
Langdon felt his finger tighten on the trigger. The cardinal lay motionless now.
He looked exhausted,
moribund. "Untie him."
"Forget him. You've come for the woman. Do not pretend otherwise."
Langdon fought the urge to end it right there. "Where is she?"
"Somewhere safe. Awaiting my return."
She's alive. Langdon felt a ray of hope. "At the Church of Illumination?"
The killer smiled. "You will never find its location."
Langdon was incredulous. The lair is still standing. He aimed the gun. "Where?"
"The location has remained secret for centuries. Even to me it was only revealed
recently. I would die
before I break that trust."
"I can find it without you."
"An arrogant thought."
Langdon motioned to the fountain. "I've come this far."
"So have many. The final step is the hardest."
Langdon stepped closer, his footing tentative beneath the water. The Hassassin
looked remarkably calm,
squatting there in the back of the van with his arms raised over his head.
Langdon aimed at his chest,
wondering if he should simply shoot and be done with it. No. He knows where
Vittoria is. He knows where
the antimatter is. I need information!
From the darkness of the van the Hassassin gazed out at his aggressor and
couldn't help but feel an amused
pity. The American was brave, that he had proven. But he was also untrained.
That he had also proven.
Valor without expertise was suicide. There were rules of survival. Ancient
rules. And the American was
breaking all of them.
You had the advantage-the element of surprise. You squandered it.
The American was indecisive . . . hoping for backup most likely . . . or perhaps
a slip of the tongue that
would reveal critical information.
Never interrogate before you disable your prey. A cornered enemy is a deadly
enemy.
The American was talking again. Probing. Maneuvering.
The killer almost laughed aloud. This is not one of your Hollywood movies . . .
there will be no long
discussions at gunpoint before the final shoot-out. This is the end. Now.
Without breaking eye contact, the killer inched his hands across the ceiling of
the van until he found what
he was looking for. Staring dead ahead, he grasped it.
Then he made his play.
The motion was utterly unexpected. For an instant, Langdon thought the laws of
physics had ceased to
exist. The killer seemed to hang weightless in the air as his legs shot out from
beneath him, his boots
driving into the cardinal's side and launching the chain-laden body out the
door. The cardinal splashed
down, sending up a sheet of spray.
Water dousing his face, Langdon realized too late what had happened. The killer
had grasped one of the
van's roll bars and used it to swing outward. Now the Hassassin was sailing
toward him, feet-first through
the spray.
Langdon pulled the trigger, and the silencer spat. The bullet exploded through
the toe of the Hassassin's left
boot. Instantly Langdon felt the soles of the Hassassin's boots connect with his
chest, driving him back
with a crushing kick.
The two men splashed down in a spray of blood and water.
As the icy liquid engulfed Langdon's body, his first cognition was pain.
Survival instinct came next. He
realized he was no longer holding his weapon. It had been knocked away. Diving
deep, he groped along the
slimy bottom. His hand gripped metal. A handful of coins. He dropped them.
Opening his eyes, Langdon
scanned the glowing basin. The water churned around him like a frigid Jacuzzi.
Despite the instinct to breathe, fear kept him on the bottom. Always moving. He
did not know from where
the next assault would come. He needed to find the gun! His hands groped
desperately in front of him.
You have the advantage, he told himself. You are in your element. Even in a
soaked turtleneck Langdon
was an agile swimmer. Water is your element.
When Langdon's fingers found metal a second time, he was certain his luck had
changed. The object in his
hand was no handful of coins. He gripped it and tried to pull it toward him, but
when he did, he found
himself gliding through the water. The object was stationary.
Langdon realized even before he coasted over the cardinal's writhing body that
he had grasped part of the
metal chain that was weighing the man down. Langdon hovered a moment,
immobilized by the sight of the
terrified face staring up at him from the floor of the fountain.
Jolted by the life in the man's eyes, Langdon reached down and grabbed the
chains, trying to heave him
toward the surface. The body came slowly . . . like an anchor. Langdon pulled
harder. When the cardinal's
head broke the surface, the old man gasped a few sucking, desperate breaths.
Then, violently, his body
rolled, causing Langdon to lose his grip on the slippery chains. Like a stone,
Baggia went down again and
disappeared beneath the foaming water.
Langdon dove, eyes wide in the liquid murkiness. He found the cardinal. This
time, when Langdon grabbed
on, the chains across Baggia's chest shifted . . . parting to reveal a further
wickedness . . . a word stamped
in seared flesh.
An instant later, two boots strode into view. One was gushing blood.
103
A s a water polo player, Robert Langdon had endured more than his fair share of
underwater battles. The
competitive savagery that raged beneath the surface of a water polo pool, away
from the eyes of the
referees, could rival even the ugliest wrestling match. Langdon had been kicked,
scratched, held, and even
bitten once by a frustrated defenseman from whom Langdon had continuously
twisted away.
Now, though, thrashing in the frigid water of Bernini's fountain, Langdon knew
he was a long way from
the Harvard pool. He was fighting not for a game, but for his life. This was the
second time they had
battled. No referees here. No rematches. The arms driving his face toward the
bottom of the basin thrust
with a force that left no doubt that it intended to kill.
Langdon instinctively spun like a torpedo. Break the hold! But the grip torqued
him back, his attacker
enjoying an advantage no water polo defenseman ever had-two feet on solid
ground. Langdon contorted,
trying to get his own feet beneath him. The Hassassin seemed to be favoring one
arm . . . but nonetheless,
his grip held firm.
It was then that Langdon knew he was not coming up. He did the only thing he
could think of to do. He
stopped trying to surface. If you can't go north, go east. Marshalling the last
of his strength, Langdon
dolphin-kicked his legs and pulled his arms beneath him in an awkward butterfly
stroke. His body lurched
forward.
The sudden switch in direction seemed to take the Hassassin off guard. Langdon's
lateral motion dragged
his captor's arms sideways, compromising his balance. The man's grip faltered,
and Langdon kicked again.
The sensation felt like a towline had snapped. Suddenly Langdon was free.
Blowing the stale air from his
lungs, Langdon clawed for the surface. A single breath was all he got. With
crashing force the Hassassin
was on top of him again, palms on his shoulders, all of his weight bearing down.
Langdon scrambled to
plant his feet beneath him but the Hassassin's leg swung out, cutting Langdon
down.
He went under again.
Langdon's muscles burned as he twisted beneath the water. This time his
maneuvers were in vain. Through
the bubbling water, Langdon scanned the bottom, looking for the gun. Everything
was blurred. The bubbles
were denser here. A blinding light flashed in his face as the killer wrestled
him deeper, toward a submerged
spotlight bolted on the floor of the fountain. Langdon reached out, grabbing the
canister. It was hot.
Langdon tried to pull himself free, but the contraption was mounted on hinges
and pivoted in his hand. His
leverage was instantly lost.
The Hassassin drove him deeper still.
It was then Langdon saw it. Poking out from under the coins directly beneath his
face. A narrow, black
cylinder. The silencer of Olivetti's gun! Langdon reached out, but as his
fingers wrapped around the
cylinder, he did not feel metal, he felt plastic. When he pulled, the flexible
rubber hose came flopping
toward him like a flimsy snake. It was about two feet long with a jet of bubbles
surging from the end.
Langdon had not found the gun at all. It was one of the fountain's many harmless
spumanti . . . bubble
makers.
Only a few feet away, Cardinal Baggia felt his soul straining to leave his body.
Although he had prepared
for this moment his entire life, he had never imagined the end would be like
this. His physical shell was in
agony . . . burned, bruised, and held underwater by an immovable weight. He
reminded himself that this
suffering was nothing compared to what Jesus had endured.
He died for my sins . . .
Baggia could hear the thrashing of a battle raging nearby. He could not bear the
thought of it. His captor
was about to extinguish yet another life . . . the man with kind eyes, the man
who had tried to help.
As the pain mounted, Baggia lay on his back and stared up through the water at
the black sky above him.
For a moment he thought he saw stars.
It was time.
Releasing all fear and doubt, Baggia opened his mouth and expelled what he knew
would be his final
breath. He watched his spirit gurgle heavenward in a burst of transparent
bubbles. Then, reflexively, he
gasped. The water poured in like icy daggers to his sides. The pain lasted only
a few seconds.
Then . . . peace.
The Hassassin ignored the burning in his foot and focused on the drowning
American, whom he now held
pinned beneath him in the churning water. Finish it fully. He tightened his
grip, knowing this time Robert
Langdon would not survive. As he predicted, his victim's struggling became
weaker and weaker.
Suddenly Langdon's body went rigid. He began to shake wildly.
Yes, the Hassassin mused. The rigors. When the water first hits the lungs. The
rigors, he knew, would last
about five seconds.
They lasted six.
Then, exactly as the Hassassin expected, his victim went suddenly flaccid. Like
a great deflating balloon,
Robert Langdon fell limp. It was over. The Hassassin held him down for another
thirty seconds to let the
water flood all of his pulmonary tissue. Gradually, he felt Langdon's body sink,
on its own accord, to the
bottom. Finally, the Hassassin let go. The media would find a double surprise in
the Fountain of the Four
Rivers.
"Tabban!" the Hassassin swore, clambering out of the fountain and looking at his
bleeding toe. The tip of
his boot was shredded, and the front of his big toe had been sheared off. Angry
at his own carelessness, he
tore the cuff from his pant leg and rammed the fabric into the toe of his boot.
Pain shot up his leg. "Ibn alkalb!"
He clenched his fists and rammed the cloth deeper. The bleeding slowed
until it was only a trickle.
Turning his thoughts from pain to pleasure, the Hassassin got into his van. His
work in Rome was done. He
knew exactly what would soothe his discomfort. Vittoria Vetra was bound and
waiting. The Hassassin,
even cold and wet, felt himself stiffen.
I have earned my reward.
Across town Vittoria awoke in pain. She was on her back. All of her muscles felt
like stone. Tight. Brittle.
Her arms hurt. When she tried to move, she felt spasms in her shoulders. It took
her a moment to
comprehend her hands were tied behind her back. Her initial reaction was
confusion. Am I dreaming? But
when she tried to lift her head, the pain at the base of her skull informed her
of her wakefulness.
Confusion transforming to fear, she scanned her surroundings. She was in a
crude, stone room-large and
well-furnished, lit by torches. Some kind of ancient meeting hall. Old-fashioned
benches sat in a circle
nearby.
Vittoria felt a breeze, cold now on her skin. Nearby, a set of double doors
stood open, beyond them a
balcony. Through the slits in the balustrade, Vittoria could have sworn she saw
the Vatican.
104
R obert Langdon lay on a bed of coins at the bottom of the Fountain of the Four
Rivers. His mouth was
still wrapped around the plastic hose. The air being pumped through the spumanti
tube to froth the fountain
had been polluted by the pump, and his throat burned. He was not complaining,
though. He was alive.
He was not sure how accurate his imitation of a drowning man had been, but
having been around water his
entire life, Langdon had certainly heard accounts. He had done his best. Near
the end, he had even blown
all the air from his lungs and stopped breathing so that his muscle mass would
carry his body to the floor.
Thankfully, the Hassassin had bought it and let go.
Now, resting on the bottom of the fountain, Langdon had waited as long as he
could wait. He was about to
start choking. He wondered if the Hassassin was still out there. Taking an acrid
breath from the tube,
Langdon let go and swam across the bottom of the fountain until he found the
smooth swell of the central
core. Silently, he followed it upward, surfacing out of sight, in the shadows
beneath the huge marble
figures.
The van was gone.
That was all Langdon needed to see. Pulling a long breath of fresh air back into
his lungs, he scrambled
back toward where Cardinal Baggia had gone down. Langdon knew the man would be
unconscious now,
and chances of revival were slim, but he had to try. When Langdon found the
body, he planted his feet on
either side, reached down, and grabbed the chains wrapped around the cardinal.
Then Langdon pulled.
When the cardinal broke water, Langdon could see the eyes were already rolled
upward, bulging. Not a
good sign. There was no breath or pulse.
Knowing he could never get the body up and over the fountain rim, Langdon lugged
Cardinal Baggia
through the water and into the hollow beneath the central mound of marble. Here
the water became
shallow, and there was an inclined ledge. Langdon dragged the naked body up onto
the ledge as far as he
could. Not far.
Then he went to work. Compressing the cardinal's chain-clad chest, Langdon
pumped the water from his
lungs. Then he began CPR. Counting carefully. Deliberately. Resisting the
instinct to blow too hard and too
fast. For three minutes Langdon tried to revive the old man. After five minutes,
Langdon knew it was over.
Il preferito. The man who would be Pope. Lying dead before him.
Somehow, even now, prostrate in the shadows on the semisubmerged ledge, Cardinal
Baggia retained an
air of quiet dignity. The water lapped softly across his chest, seeming almost
remorseful . . . as if asking
forgiveness for being the man's ultimate killer . . . as if trying to cleanse
the scalded wound that bore its
name.
Gently, Langdon ran a hand across the man's face and closed his upturned eyes.
As he did, he felt an
exhausted shudder of tears well from within. It startled him. Then, for the
first time in years, Langdon
cried.
105
T he fog of weary emotion lifted slowly as Langdon waded away from the dead
cardinal, back into deep
water. Depleted and alone in the fountain, Langdon half-expected to collapse.
But instead, he felt a new
compulsion rising within him. Undeniable. Frantic. He sensed his muscles
hardening with an unexpected
grit. His mind, as though ignoring the pain in his heart, forced aside the past
and brought into focus the
single, desperate task ahead.
Find the Illuminati lair. Help Vittoria.
Turning now to the mountainous core of Bernini's fountain, Langdon summoned hope
and launched
himself into his quest for the final Illuminati marker. He knew somewhere on
this gnarled mass of figures
was a clue that pointed to the lair. As Langdon scanned the fountain, though,
his hope withered quickly.
The words of the segno seemed to gurgle mockingly all around him. Let angels
guide you on your lofty
quest. Langdon glared at the carved forms before him. The fountain is pagan! It
has no damn angels
anywhere!
When Langdon completed his fruitless search of the core, his eyes instinctively
climbed the towering stone
pillar. Four markers, he thought, spread across Rome in a giant cross.
Scanning the hieroglyphics covering the obelisk, he wondered if perhaps there
were a clue hidden in the
Egyptian symbology. He immediately dismissed the idea. The hieroglyphs predated
Bernini by centuries,
and hieroglyphs had not even been decipherable until the Rosetta Stone was
discovered. Still, Langdon
ventured, maybe Bernini had carved an additional symbol? One that would go
unnoticed among all the
hieroglyphs?
Feeling a shimmer of hope, Langdon circumnavigated the fountain one more time
and studied all four
façades of the obelisk. It took him two minutes, and when he reached the end of
the final face, his hopes
sank. Nothing in the hieroglyphs stood out as any kind of addition. Certainly no
angels.
Langdon checked his watch. It was eleven on the dot. He couldn't tell whether
time was flying or crawling.
Images of Vittoria and the Hassassin started to swirl hauntingly as Langdon
clambered his way around the
fountain, the frustration mounting as he frantically completed yet another
fruitless circle. Beaten and
exhausted, Langdon felt ready to collapse. He threw back his head to scream into
the night.
The sound jammed in his throat.
Langdon was staring straight up the obelisk. The object perched at the very top
was one he had seen earlier
and ignored. Now, however, it stopped him short. It was not an angel. Far from
it. In fact, he had not even
perceived it as part of Bernini's fountain. He thought it was a living creature,
another one of the city's
scavengers perched on a lofty tower.
A pigeon.
Langdon squinted skyward at the object, his vision blurred by the glowing mist
around him. It was a
pigeon, wasn't it? He could clearly see the head and beak silhouetted against a
cluster of stars. And yet the
bird had not budged since Langdon's arrival, even with the battle below. The
bird sat now exactly as it had
been when Langdon entered the square. It was perched high atop the obelisk,
gazing calmly westward.
Langdon stared at it a moment and then plunged his hand into the fountain and
grabbed a fistful of coins.
He hurled the coins skyward. They clattered across the upper levels of the
granite obelisk. The bird did not
budge. He tried again. This time, one of the coins hit the mark. A faint sound
of metal on metal clanged
across the square.
The damned pigeon was bronze.
You're looking for an angel, not a pigeon, a voice reminded him. But it was too
late. Langdon had made
the connection. He realized the bird was not a pigeon at all.
It was a dove.
Barely aware of his own actions, Langdon splashed toward the center of the
fountain and began scrambling
up the travertine mountain, clambering over huge arms and heads, pulling himself
higher. Halfway to the
base of the obelisk, he emerged from the mist and could see the head of the bird
more clearly.
There was no doubt. It was a dove. The bird's deceptively dark color was the
result of Rome's pollution
tarnishing the original bronze. Then the significance hit him. He had seen a
pair of doves earlier today at
the Pantheon. A pair of doves carried no meaning. This dove, however, was alone.
The lone dove is the pagan symbol for the Angel of Peace.
The truth almost lifted Langdon the rest of the way to the obelisk. Bernini had
chosen the pagan symbol for
the angel so he could disguise it in a pagan fountain. Let angels guide you on
your lofty quest. The dove is
the angel! Langdon could think of no more lofty perch for the Illuminati's final
marker than atop this
obelisk.
The bird was looking west. Langdon tried to follow its gaze, but he could not
see over the buildings. He
climbed higher. A quote from St. Gregory of Nyssa emerged from his memory most
unexpectedly. As the
soul becomes enlightened . . . it takes the beautiful shape of the dove.
Langdon rose heavenward. Toward the dove. He was almost flying now. He reached
the platform from
which the obelisk rose and could climb no higher. With one look around, though,
he knew he didn't have
to. All of Rome spread out before him. The view was stunning.
To his left, the chaotic media lights surrounding St. Peter's. To his right, the
smoking cupola of Santa
Maria della Vittoria. In front of him in the distance, Piazza del Popolo.
Beneath him, the fourth and final
point. A giant cross of obelisks.
Trembling, Langdon looked to the dove overhead. He turned and faced the proper
direction, and then he
lowered his eyes to the skyline.
In an instant he saw it.
So obvious. So clear. So deviously simple.
Staring at it now, Langdon could not believe the Illuminati lair had stayed
hidden for so many years. The
entire city seemed to fade away as he looked out at the monstrous stone
structure across the river in front of
him. The building was as famous as any in Rome. It stood on the banks of the
Tiber River diagonally
adjacent to the Vatican. The building's geometry was stark-a circular castle,
within a square fortress, and
then, outside its walls, surrounding the entire structure, a park in the shape
of a pentagram.
The ancient stone ramparts before him were dramatically lit by soft floodlights.
High atop the castle stood
the mammoth bronze angel. The angel pointed his sword downward at the exact
center of the castle. And as
if that were not enough, leading solely and directly to the castle's main
entrance stood the famous Bridge of
Angels . . . a dramatic approachway adorned by twelve towering angels carved by
none other than Bernini
himself.
In a final breathtaking revelation, Langdon realized Bernini's city-wide cross
of obelisks marked the
fortress in perfect Illuminati fashion; the cross's central arm passed directly
through the center of the
castle's bridge, dividing it into two equal halves.
Langdon retrieved his tweed coat, holding it away from his dripping body. Then
he jumped into the stolen
sedan and rammed his soggy shoe into the accelerator, speeding off into the
night.
106
I t was 11:07 P.M. Langdon's car raced through the Roman night. Speeding down
Lungotevere Tor Di
Nona, parallel with the river, Langdon could now see his destination rising like
a mountain to his right.
Castel Sant' Angelo. Castle of the Angel.
Without warning, the turnoff to the narrow Bridge of Angels-Ponte Sant'
Angelo-appeared suddenly.
Langdon slammed on his brakes and swerved. He turned in time, but the bridge was
barricaded. He skidded
ten feet and collided with a series of short cement pillars blocking his way.
Langdon lurched forward as the
vehicle stalled, wheezing and shuddering. He had forgotten the Bridge of Angels,
in order to preserve it,
was now zoned pedestrians only.
Shaken, Langdon staggered from the crumpled car, wishing now he had chosen one
of the other routes. He
felt chilled, shivering from the fountain. He donned his Harris tweed over his
damp shirt, grateful for
Harris's trademark double lining. The Diagramma folio would remain dry. Before
him, across the bridge,
the stone fortress rose like a mountain. Aching and depleted, Langdon broke into
a loping run.
On both sides of him now, like a gauntlet of escorts, a procession of Bernini
angels whipped past, funneling
him toward his final destination. Let angels guide you on your lofty quest. The
castle seemed to rise as he
advanced, an unscalable peak, more intimidating to him even than St. Peter's. He
sprinted toward the
bastion, running on fumes, gazing upward at the citadel's circular core as it
shot skyward to a gargantuan,
sword-wielding angel.
The castle appeared deserted.
Langdon knew through the centuries the building had been used by the Vatican as
a tomb, a fortress, a
papal hideout, a prison for enemies of the church, and a museum. Apparently, the
castle had other tenants
as well-the Illuminati. Somehow it made eerie sense. Although the castle was
property of the Vatican, it
was used only sporadically, and Bernini had made numerous renovations to it over
the years. The building
was now rumored to be honeycombed with secret entries, passageways, and hidden
chambers. Langdon had
little doubt that the angel and surrounding pentagonal park were Bernini's doing
as well.
Arriving at the castle's elephantine double doors, Langdon shoved them hard. Not
surprisingly, they were
immovable. Two iron knockers hung at eye level. Langdon didn't bother. He
stepped back, his eyes
climbing the sheer outer wall. These ramparts had fended off armies of Berbers,
heathens, and Moors.
Somehow he sensed his chances of breaking in were slim.
Vittoria, Langdon thought. Are you in there?
Langdon hurried around the outer wall. There must be another entrance!
Rounding the second bulwark to the west, Langdon arrived breathless in a small
parking area off Lungotere
Angelo. On this wall he found a second castle entrance, a drawbridge-type
ingress, raised and sealed shut.
Langdon gazed upward again.
The only lights on the castle were exterior floods illuminating the façade. All
the tiny windows inside
seemed black. Langdon's eyes climbed higher. At the very peak of the central
tower, a hundred feet above,
directly beneath the angel's sword, a single balcony protruded. The marble
parapet seemed to shimmer
slightly, as if the room beyond it were aglow with torchlight. Langdon paused,
his soaked body shivering
suddenly. A shadow? He waited, straining. Then he saw it again. His spine
prickled. Someone is up there!
"Vittoria!" he called out, unable to help himself, but his voice was swallowed
by the raging Tiber behind
him. He wheeled in circles, wondering where the hell the Swiss Guard were. Had
they even heard his
transmission?
Across the lot a large media truck was parked. Langdon ran toward it. A paunchy
man in headphones sat in
the cabin adjusting levers. Langdon rapped on the side of the truck. The man
jumped, saw Langdon's
dripping clothes, and yanked off his headset.
"What's the worry, mate?" His accent was Australian.
"I need your phone." Langdon was frenzied.
The man shrugged. "No dial tone. Been trying all night. Circuits are packed."
Langdon swore aloud. "Have you seen anyone go in there?" He pointed to the
drawbridge.
"Actually, yeah. A black van's been going in and out all night."
Langdon felt a brick hit the bottom of his stomach.
"Lucky bastard," the Aussie said, gazing up at the tower, and then frowning at
his obstructed view of the
Vatican. "I bet the view from up there is perfect. I couldn't get through the
traffic in St. Peter's, so I'm
shooting from here."
Langdon wasn't listening. He was looking for options.
"What do you say?" the Australian said. "This 11th Hour Samaritan for real?"
Langdon turned. "The what?"
"You didn't hear? The Captain of the Swiss Guard got a call from somebody who
claims to have some
primo info. The guy's flying in right now. All I know is if he saves the day . .
. there go the ratings!" The
man laughed.
Langdon was suddenly confused. A good Samaritan flying in to help? Did the
person somehow know
where the antimatter was? Then why didn't he just tell the Swiss Guard? Why was
he coming in person?
Something was odd, but Langdon didn't have time to figure out what.
"Hey," the Aussie said, studying Langdon more closely. "Ain't you that guy I saw
on TV? Trying to save
that cardinal in St. Peter's Square?"
Langdon did not answer. His eyes had suddenly locked on a contraption attached
to the top of the truck-a
satellite dish on a collapsible appendage. Langdon looked at the castle again.
The outer rampart was fifty
feet tall. The inner fortress climbed farther still. A shelled defense. The top
was impossibly high from here,
but maybe if he could clear the first wall . . .
Langdon spun to the newsman and pointed to the satellite arm. "How high does
that go?"
"Huh?" The man looked confused. "Fifteen meters. Why?"
"Move the truck. Park next to the wall. I need help."
"What are you talking about?"
Langdon explained.
The Aussie's eyes went wide. "Are you insane? That's a twohundred-
thousand-dollar telescoping extension. Not a ladder!"
"You want ratings? I've got information that will make your day." Langdon was
desperate.
"Information worth two hundred grand?"
Langdon told him what he would reveal in exchange for the favor.
Ninety seconds later, Robert Langdon was gripping the top of the satellite arm
wavering in the breeze fifty
feet off the ground. Leaning out, he grabbed the top of the first bulwark,
dragged himself onto the wall, and
dropped onto the castle's lower bastion.
"Now keep your bargain!" the Aussie called up. "Where is he?"
Langdon felt guilt-ridden for revealing this information, but a deal was a deal.
Besides, the Hassassin
would probably call the press anyway. "Piazza Navona," Langdon shouted. "He's in
the fountain."
The Aussie lowered his satellite dish and peeled out after the scoop of his
career.
In a stone chamber high above the city, the Hassassin removed his soaking boots
and bandaged his
wounded toe. There was pain, but not so much that he couldn't enjoy himself.
He turned to his prize.
She was in the corner of the room, on her back on a rudimentary divan, hands
tied behind her, mouth
gagged. The Hassassin moved toward her. She was awake now. This pleased him.
Surprisingly, in her eyes,
he saw fire instead of fear.
The fear will come.
107
R obert Langdon dashed around the outer bulwark of the castle, grateful for the
glow of the floodlights.
As he circled the wall, the courtyard beneath him looked like a museum of
ancient warfare-catapults, stacks
of marble cannonballs, and an arsenal of fearful contraptions. Parts of the
castle were open to tourists
during the day, and the courtyard had been partially restored to its original
state.
Langdon's eyes crossed the courtyard to the central core of the fortress. The
circular citadel shot skyward
107 feet to the bronze angel above. The balcony at the top still glowed from
within. Langdon wanted to call
out but knew better. He would have to find a way in.
He checked his watch.
11:12 P.M.
Dashing down the stone ramp that hugged the inside of the wall, Langdon
descended to the courtyard. Back
on ground level, he ran through shadows, clockwise around the fort. He passed
three porticos, but all of
them were permanently sealed. How did the Hassassin get in? Langdon pushed on.
He passed two modern
entrances, but they were padlocked from the outside. Not here. He kept running.
Langdon had circled almost the entire building when he saw a gravel drive
cutting across the courtyard in
front of him. At one end, on the outer wall of the castle, he saw the back of
the gated drawbridge leading
back outside. At the other end, the drive disappeared into the fortress. The
drive seemed to enter a kind of
tunnel-a gaping entry in the central core. Il traforo! Langdon had read about
this castle's traforo, a giant
spiral ramp that circled up inside the fort, used by commanders on horseback to
ride from top to bottom
rapidly. The Hassassin drove up! The gate blocking the tunnel was raised,
ushering Langdon in. He felt
almost exuberant as he ran toward the tunnel. But as he reached the opening, his
excitement disappeared.
The tunnel spiraled down.
The wrong way. This section of the traforo apparently descended to the dungeons,
not to the top.
Standing at the mouth of a dark bore that seemed to twist endlessly deeper into
the earth, Langdon
hesitated, looking up again at the balcony. He could swear he saw motion up
there. Decide! With no other
options, he dashed down into the tunnel.
High overhead, the Hassassin stood over his prey. He ran a hand across her arm.
Her skin was like cream.
The anticipation of exploring her bodily treasures was inebriating. How many
ways could he violate her?
The Hassassin knew he deserved this woman. He had served Janus well. She was a
spoil of war, and when
he was finished with her, he would pull her from the divan and force her to her
knees. She would service
him again. The ultimate submission. Then, at the moment of his own climax, he
would slit her throat.
Ghayat assa'adah, they called it. The ultimate pleasure.
Afterward, basking in his glory, he would stand on the balcony and savor the
culmination of the Illuminati
triumph . . . a revenge desired by so many for so long.
The tunnel grew darker. Langdon descended.
After one complete turn into the earth, the light was all but gone. The tunnel
leveled out, and Langdon
slowed, sensing by the echo of his footfalls that he had just entered a larger
chamber. Before him in the
murkiness, he thought he saw glimmers of light . . . fuzzy reflections in the
ambient gleam. He moved
forward, reaching out his hand. He found smooth surfaces. Chrome and glass. It
was a vehicle. He groped
the surface, found a door, and opened it.
The vehicle's interior dome-light flashed on. He stepped back and recognized the
black van immediately.
Feeling a surge of loathing, he stared a moment, then he dove in, rooting around
in hopes of finding a
weapon to replace the one he'd lost in the fountain. He found none. He did,
however, find Vittoria's cell
phone. It was shattered and useless. The sight of it filled Langdon with fear.
He prayed he was not too late.
He reached up and turned on the van's headlights. The room around him blazed
into existence, harsh
shadows in a simple chamber. Langdon guessed the room was once used for horses
and ammunition. It was
also a dead end.
No exit. I came the wrong way!
At the end of his rope, Langdon jumped from the van and scanned the walls around
him. No doorways. No
gates. He thought of the angel over the tunnel entrance and wondered if it had
been a coincidence. No! He
thought of the killer's words at the fountain. She is in the Church of
Illumination . . . awaiting my return.
Langdon had come too far to fail now. His heart was pounding. Frustration and
hatred were starting to
cripple his senses.
When he saw the blood on the floor, Langdon's first thought was for Vittoria.
But as his eyes followed the
stains, he realized they were bloody footprints. The strides were long. The
splotches of blood were only on
the left foot. The Hassassin!
Langdon followed the footprints toward the corner of the room, his sprawling
shadow growing fainter. He
felt more and more puzzled with every step. The bloody prints looked as though
they walked directly into
the corner of the room and then disappeared.
When Langdon arrived in the corner, he could not believe his eyes. The granite
block in the floor here was
not a square like the others. He was looking at another signpost. The block was
carved into a perfect
pentagram, arranged with the tip pointing into the corner. Ingeniously concealed
by overlapping walls, a
narrow slit in the stone served as an exit. Langdon slid through. He was in a
passage. In front of him were
the remains of a wooden barrier that had once been blocking this tunnel.
Beyond it there was light.
Langdon was running now. He clambered over the wood and headed for the light.
The passage quickly
opened into another, larger chamber. Here a single torch flickered on the wall.
Langdon was in a section of
the castle that had no electricity . . . a section no tourists would ever see.
The room would have been
frightful in daylight, but the torch made it even more gruesome.
Il prigione.
There were a dozen tiny jail cells, the iron bars on most eroded away. One of
the larger cells, however,
remained intact, and on the floor Langdon saw something that almost stopped his
heart. Black robes and
red sashes on the floor. This is where he held the cardinals!
Near the cell was an iron doorway in the wall. The door was ajar and beyond it
Langdon could see some
sort of passage. He ran toward it. But Langdon stopped before he got there. The
trail of blood did not enter
the passage. When Langdon saw the words carved over the archway, he knew why.
Il Passetto.
He was stunned. He had heard of this tunnel many times, never knowing where
exactly the entrance was. Il
Passetto-The Little Passage-was a slender, three-quarter-mile tunnel built
between Castle St. Angelo and
the Vatican. It had been used by various Popes to escape to safety during sieges
of the Vatican . . . as well
as by a few less pious Popes to secretly visit mistresses or oversee the torture
of their enemies. Nowadays
both ends of the tunnel were supposedly sealed with impenetrable locks whose
keys were kept in some
Vatican vault. Langdon suddenly feared he knew how the Illuminati had been
moving in and out of the
Vatican. He found himself wondering who on the inside had betrayed the church
and coughed up the keys.
Olivetti? One of the Swiss Guard? None of it mattered anymore.
The blood on the floor led to the opposite end of the prison. Langdon followed.
Here, a rusty gate hung
draped with chains. The lock had been removed and the gate stood ajar. Beyond
the gate was a steep
ascension of spiral stairs. The floor here was also marked with a pentagramal
block. Langdon stared at the
block, trembling, wondering if Bernini himself had held the chisel that had
shaped these chunks. Overhead,
the archway was adorned with a tiny carved cherub. This was it.
The trail of blood curved up the stairs.
Before ascending, Langdon knew he needed a weapon, any weapon. He found a
four-foot section of iron
bar near one of the cells. It had a sharp, splintered end. Although absurdly
heavy, it was the best he could
do. He hoped the element of surprise, combined with the Hassassin's wound, would
be enough to tip the
scales in his advantage. Most of all, though, he hoped he was not too late.
The staircase's spiral treads were worn and twisted steeply upward. Langdon
ascended, listening for
sounds. None. As he climbed, the light from the prison area faded away. He
ascended into the total
darkness, keeping one hand on the wall. Higher. In the blackness, Langdon sensed
the ghost of Galileo,
climbing these very stairs, eager to share his visions of heaven with other men
of science and faith.
Langdon was still in a state of shock over the location of the lair. The
Illuminati meeting hall was in a
building owned by the Vatican. No doubt while the Vatican guards were out
searching basements and
homes of well-known scientists, the Illuminati were meeting here . . . right
under the Vatican's nose. It
suddenly seemed so perfect. Bernini, as head architect of renovations here,
would have had unlimited
access to this structure . . . remodeling it to his own specifications with no
questions asked. How many
secret entries had Bernini added? How many subtle embellishments pointing the
way?
The Church of Illumination. Langdon knew he was close.
As the stairs began narrowing, Langdon felt the passage closing around him. The
shadows of history were
whispering in the dark, but he moved on. When he saw the horizontal shaft of
light before him, he realized
he was standing a few steps beneath a landing, where the glow of torchlight
spilled out beneath the
threshold of a door in front of him. Silently he moved up.
Langdon had no idea where in the castle he was right now, but he knew he had
climbed far enough to be
near the peak. He pictured the mammoth angel atop the castle and suspected it
was directly overhead.
Watch over me, angel, he thought, gripping the bar. Then, silently, he reached
for the door.
On the divan, Vittoria's arms ached. When she had first awoken to find them tied
behind her back, she'd
thought she might be able to relax and work her hands free. But time had run
out. The beast had returned.
Now he was standing over her, his chest bare and powerful, scarred from battles
he had endured. His eyes
looked like two black slits as he stared down at her body. Vittoria sensed he
was imagining the deeds he
was about to perform. Slowly, as if to taunt her, the Hassassin removed his
soaking belt and dropped it on
the floor.
Vittoria felt a loathing horror. She closed her eyes. When she opened them
again, the Hassassin had
produced a switchblade knife. He snapped it open directly in front of her face.
Vittoria saw her own terrified reflection in the steel.
The Hassassin turned the blade over and ran the back of it across her belly. The
icy metal gave her chills.
With a contemptuous stare, he slipped the blade below the waistline of her
shorts. She inhaled. He moved
back and forth, slowly, dangerously . . . lower. Then he leaned forward, his hot
breath whispering in her
ear.
"This blade cut out your father's eye."
Vittoria knew in that instant that she was capable of killing.
The Hassassin turned the blade again and began sawing upward through the fabric
of her khaki shorts.
Suddenly, he stopped, looking up. Someone was in the room.
"Get away from her," a deep voice growled from the doorway.
Vittoria could not see who had spoken, but she recognized the voice. Robert!
He's alive!
The Hassassin looked as if he had seen a ghost. "Mr. Langdon, you must have a
guardian angel."
108
I n the split second it took Langdon to take in his surroundings, he realized he
was in a sacred place. The
embellishments in the oblong room, though old and faded, were replete with
familiar symbology.
Pentagram tiles. Planet frescoes. Doves. Pyramids.
The Church of Illumination. Simple and pure. He had arrived.
Directly in front of him, framed in the opening of the balcony, stood the
Hassassin. He was bare chested,
standing over Vittoria, who lay bound but very much alive. Langdon felt a wave
of relief to see her. For an
instant, their eyes met, and a torrent of emotions flowed-gratitude,
desperation, and regret.
"So we meet yet again," the Hassassin said. He looked at the bar in Langdon's
hand and laughed out loud.
"And this time you come for me with that?"
"Untie her."
The Hassassin put the knife to Vittoria's throat. "I will kill her."
Langdon had no doubt the Hassassin was capable of such an act. He forced a calm
into his voice. "I
imagine she would welcome it . . . considering the alternative."
The Hassassin smiled at the insult. "You're right. She has much to offer. It
would be a waste."
Langdon stepped forward, grasping the rusted bar, and aimed the splintered end

