Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
Galileo during the scientist's house arrest, meetings portrayed in many
Renaissance paintings, including
Annibale Gatti's famous Galileo and Milton, which hung even now in the IMSS
Museum in Florence.
"Milton knew Galileo, didn't he?" Vittoria said, finally pushing the folio over
to Langdon. "Maybe he
wrote the poem as a favor?"
Langdon clenched his teeth as he took the sheathed document. Leaving it flat on
the table, he read the line
at the top. Then he rotated the page 90 degrees, reading the line in the right
margin. Another twist, and he
read the bottom. Another twist, the left. A final twist completed the circle.
There were four lines in all. The
first line Vittoria had found was actually the third line of the poem. Utterly
agape, he read the four lines
again, clockwise in sequence: top, right, bottom, left. When he was done, he
exhaled. There was no doubt
in his mind. "You found it, Ms. Vetra."
She smiled tightly. "Good, now can we get the hell out of here?"
"I have to copy these lines down. I need to find a pencil and paper."
Vittoria shook her head. "Forget it, professor. No time to play scribe. Mickey's
ticking." She took the page
from him and headed for the door.
Langdon stood up. "You can't take that outside! It's a-"
But Vittoria was already gone.
55
L angdon and Vittoria exploded onto the courtyard outside the Secret Archives.
The fresh air felt like a
drug as it flowed into Langdon's lungs. The purple spots in his vision quickly
faded. The guilt, however,
did not. He had just been accomplice to stealing a priceless relic from the
world's most private vault. The
camerlegno had said, I am giving you my trust.
"Hurry," Vittoria said, still holding the folio in her hand and striding at a
half-jog across Via Borgia in the
direction of Olivetti's office.
"If any water gets on that papyrus-"
"Calm down. When we decipher this thing, we can return their sacred Folio 5."
Langdon accelerated to keep up. Beyond feeling like a criminal, he was still
dazed over the document's
spellbinding implications. John Milton was an Illuminatus. He composed the poem
for Galileo to publish in
Folio 5 . . . far from the eyes of the Vatican.
As they left the courtyard, Vittoria held out the folio for Langdon. "You think
you can decipher this thing?
Or did we just kill all those brain cells for kicks?"
Langdon took the document carefully in his hands. Without hesitation he slipped
it into one of the breast
pockets of his tweed jacket, out of the sunlight and dangers of moisture. "I
deciphered it already."
Vittoria stopped short. "You what?"
Langdon kept moving.
Vittoria hustled to catch up. "You read it once! I thought it was supposed to be
hard!"
Langdon knew she was right, and yet he had deciphered the segno in a single
reading. A perfect stanza of
iambic pentameter, and the first altar of science had revealed itself in
pristine clarity. Admittedly, the ease
with which he had accomplished the task left him with a nagging disquietude. He
was a child of the Puritan
work ethic. He could still hear his father speaking the old New England
aphorism: If it wasn't painfully
difficult, you did it wrong. Langdon hoped the saying was false. "I deciphered
it," he said, moving faster
now. "I know where the first killing is going to happen. We need to warn
Olivetti."
Vittoria closed in on him. "How could you already know? Let me see that thing
again." With the sleight of
a boxer, she slipped a lissome hand into his pocket and pulled out the folio
again.
"Careful!" Langdon said. "You can't-"
Vittoria ignored him. Folio in hand, she floated beside him, holding the
document up to the evening light,
examining the margins. As she began reading aloud, Langdon moved to retrieve the
folio but instead found
himself bewitched by Vittoria's accented alto speaking the syllables in perfect
rhythm with her gait.
For a moment, hearing the verse aloud, Langdon felt transported in time . . . as
though he were one of
Galileo's contemporaries, listening to the poem for the first time . . . knowing
it was a test, a map, a clue
unveiling the four altars of science . . . the four markers that blazed a secret
path across Rome. The verse
flowed from Vittoria's lips like a song.
From Santi's earthly tomb with demon's hole,
'Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold.
The path of light is laid, the sacred test,
Let angels guide you on your lofty quest.
Vittoria read it twice and then fell silent, as if letting the ancient words
resonate on their own.
From Santi's earthly tomb, Langdon repeated in his mind. The poem was crystal
clear about that. The Path
of Illumination began at Santi's tomb. From there, across Rome, the markers
blazed the trail.
From Santi's earthly tomb with demon's hole,
'Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold.
Mystic elements. Also clear. Earth, Air, Fire, Water. Elements of science, the
four Illuminati markers
disguised as religious sculpture.
"The first marker," Vittoria said, "sounds like it's at Santi's tomb."
Langdon smiled. "I told you it wasn't that tough."
"So who is Santi?" she asked, sounding suddenly excited. "And where's his tomb?"
Langdon chuckled to himself. He was amazed how few people knew Santi, the last
name of one of the most
famous Renaissance artists ever to live. His first name was world renowned . . .
the child prodigy who at
the age of twenty-five was already doing commissions for Pope Julius II, and
when he died at only thirtyeight,
left behind the greatest collection of frescoes the world had ever seen.
Santi was a behemoth in the
art world, and being known solely by one's first name was a level of fame
achieved only by an elite few . . .
people like Napoleon, Galileo, and Jesus . . . and, of course, the demigods
Langdon now heard blaring from
Harvard dormitories-Sting, Madonna, Jewel, and the artist formerly known as
Prince, who had changed his
name to the symbol , causing Langdon to dub him "The Tau Cross With
Intersecting Hermaphroditic
Ankh."
"Santi," Langdon said, "is the last name of the great Renaissance master,
Raphael."
Vittoria looked surprised. "Raphael? As in the Raphael?"
"The one and only." Langdon pushed on toward the Office of the Swiss Guard.
"So the path starts at Raphael's tomb?"
"It actually makes perfect sense," Langdon said as they rushed on. "The
Illuminati often considered great
artists and sculptors honorary brothers in enlightenment. The Illuminati could
have chosen Raphael's tomb
as a kind of tribute." Langdon also knew that Raphael, like many other religious
artists, was a suspected
closet atheist.
Vittoria slipped the folio carefully back in Langdon's pocket. "So where is he
buried?"
Langdon took a deep breath. "Believe it or not, Raphael's buried in the
Pantheon."
Vittoria looked skeptical. "The Pantheon?"
"The Raphael at the Pantheon." Langdon had to admit, the Pantheon was not what
he had expected for the
placement of the first marker. He would have guessed the first altar of science
to be at some quiet, out of
the way church, something subtle. Even in the 1600s, the Pantheon, with its
tremendous, holed dome, was
one of the best known sites in Rome.
"Is the Pantheon even a church?" Vittoria asked.
"Oldest Catholic church in Rome."
Vittoria shook her head. "But do you really think the first cardinal could be
killed at the Pantheon? That's
got to be one of the busiest tourist spots in Rome."
Langdon shrugged. "The Illuminati said they wanted the whole world watching.
Killing a cardinal at the
Pantheon would certainly open some eyes."
"But how does this guy expect to kill someone at the Pantheon and get away
unnoticed? It would be
impossible."
"As impossible as kidnapping four cardinals from Vatican City? The poem is
precise."
"And you're certain Raphael is buried inside the Pantheon?"
"I've seen his tomb many times."
Vittoria nodded, still looking troubled. "What time is it?"
Langdon checked. "Seven-thirty."
"Is the Pantheon far?"
"A mile maybe. We've got time."
"The poem said Santi's earthly tomb. Does that mean anything to you?"
Langdon hastened diagonally across the Courtyard of the Sentinel. "Earthly?
Actually, there's probably no
more earthly place in Rome than the Pantheon. It got its name from the original
religion practiced there-
Pantheism-the worship of all gods, specifically the pagan gods of Mother Earth."
As a student of architecture, Langdon had been amazed to learn that the
dimensions of the Pantheon's main
chamber were a tribute to Gaea-the goddess of the Earth. The proportions were so
exact that a giant
spherical globe could fit perfectly inside the building with less than a
millimeter to spare.
"Okay," Vittoria said, sounding more convinced. "And demon's hole? From Santi's
earthly tomb with
demon's hole?"
Langdon was not quite as sure about this. "Demon's hole must mean the oculus,"
he said, making a logical
guess. "The famous circular opening in the Pantheon's roof."
"But it's a church," Vittoria said, moving effortlessly beside him. "Why would
they call the opening a
demon's hole?"
Langdon had actually been wondering that himself. He had never heard the term
"demon's hole," but he
did recall a famous sixth-century critique of the Pantheon whose words seemed
oddly appropriate now. The
Venerable Bede had once written that the hole in the Pantheon's roof had been
bored by demons trying to
escape the building when it was consecrated by Boniface IV.
"And why," Vittoria added as they entered a smaller courtyard, "why would the
Illuminati use the name
Santi if he was really known as Raphael?"
"You ask a lot of questions."
"My dad used to say that."
"Two possible reasons. One, the word Raphael has too many syllables. It would
have destroyed the poem's
iambic pentameter."
"Sounds like a stretch."
Langdon agreed. "Okay, then maybe using 'Santi' was to make the clue more
obscure, so only very
enlightened men would recognize the reference to Raphael."
Vittoria didn't appear to buy this either. "I'm sure Raphael's last name was
very well known when he was
alive."
"Surprisingly not. Single name recognition was a status symbol. Raphael shunned
his last name much like
pop stars do today. Take Madonna, for example. She never uses her surname,
Ciccone."
Vittoria looked amused. "You know Madonna's last name?"
Langdon regretted the example. It was amazing the kind of garbage a mind picked
up living with 10,000
adolescents.
As he and Vittoria passed the final gate toward the Office of the Swiss Guard,
their progress was halted
without warning.
"Para!" a voice bellowed behind them.
Langdon and Vittoria wheeled to find themselves looking into the barrel of a
rifle.
"Attento!" Vittoria exclaimed, jumping back. "Watch it with-"
"Non sportarti!" the guard snapped, cocking the weapon.
"Soldato!" a voice commanded from across the courtyard. Olivetti was emerging
from the security center.
"Let them go!"
The guard looked bewildered. "Ma, signore, è una donna-"
"Inside!" he yelled at the guard.
"Signore, non posso-"
"Now! You have new orders. Captain Rocher will be briefing the corps in two
minutes. We will be
organizing a search."
Looking bewildered, the guard hurried into the security center. Olivetti marched
toward Langdon, rigid and
steaming. "Our most secret archives? I'll want an explanation."
"We have good news," Langdon said.
Olivetti's eyes narrowed. "It better be damn good."
56
T he four unmarked Alpha Romeo 155 T-Sparks roared down Via dei Coronari like
fighter jets off a
runway. The vehicles carried twelve plainclothed Swiss Guards armed with
Cherchi-Pardini
semiautomatics, local-radius nerve gas canisters, and long-range stun guns. The
three sharpshooters carried
laser-sighted rifles.
Sitting in the passenger seat of the lead car, Olivetti turned backward toward
Langdon and Vittoria. His
eyes were filled with rage. "You assured me a sound explanation, and this is
what I get?"
Langdon felt cramped in the small car. "I understand your-"
"No, you don't understand!" Olivetti never raised his voice, but his intensity
tripled. "I have just removed a
dozen of my best men from Vatican City on the eve of conclave. And I have done
this to stake out the
Pantheon based on the testimony of some American I have never met who has just
interpreted a fourhundred-
year-old poem. I have also just left the search for this antimatter
weapon in the hands of secondary
officers."
Langdon resisted the urge to pull Folio 5 from his pocket and wave it in
Olivetti's face. "All I know is that
the information we found refers to Raphael's tomb, and Raphael's tomb is inside
the Pantheon."
The officer behind the wheel nodded. "He's right, commander. My wife and I-"
"Drive," Olivetti snapped. He turned back to Langdon. "How could a killer
accomplish an assassination in
such a crowded place and escape unseen?"
"I don't know," Langdon said. "But the Illuminati are obviously highly
resourceful. They've broken into
both CERN and Vatican City. It's only by luck that we know where the first kill
zone is. The Pantheon is
your one chance to catch this guy."
"More contradictions," Olivetti said. "One chance? I thought you said there was
some sort of pathway. A
series of markers. If the Pantheon is the right spot, we can follow the pathway
to the other markers. We will
have four chances to catch this guy."
"I had hoped so," Langdon said. "And we would have . . . a century ago."
Langdon's realization that the Pantheon was the first altar of science had been
a bittersweet moment.
History had a way of playing cruel tricks on those who chased it. It was a long
shot that the Path of
Illumination would be intact after all of these years, with all of its statues
in place, but part of Langdon had
fantasized about following the path all the way to the end and coming face to
face with the sacred
Illuminati lair. Alas, he realized, it was not to be. "The Vatican had all the
statues in the Pantheon removed
and destroyed in the late 1800s."
Vittoria looked shocked. "Why?"
"The statues were pagan Olympian Gods. Unfortunately, that means the first
marker is gone . . . and with
it-"
"Any hope," Vittoria said, "of finding the Path of Illumination and additional
markers?"
Langdon shook his head. "We have one shot. The Pantheon. After that, the path
disappears."
Olivetti stared at them both a long moment and then turned and faced front.
"Pull over," he barked to the
driver.
The driver swerved the car toward the curb and put on the brakes. Three other
Alpha Romeos skidded in
behind them. The Swiss Guard convoy screeched to a halt.
"What are you doing!" Vittoria demanded.
"My job," Olivetti said, turning in his seat, his voice like stone. "Mr.
Langdon, when you told me you
would explain the situation en route, I assumed I would be approaching the
Pantheon with a clear idea of
why my men are here. That is not the case. Because I am abandoning critical
duties by being here, and
because I have found very little that makes sense in this theory of yours about
virgin sacrifices and ancient
poetry, I cannot in good conscience continue. I am recalling this mission
immediately." He pulled out his
walkie-talkie and clicked it on.
Vittoria reached across the seat and grabbed his arm. "You can't!"
Olivetti slammed down the walkie-talkie and fixed her with a red-hot stare.
"Have you been to the
Pantheon, Ms. Vetra?"
"No, but I-"
"Let me tell you something about it. The Pantheon is a single room. A circular
cell made of stone and
cement. It has one entrance. No windows. One narrow entrance. That entrance is
flanked at all times by no
less than four armed Roman policemen who protect this shrine from art defacers,
anti-Christian terrorists,
and gypsy tourist scams."
"Your point?" she said coolly.
"My point?" Olivetti's knuckles gripped the seat. "My point is that what you
have just told me is going to
happen is utterly impossible! Can you give me one plausible scenario of how
someone could kill a cardinal
inside the Pantheon? How does one even get a hostage past the guards into the
Pantheon in the first place?
Much less actually kill him and get away?" Olivetti leaned over the seat, his
coffee breath now in
Langdon's face. "How, Mr. Langdon? One plausible scenario."
Langdon felt the tiny car shrink around him. I have no idea! I'm not an
assassin! I don't know how he will
do it! I only know-
"One scenario?" Vittoria quipped, her voice unruffled. "How about this? The
killer flies over in a
helicopter and drops a screaming, branded cardinal down through the hole in the
roof. The cardinal hits the
marble floor and dies."
Everyone in the car turned and stared at Vittoria. Langdon didn't know what to
think. You've got one sick
imagination, lady, but you are quick.
Olivetti frowned. "Possible, I admit . . . but hardly-"
"Or the killer drugs the cardinal," Vittoria said, "brings him to the Pantheon
in a wheelchair like some old
tourist. He wheels him inside, quietly slits his throat, and then walks out."
This seemed to wake up Olivetti a bit.
Not bad! Langdon thought.
"Or," she said, "the killer could-"
"I heard you," Olivetti said. "Enough." He took a deep breath and blew it out.
Someone rapped sharply on
the window, and everyone jumped. It was a soldier from one of the other cars.
Olivetti rolled down the
window.
"Everything all right, commander?" The soldier was dressed in street clothes. He
pulled back the sleeve of
his denim shirt to reveal a black chronograph military watch. "Seven-forty,
commander. We'll need time to
get in position."
Olivetti nodded vaguely but said nothing for many moments. He ran a finger back
and forth across the
dash, making a line in the dust. He studied Langdon in the side-view mirror, and
Langdon felt himself
being measured and weighed. Finally Olivetti turned back to the guard. There was
reluctance in his voice.
"I'll want separate approaches. Cars to Piazza della Rotunda, Via delgi Orfani,
Piazza Sant'Ignacio, and
Sant'Eustachio. No closer than two blocks. Once you're parked, gear up and await
my orders. Three
minutes."
"Very good, sir." The soldier returned to his car.
Langdon gave Vittoria an impressed nod. She smiled back, and for an instant
Langdon felt an unexpected
connection . . . a thread of magnetism between them.
The commander turned in his seat and locked eyes with Langdon. "Mr. Langdon,
this had better not blow
up in our faces."
Langdon smiled uneasily. How could it?
57
T he director of CERN, Maximilian Kohler, opened his eyes to the cool rush of
cromolyn and
leukotriene in his body, dilating his bronchial tubes and pulmonary capillaries.
He was breathing normally
again. He found himself lying in a private room in the CERN infirmary, his
wheelchair beside the bed.
He took stock, examining the paper robe they had put him in. His clothing was
folded on the chair beside
the bed. Outside he could hear a nurse making the rounds. He lay there a long
minute listening. Then, as
quietly as possible, he pulled himself to the edge of the bed and retrieved his
clothing. Struggling with his
dead legs, he dressed himself. Then he dragged his body onto his wheelchair.
Muffling a cough, he wheeled himself to the door. He moved manually, careful not
to engage the motor.
When he arrived at the door he peered out. The hall was empty.
Silently, Maximilian Kohler slipped out of the infirmary.
58
S even-forty-six and thirty . . . mark." Even speaking into his walkie-talkie,
Olivetti's voice never
seemed to rise above a whisper.
Langdon felt himself sweating now in his Harris tweed in the backseat of the
Alpha Romeo, which was
idling in Piazza de la Concorde, three blocks from the Pantheon. Vittoria sat
beside him, looking engrossed
by Olivetti, who was transmitting his final orders.
"Deployment will be an eight-point hem," the commander said. "Full perimeter
with a bias on the entry.
Target may know you visually, so you will be pas-visible. Nonmortal force only.
We'll need someone to
spot the roof. Target is primary. Asset secondary."
Jesus, Langdon thought, chilled by the efficiency with which Olivetti had just
told his men the cardinal was
expendable. Asset secondary.
"I repeat. Nonmortal procurement. We need the target alive. Go." Olivetti
snapped off his walkie-talkie.
Vittoria looked stunned, almost angry. "Commander, isn't anyone going inside?"
Olivetti turned. "Inside?"
"Inside the Pantheon! Where this is supposed to happen?"
"Attento," Olivetti said, his eyes fossilizing. "If my ranks have been
infiltrated, my men may be known by
sight. Your colleague has just finished warning me that this will be our sole
chance to catch the target. I
have no intention of scaring anyone off by marching my men inside."
"But what if the killer is already inside?"
Olivetti checked his watch. "The target was specific. Eight o'clock. We have
fifteen minutes."
"He said he would kill the cardinal at eight o'clock. But he may already have
gotten the victim inside
somehow. What if your men see the target come out but don't know who he is?
Someone needs to make
sure the inside is clean."
"Too risky at this point."
"Not if the person going in was unrecognizable."
"Disguising operatives is time consuming and-"
"I meant me," Vittoria said.
Langdon turned and stared at her.
Olivetti shook his head. "Absolutely not."
"He killed my father."
"Exactly, so he may know who you are."
"You heard him on the phone. He had no idea Leonardo Vetra even had a daughter.
He sure as hell doesn't
know what I look like. I could walk in like a tourist. If I see anything
suspicious, I could walk into the
square and signal your men to move in."
"I'm sorry, I cannot allow that."
"Comandante?" Olivetti's receiver crackled. "We've got a situation from the
north point. The fountain is
blocking our line of sight. We can't see the entrance unless we move into plain
view on the piazza. What's
your call? Do you want us blind or vulnerable?"
Vittoria apparently had endured enough. "That's it. I'm going." She opened her
door and got out.
Olivetti dropped his walkie-talkie and jumped out of the car, circling in front
of Vittoria.
Langdon got out too. What the hell is she doing!
Olivetti blocked Vittoria's way. "Ms. Vetra, your instincts are good, but I
cannot let a civilian interfere."
"Interfere? You're flying blind. Let me help."
"I would love to have a recon point inside, but . . ."
"But what?" Vittoria demanded. "But I'm a woman?"
Olivetti said nothing.
"That had better not be what you were going to say, Commander, because you know
damn well this is a
good idea, and if you let some archaic macho bullshit-"
"Let us do our job."
"Let me help."
"Too dangerous. We would have no lines of communication with you. I can't let
you carry a walkie-talkie,
it would give you away."
Vittoria reached in her shirt pocket and produced her cell phone. "Plenty of
tourists carry phones."
Olivetti frowned.
Vittoria unsnapped the phone and mimicked a call. "Hi, honey, I'm standing in
the Pantheon. You should
see this place!" She snapped the phone shut and glared at Olivetti. "Who the
hell is going to know? It is a
no-risk situation. Let me be your eyes!" She motioned to the cell phone on
Olivetti's belt. "What's your
number?"
Olivetti did not reply.
The driver had been looking on and seemed to have some thoughts of his own. He
got out of the car and
took the commander aside. They spoke in hushed tones for ten seconds. Finally
Olivetti nodded and
returned. "Program this number." He began dictating digits.
Vittoria programmed her phone.
"Now call the number."
Vittoria pressed the auto dial. The phone on Olivetti's belt began ringing. He
picked it up and spoke into
the receiver. "Go into the building, Ms. Vetra, look around, exit the building,
then call and tell me what you
see."
Vittoria snapped the phone shut. "Thank you, sir."
Langdon felt a sudden, unexpected surge of protective instinct. "Wait a minute,"
he said to Olivetti.
"You're sending her in there alone."
Vittoria scowled at him. "Robert, I'll be fine."
The Swiss Guard driver was talking to Olivetti again.
"It's dangerous," Langdon said to Vittoria.
"He's right," Olivetti said. "Even my best men don't work alone. My lieutenant
has just pointed out that the
masquerade will be more convincing with both of you anyway."
Both of us? Langdon hesitated. Actually, what I meant-
"Both of you entering together," Olivetti said, "will look like a couple on
holiday. You can also back each
other up. I'm more comfortable with that."
Vittoria shrugged. "Fine, but we'll need to go fast."
Langdon groaned. Nice move, cowboy.
Olivetti pointed down the street. "First street you hit will be Via degli
Orfani. Go left. It takes you directly
to the Pantheon. Two-minute walk, tops. I'll be here, directing my men and
waiting for your call. I'd like
you to have protection." He pulled out his pistol. "Do either of you know how to
use a gun?"
Langdon's heart skipped. We don't need a gun!
Vittoria held her hand out. "I can tag a breaching porpoise from forty meters
off the bow of a rocking ship."
"Good." Olivetti handed the gun to her. "You'll have to conceal it."
Vittoria glanced down at her shorts. Then she looked at Langdon.
Oh no you don't! Langdon thought, but Vittoria was too fast. She opened his
jacket, and inserted the
weapon into one of his breast pockets. It felt like a rock dropping into his
coat, his only consolation being
that Diagramma was in the other pocket.
"We look harmless," Vittoria said. "We're leaving." She took Langdon's arm and
headed down the street.
The driver called out, "Arm in arm is good. Remember, you're tourists. Newlyweds
even. Perhaps if you
held hands?"
As they turned the corner Langdon could have sworn he saw on Vittoria's face the
hint of a smile.
59
T he Swiss Guard "staging room" is located adjacent to the Corpo di Vigilanza
barracks and is used
primarily for planning the security surrounding papal appearances and public
Vatican events. Today,
however, it was being used for something else.
The man addressing the assembled task force was the second-in-command of the
Swiss Guard, Captain
Elias Rocher. Rocher was a barrel-chested man with soft, puttylike features. He
wore the traditional blue
captain's uniform with his own personal flair-a red beret cocked sideways on his
head. His voice was
surprisingly crystalline for such a large man, and when he spoke, his tone had
the clarity of a musical
instrument. Despite the precision of his inflection, Rocher's eyes were cloudy
like those of some nocturnal
mammal. His men called him "orso"-grizzly bear. They sometimes joked that Rocher
was "the bear who
walked in the viper's shadow." Commander Olivetti was the viper. Rocher was just
as deadly as the viper,
but at least you could see him coming.
Rocher's men stood at sharp attention, nobody moving a muscle, although the
information they had just
received had increased their aggregate blood pressure by a few thousand points.
Rookie Lieutenant Chartrand stood in the back of the room wishing he had been
among the 99 percent of
applicants who had not qualified to be here. At twenty years old, Chartrand was
the youngest guard on the
force. He had been in Vatican City only three months. Like every man there,
Chartrand was Swiss Army
trained and had endured two years of additional ausbilding in Bern before
qualifying for the grueling
Vatican pròva held in a secret barracks outside of Rome. Nothing in his
training, however, had prepared
him for a crisis like this.
At first Chartrand thought the briefing was some sort of bizarre training
exercise. Futuristic weapons?
Ancient cults? Kidnapped cardinals? Then Rocher had shown them the live video
feed of the weapon in
question. Apparently this was no exercise.
"We will be killing power in selected areas," Rocher was saying, "to eradicate
extraneous magnetic
interference. We will move in teams of four. We will wear infrared goggles for
vision. Reconnaissance will
be done with traditional bug sweepers, recalibrated for sub-three-ohm flux
fields. Any questions?"
None.
Chartrand's mind was on overload. "What if we don't find it in time?" he asked,
immediately wishing he
had not.
The grizzly bear gazed out at him from beneath his red beret. Then he dismissed
the group with a somber
salute. "Godspeed, men."
60
T wo blocks from the Pantheon, Langdon and Vittoria approached on foot past a
line of taxis, their
drivers sleeping in the front seats. Nap time was eternal in the Eternal
City-the ubiquitous public dozing a
perfected extension of the afternoon siestas born of ancient Spain.
Langdon fought to focus his thoughts, but the situation was too bizarre to grasp
rationally. Six hours ago he
had been sound asleep in Cambridge. Now he was in Europe, caught up in a surreal
battle of ancient titans,
packing a semiautomatic in his Harris tweed, and holding hands with a woman he
had only just met.
He looked at Vittoria. She was focused straight ahead. There was a strength in
her grasp-that of an
independent and determined woman. Her fingers wrapped around his with the
comfort of innate
acceptance. No hesitation. Langdon felt a growing attraction. Get real, he told
himself.
Vittoria seemed to sense his uneasiness. "Relax," she said, without turning her
head. "We're supposed to
look like newlyweds."
"I'm relaxed."
"You're crushing my hand."
Langdon flushed and loosened up.
"Breathe through your eyes," she said.
"I'm sorry?"
"It relaxes the muscles. It's called pranayama."
"Piranha?"
"Not the fish. Pranayama. Never mind."
As they rounded the corner into Piazza della Rotunda, the Pantheon rose before
them. Langdon admired it,
as always, with awe. The Pantheon. Temple to all gods. Pagan gods. Gods of
Nature and Earth. The
structure seemed boxier from the outside than he remembered. The vertical
pillars and triangular pronaus
all but obscured the circular dome behind it. Still, the bold and immodest
inscription over the entrance
assured him they were in the right spot. M AGRIPPA L F COS TERTIUM FECIT.
Langdon translated it,
as always, with amusement. Marcus Agrippa, Consul for the third time, built
this.
So much for humility, he thought, turning his eyes to the surrounding area. A
scattering of tourists with
video cameras wandered the area. Others sat enjoying Rome's best iced coffee at
La Tazza di Oro's
outdoor cafe. Outside the entrance to the Pantheon, four armed Roman policemen
stood at attention just as
Olivetti had predicted.
"Looks pretty quiet," Vittoria said.
Langdon nodded, but he felt troubled. Now that he was standing here in person,
the whole scenario seemed
surreal. Despite Vittoria's apparent faith that he was right, Langdon realized
he had put everyone on the
line here. The Illuminati poem lingered. From Santi's earthly tomb with demon's
hole. YES, he told
himself. This was the spot. Santi's tomb. He had been here many times beneath
the Pantheon's oculus and
stood before the grave of the great Raphael.
"What time is it?" Vittoria asked.
Langdon checked his watch. "Seven-fifty. Ten minutes till show time."
"Hope these guys are good," Vittoria said, eyeing the scattered tourists
entering the Pantheon. "If anything
happens inside that dome, we'll all be in the crossfire."
Langdon exhaled heavily as they moved toward the entrance. The gun felt heavy in
his pocket. He
wondered what would happen if the policemen frisked him and found the weapon,
but the officers did not
give them a second look. Apparently the disguise was convincing.
Langdon whispered to Vittoria. "Ever fire anything other than a tranquilizer
gun?"
"Don't you trust me?"
"Trust you? I barely know you."
Vittoria frowned. "And here I thought we were newlyweds."
61
T he air inside the Pantheon was cool and damp, heavy with history. The
sprawling ceiling hovered
overhead as though weightless-the 141-foot unsupported span larger even than the
cupola at St. Peter's. As
always, Langdon felt a chill as he entered the cavernous room. It was a
remarkable fusion of engineering
and art. Above them the famous circular hole in the roof glowed with a narrow
shaft of evening sun. The
oculus, Langdon thought. The demon's hole.
They had arrived.
Langdon's eyes traced the arch of the ceiling sloping outward to the columned
walls and finally down to
the polished marble floor beneath their feet. The faint echo of footfalls and
tourist murmurs reverberated
around the dome. Langdon scanned the dozen or so tourists wandering aimlessly in
the shadows. Are you
here?
"Looks pretty quiet," Vittoria said, still holding his hand.
Langdon nodded.
"Where's Raphael's tomb?"
Langdon thought for a moment, trying to get his bearings. He surveyed the
circumference of the room.
Tombs. Altars. Pillars. Niches. He motioned to a particularly ornate funerary
across the dome and to the
left. "I think that's Raphael's over there."
Vittoria scanned the rest of the room. "I don't see anyone who looks like an
assassin about to kill a
cardinal. Shall we look around?"
Langdon nodded. "There's only one spot in here where anyone could be hiding. We
better check the
rientranze."
"The recesses?"
"Yes." Langdon pointed. "The recesses in the wall."
Around the perimeter, interspersed with the tombs, a series of semicircular
niches were hewn in the wall.
The niches, although not enormous, were big enough to hide someone in the
shadows. Sadly, Langdon
knew they once contained statues of the Olympian gods, but the pagan sculptures
had been destroyed when
the Vatican converted the Pantheon to a Christian church. He felt a pang of
frustration to know he was
standing at the first altar of science, and the marker was gone. He wondered
which statue it had been, and
where it had pointed. Langdon could imagine no greater thrill than finding an
Illuminati marker-a statue
that surreptitiously pointed the way down the Path of Illumination. Again he
wondered who the anonymous
Illuminati sculptor had been.
"I'll take the left arc," Vittoria said, indicating the left half of the
circumference. "You go right. See you in
a hundred and eighty degrees."
Langdon smiled grimly.
As Vittoria moved off, Langdon felt the eerie horror of the situation seeping
back into his mind. As he
turned and made his way to the right, the killer's voice seemed to whisper in
the dead space around him.
Eight o'clock. Virgin sacrifices on the altars of science. A mathematical
progression of death. Eight, nine,
ten, eleven . . . and at midnight. Langdon checked his watch: 7:52. Eight
minutes.
As Langdon moved toward the first recess, he passed the tomb of one of Italy's
Catholic kings. The
sarcophagus, like many in Rome, was askew with the wall, positioned awkwardly. A
group of visitors
seemed confused by this. Langdon did not stop to explain. Formal Christian tombs
were often misaligned
with the architecture so they could lie facing east. It was an ancient
superstition that Langdon's Symbology
212 class had discussed just last month.
"That's totally incongruous!" a female student in the front had blurted when
Langdon explained the reason
for east-facing tombs. "Why would Christians want their tombs to face the rising
sun? We're talking about
Christianity . . . not sun worship!"
Langdon smiled, pacing before the blackboard, chewing an apple. "Mr. Hitzrot!"
he shouted.
A young man dozing in back sat up with a start. "What! Me?"
Langdon pointed to a Renaissance art poster on the wall. "Who is that man
kneeling before God?"
"Um . . . some saint?"
"Brilliant. And how do you know he's a saint?"
"He's got a halo?"
"Excellent, and does that golden halo remind you of anything?"
Hitzrot broke into a smile. "Yeah! Those Egyptian things we studied last term.
Those . . . um . . . sun
disks!"
"Thank you, Hitzrot. Go back to sleep." Langdon turned back to the class.
"Halos, like much of Christian
symbology, were borrowed from the ancient Egyptian religion of sun worship.
Christianity is filled with
examples of sun worship."
"Excuse me?" the girl in front said. "I go to church all the time, and I don't
see much sun worshiping going
on!"
"Really? What do you celebrate on December twenty-fifth?"
"Christmas. The birth of Jesus Christ."
"And yet according to the Bible, Christ was born in March, so what are we doing
celebrating in late
December?"
Silence.
Langdon smiled. "December twenty-fifth, my friends, is the ancient pagan holiday
of sol invictus-
Unconquered Sun-coinciding with the winter solstice. It's that wonderful time of
year when the sun returns,
and the days start getting longer."
Langdon took another bite of apple.
"Conquering religions," he continued, "often adopt existing holidays to make
conversion less shocking. It's
called transmutation. It helps people acclimatize to the new faith. Worshipers
keep the same holy dates,
pray in the same sacred locations, use a similar symbology . . . and they simply
substitute a different god."
Now the girl in front looked furious. "You're implying Christianity is just some
kind of . . . repackaged sun
worship!"
"Not at all. Christianity did not borrow only from sun worship. The ritual of
Christian canonization is taken
from the ancient 'god-making' rite of Euhemerus. The practice of
'god-eating'-that is, Holy Communionwas
borrowed from the Aztecs. Even the concept of Christ dying for our sins is
arguably not exclusively
Christian; the self-sacrifice of a young man to absolve the sins of his people
appears in the earliest tradition
of the Quetzalcoatl."
The girl glared. "So, is anything in Christianity original?"
"Very little in any organized faith is truly original. Religions are not born
from scratch. They grow from
one another. Modern religion is a collage . . . an assimilated historical record
of man's quest to understand
the divine."
"Um . . . hold on," Hitzrot ventured, sounding awake now. "I know something
Christian that's original.
How about our image of God? Christian art never portrays God as the hawk sun
god, or as an Aztec, or as
anything weird. It always shows God as an old man with a white beard. So our
image of God is original,
right?"
Langdon smiled. "When the early Christian converts abandoned their former
deities-pagan gods, Roman
gods, Greek, sun, Mithraic, whatever-they asked the church what their new
Christian God looked like.
Wisely, the church chose the most feared, powerful . . . and familiar face in
all of recorded history."
Hitzrot looked skeptical. "An old man with a white, flowing beard?"
Langdon pointed to a hierarchy of ancient gods on the wall. At the top sat an
old man with a white, flowing
beard. "Does Zeus look familiar?"
The class ended right on cue.
"Good evening," a man's voice said.
Langdon jumped. He was back in the Pantheon. He turned to face an elderly man in
a blue cape with a red
cross on the chest. The man gave him a gray-toothed smile.
"You're English, right?" The man's accent was thick Tuscan.
Langdon blinked, confused. "Actually, no. I'm American."
The man looked embarrassed. "Oh heavens, forgive me. You were so nicely dressed,
I just figured . . . my
apologies."
"Can I help you?" Langdon asked, his heart beating wildly.
"Actually I thought perhaps I could help you. I am the cicerone here." The man
pointed proudly to his cityissued
badge. "It is my job to make your visit to Rome more interesting."
More interesting? Langdon was certain this particular visit to Rome was plenty
interesting.
"You look like a man of distinction," the guide fawned, "no doubt more
interested in culture than most.
Perhaps I can give you some history on this fascinating building."
Langdon smiled politely. "Kind of you, but I'm actually an art historian myself,
and-"
"Superb!" The man's eyes lit up like he'd hit the jackpot. "Then you will no
doubt find this delightful!"
"I think I'd prefer to-"
"The Pantheon," the man declared, launching into his memorized spiel, "was built
by Marcus Agrippa in 27
B.C."
"Yes," Langdon interjected, "and rebuilt by Hadrian in 119 A.D."
"It was the world's largest free-standing dome until 1960 when it was eclipsed
by the Superdome in New
Orleans!"
Langdon groaned. The man was unstoppable.
"And a fifth-century theologian once called the Pantheon the House of the Devil,
warning that the hole in
the roof was an entrance for demons!"
Langdon blocked him out. His eyes climbed skyward to the oculus, and the memory
of Vittoria's suggested
plot flashed a bone-numbing image in his mind . . . a branded cardinal falling
through the hole and hitting
the marble floor. Now that would be a media event. Langdon found himself
scanning the Pantheon for
reporters. None. He inhaled deeply. It was an absurd idea. The logistics of
pulling off a stunt like that
would be ridiculous.
As Langdon moved off to continue his inspection, the babbling docent followed
like a love-starved puppy.
Remind me, Langdon thought to himself, there's nothing worse than a gung ho art
historian.
Across the room, Vittoria was immersed in her own search. Standing all alone for
the first time since she
had heard the news of her father, she felt the stark reality of the last eight
hours closing in around her. Her
father had been murdered-cruelly and abruptly. Almost equally painful was that
her father's creation had
been corrupted-now a tool of terrorists. Vittoria was plagued with guilt to
think that it was her invention
that had enabled the antimatter to be transported . . . her canister that was
now counting down inside the
Vatican. In an effort to serve her father's quest for the simplicity of truth .
. . she had become a conspirator
of chaos.
Oddly, the only thing that felt right in her life at the moment was the presence
of a total stranger. Robert
Langdon. She found an inexplicable refuge in his eyes . . . like the harmony of
the oceans she had left
behind early that morning. She was glad he was there. Not only had he been a
source of strength and hope
for her, Langdon had used his quick mind to render this one chance to catch her
father's killer.
Vittoria breathed deeply as she continued her search, moving around the
perimeter. She was overwhelmed
by the unexpected images of personal revenge that had dominated her thoughts all
day. Even as a sworn
lover of all life . . . she wanted this executioner dead. No amount of good
karma could make her turn the
other cheek today. Alarmed and electrified, she sensed something coursing
through her Italian blood that
she had never felt before . . . the whispers of Sicilian ancestors defending
family honor with brutal justice.
Vendetta, Vittoria thought, and for the first time in her life understood.
Visions of reprisal spurred her on. She approached the tomb of Raphael Santi.
Even from a distance she
could tell this guy was special. His casket, unlike the others, was protected by
a Plexiglas shield and
recessed into the wall. Through the barrier she could see the front of the
sarcophagus.
RAPHAEL SANTI, 1483-1520
Vittoria studied the grave and then read the one-sentence descriptive plaque
beside Raphael's tomb.
Then she read it again.
Then . . . she read it again.
A moment later, she was dashing in horror across the floor. "Robert! Robert!"
62
L angdon's progress around his side of the Pantheon was being hampered somewhat
by the guide on his
heels, now continuing his tireless narration as Langdon prepared to check the
final alcove.
"You certainly seem to be enjoying those niches!" the docent said, looking
delighted. "Were you aware that
the tapering thickness of the walls is the reason the dome appears weightless?"
Langdon nodded, not hearing a word as he prepared to examine another niche.
Suddenly someone grabbed
him from behind. It was Vittoria. She was breathless and tugging at his arm.
From the look of terror on her
face, Langdon could only imagine one thing. She found a body. He felt an
upswelling of dread.
"Ah, your wife!" the docent exclaimed, clearly thrilled to have another guest.
He motioned to her short
pants and hiking boots. "Now you I can tell are American!"
Vittoria's eyes narrowed. "I'm Italian."
The guide's smile dimmed. "Oh, dear."
"Robert," Vittoria whispered, trying to turn her back on the guide. "Galileo's
Diagramma. I need to see it."
"Diagramma?" the docent said, wheedling back in. "My! You two certainly know
your history!
Unfortunately that document is not viewable. It is under secret preservation in
the Vatican Arc-"
"Could you excuse us?" Langdon said. He was confused by Vittoria's panic. He
took her aside and reached
in his pocket, carefully extracting the Diagramma folio. "What's going on?"
"What's the date on this thing?" Vittoria demanded, scanning the sheet.
The docent was on them again, staring at the folio, mouth agape. "That's not . .
. really . . ."
"Tourist reproduction," Langdon quipped. "Thank you for your help. Please, my
wife and I would like a
moment alone."
The docent backed off, eyes never leaving the paper.
"Date," Vittoria repeated to Langdon. "When did Galileo publish . . ."
Langdon pointed to the Roman numeral in the lower liner. "That's the pub date.
What's going on?"
Vittoria deciphered the number. "1639?"
"Yes. What's wrong?"
Vittoria's eyes filled with foreboding. "We're in trouble, Robert. Big trouble.
The dates don't match."
"What dates don't match?"
"Raphael's tomb. He wasn't buried here until 1759. A century after Diagramma was
published."
Langdon stared at her, trying to make sense of the words. "No," he replied.
"Raphael died in 1520, long
before Diagramma."
"Yes, but he wasn't buried here until much later."
Langdon was lost. "What are you talking about?"
"I just read it. Raphael's body was relocated to the Pantheon in 1758. It was
part of some historic tribute to
eminent Italians."
As the words settled in, Langdon felt like a rug had just been yanked out from
under him.
"When that poem was written," Vittoria declared, "Raphael's tomb was somewhere
else. Back then, the
Pantheon had nothing at all to do with Raphael!"
Langdon could not breathe. "But that . . . means . . ."
"Yes! It means we're in the wrong place!"
Langdon felt himself sway. Impossible . . . I was certain . . .
Vittoria ran over and grabbed the docent, pulling him back. "Signore, excuse us.
Where was Raphael's
body in the 1600s?"
"Urb . . . Urbino," he stammered, now looking bewildered. "His birthplace."
"Impossible!" Langdon cursed to himself. "The Illuminati altars of science were
here in Rome. I'm certain
of it!"
"Illuminati?" The docent gasped, looking again at the document in Langdon's
hand. "Who are you
people?"
Vittoria took charge. "We're looking for something called Santi's earthly tomb.
In Rome. Can you tell us
what that might be?"
The docent looked unsettled. "This was Raphael's only tomb in Rome."
Langdon tried to think, but his mind refused to engage. If Raphael's tomb wasn't
in Rome in 1655, then
what was the poem referring to? Santi's earthly tomb with demon's hole? What the
hell is it? Think!
"Was there another artist called Santi?" Vittoria asked.
The docent shrugged. "Not that I know of."
"How about anyone famous at all? Maybe a scientist or a poet or an astronomer
named Santi?"
The docent now looked like he wanted to leave. "No, ma'am. The only Santi I've
ever heard of is Raphael
the architect."
"Architect?" Vittoria said. "I thought he was a painter!"
"He was both, of course. They all were. Michelangelo, da Vinci, Raphael."
Langdon didn't know whether it was the docent's words or the ornate tombs around
them that brought the
revelation to mind, but it didn't matter. The thought occurred. Santi was an
architect. From there the
progression of thoughts fell like dominoes. Renaissance architects lived for
only two reasons-to glorify God
with big churches, and to glorify dignitaries with lavish tombs. Santi's tomb.
Could it be? The images came
faster now . . .
da Vinci's Mona Lisa.
Monet's Water Lilies.
Michelangelo's David.
Santi's earthly tomb . . .
"Santi designed the tomb," Langdon said.
Vittoria turned. "What?"
"It's not a reference to where Raphael is buried, it's referring to a tomb he
designed."
"What are you talking about?"
"I misunderstood the clue. It's not Raphael's burial site we're looking for,
it's a tomb Raphael designed for
someone else. I can't believe I missed it. Half of the sculpting done in
Renaissance and Baroque Rome was
for the funeraries." Langdon smiled with the revelation. "Raphael must have
designed hundreds of tombs!"
Vittoria did not look happy. "Hundreds?"
Langdon's smile faded. "Oh."
"Any of them earthly, professor?"
Langdon felt suddenly inadequate. He knew embarrassingly little about Raphael's
work. Michelangelo he
could have helped with, but Raphael's work had never captivated him. Langdon
could only name a couple
of Raphael's more famous tombs, but he wasn't sure what they looked like.
Apparently sensing Langdon's stymie, Vittoria turned to the docent, who was now
inching away. She
grabbed his arm and reeled him in. "I need a tomb. Designed by Raphael. A tomb
that could be considered
earthly."
The docent now looked distressed. "A tomb of Raphael's? I don't know. He
designed so many. And you
probably would mean a chapel by Raphael, not a tomb. Architects always designed
the chapels in
conjunction with the tomb."
Langdon realized the man was right.
"Are any of Raphael's tombs or chapels considered earthly?"
The man shrugged. "I'm sorry. I don't know what you mean. Earthly really doesn't
describe anything I
know of. I should be going."
Vittoria held his arm and read from the top line of the folio. "From Santi's
earthly tomb with demon's hole.
Does that mean anything to you?"
"Not a thing."
Langdon looked up suddenly. He had momentarily forgotten the second part of the
line. Demon's hole?
"Yes!" he said to the docent. "That's it! Do any of Raphael's chapels have an
oculus in them?"
The docent shook his head. "To my knowledge the Pantheon is unique." He paused.
"But . . ."
"But what!" Vittoria and Langdon said in unison.
Now the docent cocked his head, stepping toward them again. "A demon's hole?" He
muttered to himself
and picked at his teeth. "Demon's hole . . . that is . . . buco diàvolo?"
Vittoria nodded. "Literally, yes."
The docent smiled faintly. "Now there's a term I have not heard in a while. If
I'm not mistaken, a buco
diàvolo refers to an undercroft."
"An undercroft?" Langdon asked. "As in a crypt?"
"Yes, but a specific kind of crypt. I believe a demon's hole is an ancient term
for a massive burial cavity
located in a chapel . . . underneath another tomb."
"An ossuary annex?" Langdon demanded, immediately recognizing what the man was
describing.
The docent looked impressed. "Yes! That is the term I was looking for!"
Langdon considered it. Ossuary annexes were a cheap ecclesiastic fix to an
awkward dilemma. When
churches honored their most distinguished members with ornate tombs inside the
sanctuary, surviving
family members often demanded the family be buried together . . . thus ensuring
they too would have a
coveted burial spot inside the church. However, if the church did not have space
or funds to create tombs
for an entire family, they sometimes dug an ossuary annex-a hole in the floor
near the tomb where they
buried the less worthy family members. The hole was then covered with the
Renaissance equivalent of a
manhole cover. Although convenient, the ossuary annex went out of style quickly
because of the stench
that often wafted up into the cathedral. Demon's hole, Langdon thought. He had
never heard the term. It
seemed eerily fitting.
Langdon's heart was now pounding fiercely. From Santi's earthly tomb with
demon's hole. There seemed
to be only one question left to ask. "Did Raphael design any tombs that had one
of these demon's holes?"
The docent scratched his head. "Actually. I'm sorry . . . I can only think of
one."
Only one? Langdon could not have dreamed of a better response.
"Where!" Vittoria almost shouted.
The docent eyed them strangely. "It's called the Chigi Chapel. Tomb of Agostino
Chigi and his brother,
wealthy patrons of the arts and sciences."
"Sciences?" Langdon said, exchanging looks with Vittoria.
"Where?" Vittoria asked again.
The docent ignored the question, seeming enthusiastic again to be of service.
"As for whether or not the
tomb is earthly, I don't know, but certainly it is . . . shall we say
differénte."
"Different?" Langdon said. "How?"
"Incoherent with the architecture. Raphael was only the architect. Some other
sculptor did the interior
adornments. I can't remember who."
Langdon was now all ears. The anonymous Illuminati master, perhaps?
"Whoever did the interior monuments lacked taste," the docent said. "Dio mio!
Atrocitàs! Who would want
to be buried beneath pirámides?"
Langdon could scarcely believe his ears. "Pyramids? The chapel contains
pyramids?"
"I know," the docent scoffed. "Terrible, isn't it?"
Vittoria grabbed the docent's arm. "Signore, where is this Chigi Chapel?"
"About a mile north. In the church of Santa Maria del Popolo."
Vittoria exhaled. "Thank you. Let's-"
"Hey," the docent said, "I just thought of something. What a fool I am."
Vittoria stopped short. "Please don't tell me you made a mistake."
He shook his head. "No, but it should have dawned on me earlier. The Chigi
Chapel was not always known
as the Chigi. It used to be called Capella della Terra."
"Chapel of the Land?" Langdon asked.
"No," Vittoria said, heading for the door. "Chapel of the Earth."
Vittoria Vetra whipped out her cell phone as she dashed into Piazza della
Rotunda. "Commander Olivetti,"
she said. "This is the wrong place!"
Olivetti sounded bewildered. "Wrong? What do you mean?"
"The first altar of science is at the Chigi Chapel!"
"Where?" Now Olivetti sounded angry. "But Mr. Langdon said-"
"Santa Maria del Popolo! One mile north. Get your men over there now! We've got
four minutes!"
"But my men are in position here! I can't possibly-"
"Move!" Vittoria snapped the phone shut.
Behind her, Langdon emerged from the Pantheon, dazed.
She grabbed his hand and pulled him toward the queue of seemingly driverless
taxis waiting by the curb.
She pounded on the hood of the first car in line. The sleeping driver bolted
upright with a startled yelp.
Vittoria yanked open the rear door and pushed Langdon inside. Then she jumped in
behind him.
"Santa Maria del Popolo," she ordered. "Presto!"
Looking delirious and half terrified, the driver hit the accelerator, peeling
out down the street.
63
G unther Glick had assumed control of the computer from Chinita Macri, who now
stood hunched in the
back of the cramped BBC van staring in confusion over Glick's shoulder.
"I told you," Glick said, typing some more keys. "The British Tattler isn't the
only paper that runs stories
on these guys."
Macri peered closer. Glick was right. The BBC database showed their
distinguished network as having
picked up and run six stories in the past ten years on the brotherhood called
the Illuminati. Well, paint me
purple, she thought. "Who are the journalists who ran the stories," Macri asked.
"Schlock jocks?"
"BBC doesn't hire schlock jocks."
"They hired you."
Glick scowled. "I don't know why you're such a skeptic. The Illuminati are well
documented throughout
history."
"So are witches, UFOs, and the Loch Ness Monster."
Glick read the list of stories. "You ever heard of a guy called Winston
Churchill?"
"Rings a bell."
"BBC did a historical a while back on Churchill's life. Staunch Catholic by the
way. Did you know that in
1920 Churchill published a statement condemning the Illuminati and warning Brits
of a worldwide
conspiracy against morality?"
Macri was dubious. "Where did it run? In the British Tattler?"
Glick smiled. "London Herald. February 8, 1920."
"No way."
"Feast your eyes."
Macri looked closer at the clip. London Herald. Feb. 8, 1920. I had no idea.
"Well, Churchill was a
paranoid."
"He wasn't alone," Glick said, reading further. "Looks like Woodrow Wilson gave
three radio broadcasts
in 1921 warning of growing Illuminati control over the U.S. banking system. You
want a direct quote from
the radio transcript?"
"Not really."
Glick gave her one anyway. "He said, 'There is a power so organized, so subtle,
so complete, so pervasive,
that none had better speak above their breath when they speak in condemnation of
it.' "
"I've never heard anything about this."
"Maybe because in 1921 you were just a kid."
"Charming." Macri took the jab in stride. She knew her years were showing. At
forty-three, her bushy
black curls were streaked with gray. She was too proud for dye. Her mom, a
Southern Baptist, had taught
Chinita contentedness and self-respect. When you're a black woman, her mother
said, ain't no hiding what
you are. Day you try, is the day you die. Stand tall, smile bright, and let 'em
wonder what secret's making
you laugh.
"Ever heard of Cecil Rhodes?" Glick asked.
Macri looked up. "The British financier?"
"Yeah. Founded the Rhodes Scholarships."
"Don't tell me-"
"Illuminatus."
"BS."
"BBC, actually. November 16, 1984."
"We wrote that Cecil Rhodes was Illuminati?"
"Sure did. And according to our network, the Rhodes Scholarships were funds set
up centuries ago to
recruit the world's brightest young minds into the Illuminati."
"That's ridiculous! My uncle was a Rhodes Scholar!"
Glick winked. "So was Bill Clinton."
Macri was getting mad now. She had never had tolerance for shoddy, alarmist
reporting. Still, she knew
enough about the BBC to know that every story they ran was carefully researched
and confirmed.
"Here's one you'll remember," Glick said. "BBC, March 5, 1998. Parliament
Committee Chair, Chris
Mullin, required all members of British Parliament who were Masons to declare
their affiliation."
Macri remembered it. The decree had eventually extended to include policemen and
judges as well. "Why
was it again?"
Glick read. ". . . concern that secret factions within the Masons exerted
considerable control over political
and financial systems."
"That's right."
"Caused quite a bustle. The Masons in parliament were furious. Had a right to
be. The vast majority turned
out to be innocent men who joined the Masons for networking and charity work.
They had no clue about
the brotherhood's past affiliations."
"Alleged affiliations."
"Whatever." Glick scanned the articles. "Look at this stuff. Accounts tracing
the Illuminati back to Galileo,
the Guerenets of France, the Alumbrados of Spain. Even Karl Marx and the Russian
Revolution."
"History has a way of rewriting itself."
"Fine, you want something current? Have a look at this. Here's an Illuminati
reference from a recent Wall
Street Journal."
This caught Macri's ear. "The Journal?"
"Guess what the most popular Internet computer game in America is right now?"
"Pin the tail on Pamela Anderson."
"Close. It's called, Illuminati: New World Order."
Macri looked over his shoulder at the blurb. "Steve Jackson Games has a runaway
hit . . . a quasihistorical
adventure in which an ancient satanic brotherhood from Bavaria sets
out to take over the world.
You can find them on-line at . . ." Macri looked up, feeling ill. "What do these
Illuminati guys have against
Christianity?"
"Not just Christianity," Glick said. "Religion in general." Glick cocked his
head and grinned. "Although
from the phone call we just got, it appears they do have a special spot in their
hearts for the Vatican."
"Oh, come on. You don't really think that guy who called is who he claims to be,
do you?"
"A messenger of the Illuminati? Preparing to kill four cardinals?" Glick smiled.
"I sure hope so."
64
L angdon and Vittoria's taxi completed the one-mile sprint up the wide Via della
Scrofa in just over a
minute. They skidded to a stop on the south side of the Piazza del Popolo just
before eight. Not having any
lire, Langdon overpaid the driver in U.S. dollars. He and Vittoria jumped out.
The piazza was quiet except
for the laughter of a handful of locals seated outside the popular Rosati Café-a
hot spot of the Italian
literati. The breeze smelled of espresso and pastry.
Langdon was still in shock over his mistake at the Pantheon. With a cursory
glance at this square, however,
his sixth sense was already tingling. The piazza seemed subtly filled with
Illuminati significance. Not only
was it laid out in a perfectly elliptical shape, but dead center stood a
towering Egyptian obelisk-a square
pillar of stone with a distinctively pyramidal tip. Spoils of Rome's imperial
plundering, obelisks were
scattered across Rome and referred to by symbologists as "Lofty
Pyramids"-skyward extensions of the
sacred pyramidal form.
As Langdon's eyes moved up the monolith, though, his sight was suddenly drawn to
something else in the
background. Something even more remarkable.
"We're in the right place," he said quietly, feeling a sudden exposed wariness.
"Have a look at that."
Langdon pointed to the imposing Porta del Popolo-the high stone archway at the
far end of the piazza. The
vaulted structure had been overlooking the piazza for centuries. Dead center of
the archway's highest point
was a symbolic engraving. "Look familiar?"
Vittoria looked up at the huge carving. "A shining star over a triangular pile
of stones?"
Langdon shook his head. "A source of Illumination over a pyramid."
Vittoria turned, her eyes suddenly wide. "Like . . . the Great Seal of the
United States?"
"Exactly. The Masonic symbol on the one-dollar bill."
Vittoria took a deep breath and scanned the piazza. "So where's this damn
church?"
The Church of Santa Maria del Popolo stood out like a misplaced battleship,
askew at the base of a hill on
the southeast corner of the piazza. The eleventh-century stone aerie was made
even more clumsy by the
tower of scaffolding covering the façade.
Langdon's thoughts were a blur as they raced toward the edifice. He stared up at
the church in wonder.
Could a murder really be about to take place inside? He wished Olivetti would
hurry. The gun felt awkward
in his pocket.
The church's front stairs were ventaglio-a welcoming, curved fan-ironic in this
case because they were
blocked with scaffolding, construction equipment, and a sign warning:
CONSTRUZZIONE. NON
ENTRARE.
Langdon realized that a church closed for renovation meant total privacy for a
killer. Not like the Pantheon.
No fancy tricks needed here. Only to find a way in.
Vittoria slipped without hesitation between the sawhorses and headed up the
staircase.
"Vittoria," Langdon cautioned. "If he's still in there . . ."
Vittoria did not seem to hear. She ascended the main portico to the church's
sole wooden door. Langdon
hurried up the stairs behind her. Before he could say a word she had grasped the
handle and pulled.
Langdon held his breath. The door did not budge.
"There must be another entrance," Vittoria said.
"Probably," Langdon said, exhaling, "but Olivetti will be here in a minute. It's
too dangerous to go in. We
should cover the church from out here until-"
Vittoria turned, her eyes blazing. "If there's another way in, there's another
way out. If this guy disappears,
we're fungito."
Langdon knew enough Italian to know she was right.
The alley on the right side of the church was pinched and dark, with high walls
on both sides. It smelled of
urine-a common aroma in a city where bars outnumbered public rest rooms twenty
to one.
Langdon and Vittoria hurried into the fetid dimness. They had gone about fifteen
yards down when Vittoria
tugged Langdon's arm and pointed.
Langdon saw it too. Up ahead was an unassuming wooden door with heavy hinges.
Langdon recognized it
as the standard porta sacra-a private entrance for clergy. Most of these
entrances had gone out of use years
ago as encroaching buildings and limited real estate relegated side entrances to
inconvenient alleyways.
Vittoria hurried to the door. She arrived and stared down at the doorknob,
apparently perplexed. Langdon
arrived behind her and eyed the peculiar donut-shaped hoop hanging where the
doorknob should have been.
"An annulus," he whispered. Langdon reached out and quietly lifted the ring in
his hand. He pulled the ring
toward him. The fixture clicked. Vittoria shifted, looking suddenly uneasy.
Quietly, Langdon twisted the
ring clockwise. It spun loosely 360 degrees, not engaging. Langdon frowned and
tried the other direction
with the same result.
Vittoria looked down the remainder of the alley. "You think there's another
entrance?"
Langdon doubted it. Most Renaissance cathedrals were designed as makeshift
fortresses in the event a city
was stormed. They had as few entrances as possible. "If there is another way
in," he said, "it's probably
recessed in the rear bastion-more of an escape route than an entrance."
Vittoria was already on the move.
Langdon followed deeper into the alley. The walls shot skyward on both sides of
him. Somewhere a bell
began ringing eight o'clock . . .
Robert Langdon did not hear Vittoria the first time she called to him. He had
slowed at a stained-glass
window covered with bars and was trying to peer inside the church.
"Robert!" Her voice was a loud whisper.
Langdon looked up. Vittoria was at the end of the alley. She was pointing around
the back of the church
and waving to him. Langdon jogged reluctantly toward her. At the base of the
rear wall, a stone bulwark
jutted out concealing a narrow grotto-a kind of compressed passageway cutting
directly into the foundation
of the church.
"An entrance?" Vittoria asked.
Langdon nodded. Actually an exit, but we won't get technical.
Vittoria knelt and peered into the tunnel. "Let's check the door. See if it's
open."
Langdon opened his mouth to object, but Vittoria took his hand and pulled him
into the opening.
"Wait," Langdon said.
She turned impatiently toward him.
Langdon sighed. "I'll go first."
Vittoria looked surprised. "More chivalry?"
"Age before beauty."
"Was that a compliment?"
Langdon smiled and moved past her into the dark. "Careful on the stairs."
He inched slowly into the darkness, keeping one hand on the wall. The stone felt
sharp on his fingertips.
For an instant Langdon recalled the ancient myth of Daedelus, how the boy kept
one hand on the wall as he
moved through the Minotaur's labyrinth, knowing he was guaranteed to find the
end if he never broke
contact with the wall. Langdon moved forward, not entirely certain he wanted to
find the end.
The tunnel narrowed slightly, and Langdon slowed his pace. He sensed Vittoria
close behind him. As the
wall curved left, the tunnel opened into a semicircular alcove. Oddly, there was
faint light here. In the
dimness Langdon saw the outline of a heavy wooden door.
"Uh oh," he said.
"Locked?"
"It was."
"Was?" Vittoria arrived at his side.
Langdon pointed. Lit by a shaft of light coming from within, the door hung ajar
. . . its hinges splintered by
a wrecking bar still lodged in the wood.
They stood a moment in silence. Then, in the dark, Langdon felt Vittoria's hands
on his chest, groping,
sliding beneath his jacket.
"Relax, professor," she said. "I'm just getting the gun."
At that moment, inside the Vatican Museums, a task force of Swiss Guards spread
out in all directions. The
museum was dark, and the guards wore U.S. Marine issue infrared goggles. The
goggles made everything
appear an eerie shade of green. Every guard wore headphones connected to an
antennalike detector that he
waved rhythmically in front of him-the same devices they used twice a week to
sweep for electronic bugs
inside the Vatican. They moved methodically, checking behind statues, inside
niches, closets, under
furniture. The antennae would sound if they detected even the tiniest magnetic
field.
Tonight, however, they were getting no readings at all.
65
T he interior of Santa Maria del Popolo was a murky cave in the dimming light.
It looked more like a
half-finished subway station than a cathedral. The main sanctuary was an
obstacle course of torn-up
flooring, brick pallets, mounds of dirt, wheelbarrows, and even a rusty backhoe.
Mammoth columns rose
through the floor, supporting a vaulted roof. In the air, silt drifted lazily in
the muted glow of the stained
glass. Langdon stood with Vittoria beneath a sprawling Pinturicchio fresco and
scanned the gutted shrine.
Nothing moved. Dead silence.
Vittoria held the gun out in front of her with both hands. Langdon checked his
watch: 8:04 P.M. We're
crazy to be in here, he thought. It's too dangerous. Still he knew if the killer
were inside, the man could
leave through any door he wanted, making a one-gun outside stakeout totally
fruitless. Catching him inside
was the only way . . . that was, if he was even still here. Langdon felt
guilt-ridden over the blunder that had
cost everyone their chance at the Pantheon. He was in no position to insist on
precaution now; he was the
one who had backed them into this corner.
Vittoria looked harrowed as she scanned the church. "So," she whispered. "Where
is this Chigi Chapel?"
Langdon gazed through the dusky ghostliness toward the back of the cathedral and
studied the outer walls.
Contrary to common perception, Renaissance cathedrals invariably contained
multiple chapels, huge
cathedrals like Notre Dame having dozens. Chapels were less rooms than they were
hollows-semicircular
niches holding tombs around a church's perimeter wall.
Bad news, Langdon thought, seeing the four recesses on each side wall. There
were eight chapels in all.
Although eight was not a particularly overwhelming number, all eight openings
were covered with huge
sheets of clear polyurethane due to the construction, the translucent curtains
apparently intended to keep
dust off the tombs inside the alcoves.
"It could be any of those draped recesses," Langdon said. "No way to know which
is the Chigi without
looking inside every one. Could be a good reason to wait for Oliv-"
"Which is the secondary left apse?" she asked.
Langdon studied her, surprised by her command of architectural terminology.
"Secondary left apse?"
Vittoria pointed at the wall behind him. A decorative tile was embedded in the
stone. It was engraved with
the same symbol they had seen outside-a pyramid beneath a shining star. The
grime-covered plaque beside
it read:
COAT OF ARMS OF ALEXANDER CHIGI
WHOSE TOMB IS LOCATED IN THE
SECONDARY LEFT APSE OF THIS CATHEDRAL
Langdon nodded. Chigi's coat of arms was a pyramid and star? He suddenly found
himself wondering if
the wealthy patron Chigi had been an Illuminatus. He nodded to Vittoria. "Nice
work, Nancy Drew."
"What?"
"Never mind. I-"
A piece of metal clattered to the floor only yards away. The clang echoed
through the entire church.
Langdon pulled Vittoria behind a pillar as she whipped the gun toward the sound
and held it there. Silence.
They waited. Again there was sound, this time a rustling. Langdon held his
breath. I never should have let
us come in here! The sound moved closer, an intermittent scuffling, like a man
with a limp. Suddenly
around the base of the pillar, an object came into view.
"Figlio di puttana!" Vittoria cursed under her breath, jumping back. Langdon
fell back with her.
Beside the pillar, dragging a half-eaten sandwich in paper, was an enormous rat.
The creature paused when
it saw them, staring a long moment down the barrel of Vittoria's weapon, and
then, apparently unmoved,
continued dragging its prize off to the recesses of the church.
"Son of a . . ." Langdon gasped, his heart racing.
Vittoria lowered the gun, quickly regaining her composure. Langdon peered around
the side of the column
to see a workman's lunchbox splayed on the floor, apparently knocked off a
sawhorse by the resourceful
rodent.
Langdon scanned the basilica for movement and whispered, "If this guy's here, he
sure as hell heard that.
You sure you don't want to wait for Olivetti?"
"Secondary left apse," Vittoria repeated. "Where is it?"
Reluctantly Langdon turned and tried to get his bearings. Cathedral terminology
was like stage directionstotally
counterintuitive. He faced the main altar. Stage center. Then he pointed
with his thumb backward
over his shoulder.
They both turned and looked where he was pointing.
It seemed the Chigi Chapel was located in the third of four recessed alcoves to
their right. The good news
was that Langdon and Vittoria were on the correct side of the church. The bad
news was that they were at
the wrong end. They would have to traverse the length of the cathedral, passing
three other chapels, each of
them, like the Chigi Chapel, covered with translucent plastic shrouds.
"Wait," Langdon said. "I'll go first."
"Forget it."
"I'm the one who screwed up at the Pantheon."
She turned. "But I'm the one with the gun."
In her eyes Langdon could see what she was really thinking . . . I'm the one who
lost my father. I'm the one
who helped build a weapon of mass destruction. This guy's kneecaps are mine. . .
Langdon sensed the futility and let her go. He moved beside her, cautiously,
down the east side of the
basilica. As they passed the first shrouded alcove, Langdon felt taut, like a
contestant on some surreal game
show. I'll take curtain number three, he thought.
The church was quiet, the thick stone walls blocking out all hints of the
outside world. As they hurried past
one chapel after the other, pale humanoid forms wavered like ghosts behind the
rustling plastic. Carved
marble, Langdon told himself, hoping he was right. It was 8:06 P.M. Had the
killer been punctual and
slipped out before Langdon and Vittoria had entered? Or was he still here?
Langdon was unsure which
scenario he preferred.
They passed the second apse, ominous in the slowly darkening cathedral. Night
seemed to be falling
quickly now, accentuated by the musty tint of the stained-glass windows. As they
pressed on, the plastic
curtain beside them billowed suddenly, as if caught in a draft. Langdon wondered
if someone somewhere
had opened a door.
Vittoria slowed as the third niche loomed before them. She held the gun before
her, motioning with her
head to the stele beside the apse. Carved in the granite block were two words:
CAPELLA CHIGI
Langdon nodded. Without a sound they moved to the corner of the opening,
positioning themselves behind
a wide pillar. Vittoria leveled the gun around a corner at the plastic. Then she
signaled for Langdon to pull
back the shroud.
A good time to start praying, he thought. Reluctantly, he reached over her
shoulder. As carefully as
possible, he began to pull the plastic aside. It moved an inch and then crinkled
loudly. They both froze.
Silence. After a moment, moving in slow motion, Vittoria leaned forward and
peered through the narrow
slit. Langdon looked over her shoulder.
For a moment, neither one of them breathed.
"Empty," Vittoria finally said, lowering the gun. "We're too late."
Langdon did not hear. He was in awe, transported for an instant to another
world. In his life, he had never
imagined a chapel that looked like this. Finished entirely in chestnut marble,
the Chigi Chapel was
breathtaking. Langdon's trained eye devoured it in gulps. It was as earthly a
chapel as Langdon could
fathom, almost as if Galileo and the Illuminati had designed it themselves.
Overhead, the domed cupola shone with a field of illuminated stars and the seven
astronomical planets.
Below that the twelve signs of the zodiac-pagan, earthly symbols rooted in
astronomy. The zodiac was also
tied directly to Earth, Air, Fire, Water . . . the quadrants representing power,
intellect, ardor, emotion. Earth
is for power, Langdon recalled.
Farther down the wall, Langdon saw tributes to the Earth's four temporal
seasons-primavera, estate,
autunno, invérno. But far more incredible than any of this were the two huge
structures dominating the
room. Langdon stared at them in silent wonder.It can't be, he thought. It just
can't be! But it was. On either
side of the chapel, in perfect symmetry, were two ten-foot-high marble pyramids.
"I don't see a cardinal," Vittoria whispered. "Or an assassin." She pulled aside
the plastic and stepped in.
Langdon's eyes were transfixed on the pyramids. What are pyramids doing inside a
Christian chapel? And
incredibly, there was more. Dead center of each pyramid, embedded in their
anterior façades, were gold
medallions . . . medallions like few Langdon had ever seen . . . perfect
ellipses. The burnished disks
glimmered in the setting sun as it sifted through the cupola. Galileo's
ellipses? Pyramids? A cupola of
stars? The room had more Illuminati significance than any room Langdon could
have fabricated in his
mind.
"Robert," Vittoria blurted, her voice cracking. "Look!"
Langdon wheeled, reality returning as his eyes dropped to where she was
pointing. "Bloody hell!" he
shouted, jumping backward.
Sneering up at them from the floor was the image of a skeleton-an intricately
detailed, marble mosaic
depicting "death in flight." The skeleton was carrying a tablet portraying the
same pyramid and stars they
had seen outside. It was not the image, however, that had turned Langdon's blood
cold. It was the fact that
the mosaic was mounted on a circular stone-a cupermento-that had been lifted out
of the floor like a
manhole cover and was now sitting off to one side of a dark opening in the
floor.
"Demon's hole," Langdon gasped. He had been so taken with the ceiling he had not
even seen it.
Tentatively he moved toward the pit. The stench coming up was overwhelming.
Vittoria put a hand over her mouth. "Che puzzo."
"Effluvium," Langdon said. "Vapors from decaying bone." He breathed through his
sleeve as he leaned out
over the hole, peering down. Blackness. "I can't see a thing."
"You think anybody's down there?"
"No way to know."
Vittoria motioned to the far side of the hole where a rotting, wooden ladder
descended into the depths.
Langdon shook his head. "Like hell."
"Maybe there's a flashlight outside in those tools." She sounded eager for an
excuse to escape the smell.
"I'll look."
"Careful!" Langdon warned. "We don't know for sure that the Hassassin-"
But Vittoria was already gone.
One strong-willed woman, Langdon thought.
As he turned back to the pit, he felt light-headed from the fumes. Holding his
breath, he dropped his head
below the rim and peered deep into the darkness. Slowly, as his eyes adjusted,
he began to see faint shapes
below. The pit appeared to open into a small chamber. Demon's hole. He wondered
how many generations
of Chigis had been unceremoniously dumped in. Langdon closed his eyes and
waited, forcing his pupils to
dilate so he could see better in the dark. When he opened his eyes again, a pale
muted figure hovered below
in the darkness. Langdon shivered but fought the instinct to pull out. Am I
seeing things? Is that a body?
The figure faded. Langdon closed his eyes again and waited, longer this time, so
his eyes would pick up the
faintest light.
Dizziness started to set in, and his thoughts wandered in the blackness. Just a
few more seconds. He wasn't
sure if it was breathing the fumes or holding his head at a low inclination, but
Langdon was definitely
starting to feel squeamish. When he finally opened his eyes again, the image
before him was totally
inexplicable.
He was now staring at a crypt bathed in an eerie bluish light. A faint hissing
sound reverberated in his ears.
Light flickered on the steep walls of the shaft. Suddenly, a long shadow
materialized over him. Startled,
Langdon scrambled up.
"Look out!" someone exclaimed behind him.
Before Langdon could turn, he felt a sharp pain on the back of his neck. He spun
to see Vittoria twisting a
lit blowtorch away from him, the hissing flame throwing blue light around the
chapel.
Langdon grabbed his neck. "What the hell are you doing?"
"I was giving you some light," she said. "You backed right into me."
Langdon glared at the portable blowtorch in her hand.
"Best I could do," she said. "No flashlights."
Langdon rubbed his neck. "I didn't hear you come in."
Vittoria handed him the torch, wincing again at the stench of the crypt. "You
think those fumes are
combustible?"
"Let's hope not."
He took the torch and moved slowly toward the hole. Cautiously, he advanced to
the rim and pointed the
flame down into the hole, lighting the side wall. As he directed the light, his
eyes traced the outline of the
wall downward. The crypt was circular and about twenty feet across. Thirty feet
down, the glow found the
floor. The ground was dark and mottled. Earthy. Then Langdon saw the body.
His instinct was to recoil. "He's here," Langdon said, forcing himself not to
turn away. The figure was a
pallid outline against the earthen floor. "I think he's been stripped naked."
Langdon flashed on the nude
corpse of Leonardo Vetra.
"Is it one of the cardinals?"
Langdon had no idea, but he couldn't imagine who the hell else it would be. He
stared down at the pale
blob. Unmoving. Lifeless. And yet . . . Langdon hesitated. There was something
very strange about the way
the figure was positioned. He seemed to be . . .
Langdon called out. "Hello?"
"You think he's alive?"
There was no response from below.
"He's not moving," Langdon said. "But he looks . . ." No, impossible.
"He looks what?" Vittoria was peering over the edge now too.
Langdon squinted into the darkness. "He looks like he's standing up."
Vittoria held her breath and lowered her face over the edge for a better look.
After a moment, she pulled
back. "You're right. He's standing up! Maybe he's alive and needs help!" She
called into the hole. "Hello?!
Mi puó sentire?"
There was no echo off the mossy interior. Only silence.
Vittoria headed for the rickety ladder. "I'm going down."
Langdon caught her arm. "No. It's dangerous. I'll go."
This time Vittoria didn't argue.
66
C hinita Macri was mad. She sat in the passenger's seat of the BBC van as it
idled at a corner on Via
Tomacelli. Gunther Glick was checking his map of Rome, apparently lost. As she
had feared, his mystery
caller had phoned back, this time with information.
"Piazza del Popolo," Glick insisted. "That's what we're looking for. There's a
church there. And inside is
proof."
"Proof." Chinita stopped polishing the lens in her hand and turned to him.
"Proof that a cardinal has been
murdered?"
"That's what he said."
"You believe everything you hear?" Chinita wished, as she often did, that she
was the one in charge.
Videographers, however, were at the whim of the crazy reporters for whom they
shot footage. If Gunther
Glick wanted to follow a feeble phone tip, Macri was his dog on a leash.
She looked at him, sitting there in the driver's seat, his jaw set intently. The
man's parents, she decided,
must have been frustrated comedians to have given him a name like Gunther Glick.
No wonder the guy felt
like he had something to prove. Nonetheless, despite his unfortunate appellative
and annoying eagerness to
make a mark, Glick was sweet . . . charming in a pasty, Briddish, unstrung sort
of way. Like Hugh Grant on
lithium.
"Shouldn't we be back at St. Peter's?" Macri said as patiently as possible. "We
can check this mystery
church out later. Conclave started an hour ago. What if the cardinals come to a
decision while we're gone?"
Glick did not seem to hear. "I think we go to the right, here." He tilted the
map and studied it again. "Yes,
if I take a right . . . and then an immediate left." He began to pull out onto
the narrow street before them.
"Look out!" Macri yelled. She was a video technician, and her eyes were sharp.
Fortunately, Glick was
pretty fast too. He slammed on the brakes and avoided entering the intersection
just as a line of four Alpha
Romeos appeared out of nowhere and tore by in a blur. Once past, the cars
skidded, decelerating, and cut
sharply left one block ahead, taking the exact route Glick had intended to take.
"Maniacs!" Macri shouted.
Glick looked shaken. "Did you see that?"
"Yeah, I saw that! They almost killed us!"
"No, I mean the cars," Glick said, his voice suddenly excited. "They were all
the same."
"So they were maniacs with no imagination."
"The cars were also full."
"So what?"
"Four identical cars, all with four passengers?"
"You ever heard of carpooling?"
"In Italy?" Glick checked the intersection. "They haven't even heard of unleaded
gas." He hit the
accelerator and peeled out after the cars.
Macri was thrown back in her seat. "What the hell are you doing?"
Glick accelerated down the street and hung a left after the Alpha Romeos.
"Something tells me you and I
are not the only ones going to church right now."
67
T he descent was slow.
Langdon dropped rung by rung down the creaking ladder . . . deeper and deeper
beneath the floor of the
Chigi Chapel. Into the Demon's hole, he thought. He was facing the side wall,
his back to the chamber, and
he wondered how many more dark, cramped spaces one day could provide. The ladder
groaned with every
step, and the pungent smell of rotting flesh and dampness was almost
asphyxiating. Langdon wondered
where the hell Olivetti was.
Vittoria's outline was still visible above, holding the blowtorch inside the
hole, lighting Langdon's way. As
