Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
PROLOGUE
P hysicist Leonardo Vetra smelled burning flesh, and he knew it was his own. He
stared up in terror at
the dark figure looming over him. "What do you want!"
"La chiave," the raspy voice replied. "The password."
"But . . . I don't-"
The intruder pressed down again, grinding the white hot object deeper into
Vetra's chest. There was the hiss of broiling flesh.
Vetra cried out in agony. "There is no password!" He felt himself drifting
toward unconsciousness.
The figure glared. "Ne avevo paura. I was afraid of that."
Vetra fought to keep his senses, but the darkness was closing in. His only
solace was in knowing his
attacker would never obtain what he had come for. A moment later, however, the
figure produced a blade
and brought it to Vetra's face. The blade hovered. Carefully. Surgically.
"For the love of God!" Vetra screamed. But it was too late.
1
H igh atop the steps of the Pyramid of Giza a young woman laughed and called
down to him. "Robert,
hurry up! I knew I should have married a younger man!" Her smile was magic.
He struggled to keep up, but his legs felt like stone. "Wait," he begged.
"Please . . ."
As he climbed, his vision began to blur. There was a thundering in his ears. I
must reach her! But when he
looked up again, the woman had disappeared. In her place stood an old man with
rotting teeth. The man
stared down, curling his lips into a lonely grimace. Then he let out a scream of
anguish that resounded
across the desert.
Robert Langdon awoke with a start from his nightmare. The phone beside his bed
was ringing. Dazed, he
picked up the receiver.
"Hello?"
"I'm looking for Robert Langdon," a man's voice said.
Langdon sat up in his empty bed and tried to clear his mind. "This . . . is
Robert Langdon." He squinted at
his digital clock. It was 5:18 A.M.
"I must see you immediately."
"Who is this?"
"My name is Maximilian Kohler. I'm a discrete particle physicist."
"A what?" Langdon could barely focus. "Are you sure you've got the right
Langdon?"
"You're a professor of religious iconology at Harvard University. You've written
three books on
symbology and-"
"Do you know what time it is?"
"I apologize. I have something you need to see. I can't discuss it on the
phone."
A knowing groan escaped Langdon's lips. This had happened before. One of the
perils of writing books
about religious symbology was the calls from religious zealots who wanted him to
confirm their latest sign
from God. Last month a stripper from Oklahoma had promised Langdon the best sex
of his life if he would
fly down and verify the authenticity of a cruciform that had magically appeared
on her bed sheets. The
Shroud of Tulsa, Langdon had called it.
"How did you get my number?" Langdon tried to be polite, despite the hour.
"On the Worldwide Web. The site for your book."
Langdon frowned. He was damn sure his book's site did not include his home phone
number. The man was
obviously lying.
"I need to see you," the caller insisted. "I'll pay you well."
Now Langdon was getting mad. "I'm sorry, but I really-"
"If you leave immediately, you can be here by-"
"I'm not going anywhere! It's five o'clock in the morning!" Langdon hung up and
collapsed back in bed.
He closed his eyes and tried to fall back asleep. It was no use. The dream was
emblazoned in his mind.
Reluctantly, he put on his robe and went downstairs.
Robert Langdon wandered barefoot through his deserted Massachusetts Victorian
home and nursed his
ritual insomnia remedy-a mug of steaming Nestlé's Quik. The April moon filtered
through the bay
windows and played on the oriental carpets. Langdon's colleagues often joked
that his place looked more
like an anthropology museum than a home. His shelves were packed with religious
artifacts from around
the world-an ekuaba from Ghana, a gold cross from Spain, a cycladic idol from
the Aegean, and even a rare
woven boccus from Borneo, a young warrior's symbol of perpetual youth.
As Langdon sat on his brass Maharishi's chest and savored the warmth of the
chocolate, the bay window
caught his reflection. The image was distorted and pale . . . like a ghost. An
aging ghost, he thought, cruelly
reminded that his youthful spirit was living in a mortal shell.
Although not overly handsome in a classical sense, the forty-five-year-old
Langdon had what his female
colleagues referred to as an "erudite" appeal-wisps of gray in his thick brown
hair, probing blue eyes, an
arrestingly deep voice, and the strong, carefree smile of a collegiate athlete.
A varsity diver in prep school
and college, Langdon still had the body of a swimmer, a toned, six-foot physique
that he vigilantly
maintained with fifty laps a day in the university pool.
Langdon's friends had always viewed him as a bit of an enigma-a man caught
between centuries. On
weekends he could be seen lounging on the quad in blue jeans, discussing
computer graphics or religious
history with students; other times he could be spotted in his Harris tweed and
paisley vest, photographed in
the pages of upscale art magazines at museum openings where he had been asked to
lecture.
Although a tough teacher and strict disciplinarian, Langdon was the first to
embrace what he hailed as the
"lost art of good clean fun." He relished recreation with an infectious
fanaticism that had earned him a
fraternal acceptance among his students. His campus nickname-"The Dolphin"-was a
reference both to his
affable nature and his legendary ability to dive into a pool and outmaneuver the
entire opposing squad in a
water polo match.
As Langdon sat alone, absently gazing into the darkness, the silence of his home
was shattered again, this
time by the ring of his fax machine. Too exhausted to be annoyed, Langdon forced
a tired chuckle.
God's people, he thought. Two thousand years of waiting for their Messiah, and
they're still persistent as
hell.
Wearily, he returned his empty mug to the kitchen and walked slowly to his
oak-paneled study. The
incoming fax lay in the tray. Sighing, he scooped up the paper and looked at it.
Instantly, a wave of nausea hit him.
The image on the page was that of a human corpse. The body had been stripped
naked, and its head had
been twisted, facing completely backward. On the victim's chest was a terrible
burn. The man had been
branded . . . imprinted with a single word. It was a word Langdon knew well.
Very well. He stared at the
ornate lettering in disbelief.
"Illuminati," he stammered, his heart pounding. It can't be . . .
In slow motion, afraid of what he was about to witness, Langdon rotated the fax
180 degrees. He looked at
the word upside down.
Instantly, the breath went out of him. It was like he had been hit by a truck.
Barely able to believe his eyes,
he rotated the fax again, reading the brand right-side up and then upside down.
"Illuminati," he whispered.
Stunned, Langdon collapsed in a chair. He sat a moment in utter bewilderment.
Gradually, his eyes were
drawn to the blinking red light on his fax machine. Whoever had sent this fax
was still on the line . . .
waiting to talk. Langdon gazed at the blinking light a long time.
Then, trembling, he picked up the receiver.
2
D o I have your attention now?" the man's voice said when Langdon finally
answered the line.
"Yes, sir, you damn well do. You want to explain yourself?"
"I tried to tell you before." The voice was rigid, mechanical. "I'm a physicist.
I run a research facility.
We've had a murder. You saw the body."
"How did you find me?" Langdon could barely focus. His mind was racing from the
image on the fax.
"I already told you. The Worldwide Web. The site for your book, The Art of the
Illuminati."
Langdon tried to gather his thoughts. His book was virtually unknown in
mainstream literary circles, but it
had developed quite a following on-line. Nonetheless, the caller's claim still
made no sense. "That page has
no contact information," Langdon challenged. "I'm certain of it."
"I have people here at the lab very adept at extracting user information from
the Web."
Langdon was skeptical. "Sounds like your lab knows a lot about the Web."
"We should," the man fired back. "We invented it."
Something in the man's voice told Langdon he was not joking.
"I must see you," the caller insisted. "This is not a matter we can discuss on
the phone. My lab is only an
hour's flight from Boston."
Langdon stood in the dim light of his study and analyzed the fax in his hand.
The image was overpowering,
possibly representing the epigraphical find of the century, a decade of his
research confirmed in a single
symbol.
"It's urgent," the voice pressured.
Langdon's eyes were locked on the brand. Illuminati, he read over and over. His
work had always been
based on the symbolic equivalent of fossils-ancient documents and historical
hearsay-but this image before
him was today. Present tense. He felt like a paleontologist coming face to face
with a living dinosaur.
"I've taken the liberty of sending a plane for you," the voice said. "It will be
in Boston in twenty minutes."
Langdon felt his mouth go dry. An hour's flight . . .
"Please forgive my presumption," the voice said. "I need you here."
Langdon looked again at the fax-an ancient myth confirmed in black and white.
The implications were
frightening. He gazed absently through the bay window. The first hint of dawn
was sifting through the
birch trees in his backyard, but the view looked somehow different this morning.
As an odd combination of
fear and exhilaration settled over him, Langdon knew he had no choice.
"You win," he said. "Tell me where to meet the plane."
3
T housands of miles away, two men were meeting. The chamber was dark. Medieval.
Stone.
"Benvenuto," the man in charge said. He was seated in the shadows, out of sight.
"Were you successful?"
"Si," the dark figure replied. "Perfectamente." His words were as hard as the
rock walls.
"And there will be no doubt who is responsible?"
"None."
"Superb. Do you have what I asked for?"
The killer's eyes glistened, black like oil. He produced a heavy electronic
device and set it on the table.
The man in the shadows seemed pleased. "You have done well."
"Serving the brotherhood is an honor," the killer said.
"Phase two begins shortly. Get some rest. Tonight we change the world."
4
R obert Langdon's Saab 900S tore out of the Callahan Tunnel and emerged on the
east side of Boston
Harbor near the entrance to Logan Airport. Checking his directions Langdon found
Aviation Road and
turned left past the old Eastern Airlines Building. Three hundred yards down the
access road a hangar
loomed in the darkness. A large number "4"was painted on it. He pulled into the
parking lot and got out of
his car.
A round-faced man in a blue flight suit emerged from behind the building.
"Robert Langdon?" he called.
The man's voice was friendly. He had an accent Langdon couldn't place.
"That's me," Langdon said, locking his car.
"Perfect timing," the man said. "I've just landed. Follow me, please."
As they circled the building, Langdon felt tense. He was not accustomed to
cryptic phone calls and secret
rendezvous with strangers. Not knowing what to expect he had donned his usual
classroom attire-a pair of
chinos, a turtleneck, and a Harris tweed suit jacket. As they walked, he thought
about the fax in his jacket
pocket, still unable to believe the image it depicted.
The pilot seemed to sense Langdon's anxiety. "Flying's not a problem for you, is
it, sir?"
"Not at all," Langdon replied. Branded corpses are a problem for me. Flying I
can handle.
The man led Langdon the length of the hangar. They rounded the corner onto the
runway.
Langdon stopped dead in his tracks and gaped at the aircraft parked on the
tarmac. "We're riding in that?"
The man grinned. "Like it?"
Langdon stared a long moment. "Like it? What the hell is it?"
The craft before them was enormous. It was vaguely reminiscent of the space
shuttle except that the top had
been shaved off, leaving it perfectly flat. Parked there on the runway, it
resembled a colossal wedge.
Langdon's first impression was that he must be dreaming. The vehicle looked as
airworthy as a Buick. The
wings were practically nonexistent-just two stubby fins on the rear of the
fuselage. A pair of dorsal guiders
rose out of the aft section. The rest of the plane was hull-about 200 feet from
front to back-no windows,
nothing but hull.
"Two hundred fifty thousand kilos fully fueled," the pilot offered, like a
father bragging about his newborn.
"Runs on slush hydrogen. The shell's a titanium matrix with silicon carbide
fibers. She packs a 20:1
thrust/weight ratio; most jets run at 7:1. The director must be in one helluva a
hurry to see you. He doesn't
usually send the big boy."
"This thing flies?" Langdon said.
The pilot smiled. "Oh yeah." He led Langdon across the tarmac toward the plane.
"Looks kind of startling,
I know, but you better get used to it. In five years, all you'll see are these
babies-HSCT's-High Speed Civil
Transports. Our lab's one of the first to own one."
Must be one hell of a lab, Langdon thought.
"This one's a prototype of the Boeing X-33," the pilot continued, "but there are
dozens of others-the
National Aero Space Plane, the Russians have Scramjet, the Brits have HOTOL. The
future's here, it's just
taking some time to get to the public sector. You can kiss conventional jets
good-bye."
Langdon looked up warily at the craft. "I think I'd prefer a conventional jet."
The pilot motioned up the gangplank. "This way, please, Mr. Langdon. Watch your
step."
Minutes later, Langdon was seated inside the empty cabin. The pilot buckled him
into the front row and
disappeared toward the front of the aircraft.
The cabin itself looked surprisingly like a wide-body commercial airliner. The
only exception was that it
had no windows, which made Langdon uneasy. He had been haunted his whole life by
a mild case of
claustrophobia-the vestige of a childhood incident he had never quite overcome.
Langdon's aversion to closed spaces was by no means debilitating, but it had
always frustrated him. It
manifested itself in subtle ways. He avoided enclosed sports like racquetball or
squash, and he had gladly
paid a small fortune for his airy, high-ceilinged Victorian home even though
economical faculty housing
was readily available. Langdon had often suspected his attraction to the art
world as a young boy sprang
from his love of museums' wide open spaces.
The engines roared to life beneath him, sending a deep shudder through the hull.
Langdon swallowed hard
and waited. He felt the plane start taxiing. Piped-in country music began
playing quietly overhead.
A phone on the wall beside him beeped twice. Langdon lifted the receiver.
"Hello?"
"Comfortable, Mr. Langdon?"
"Not at all."
"Just relax. We'll be there in an hour."
"And where exactly is there?" Langdon asked, realizing he had no idea where he
was headed.
"Geneva," the pilot replied, revving the engines. "The lab's in Geneva."
"Geneva," Langdon repeated, feeling a little better. "Upstate New York. I've
actually got family near
Seneca Lake. I wasn't aware Geneva had a physics lab."
The pilot laughed. "Not Geneva, New York, Mr. Langdon. Geneva, Switzerland."
The word took a long moment to register. "Switzerland?" Langdon felt his pulse
surge. "I thought you said
the lab was only an hour away!"
"It is, Mr. Langdon." The pilot chuckled. "This plane goes Mach fifteen."
5
O n a busy European street, the killer serpentined through a crowd. He was a
powerful man. Dark and
potent. Deceptively agile. His muscles still felt hard from the thrill of his
meeting.
It went well, he told himself. Although his employer had never revealed his
face, the killer felt honored to
be in his presence. Had it really been only fifteen days since his employer had
first made contact? The
killer still remembered every word of that call . . .
"My name is Janus," the caller had said. "We are kinsmen of a sort. We share an
enemy. I hear your skills
are for hire."
"It depends whom you represent," the killer replied.
The caller told him.
"Is this your idea of a joke?"
"You have heard our name, I see," the caller replied.
"Of course. The brotherhood is legendary."
"And yet you find yourself doubting I am genuine."
"Everyone knows the brothers have faded to dust."
"A devious ploy. The most dangerous enemy is that which no one fears."
The killer was skeptical. "The brotherhood endures?"
"Deeper underground than ever before. Our roots infiltrate everything you see .
. . even the sacred fortress
of our most sworn enemy."
"Impossible. They are invulnerable."
"Our reach is far."
"No one's reach is that far."
"Very soon, you will believe. An irrefutable demonstration of the brotherhood's
power has already
transpired. A single act of treachery and proof."
"What have you done?"
The caller told him.
The killer's eyes went wide. "An impossible task."
The next day, newspapers around the globe carried the same headline. The killer
became a believer.
Now, fifteen days later, the killer's faith had solidified beyond the shadow of
a doubt. The brotherhood
endures, he thought. Tonight they will surface to reveal their power.
As he made his way through the streets, his black eyes gleamed with foreboding.
One of the most covert
and feared fraternities ever to walk the earth had called on him for service.
They have chosen wisely, he
thought. His reputation for secrecy was exceeded only by that of his deadliness.
So far, he had served them nobly. He had made his kill and delivered the item to
Janus as requested. Now,
it was up to Janus to use his power to ensure the item's placement.
The placement . . .
The killer wondered how Janus could possibly handle such a staggering task. The
man obviously had
connections on the inside. The brotherhood's dominion seemed limitless.
Janus, the killer thought. A code name, obviously. Was it a reference, he
wondered, to the Roman twofaced
god . . . or to the moon of Saturn? Not that it made any difference. Janus
wielded unfathomable
power. He had proven that beyond a doubt.
As the killer walked, he imagined his ancestors smiling down on him. Today he
was fighting their battle, he
was fighting the same enemy they had fought for ages, as far back as the
eleventh century . . . when the
enemy's crusading armies had first pillaged his land, raping and killing his
people, declaring them unclean,
defiling their temples and gods.
His ancestors had formed a small but deadly army to defend themselves. The army
became famous across
the land as protectors-skilled executioners who wandered the countryside
slaughtering any of the enemy
they could find. They were renowned not only for their brutal killings, but also
for celebrating their
slayings by plunging themselves into drug-induced stupors. Their drug of choice
was a potent intoxicant
they called hashish.
As their notoriety spread, these lethal men became known by a single
word-Hassassin-literally "the
followers of hashish." The name Hassassin became synonymous with death in almost
every language on
earth. The word was still used today, even in modern English . . . but like the
craft of killing, the word had
evolved.
It was now pronounced assassin.
6
S ixty-four minutes had passed when an incredulous and slightly air-sick Robert
Langdon stepped down
the gangplank onto the sun-drenched runway. A crisp breeze rustled the lapels of
his tweed jacket. The open space felt wonderful. He squinted out at the lush green valley rising to
snowcapped peaks all around
them.
I'm dreaming, he told himself. Any minute now I'll be waking up.
"Welcome to Switzerland," the pilot said, yelling over the roar of the X-33's
misted-fuel HEDM engines
winding down behind them.
Langdon checked his watch. It read 7:07 A.M.
"You just crossed six time zones," the pilot offered. "It's a little past 1 P.M.
here."
Langdon reset his watch.
"How do you feel?"
He rubbed his stomach. "Like I've been eating Styrofoam."
The pilot nodded. "Altitude sickness. We were at sixty thousand feet. You're
thirty percent lighter up there.
Lucky we only did a puddle jump. If we'd gone to Tokyo I'd have taken her all
the way up-a hundred
miles. Now that'll get your insides rolling."
Langdon gave a wan nod and counted himself lucky. All things considered, the
flight had been remarkably
ordinary. Aside from a bone-crushing acceleration during take off, the plane's
motion had been fairly
typical-occasional minor turbulence, a few pressure changes as they'd climbed,
but nothing at all to suggest
they had been hurtling through space at the mind-numbing speed of 11,000 miles
per hour.
A handful of technicians scurried onto the runway to tend to the X-33. The pilot
escorted Langdon to a
black Peugeot sedan in a parking area beside the control tower. Moments later
they were speeding down a
paved road that stretched out across the valley floor. A faint cluster of
buildings rose in the distance.
Outside, the grassy plains tore by in a blur.
Langdon watched in disbelief as the pilot pushed the speedometer up around 170
kilometers an hour-over
100 miles per hour. What is it with this guy and speed? he wondered.
"Five kilometers to the lab," the pilot said. "I'll have you there in two
minutes."
Langdon searched in vain for a seat belt. Why not make it three and get us there
alive?
The car raced on.
"Do you like Reba?" the pilot asked, jamming a cassette into the tape deck.
A woman started singing. "It's just the fear of being alone . . . "
No fear here, Langdon thought absently. His female colleagues often ribbed him
that his collection of
museum-quality artifacts was nothing more than a transparent attempt to fill an
empty home, a home they
insisted would benefit greatly from the presence of a woman. Langdon always
laughed it off, reminding
them he already had three loves in his life-symbology, water polo, and
bachelorhood-the latter being a
freedom that enabled him to travel the world, sleep as late as he wanted, and
enjoy quiet nights at home
with a brandy and a good book.
"We're like a small city," the pilot said, pulling Langdon from his daydream.
"Not just labs. We've got
supermarkets, a hospital, even a cinema."
Langdon nodded blankly and looked out at the sprawling expanse of buildings
rising before them.
"In fact," the pilot added, "we possess the largest machine on earth."
"Really?" Langdon scanned the countryside.
"You won't see it out there, sir." The pilot smiled. "It's buried six stories
below the earth."
Langdon didn't have time to ask. Without warning the pilot jammed on the brakes.
The car skidded to a
stop outside a reinforced sentry booth.
Langdon read the sign before them. SECURITE. ARRETEZ. He suddenly felt a wave of
panic, realizing
where he was. "My God! I didn't bring my passport!"
"Passports are unnecessary," the driver assured. "We have a standing arrangement
with the Swiss
government."
Langdon watched dumbfounded as his driver gave the guard an ID. The sentry ran
it through an electronic
authentication device. The machine flashed green.
"Passenger name?"
"Robert Langdon," the driver replied.
"Guest of?"
"The director."
The sentry arched his eyebrows. He turned and checked a computer printout,
verifying it against the data on
his computer screen. Then he returned to the window. "Enjoy your stay, Mr.
Langdon."
The car shot off again, accelerating another 200 yards around a sweeping rotary
that led to the facility's
main entrance. Looming before them was a rectangular, ultramodern structure of
glass and steel. Langdon
was amazed by the building's striking transparent design. He had always had a
fond love of architecture.
"The Glass Cathedral," the escort offered.
"A church?"
"Hell, no. A church is the one thing we don't have. Physics is the religion
around here. Use the Lord's
name in vain all you like," he laughed, "just don't slander any quarks or
mesons."
Langdon sat bewildered as the driver swung the car around and brought it to a
stop in front of the glass
building. Quarks and mesons? No border control? Mach 15 jets? Who the hell ARE
these guys? The
engraved granite slab in front of the building bore the answer:
(CERN)
Conseil Européen pour la
Recherche Nucléaire
"Nuclear Research?" Langdon asked, fairly certain his translation was correct.
The driver did not answer. He was leaning forward, busily adjusting the car's
cassette player. "This is your
stop. The director will meet you at this entrance."
Langdon noted a man in a wheelchair exiting the building. He looked to be in his
early sixties. Gaunt and
totally bald with a sternly set jaw, he wore a white lab coat and dress shoes
propped firmly on the
wheelchair's footrest. Even at a distance his eyes looked lifeless-like two gray
stones.
"Is that him?" Langdon asked.
The driver looked up. "Well, I'll be." He turned and gave Langdon an ominous
smile. "Speak of the devil."
Uncertain what to expect, Langdon stepped from the vehicle.
The man in the wheelchair accelerated toward Langdon and offered a clammy hand.
"Mr. Langdon? We
spoke on the phone. My name is Maximilian Kohler."
7
M aximilian Kohler, director general of CERN, was known behind his back as
König-King. It was a
title more of fear than reverence for the figure who ruled over his dominion
from a wheelchair throne.
Although few knew him personally, the horrific story of how he had been crippled
was lore at CERN, and
there were few there who blamed him for his bitterness . . . nor for his sworn
dedication to pure science.
Langdon had only been in Kohler's presence a few moments and already sensed the
director was a man
who kept his distance. Langdon found himself practically jogging to keep up with
Kohler's electric
wheelchair as it sped silently toward the main entrance. The wheelchair was like
none Langdon had ever
seen-equipped with a bank of electronics including a multiline phone, a paging
system, computer screen,
even a small, detachable video camera. King Kohler's mobile command center.
Langdon followed through a mechanical door into CERN's voluminous main lobby.
The Glass Cathedral, Langdon mused, gazing upward toward heaven.
Overhead, the bluish glass roof shimmered in the afternoon sun, casting rays of
geometric patterns in the air
and giving the room a sense of grandeur. Angular shadows fell like veins across
the white tiled walls and
down to the marble floors. The air smelled clean, sterile. A handful of
scientists moved briskly about, their
footsteps echoing in the resonant space.
"This way, please, Mr. Langdon." His voice sounded almost computerized. His
accent was rigid and
precise, like his stern features. Kohler coughed and wiped his mouth on a white
handkerchief as he fixed
his dead gray eyes on Langdon. "Please hurry." His wheelchair seemed to leap
across the tiled floor.
Langdon followed past what seemed to be countless hallways branching off the
main atrium. Every
hallway was alive with activity. The scientists who saw Kohler seemed to stare
in surprise, eyeing Langdon
as if wondering who he must be to command such company.
"I'm embarrassed to admit," Langdon ventured, trying to make conversation, "that
I've never heard of
CERN."
"Not surprising," Kohler replied, his clipped response sounding harshly
efficient. "Most Americans do not
see Europe as the world leader in scientific research. They see us as nothing
but a quaint shopping districtan
odd perception if you consider the nationalities of men like Einstein,
Galileo, and Newton."
Langdon was unsure how to respond. He pulled the fax from his pocket. "This man
in the photograph, can
you-"
Kohler cut him off with a wave of his hand. "Please. Not here. I am taking you
to him now." He held out
his hand. "Perhaps I should take that."
Langdon handed over the fax and fell silently into step.
Kohler took a sharp left and entered a wide hallway adorned with awards and
commendations. A
particularly large plaque dominated the entry. Langdon slowed to read the
engraved bronze as they passed.
ARS ELECTRONICA AWARD
For Cultural Innovation in the Digital Age
Awarded to Tim Berners Lee and CERN
for the invention of the
WORLDWIDE WEB
Well I'll be damned, Langdon thought, reading the text. This guy wasn't kidding.
Langdon had always
thought of the Web as an American invention. Then again, his knowledge was
limited to the site for his
own book and the occasional on-line exploration of the Louvre or El Prado on his
old Macintosh.
"The Web," Kohler said, coughing again and wiping his mouth, "began here as a
network of in-house
computer sites. It enabled scientists from different departments to share daily
findings with one another. Of
course, the entire world is under the impression the Web is U.S. technology."
Langdon followed down the hall. "Why not set the record straight?"
Kohler shrugged, apparently disinterested. "A petty misconception over a petty
technology. CERN is far
greater than a global connection of computers. Our scientists produce miracles
almost daily."
Langdon gave Kohler a questioning look. "Miracles?" The word "miracle" was
certainly not part of the
vocabulary around Harvard's Fairchild Science Building. Miracles were left for
the School of Divinity.
corridor again. "One square yard of drag will slow a falling body almost twenty
percent."
Langdon nodded blankly.
He never suspected that later that night, in a country hundreds of miles away,
the information would save
his life.
8
W hen Kohler and Langdon emerged from the rear of CERN's main complex into the
stark Swiss
sunlight, Langdon felt as if he'd been transported home. The scene before him
looked like an Ivy League
campus.
A grassy slope cascaded downward onto an expansive lowlands where clusters of
sugar maples dotted
quadrangles bordered by brick dormitories and footpaths. Scholarly looking
individuals with stacks of
books hustled in and out of buildings. As if to accentuate the collegiate
atmosphere, two longhaired hippies
hurled a Frisbee back and forth while enjoying Mahler's Fourth Symphony blaring
from a dorm window.
"These are our residential dorms," Kohler explained as he accelerated his
wheelchair down the path toward
the buildings. "We have over three thousand physicists here. CERN
single-handedly employs more than
half of the world's particle physicists-the brightest minds on earth-Germans,
Japanese, Italians, Dutch, you
name it. Our physicists represent over five hundred universities and sixty
nationalities."
Langdon was amazed. "How do they all communicate?"
"English, of course. The universal language of science."
Langdon had always heard math was the universal language of science, but he was
too tired to argue. He
dutifully followed Kohler down the path.
Halfway to the bottom, a young man jogged by. His T-shirt proclaimed the
message: NO GUT, NO
GLORY!
Langdon looked after him, mystified. "Gut?"
"General Unified Theory." Kohler quipped. "The theory of everything."
"I see," Langdon said, not seeing at all.
"Are you familiar with particle physics, Mr. Langdon?"
Langdon shrugged. "I'm familiar with general physics-falling bodies, that sort
of thing." His years of highdiving
experience had given him a profound respect for the awesome power of
gravitational acceleration.
"Particle physics is the study of atoms, isn't it?"
Kohler shook his head. "Atoms look like planets compared to what we deal with.
Our interests lie with an
atom's nucleus-a mere ten-thousandth the size of the whole." He coughed again,
sounding sick. "The men
and women of CERN are here to find answers to the same questions man has been
asking since the
beginning of time. Where did we come from? What are we made of?"
"And these answers are in a physics lab?"
"You sound surprised."
"I am. The questions seem spiritual."
"Mr. Langdon, all questions were once spiritual. Since the beginning of time,
spirituality and religion have
been called on to fill in the gaps that science did not understand. The rising
and setting of the sun was once
attributed to Helios and a flaming chariot. Earthquakes and tidal waves were the
wrath of Poseidon.
Science has now proven those gods to be false idols. Soon all Gods will be
proven to be false idols. Science
has now provided answers to almost every question man can ask. There are only a
few questions left, and
they are the esoteric ones. Where do we come from? What are we doing here? What
is the meaning of life
and the universe?"
Langdon was amazed. "And these are questions CERN is trying to answer?"
"Correction. These are questions we are answering."
Langdon fell silent as the two men wound through the residential quadrangles. As
they walked, a Frisbee
sailed overhead and skidded to a stop directly in front of them. Kohler ignored
it and kept going.
A voice called out from across the quad. "S'il vous plaît!"
Langdon looked over. An elderly white-haired man in a COLLEGE PARIS sweatshirt
waved to him.
Langdon picked up the Frisbee and expertly threw it back. The old man caught it
on one finger and
bounced it a few times before whipping it over his shoulder to his partner.
"Merci!" he called to Langdon.
"Congratulations," Kohler said when Langdon finally caught up. "You just played
toss with a Noble prizewinner,
Georges Charpak, inventor of the multiwire proportional chamber."
Langdon nodded. My lucky day.
It took Langdon and Kohler three more minutes to reach their destination-a
large, well-kept dormitory
sitting in a grove of aspens. Compared to the other dorms, this structure seemed
luxurious. The carved
stone sign in front read BUILDING C.
Imaginative title, Langdon thought.
But despite its sterile name, Building C appealed to Langdon's sense of
architectural style-conservative and
solid. It had a red brick facade, an ornate balustrade, and sat framed by
sculpted symmetrical hedges. As
the two men ascended the stone path toward the entry, they passed under a
gateway formed by a pair of
marble columns. Someone had put a sticky-note on one of them.
THIS COLUMN IS IONIC
Physicist graffiti? Langdon mused, eyeing the column and chuckling to himself.
"I'm relieved to see that
even brilliant physicists make mistakes."
Kohler looked over. "What do you mean?"
"Whoever wrote that note made a mistake. That column isn't Ionic. Ionic columns
are uniform in width.
That one's tapered. It's Doric-the Greek counterpart. A common mistake."
Kohler did not smile. "The author meant it as a joke, Mr. Langdon. Ionic means
containing ions-electrically
charged particles. Most objects contain them."
Langdon looked back at the column and groaned.
Langdon was still feeling stupid when he stepped from the elevator on the top
floor of Building C. He
followed Kohler down a well-appointed corridor. The decor was
unexpected-traditional colonial French-a
cherry divan, porcelain floor vase, and scrolled woodwork.
"We like to keep our tenured scientists comfortable," Kohler explained.
Evidently, Langdon thought. "So the man in the fax lived up here? One of your
upper-level employees?"
"Quite," Kohler said. "He missed a meeting with me this morning and did not
answer his page. I came up
here to locate him and found him dead in his living room."
Langdon felt a sudden chill realizing that he was about to see a dead body. His
stomach had never been
particularly stalwart. It was a weakness he'd discovered as an art student when
the teacher informed the
class that Leonardo da Vinci had gained his expertise in the human form by
exhuming corpses and
dissecting their musculature.
Kohler led the way to the far end of the hallway. There was a single door. "The
Penthouse, as you would
say," Kohler announced, dabbing a bead of perspiration from his forehead.
Langdon eyed the lone oak door before them. The name plate read:
LEONARDO VETRA
"Leonardo Vetra," Kohler said, "would have been fifty-eight next week. He was
one of the most brilliant
scientists of our time. His death is a profound loss for science."
For an instant Langdon thought he sensed emotion in Kohler's hardened face. But
as quickly as it had
come, it was gone. Kohler reached in his pocket and began sifting through a
large key ring.
An odd thought suddenly occurred to Langdon. The building seemed deserted.
"Where is everyone?" he
asked. The lack of activity was hardly what he expected considering they were
about to enter a murder
scene.
"The residents are in their labs," Kohler replied, finding the key.
"I mean the police," Langdon clarified. "Have they left already?"
Kohler paused, his key halfway into the lock. "Police?"
Langdon's eyes met the director's. "Police. You sent me a fax of a homicide. You
must have called the
police."
"I most certainly have not."
"What?"
Kohler's gray eyes sharpened. "The situation is complex, Mr. Langdon."
Langdon felt a wave of apprehension. "But . . . certainly someone else knows
about this!"
"Yes. Leonardo's adopted daughter. She is also a physicist here at CERN. She and
her father share a lab.
They are partners. Ms. Vetra has been away this week doing field research. I
have notified her of her
father's death, and she is returning as we speak."
"But a man has been murd-"
"A formal investigation," Kohler said, his voice firm, "will take place.
However, it will most certainly
involve a search of Vetra's lab, a space he and his daughter hold most private.
Therefore, it will wait until
Ms. Vetra has arrived. I feel I owe her at least that modicum of discretion."
Kohler turned the key.
As the door swung open, a blast of icy air hissed into the hall and hit Langdon
in the face. He fell back in
bewilderment. He was gazing across the threshold of an alien world. The flat
before him was immersed in a
thick, white fog. The mist swirled in smoky vortexes around the furniture and
shrouded the room in opaque
haze.
"What the . . . ?" Langdon stammered.
"Freon cooling system," Kohler replied. "I chilled the flat to preserve the
body."
Langdon buttoned his tweed jacket against the cold. I'm in Oz, he thought. And I
forgot my magic slippers.
9
T he corpse on the floor before Langdon was hideous. The late Leonardo Vetra lay
on his back, stripped
naked, his skin bluish-gray. His neck bones were jutting out where they had been
broken, and his head was
twisted completely backward, pointing the wrong way. His face was out of view,
pressed against the floor.
The man lay in a frozen puddle of his own urine, the hair around his shriveled
genitals spidered with frost.
Fighting a wave of nausea, Langdon let his eyes fall to the victim's chest.
Although Langdon had stared at
the symmetrical wound a dozen times on the fax, the burn was infinitely more
commanding in real life. The
raised, broiled flesh was perfectly delineated . . . the symbol flawlessly
formed.
Langdon wondered if the intense chill now raking through his body was the
air-conditioning or his utter
amazement with the significance of what he was now staring at.
His heart pounded as he circled the body, reading the word upside down,
reaffirming the genius of the
symmetry. The symbol seemed even less conceivable now that he was staring at it.
"Mr. Langdon?"
Langdon did not hear. He was in another world . . . his world, his element, a
world where history, myth,
and fact collided, flooding his senses. The gears turned.
"Mr. Langdon?" Kohler's eyes probed expectantly.
Langdon did not look up. His disposition now intensified, his focus total. "How
much do you already
know?"
"Only what I had time to read on your website. The word Illuminati means 'the
enlightened ones.' It is the
name of some sort of ancient brotherhood."
Langdon nodded. "Had you heard the name before?"
"Not until I saw it branded on Mr. Vetra."
"So you ran a web search for it?"
"Yes."
"And the word returned hundreds of references, no doubt."
"Thousands," Kohler said. "Yours, however, contained references to Harvard,
Oxford, a reputable
publisher, as well as a list of related publications. As a scientist I have come
to learn that information is
only as valuable as its source. Your credentials seemed authentic."
Langdon's eyes were still riveted on the body.
Kohler said nothing more. He simply stared, apparently waiting for Langdon to
shed some light on the
scene before them.
Langdon looked up, glancing around the frozen flat. "Perhaps we should discuss
this in a warmer place?"
"This room is fine." Kohler seemed oblivious to the cold. "We'll talk here."
Langdon frowned. The Illuminati history was by no means a simple one. I'll
freeze to death trying to
explain it. He gazed again at the brand, feeling a renewed sense of awe.
Although accounts of the Illuminati emblem were legendary in modern symbology,
no academic had ever
actually seen it. Ancient documents described the symbol as an ambigram-ambi
meaning "both"-signifying
it was legible both ways. And although ambigrams were common in
symbology-swastikas, yin yang,
Jewish stars, simple crosses-the idea that a word could be crafted into an
ambigram seemed utterly
impossible. Modern symbologists had tried for years to forge the word
"Illuminati" into a perfectly
symmetrical style, but they had failed miserably. Most academics had now decided
the symbol's existence
was a myth.
"So who are the Illuminati?" Kohler demanded.
Yes, Langdon thought, who indeed? He began his tale.
"Since the beginning of history," Langdon explained, "a deep rift has existed
between science and religion.
Outspoken scientists like Copernicus-"
"Were murdered," Kohler interjected. "Murdered by the church for revealing
scientific truths. Religion has
always persecuted science."
"Yes. But in the 1500s, a group of men in Rome fought back against the church.
Some of Italy's most
enlightened men-physicists, mathematicians, astronomers-began meeting secretly
to share their concerns
about the church's inaccurate teachings. They feared that the church's monopoly
on 'truth' threatened
academic enlightenment around the world. They founded the world's first
scientific think tank, calling
themselves 'the enlightened ones.' "
"The Illuminati."
"Yes," Langdon said. "Europe's most learned minds . . . dedicated to the quest
for scientific truth."
Kohler fell silent.
"Of course, the Illuminati were hunted ruthlessly by the Catholic Church. Only
through rites of extreme
secrecy did the scientists remain safe. Word spread through the academic
underground, and the Illuminati
brotherhood grew to include academics from all over Europe. The scientists met
regularly in Rome at an
ultrasecret lair they called the Church of Illumination."
Kohler coughed and shifted in his chair.
"Many of the Illuminati," Langdon continued, "wanted to combat the church's
tyranny with acts of
violence, but their most revered member persuaded them against it. He was a
pacifist, as well as one of
history's most famous scientists."
Langdon was certain Kohler would recognize the name. Even nonscientists were
familiar with the ill-fated
astronomer who had been arrested and almost executed by the church for
proclaiming that the sun, and not
the earth, was the center of the solar system. Although his data were
incontrovertible, the astronomer was
severely punished for implying that God had placed mankind somewhere other than
at the center of His
universe.
"His name was Galileo Galilei," Langdon said.
Kohler looked up. "Galileo?"
"Yes. Galileo was an Illuminatus. And he was also a devout Catholic. He tried to
soften the church's
position on science by proclaiming that science did not undermine the existence
of God, but rather
reinforced it. He wrote once that when he looked through his telescope at the
spinning planets, he could
hear God's voice in the music of the spheres. He held that science and religion
were not enemies, but rather
allies-two different languages telling the same story, a story of symmetry and
balance . . . heaven and hell,
night and day, hot and cold, God and Satan. Both science and religion rejoiced
in God's symmetry . . . the
endless contest of light and dark." Langdon paused, stamping his feet to stay
warm.
Kohler simply sat in his wheelchair and stared.
"Unfortunately," Langdon added, "the unification of science and religion was not
what the church wanted."
"Of course not," Kohler interrupted. "The union would have nullified the
church's claim as the sole vessel
through which man could understand God. So the church tried Galileo as a
heretic, found him guilty, and
put him under permanent house arrest. I am quite aware of scientific history,
Mr. Langdon. But this was all
centuries ago. What does it have to do with Leonardo Vetra?"
The million dollar question. Langdon cut to the chase. "Galileo's arrest threw
the Illuminati into upheaval.
Mistakes were made, and the church discovered the identities of four members,
whom they captured and
interrogated. But the four scientists revealed nothing . . . even under
torture."
"Torture?"
Langdon nodded. "They were branded alive. On the chest. With the symbol of a
cross."
Kohler's eyes widened, and he shot an uneasy glance at Vetra's body.
"Then the scientists were brutally murdered, their dead bodies dropped in the
streets of Rome as a warning
to others thinking of joining the Illuminati. With the church closing in, the
remaining Illuminati fled Italy."
Langdon paused to make his point. He looked directly into Kohler's dead eyes.
"The Illuminati went deep
underground, where they began mixing with other refugee groups fleeing the
Catholic purges-mystics,
alchemists, occultists, Muslims, Jews. Over the years, the Illuminati began
absorbing new members. A new
Illuminati emerged. A darker Illuminati. A deeply anti-Christian Illuminati.
They grew very powerful,
employing mysterious rites, deadly secrecy, vowing someday to rise again and
take revenge on the Catholic
Church. Their power grew to the point where the church considered them the
single most dangerous anti-
Christian force on earth. The Vatican denounced the brotherhood as Shaitan."
"Shaitan?"
"It's Islamic. It means 'adversary' . . . God's adversary. The church chose
Islam for the name because it
was a language they considered dirty." Langdon hesitated. "Shaitan is the root
of an English word . .
.Satan."
An uneasiness crossed Kohler's face.
Langdon's voice was grim. "Mr. Kohler, I do not know how this marking appeared
on this man's chest . . .
or why . . . but you are looking at the long-lost symbol of the world's oldest
and most powerful satanic
cult."
10
T he alley was narrow and deserted. The Hassassin strode quickly now, his black
eyes filling with
anticipation. As he approached his destination, Janus's parting words echoed in
his mind. Phase two begins
shortly. Get some rest.
The Hassassin smirked. He had been awake all night, but sleep was the last thing
on his mind. Sleep was
for the weak. He was a warrior like his ancestors before him, and his people
never slept once a battle had
begun. This battle had most definitely begun, and he had been given the honor of
spilling first blood. Now
he had two hours to celebrate his glory before going back to work.
Sleep? There are far better ways to relax . . .
An appetite for hedonistic pleasure was something bred into him by his
ancestors. His ascendants had
indulged in hashish, but he preferred a different kind of gratification. He took
pride in his body-a welltuned,
lethal machine, which, despite his heritage, he refused to pollute with
narcotics. He had developed a
more nourishing addiction than drugs . . . a far more healthy and satisfying
reward.
Feeling a familiar anticipation swelling within him, the Hassassin moved faster
down the alley. He arrived
at the nondescript door and rang the bell. A view slit in the door opened, and
two soft brown eyes studied
him appraisingly. Then the door swung open.
"Welcome," the well-dressed woman said. She ushered him into an impeccably
furnished sitting room
where the lights were low. The air was laced with expensive perfume and musk.
"Whenever you are
ready." She handed him a book of photographs. "Ring me when you have made your
choice." Then she
disappeared.
The Hassassin smiled.
As he sat on the plush divan and positioned the photo album on his lap, he felt
a carnal hunger stir.
Although his people did not celebrate Christmas, he imagined that this is what
it must feel like to be a
Christian child, sitting before a stack of Christmas presents, about to discover
the miracles inside. He
opened the album and examined the photos. A lifetime of sexual fantasies stared
back at him.
Marisa. An Italian goddess. Fiery. A young Sophia Loren.
Sachiko. A Japanese geisha. Lithe. No doubt skilled.
Kanara. A stunning black vision. Muscular. Exotic.
He examined the entire album twice and made his choice. He pressed a button on
the table beside him. A
minute later the woman who had greeted him reappeared. He indicated his
selection. She smiled. "Follow
me."
After handling the financial arrangements, the woman made a hushed phone call.
She waited a few minutes
and then led him up a winding marble staircase to a luxurious hallway. "It's the
gold door on the end," she
said. "You have expensive taste."
I should, he thought. I am a connoisseur.
The Hassassin padded the length of the hallway like a panther anticipating a
long overdue meal. When he
reached the doorway he smiled to himself. It was already ajar . . . welcoming
him in. He pushed, and the
door swung noiselessly open.
When he saw his selection, he knew he had chosen well. She was exactly as he had
requested . . . nude,
lying on her back, her arms tied to the bedposts with thick velvet cords.
He crossed the room and ran a dark finger across her ivory abdomen. I killed
last night, he thought. You are
my reward.
11
S atanic?" Kohler wiped his mouth and shifted uncomfortably. "This is the symbol
of a satanic cult?"
Langdon paced the frozen room to keep warm. "The Illuminati were satanic. But
not in the modern sense."
Langdon quickly explained how most people pictured satanic cults as
devil-worshiping fiends, and yet
Satanists historically were educated men who stood as adversaries to the church.
Shaitan. The rumors of
satanic black-magic animal sacrifices and the pentagram ritual were nothing but
lies spread by the church
as a smear campaign against their adversaries. Over time, opponents of the
church, wanting to emulate the
Illuminati, began believing the lies and acting them out. Thus, modern Satanism
was born.
Kohler grunted abruptly. "This is all ancient history. I want to know how this
symbol got here."
Langdon took a deep breath. "The symbol itself was created by an anonymous
sixteenth-century Illuminati
artist as a tribute to Galileo's love of symmetry-a kind of sacred Illuminati
logo. The brotherhood kept the
design secret, allegedly planning to reveal it only when they had amassed enough
power to resurface and
carry out their final goal."
Kohler looked unsettled. "So this symbol means the Illuminati brotherhood is
resurfacing?"
Langdon frowned. "That would be impossible. There is one chapter of Illuminati
history that I have not yet
explained."
Kohler's voice intensified. "Enlighten me."
Langdon rubbed his palms together, mentally sorting through the hundreds of
documents he'd read or
written on the Illuminati. "The Illuminati were survivors," he explained. "When
they fled Rome, they
traveled across Europe looking for a safe place to regroup. They were taken in
by another secret society . . .
a brotherhood of wealthy Bavarian stone craftsmen called the Freemasons."
Kohler looked startled. "The Masons?"
Langdon nodded, not at all surprised that Kohler had heard of the group. The
brotherhood of the Masons
currently had over five million members worldwide, half of them residing in the
United States, and over
one million of them in Europe.
"Certainly the Masons are not satanic," Kohler declared, sounding suddenly
skeptical.
"Absolutely not. The Masons fell victim of their own benevolence. After
harboring the fleeing scientists in
the 1700s, the Masons unknowingly became a front for the Illuminati. The
Illuminati grew within their
ranks, gradually taking over positions of power within the lodges. They quietly
reestablished their scientific
brotherhood deep within the Masons-a kind of secret society within a secret
society. Then the Illuminati
used the worldwide connection of Masonic lodges to spread their influence."
Langdon drew a cold breath before racing on. "Obliteration of Catholicism was
the Illuminati's central
covenant. The brotherhood held that the superstitious dogma spewed forth by the
church was mankind's
greatest enemy. They feared that if religion continued to promote pious myth as
absolute fact, scientific
progress would halt, and mankind would be doomed to an ignorant future of
senseless holy wars."
"Much like we see today."
Langdon frowned. Kohler was right. Holy wars were still making headlines. My God
is better than your
God. It seemed there was always close correlation between true believers and
high body counts.
"Go on," Kohler said.
Langdon gathered his thoughts and continued. "The Illuminati grew more powerful
in Europe and set their
sights on America, a fledgling government many of whose leaders were
Masons-George Washington, Ben
Franklin-honest, God-fearing men who were unaware of the Illuminati stronghold
on the Masons. The
Illuminati took advantage of the infiltration and helped found banks,
universities, and industry to finance
their ultimate quest." Langdon paused. "The creation of a single unified world
state-a kind of secular New
World Order."
Kohler did not move.
"A New World Order," Langdon repeated, "based on scientific enlightenment. They
called it their
Luciferian Doctrine. The church claimed Lucifer was a reference to the devil,
but the brotherhood insisted
Lucifer was intended in its literal Latin meaning-bringer of light. Or
Illuminator."
Kohler sighed, and his voice grew suddenly solemn. "Mr. Langdon, please sit
down."
Langdon sat tentatively on a frost-covered chair.
Kohler moved his wheelchair closer. "I am not sure I understand everything you
have just told me, but I do
understand this. Leonardo Vetra was one of CERN's greatest assets. He was also a
friend. I need you to
help me locate the Illuminati."
Langdon didn't know how to respond. "Locate the Illuminati?" He's kidding,
right? "I'm afraid, sir, that
will be utterly impossible."
Kohler's brow creased. "What do you mean? You won't-"
"Mr. Kohler." Langdon leaned toward his host, uncertain how to make him
understand what he was about
to say. "I did not finish my story. Despite appearances, it is extremely
unlikely that this brand was put here
by the Illuminati. There has been no evidence of their existence for over half a
century, and most scholars
agree the Illuminati have been defunct for many years."
The words hit silence. Kohler stared through the fog with a look somewhere
between stupefaction and
anger. "How the hell can you tell me this group is extinct when their name is
seared into this man!"
Langdon had been asking himself that question all morning. The appearance of the
Illuminati ambigram
was astonishing. Symbologists worldwide would be dazzled. And yet, the academic
in Langdon understood
that the brand's reemergence proved absolutely nothing about the Illuminati.
"Symbols," Langdon said, "in no way confirm the presence of their original
creators."
"What is that supposed to mean?"
"It means that when organized philosophies like the Illuminati go out of
existence, their symbols remain . .
. available for adoption by other groups. It's called transference. It's very
common in symbology. The
Nazis took the swastika from the Hindus, the Christians adopted the cruciform
from the Egyptians, the-"
"This morning," Kohler challenged, "when I typed the word 'Illuminati' into the
computer, it returned
thousands of current references. Apparently a lot of people think this group is
still active."
"Conspiracy buffs," Langdon replied. He had always been annoyed by the plethora
of conspiracy theories
that circulated in modern pop culture. The media craved apocalyptic headlines,
and self-proclaimed "cult
specialists" were still cashing in on millennium hype with fabricated stories
that the Illuminati were alive
and well and organizing their New World Order. Recently the New York Times had
reported the eerie
Masonic ties of countless famous men-Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the Duke of Kent,
Peter Sellers, Irving
Berlin, Prince Philip, Louis Armstrong, as well as a pantheon of well-known
modern-day industrialists and
banking magnates.
Kohler pointed angrily at Vetra's body. "Considering the evidence, I would say
perhaps the conspiracy
buffs are correct."
"I realize how it appears," Langdon said as diplomatically as he could. "And yet
a far more plausible
explanation is that some other organization has taken control of the Illuminati
brand and is using it for their
own purposes."
"What purposes? What does this murder prove?"
Good question, Langdon thought. He also was having trouble imagining where
anyone could have turned
up the Illuminati brand after 400 years. "All I can tell you is that even if the
Illuminati were still active
today, which I am virtually positive they are not, they would never be involved
in Leonardo Vetra's death."
"No?"
"No. The Illuminati may have believed in the abolition of Christianity, but they
wielded their power
through political and financial means, not through terrorists acts. Furthermore,
the Illuminati had a strict
code of morality regarding who they saw as enemies. They held men of science in
the highest regard. There
is no way they would have murdered a fellow scientist like Leonardo Vetra."
Kohler's eyes turned to ice. "Perhaps I failed to mention that Leonardo Vetra
was anything but an ordinary
scientist."
Langdon exhaled patiently. "Mr. Kohler, I'm sure Leonardo Vetra was brilliant in
many ways, but the fact
remains-"
Without warning, Kohler spun in his wheelchair and accelerated out of the living
room, leaving a wake of
swirling mist as he disappeared down a hallway.
For the love of God, Langdon groaned. He followed. Kohler was waiting for him in
a small alcove at the
end of the hallway.
"This is Leonardo's study," Kohler said, motioning to the sliding door. "Perhaps
when you see it you'll
understand things differently." With an awkward grunt, Kohler heaved, and the
door slid open.
Langdon peered into the study and immediately felt his skin crawl. Holy mother
of Jesus, he said to
himself.
12
I n another country, a young guard sat patiently before an expansive bank of
video monitors. He watched
as images flashed before him-live feeds from hundreds of wireless video cameras
that surveyed the
sprawling complex. The images went by in an endless procession.
An ornate hallway.A private office.
An industrial-size kitchen.
As the pictures went by, the guard fought off a daydream. He was nearing the end
of his shift, and yet he
was still vigilant. Service was an honor. Someday he would be granted his
ultimate reward.
As his thoughts drifted, an image before him registered alarm. Suddenly, with a
reflexive jerk that startled
even himself, his hand shot out and hit a button on the control panel. The
picture before him froze.
His nerves tingling, he leaned toward the screen for a closer look. The reading
on the monitor told him the
image was being transmitted from camera #86-a camera that was supposed to be
overlooking a hallway.
But the image before him was most definitely not a hallway.
13
L angdon stared in bewilderment at the study before him. "What is this place?"
Despite the welcome
blast of warm air on his face, he stepped through the door with trepidation.
Kohler said nothing as he followed Langdon inside.
Langdon scanned the room, not having the slightest idea what to make of it. It
contained the most peculiar
mix of artifacts he had ever seen. On the far wall, dominating the decor, was an
enormous wooden crucifix,
which Langdon placed as fourteenth-century Spanish. Above the cruciform,
suspended from the ceiling,
was a metallic mobile of the orbiting planets. To the left was an oil painting
of the Virgin Mary, and beside
that was a laminated periodic table of elements. On the side wall, two
additional brass cruciforms flanked a
poster of Albert Einstein, his famous quote reading, GOD DOES NOT PLAY DICE WITH
THE
UNIVERSE.
Langdon moved into the room, looking around in astonishment. A leather-bound
Bible sat on Vetra's desk
beside a plastic Bohr model of an atom and a miniature replica of Michelangelo's
Moses.
Talk about eclectic, Langdon thought. The warmth felt good, but something about
the decor sent a new set
of chills through his body. He felt like he was witnessing the clash of two
philosophical titans . . . an
unsettling blur of opposing forces. He scanned the titles on the bookshelf:
The God Particle
The Tao of Physics
God: The Evidence
One of the bookends was etched with a quote:
TRUE SCIENCE DISCOVERS GOD
WAITING BEHIND EVERY DOOR.
-POPE PIUS XII
"Leonardo was a Catholic priest," Kohler said.
Langdon turned. "A priest? I thought you said he was a physicist."
"He was both. Men of science and religion are not unprecedented in history.
Leonardo was one of them. He
considered physics 'God's natural law.' He claimed God's handwriting was visible
in the natural order all
around us. Through science he hoped to prove God's existence to the doubting
masses. He considered
himself a theo-physicist."
Theo-physicist? Langdon thought it sounded impossibly oxymoronic.
"The field of particle physics," Kohler said, "has made some shocking
discoveries lately-discoveries quite
spiritual in implication. Leonardo was responsible for many of them."
Langdon studied CERN's director, still trying to process the bizarre
surroundings. "Spirituality and
physics?" Langdon had spent his career studying religious history, and if there
was one recurring theme, it
was that science and religion had been oil and water since day one . . .
archenemies . . . unmixable.
"Vetra was on the cutting edge of particle physics," Kohler said. "He was
starting to fuse science and
religion . . . showing that they complement each other in most unanticipated
ways. He called the field New
Physics." Kohler pulled a book from the shelf and handed it to Langdon.
Langdon studied the cover. God, Miracles, and the New Physics-by Leonardo Vetra.
"The field is small," Kohler said, "but it's bringing fresh answers to some old
questions-questions about the
origin of the universe and the forces that bind us all. Leonardo believed his
research had the potential to
convert millions to a more spiritual life. Last year he categorically proved the
existence of an energy force
that unites us all. He actually demonstrated that we are all physically
connected . . . that the molecules in
your body are intertwined with the molecules in mine . . . that there is a
single force moving within all of
us."
Langdon felt disconcerted. And the power of God shall unite us all. "Mr. Vetra
actually found a way to
demonstrate that particles are connected?"
"Conclusive evidence. A recent Scientific American article hailed New Physics as
a surer path to God than
religion itself."
The comment hit home. Langdon suddenly found himself thinking of the
antireligious Illuminati.
Reluctantly, he forced himself to permit a momentary intellectual foray into the
impossible. If the
Illuminati were indeed still active, would they have killed Leonardo to stop him
from bringing his religious
message to the masses? Langdon shook off the thought. Absurd! The Illuminati are
ancient history! All
academics know that!
"Vetra had plenty of enemies in the scientific world," Kohler went on. "Many
scientific purists despised
him. Even here at CERN. They felt that using analytical physics to support
religious principles was a
treason against science."
"But aren't scientists today a bit less defensive about the church?"
Kohler grunted in disgust. "Why should we be? The church may not be burning
scientists at the stake
anymore, but if you think they've released their reign over science, ask
yourself why half the schools in
your country are not allowed to teach evolution. Ask yourself why the U.S.
Christian Coalition is the most
influential lobby against scientific progress in the world. The battle between
science and religion is still
raging, Mr. Langdon. It has moved from the battlefields to the boardrooms, but
it is still raging."
Langdon realized Kohler was right. Just last week the Harvard School of Divinity
had marched on the
Biology Building, protesting the genetic engineering taking place in the
graduate program. The chairman of
the Bio Department, famed ornithologist Richard Aaronian, defended his
curriculum by hanging a huge
banner from his office window. The banner depicted the Christian "fish" modified
with four little feet-a
tribute, Aaronian claimed, to the African lungfishes ' evolution onto dry land.
Beneath the fish, instead of
the word "Jesus," was the proclamation "DARWIN!"
A sharp beeping sound cut the air, and Langdon looked up. Kohler reached down
into the array of
electronics on his wheelchair. He slipped a beeper out of its holder and read
the incoming message.
"Good. That is Leonardo's daughter. Ms. Vetra is arriving at the helipad right
now. We will meet her there.
I think it best she not come up here and see her father this way."
Langdon agreed. It would be a shock no child deserved.
"I will ask Ms. Vetra to explain the project she and her father have been
working on . . . perhaps shedding
light on why he was murdered."
"You think Vetra's work is why he was killed?"
"Quite possibly. Leonardo told me he was working on something groundbreaking.
That is all he said. He
had become very secretive about the project. He had a private lab and demanded
seclusion, which I gladly
afforded him on account of his brilliance. His work had been consuming huge
amounts of electric power
lately, but I refrained from questioning him." Kohler rotated toward the study
door. "There is, however, one
more thing you need to know before we leave this flat."
Langdon was not sure he wanted to hear it.
"An item was stolen from Vetra by his murderer."
"An item?"
"Follow me."
The director propelled his wheelchair back into the fog-filled living room.
Langdon followed, not knowing
what to expect. Kohler maneuvered to within inches of Vetra's body and stopped.
He ushered Langdon to
join him. Reluctantly, Langdon came close, bile rising in his throat at the
smell of the victim's frozen urine.
"Look at his face," Kohler said.
Look at his face? Langdon frowned. I thought you said something was stolen.
Hesitantly, Langdon knelt down. He tried to see Vetra's face, but the head was
twisted 180 degrees
backward, his face pressed into the carpet.
Struggling against his handicap Kohler reached down and carefully twisted
Vetra's frozen head. Cracking
loudly, the corpse's face rotated into view, contorted in agony. Kohler held it
there a moment.
"Sweet Jesus!" Langdon cried, stumbling back in horror. Vetra's face was covered
in blood. A single hazel
eye stared lifelessly back at him. The other socket was tattered and empty.
"They stole his eye? "
14
L angdon stepped out of Building C into the open air, grateful to be outside
Vetra's flat. The sun helped
dissolve the image of the empty eye socket emblazoned into his mind.
"This way, please," Kohler said, veering up a steep path. The electric
wheelchair seemed to accelerate
effortlessly. "Ms. Vetra will be arriving any moment."
Langdon hurried to keep up.
"So," Kohler asked. "Do you still doubt the Illuminati's involvement?"
Langdon had no idea what to think anymore. Vetra's religious affiliations were
definitely troubling, and yet
Langdon could not bring himself to abandon every shred of academic evidence he
had ever researched.
Besides, there was the eye . . .
"I still maintain," Langdon said, more forcefully than he intended. "that the
Illuminati are not responsible
for this murder. The missing eye is proof."
"What?"
"Random mutilation," Langdon explained, "is very . . . un-Illuminati. Cult
specialists see desultory
defacement from inexperienced fringe sects-zealots who commit random acts of
terrorism-but the
Illuminati have always been more deliberate."
"Deliberate? Surgically removing someone's eyeball is not deliberate?"
"It sends no clear message. It serves no higher purpose."
Kohler's wheelchair stopped short at the top of the hill. He turned. "Mr.
Langdon, believe me, that missing
eye does indeed serve a higher purpose . . . a much higher purpose."
As the two men crossed the grassy rise, the beating of helicopter blades became
audible to the west. A chopper appeared, arching across the open valley toward them. It banked sharply,
then slowed to a hover
over a helipad painted on the grass.
Langdon watched, detached, his mind churning circles like the blades, wondering
if a full night's sleep
would make his current disorientation any clearer. Somehow, he doubted it.
As the skids touched down, a pilot jumped out and started unloading gear. There
was a lot of it-duffels,
vinyl wet bags, scuba tanks, and crates of what appeared to be high-tech diving
equipment.
Langdon was confused. "Is that Ms. Vetra's gear?" he yelled to Kohler over the
roar of the engines.
Kohler nodded and yelled back, "She was doing biological research in the
Balearic Sea."
"I thought you said she was a physicist! "
"She is. She's a Bio Entanglement Physicist. She studies the interconnectivity
of life systems. Her work ties
closely with her father's work in particle physics. Recently she disproved one
of Einstein's fundamental
theories by using atomically synchronized cameras to observe a school of tuna
fish."
Langdon searched his host's face for any glint of humor. Einstein and tuna fish?
He was starting to wonder
if the X-33 space plane had mistakenly dropped him off on the wrong planet.
A moment later, Vittoria Vetra emerged from the fuselage. Robert Langdon
realized today was going to be
a day of endless surprises. Descending from the chopper in her khaki shorts and
white sleeveless top,
Vittoria Vetra looked nothing like the bookish physicist he had expected. Lithe
and graceful, she was tall
with chestnut skin and long black hair that swirled in the backwind of the
rotors. Her face was
unmistakably Italian-not overly beautiful, but possessing full, earthy features
that even at twenty yards
seemed to exude a raw sensuality. As the air currents buffeted her body, her
clothes clung, accentuating her
slender torso and small breasts.
"Ms. Vetra is a woman of tremendous personal strength," Kohler said, seeming to
sense Langdon's
captivation. "She spends months at a time working in dangerous ecological
systems. She is a strict
vegetarian and CERN's resident guru of Hatha yoga."
Hatha yoga? Langdon mused. The ancient Buddhist art of meditative stretching
seemed an odd proficiency
for the physicist daughter of a Catholic priest.
Langdon watched Vittoria approach. She had obviously been crying, her deep sable
eyes filled with
emotions Langdon could not place. Still, she moved toward them with fire and
command. Her limbs were
strong and toned, radiating the healthy luminescence of Mediterranean flesh that
had enjoyed long hours in
the sun.
"Vittoria," Kohler said as she approached. "My deepest condolences. It's a
terrible loss for science . . . for
all of us here at CERN."
Vittoria nodded gratefully. When she spoke, her voice was smooth-a throaty,
accented English. "Do you
know who is responsible yet?"
"We're still working on it."
She turned to Langdon, holding out a slender hand. "My name is Vittoria Vetra.
You're from Interpol, I
assume?"
Langdon took her hand, momentarily spellbound by the depth of her watery gaze.
"Robert Langdon." He
was unsure what else to say.
"Mr. Langdon is not with the authorities," Kohler explained. "He is a specialist
from the U.S. He's here to
help us locate who is responsible for this situation."
Vittoria looked uncertain. "And the police?"
Kohler exhaled but said nothing.
"Where is his body?" she demanded.
"Being attended to."
The white lie surprised Langdon.
"I want to see him," Vittoria said.
"Vittoria," Kohler urged, "your father was brutally murdered. You would be
better to remember him as he
was."
Vittoria began to speak but was interrupted.
"Hey, Vittoria!" voices called from the distance. "Welcome home!"
She turned. A group of scientists passing near the helipad waved happily.
"Disprove any more of Einstein's theories?" one shouted.
Another added, "Your dad must be proud!"
Vittoria gave the men an awkward wave as they passed. Then she turned to Kohler,
her face now clouded
with confusion. "Nobody knows yet?"
"I decided discretion was paramount."
"You haven't told the staff my father was murdered? " Her mystified tone was now
laced with anger.
Kohler's tone hardened instantly. "Perhaps you forget, Ms. Vetra, as soon as I
report your father's murder,
there will be an investigation of CERN. Including a thorough examination of his
lab. I have always tried to
respect your father's privacy. Your father has told me only two things about
your current project. One, that
it has the potential to bring CERN millions of francs in licensing contracts in
the next decade. And two, that
it is not ready for public disclosure because it is still hazardous technology.
Considering these two facts, I
would prefer strangers not poke around inside his lab and either steal his work
or kill themselves in the
process and hold CERN liable. Do I make myself clear?"
Vittoria stared, saying nothing. Langdon sensed in her a reluctant respect and
acceptance of Kohler's logic.
"Before we report anything to the authorities," Kohler said, "I need to know
what you two were working
on. I need you to take us to your lab."
"The lab is irrelevant," Vittoria said. "Nobody knew what my father and I were
doing. The experiment
could not possibly have anything to do with my father's murder."
Kohler exhaled a raspy, ailing breath. "Evidence suggests otherwise."
"Evidence? What evidence?"
Langdon was wondering the same thing.
Kohler was dabbing his mouth again. "You'll just have to trust me."
It was clear, from Vittoria's smoldering gaze, that she did not.
15
L angdon strode silently behind Vittoria and Kohler as they moved back into the
main atrium where
Langdon's bizarre visit had begun. Vittoria's legs drove in fluid
efficiency-like an Olympic diver-a
potency, Langdon figured, no doubt born from the flexibility and control of
yoga. He could hear her
breathing slowly and deliberately, as if somehow trying to filter her grief.
Langdon wanted to say something to her, offer his sympathy. He too had once felt
the abrupt hollowness of
unexpectedly losing a parent. He remembered the funeral mostly, rainy and gray.
Two days after his twelfth
birthday. The house was filled with gray-suited men from the office, men who
squeezed his hand too hard
when they shook it. They were all mumbling words like cardiac and stress. His
mother joked through teary
eyes that she'd always been able to follow the stock market simply by holding
her husband's hand . . . his
pulse her own private ticker tape.
Once, when his father was alive, Langdon had heard his mom begging his father to
"stop and smell the
roses." That year, Langdon bought his father a tiny blown-glass rose for
Christmas. It was the most
beautiful thing Langdon had ever seen . . . the way the sun caught it, throwing
