Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
directly at the Hassassin.
The cut on his hand bit sharply. "Let her go."
The Hassassin seemed for a moment to be considering it. Exhaling, he dropped his
shoulders. It was a clear
motion of surrender, and yet at that exact instant the Hassassin's arm seemed to
accelerate unexpectedly.
There was a blur of dark muscle, and a blade suddenly came tearing through the
air toward Langdon's
chest.
Whether it was instinct or exhaustion that buckled Langdon's knees at that
moment, he didn't know, but the
knife sailed past his left ear and clattered to the floor behind him. The
Hassassin seemed unfazed. He
smiled at Langdon, who was kneeling now, holding the metal bar. The killer
stepped away from Vittoria
and moved toward Langdon like a stalking lion.
As Langdon scrambled to his feet, lifting the bar again, his wet turtleneck and
pants felt suddenly more
restrictive. The Hassassin, half-clothed, seemed to move much faster, the wound
on his foot apparently not
slowing him at all. Langdon sensed this was a man accustomed to pain. For the
first time in his life,
Langdon wished he were holding a very big gun.
The Hassassin circled slowly, as if enjoying himself, always just out of reach,
moving toward the knife on
the floor. Langdon cut him off. Then the killer moved back toward Vittoria.
Again Langdon cut him off.
"There's still time," Langdon ventured. "Tell me where the canister is. The
Vatican will pay more than the
Illuminati ever could."
"You are naïve."
Langdon jabbed with the bar. The Hassassin dodged. He navigated around a bench,
holding the weapon in
front of him, trying to corner the Hassassin in the oval room. This damn room
has no corners! Oddly, the
Hassassin did not seem interested in attacking or fleeing. He was simply playing
Langdon's game. Coolly
waiting.
Waiting for what? The killer kept circling, a master at positioning himself. It
was like an endless game of
chess. The weapon in Langdon's hand was getting heavy, and he suddenly sensed he
knew what the
Hassassin was waiting for. He's tiring me out. It was working, too. Langdon was
hit by a surge of
weariness, the adrenaline alone no longer enough to keep him alert. He knew he
had to make a move.
The Hassassin seemed to read Langdon's mind, shifting again, as if intentionally
leading Langdon toward a
table in the middle of the room. Langdon could tell there was something on the
table. Something glinted in
the torchlight. A weapon? Langdon kept his eyes focused on the Hassassin and
maneuvered himself closer
to the table. When the Hassassin cast a long, guileless glance at the table,
Langdon tried to fight the
obvious bait. But instinct overruled. He stole a glance. The damage was done.
It was not a weapon at all. The sight momentarily riveted him.
On the table lay a rudimentary copper chest, crusted with ancient patina. The
chest was a pentagon. The lid
lay open. Arranged inside in five padded compartments were five brands. The
brands were forged of ironlarge
embossing tools with stout handles of wood. Langdon had no doubt what they
said.
ILLUMINATI, EARTH, AIR, FIRE, WATER.
Langdon snapped his head back up, fearing the Hassassin would lunge. He did not.
The killer was waiting,
almost as if he were refreshed by the game. Langdon fought to recover his focus,
locking eyes again with
his quarry, thrusting with the pipe. But the image of the box hung in his mind.
Although the brands
themselves were mesmerizing-artifacts few Illuminati scholars even believed
existed-Langdon suddenly
realized there had been something else about the box that had ignited a wave of
foreboding within. As the
Hassassin maneuvered again, Langdon stole another glance downward.
My God!
In the chest, the five brands sat in compartments around the outer edge. But in
the center, there was another
compartment. This partition was empty, but it clearly was intended to hold
another brand . . . a brand much
larger than the others, and perfectly square.
The attack was a blur.
The Hassassin swooped toward him like a bird of prey. Langdon, his concentration
having been masterfully
diverted, tried to counter, but the pipe felt like a tree trunk in his hands.
His parry was too slow. The
Hassassin dodged. As Langdon tried to retract the bar, the Hassassin's hands
shot out and grabbed it. The
man's grip was strong, his injured arm seeming no longer to affect him.
Violently, the two men struggled.
Langdon felt the bar ripped away, and a searing pain shot through his palm. An
instant later, Langdon was
staring into the splintered point of the weapon. The hunter had become the
hunted.
Langdon felt like he'd been hit by a cyclone. The Hassassin circled, smiling
now, backing Langdon against
the wall. "What is your American adàgio?" he chided. "Something about curiosity
and the cat?"
Langdon could barely focus. He cursed his carelessness as the Hassassin moved
in. Nothing was making
sense. A sixth Illuminati brand? In frustration he blurted, "I've never read
anything about a sixth Illuminati
brand!"
"I think you probably have." The killer chuckled as he herded Langdon around the
oval wall.
Langdon was lost. He most certainly had not. There were five Illuminati brands.
He backed up, searching
the room for any weapon at all.
"A perfect union of the ancient elements," the Hassassin said. "The final brand
is the most brilliant of all.
I'm afraid you will never see it, though."
Langdon sensed he would not be seeing much of anything in a moment. He kept
backing up, searching the
room for an option. "And you've seen this final brand?" Langdon demanded, trying
to buy time.
"Someday perhaps they will honor me. As I prove myself." He jabbed at Langdon,
as if enjoying a game.
Langdon slid backward again. He had the feeling the Hassassin was directing him
around the wall toward
some unseen destination. Where? Langdon could not afford to look behind him.
"The brand?" he
demanded. "Where is it?"
"Not here. Janus is apparently the only one who holds it."
"Janus?" Langdon did not recognize the name.
"The Illuminati leader. He is arriving shortly."
"The Illuminati leader is coming here?"
"To perform the final branding."
Langdon shot a frightened glance to Vittoria. She looked strangely calm, her
eyes closed to the world
around her, her lungs pulling slowly . . . deeply. Was she the final victim? Was
he?
"Such conceit," the Hassassin sneered, watching Langdon's eyes. "The two of you
are nothing. You will
die, of course, that is for certain. But the final victim of whom I speak is a
truly dangerous enemy."
Langdon tried to make sense of the Hassassin's words. A dangerous enemy? The top
cardinals were all
dead. The Pope was dead. The Illuminati had wiped them all out. Langdon found
the answer in the vacuum
of the Hassassin's eyes.
The camerlegno.
Camerlegno Ventresca was the one man who had been a beacon of hope for the world
through this entire
tribulation. The camerlegno had done more to condemn the Illuminati tonight than
decades of conspiracy
theorists. Apparently he would pay the price. He was the Illuminati's final
target.
"You'll never get to him," Langdon challenged.
"Not I," the Hassassin replied, forcing Langdon farther back around the wall.
"That honor is reserved for
Janus himself."
"The Illuminati leader himself intends to brand the camerlegno?"
"Power has its privileges."
"But no one could possibly get into Vatican City right now!"
The Hassassin looked smug. "Not unless he had an appointment."
Langdon was confused. The only person expected at the Vatican right now was the
person the press was
calling the 11th Hour Samaritan-the person Rocher said had information that
could save-
Langdon stopped short. Good God!
The Hassassin smirked, clearly enjoying Langdon's sickening cognition. "I too
wondered how Janus would
gain entrance. Then in the van I heard the radio-a report about an 11th hour
Samaritan." He smiled. "The
Vatican will welcome Janus with open arms."
Langdon almost stumbled backward. Janus is the Samaritan! It was an unthinkable
deception. The
Illuminati leader would get a royal escort directly to the camerlegno's
chambers. But how did Janus fool
Rocher? Or was Rocher somehow involved? Langdon felt a chill. Ever since he had
almost suffocated in
the secret archives, Langdon had not entirely trusted Rocher.
The Hassassin jabbed suddenly, nicking Langdon in the side.
Langdon jumped back, his temper flaring. "Janus will never get out alive!"
The Hassassin shrugged. "Some causes are worth dying for."
Langdon sensed the killer was serious. Janus coming to Vatican City on a suicide
mission? A question of
honor? For an instant, Langdon's mind took in the entire terrifying cycle. The
Illuminati plot had come full
circle. The priest whom the Illuminati had inadvertently brought to power by
killing the Pope had emerged
as a worthy adversary. In a final act of defiance, the Illuminati leader would
destroy him.
Suddenly, Langdon felt the wall behind him disappear. There was a rush of cool
air, and he staggered
backward into the night. The balcony! He now realized what the Hassassin had in
mind.
Langdon immediately sensed the precipice behind him-a hundred-foot drop to the
courtyard below. He had
seen it on his way in. The Hassassin wasted no time. With a violent surge, he
lunged. The spear sliced
toward Langdon's midsection. Langdon skidded back, and the point came up short,
catching only his shirt.
Again the point came at him. Langdon slid farther back, feeling the banister
right behind him. Certain the
next jab would kill him, Langdon attempted the absurd. Spinning to one side, he
reached out and grabbed
the shaft, sending a jolt of pain through his palm. Langdon held on.
The Hassassin seemed unfazed. They strained for a moment against one another,
face to face, the
Hassassin's breath fetid in Langdon's nostrils. The bar began to slip. The
Hassassin was too strong. In a
final act of desperation, Langdon stretched out his leg, dangerously off balance
as he tried to ram his foot
down on the Hassassin's injured toe. But the man was a professional and adjusted
to protect his weakness.
Langdon had just played his final card. And he knew he had lost the hand.
The Hassassin's arms exploded upward, driving Langdon back against the railing.
Langdon sensed nothing
but empty space behind him as the railing hit just beneath his buttocks. The
Hassassin held the bar
crosswise and drove it into Langdon's chest. Langdon's back arched over the
chasm.
"Ma'assalamah," the Hassassin sneered. "Good-bye."
With a merciless glare, the Hassassin gave a final shove. Langdon's center of
gravity shifted, and his feet
swung up off the floor. With only one hope of survival, Langdon grabbed on to
the railing as he went over.
His left hand slipped, but his right hand held on. He ended up hanging upside
down by his legs and one
hand . . . straining to hold on.
Looming over him, the Hassassin raised the bar overhead, preparing to bring it
crashing down. As the bar
began to accelerate, Langdon saw a vision. Perhaps it was the imminence of death
or simply blind fear, but
in that moment, he sensed a sudden aura surrounding the Hassassin. A glowing
effulgence seemed to swell
out of nothing behind him . . . like an incoming fireball.
Halfway through his swing, the Hassassin dropped the bar and screamed in agony.
The iron bar clattered past Langdon out into the night. The Hassassin spun away
from him, and Langdon
saw a blistering torch burn on the killer's back. Langdon pulled himself up to
see Vittoria, eyes flaring,
now facing the Hassassin.
Vittoria waved a torch in front of her, the vengeance in her face resplendent in
the flames. How she had
escaped, Langdon did not know or care. He began scrambling back up over the
banister.
The battle would be short. The Hassassin was a deadly match. Screaming with
rage, the killer lunged for
her. She tried to dodge, but the man was on her, holding the torch and about to
wrestle it away. Langdon
did not wait. Leaping off the banister, Langdon jabbed his clenched fist into
the blistered burn on the
Hassassin's back.
The scream seemed to echo all the way to the Vatican.
The Hassassin froze a moment, his back arched in anguish. He let go of the
torch, and Vittoria thrust it hard
into his face. There was a hiss of flesh as his left eye sizzled. He screamed
again, raising his hands to his
face.
"Eye for an eye," Vittoria hissed. This time she swung the torch like a bat, and
when it connected, the
Hassassin stumbled back against the railing. Langdon and Vittoria went for him
at the same instant, both
heaving and pushing. The Hassassin's body sailed backward over the banister into
the night. There was no
scream. The only sound was the crack of his spine as he landed spread-eagle on a
pile of cannonballs far
below.
Langdon turned and stared at Vittoria in bewilderment. Slackened ropes hung off
her midsection and
shoulders. Her eyes blazed like an inferno.
"Houdini knew yoga."
109
M eanwhile, in St. Peter's Square, the wall of Swiss Guards yelled orders and
fanned outward, trying to
push the crowds back to a safer distance. It was no use. The crowd was too dense
and seemed far more
interested in the Vatican's impending doom than in their own safety. The
towering media screens in the
square were now transmitting a live countdown of the antimatter canister-a
direct feed from the Swiss
Guard security monitor-compliments of the camerlegno. Unfortunately, the image
of the canister counting
down was doing nothing to repel the crowds. The people in the square apparently
looked at the tiny droplet
of liquid suspended in the canister and decided it was not as menacing as they
had thought. They could also
see the countdown clock now-a little under forty-five minutes until detonation.
Plenty of time to stay and
watch.
Nonetheless, the Swiss Guards unanimously agreed that the camerlegno's bold
decision to address the
world with the truth and then provide the media with actual visuals of
Illuminati treachery had been a savvy
maneuver. The Illuminati had no doubt expected the Vatican to be their usual
reticent selves in the face of
adversity. Not tonight. Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca had proven himself a
commanding foe.
Inside the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati was getting restless. It was past
11:15 P.M. Many of the
cardinals were continuing to pray, but others had clustered around the exit,
clearly unsettled by the hour.
Some of the cardinals began pounding on the door with their fists.
Outside the door Lieutenant Chartrand heard the pounding and didn't know what to
do. He checked his
watch. It was time. Captain Rocher had given strict orders that the cardinals
were not to be let out until he
gave the word. The pounding on the door became more intense, and Chartrand felt
uneasy. He wondered if
the captain had simply forgotten. The captain had been acting very erratic since
his mysterious phone call.
Chartrand pulled out his walkie-talkie. "Captain? Chartrand here. It is past
time. Should I open the
Sistine?"
"That door stays shut. I believe I already gave you that order."
"Yes, sir, I just-"
"Our guest is arriving shortly. Take a few men upstairs, and guard the door of
the Pope's office. The
camerlegno is not to go anywhere."
"I'm sorry, sir?"
"What is it that you don't understand, Lieutenant?"
"Nothing, sir. I am on my way."
Upstairs in the Office of the Pope, the camerlegno stared in quiet meditation at
the fire. Give me strength,
God. Bring us a miracle. He poked at the coals, wondering if he would survive
the night.
110
E leven-twenty-three P.M.
Vittoria stood trembling on the balcony of Castle St. Angelo, staring out across
Rome, her eyes moist with
tears. She wanted badly to embrace Robert Langdon, but she could not. Her body
felt anesthetized.
Readjusting. Taking stock. The man who had killed her father lay far below,
dead, and she had almost been
a victim as well.
When Langdon's hand touched her shoulder, the infusion of warmth seemed to
magically shatter the ice.
Her body shuddered back to life. The fog lifted, and she turned. Robert looked
like hell-wet and matted-he
had obviously been through purgatory to come rescue her.
"Thank you . . ." she whispered.
Langdon gave an exhausted smile and reminded her that it was she who deserved
thanks-her ability to
practically dislocate her shoulders had just saved them both. Vittoria wiped her
eyes. She could have stood
there forever with him, but the reprieve was short-lived.
"We need to get out of here," Langdon said.
Vittoria's mind was elsewhere. She was staring out toward the Vatican. The
world's smallest country
looked unsettlingly close, glowing white under a barrage of media lights. To her
shock, much of St. Peter's
Square was still packed with people! The Swiss Guard had apparently been able to
clear only about a
hundred and fifty feet back-the area directly in front of the basilica-less than
one-third of the square. The
shell of congestion encompassing the square was compacted now, those at the
safer distances pressing for a
closer look, trapping the others inside. They are too close! Vittoria thought.
Much too close!
"I'm going back in," Langdon said flatly.
Vittoria turned, incredulous. "Into the Vatican?"
Langdon told her about the Samaritan, and how it was a ploy. The Illuminati
leader, a man named Janus,
was actually coming himself to brand the camerlegno. A final Illuminati act of
domination.
"Nobody in Vatican City knows," Langdon said. "I have no way to contact them,
and this guy is arriving
any minute. I have to warn the guards before they let him in."
"But you'll never get through the crowd!"
Langdon's voice was confident. "There's a way. Trust me."
Vittoria sensed once again that the historian knew something she did not. "I'm
coming."
"No. Why risk both-"
"I have to find a way to get those people out of there! They're in incredible
dange-"
Just then, the balcony they were standing on began to shake. A deafening rumble
shook the whole castle.
Then a white light from the direction of St. Peter's blinded them. Vittoria had
only one thought. Oh my
God! The antimatter annihilated early!
But instead of an explosion, a huge cheer went up from the crowd. Vittoria
squinted into the light. It was a
barrage of media lights from the square, now trained, it seemed, on them!
Everyone was turned their way,
hollering and pointing. The rumble grew louder. The air in the square seemed
suddenly joyous.
Langdon looked baffled. "What the devil-"
The sky overhead roared.
Emerging from behind the tower, without warning, came the papal helicopter. It
thundered fifty feet above
them, on a beeline for Vatican City. As it passed overhead, radiant in the media
lights, the castle trembled.
The lights followed the helicopter as it passed by, and Langdon and Vittoria
were suddenly again in the
dark.
Vittoria had the uneasy feeling they were too late as they watched the mammoth
machine slow to a stop
over St. Peter's Square. Kicking up a cloud of dust, the chopper dropped onto
the open portion of the
square between the crowd and the basilica, touching down at the bottom of the
basilica's staircase.
"Talk about an entrance," Vittoria said. Against the white marble, she could see
a tiny speck of a person
emerge from the Vatican and move toward the chopper. She would never have
recognized the figure except
for the bright red beret on his head. "Red carpet greeting. That's Rocher."
Langdon pounded his fist on the banister. "Somebody's got to warn them!" He
turned to go.
Vittoria caught his arm. "Wait!" She had just seen something else, something her
eyes refused to believe.
Fingers trembling, she pointed toward the chopper. Even from this distance,
there was no mistaking.
Descending the gangplank was another figure . . . a figure who moved so uniquely
that it could only be one
man. Although the figure was seated, he accelerated across the open square with
effortless control and
startling speed.
A king on an electric throne.
It was Maximilian Kohler.
111
K ohler was sickened by the opulence of the Hallway of the Belvedere. The gold
leaf in the ceiling alone
probably could have funded a year's worth of cancer research. Rocher led Kohler
up a handicapped ramp
on a circuitous route into the Apostolic Palace.
"No elevator?" Kohler demanded.
"No power." Rocher motioned to the candles burning around them in the darkened
building. "Part of our
search tactic."
"Tactics which no doubt failed."
Rocher nodded.
Kohler broke into another coughing fit and knew it might be one of his last. It
was not an entirely
unwelcome thought.
When they reached the top floor and started down the hallway toward the Pope's
office, four Swiss Guards
ran toward them, looking troubled. "Captain, what are you doing up here? I
thought this man had
information that-"
"He will only speak to the camerlegno."
The guards recoiled, looking suspicious.
"Tell the camerlegno," Rocher said forcefully, "that the director of CERN,
Maximilian Kohler, is here to
see him. Immediately."
"Yes, sir!" One of the guards ran off in the direction of the camerlegno's
office. The others stood their
ground. They studied Rocher, looking uneasy. "Just one moment, captain. We will
announce your guest."
Kohler, however, did not stop. He turned sharply and maneuvered his chair around
the sentinels.
The guards spun and broke into a jog beside him. "Fermati! Sir! Stop!"
Kohler felt repugnance for them. Not even the most elite security force in the
world was immune to the pity
everyone felt for cripples. Had Kohler been a healthy man, the guards would have
tackled him. Cripples
are powerless, Kohler thought. Or so the world believes.
Kohler knew he had very little time to accomplish what he had come for. He also
knew he might die here
tonight. He was surprised how little he cared. Death was a price he was ready to
pay. He had endured too
much in his life to have his work destroyed by someone like Camerlegno
Ventresca.
"Signore!" the guards shouted, running ahead and forming a line across the
hallway. "You must stop!"
One of them pulled a sidearm and aimed it at Kohler.
Kohler stopped.
Rocher stepped in, looking contrite. "Mr. Kohler, please. It will only be a
moment. No one enters the
Office of the Pope unannounced."
Kohler could see in Rocher's eyes that he had no choice but to wait. Fine,
Kohler thought. We wait.
The guards, cruelly it seemed, had stopped Kohler next to a full-length gilded
mirror. The sight of his own
twisted form repulsed Kohler. The ancient rage brimmed yet again to the surface.
It empowered him. He
was among the enemy now. These were the people who had robbed him of his
dignity. These were the
people. Because of them he had never felt the touch of a woman . . . had never
stood tall to accept an
award. What truth do these people possess? What proof, damn it! A book of
ancient fables? Promises of
miracles to come? Science creates miracles every day!
Kohler stared a moment into his own stony eyes. Tonight I may die at the hands
of religion, he thought. But
it will not be the first time.
For a moment, he was eleven years old again, lying in his bed in his parents'
Frankfurt mansion. The sheets
beneath him were Europe's finest linen, but they were soaked with sweat. Young
Max felt like he was on
fire, the pain wracking his body unimaginable. Kneeling beside his bed, where
they had been for two days,
were his mother and father. They were praying.
In the shadows stood three of Frankfurt's best doctors.
"I urge you to reconsider!" one of the doctors said. "Look at the boy! His fever
is increasing. He is in
terrible pain. And danger!"
But Max knew his mother's reply before she even said it. "Gott wird ihn
beschuetzen."
Yes, Max thought. God will protect me. The conviction in his mother's voice gave
him strength. God will
protect me.
An hour later, Max felt like his whole body was being crushed beneath a car. He
could not even breathe to
cry.
"Your son is in great suffering," another doctor said. "Let me at least ease his
pain. I have in my bag a
simple injection of-"
"Ruhe, bitte!" Max's father silenced the doctor without ever opening his eyes.
He simply kept praying.
"Father, please!" Max wanted to scream. "Let them stop the pain!" But his words
were lost in a spasm of
coughing.
An hour later, the pain had worsened.
"Your son could become paralyzed," one of the doctors scolded. "Or even die! We
have medicines that will
help!"
Frau and Herr Kohler would not allow it. They did not believe in medicine. Who
were they to interfere with
God's master plan? They prayed harder. After all, God had blessed them with this
boy, why would God
take the child away? His mother whispered to Max to be strong. She explained
that God was testing him . .
. like the Bible story of Abraham . . . a test of his faith.
Max tried to have faith, but the pain was excruciating.
"I cannot watch this!" one of the doctors finally said, running from the room.
By dawn, Max was barely conscious. Every muscle in his body spasmed in agony.
Where is Jesus? he
wondered. Doesn't he love me? Max felt the life slipping from his body.
His mother had fallen asleep at the bedside, her hands still clasped over him.
Max's father stood across the
room at the window staring out at the dawn. He seemed to be in a trance. Max
could hear the low mumble
of his ceaseless prayers for mercy.
It was then that Max sensed the figure hovering over him. An angel? Max could
barely see. His eyes were
swollen shut. The figure whispered in his ear, but it was not the voice of an
angel. Max recognized it as one
of the doctors . . . the one who had sat in the corner for two days, never
leaving, begging Max's parents to
let him administer some new drug from England.
"I will never forgive myself," the doctor whispered, "if I do not do this." Then
the doctor gently took
Max's frail arm. "I wish I had done it sooner."
Max felt a tiny prick in his arm-barely discernible through the pain.
Then the doctor quietly packed his things. Before he left, he put a hand on
Max's forehead. "This will save
your life. I have great faith in the power of medicine."
Within minutes, Max felt as if some sort of magic spirit were flowing through
his veins. The warmth spread
through his body numbing his pain. Finally, for the first time in days, Max
slept.
When the fever broke, his mother and father proclaimed a miracle of God. But
when it became evident that
their son was crippled, they became despondent. They wheeled their son into the
church and begged the
priest for counseling.
"It was only by the grace of God," the priest told them, "that this boy
survived."
Max listened, saying nothing.
"But our son cannot walk!" Frau Kohler was weeping.
The priest nodded sadly. "Yes. It seems God has punished him for not having
enough faith."
"Mr. Kohler?" It was the Swiss Guard who had run ahead. "The camerlegno says he
will grant you
audience."
Kohler grunted, accelerating again down the hall.
"He is surprised by your visit," the guard said.
"I'm sure." Kohler rolled on. "I would like to see him alone."
"Impossible," the guard said. "No one-"
"Lieutenant," Rocher barked. "The meeting will be as Mr. Kohler wishes."
The guard stared in obvious disbelief.
Outside the door to the Pope's office, Rocher allowed his guards to take
standard precautions before letting
Kohler in. Their handheld metal detector was rendered worthless by the myriad of
electronic devices on
Kohler's wheelchair. The guards frisked him but were obviously too ashamed of
his disability to do it
properly. They never found the revolver affixed beneath his chair. Nor did they
relieve him of the other
object . . . the one that Kohler knew would bring unforgettable closure to this
evening's chain of events.
When Kohler entered the Pope's office, Camerlegno Ventresca was alone, kneeling
in prayer beside a
dying fire. He did not open his eyes.
"Mr. Kohler," the camerlegno said. "Have you come to make me a martyr?"
112
A ll the while, the narrow tunnel called Il Passetto stretched out before
Langdon and Vittoria as they
dashed toward Vatican City. The torch in Langdon's hand threw only enough light
to see a few yards
ahead. The walls were close on either side, and the ceiling low. The air smelled
dank. Langdon raced on
into the darkness with Vittoria close at his heels.
The tunnel inclined steeply as it left the Castle St. Angelo, proceeding upward
into the underside of a stone
bastion that looked like a Roman aqueduct. There, the tunnel leveled out and
began its secret course toward
Vatican City.
As Langdon ran, his thoughts turned over and over in a kaleidoscope of
confounding images-Kohler, Janus,
the Hassassin, Rocher . . . a sixth brand? I'm sure you've heard about the sixth
brand, the killer had said.
The most brilliant of all. Langdon was quite certain he had not. Even in
conspiracy theory lore, Langdon
could think of no references to any sixth brand. Real or imagined. There were
rumors of a gold bullion and
a flawless Illuminati Diamond but never any mention of a sixth brand.
"Kohler can't be Janus!" Vittoria declared as they ran down the interior of the
dike. "It's impossible!"
Impossible was one word Langdon had stopped using tonight. "I don't know,"
Langdon yelled as they ran.
"Kohler has a serious grudge, and he also has some serious influence."
"This crisis has made CERN look like monsters! Max would never do anything to
damage CERN's
reputation!"
On one count, Langdon knew CERN had taken a public beating tonight, all because
of the Illuminati's
insistence on making this a public spectacle. And yet, he wondered how much CERN
had really been
damaged. Criticism from the church was nothing new for CERN. In fact, the more
Langdon thought about
it, the more he wondered if this crisis might actually benefit CERN. If
publicity were the game, then
antimatter was the jackpot winner tonight. The entire planet was talking about
it.
"You know what promoter P. T. Barnum said," Langdon called over his shoulder. "
'I don't care what you
say about me, just spell my name right!' I bet people are already secretly
lining up to license antimatter
technology. And after they see its true power at midnight tonight . . ."
"Illogical," Vittoria said. "Publicizing scientific breakthroughs is not about
showing destructive power!
This is terrible for antimatter, trust me!"
Langdon's torch was fading now. "Then maybe it's all much simpler than that.
Maybe Kohler gambled that
the Vatican would keep the antimatter a secret-refusing to empower the
Illuminati by confirming the
weapon's existence. Kohler expected the Vatican to be their usual tight-lipped
selves about the threat, but
the camerlegno changed the rules."
Vittoria was silent as they dashed down the tunnel.
Suddenly the scenario was making more sense to Langdon. "Yes! Kohler never
counted on the
camerlegno's reaction. The camerlegno broke the Vatican tradition of secrecy and
went public about the
crisis. He was dead honest. He put the antimatter on TV, for God's sake. It was
a brilliant response, and
Kohler never expected it. And the irony of the whole thing is that the
Illuminati attack backfired. It
inadvertently produced a new church leader in the camerlegno. And now Kohler is
coming to kill him!"
"Max is a bastard," Vittoria declared, "but he is not a murderer. And he would
never have been involved in
my father's assassination."
In Langdon's mind, it was Kohler's voice that answered. Leonardo was considered
dangerous by many
purists at CERN.Fusing science and God is the ultimate scientific blasphemy.
"Maybe Kohler found out
about the antimatter project weeks ago and didn't like the religious
implications."
"So he killed my father over it? Ridiculous! Besides, Max Kohler would never
have known the project
existed."
"While you were gone, maybe your father broke down and consulted Kohler, asking
for guidance. You
yourself said your father was concerned about the moral implications of creating
such a deadly substance."
"Asking moral guidance from Maximilian Kohler?" Vittoria snorted. "I don't think
so!"
The tunnel banked slightly westward. The faster they ran, the dimmer Langdon's
torch became. He began
to fear what the place would look like if the light went out. Black.
"Besides," Vittoria argued, "why would Kohler have bothered to call you in this
morning and ask for help
if he is behind the whole thing?"
Langdon had already considered it. "By calling me, Kohler covered his bases. He
made sure no one would
accuse him of nonaction in the face of crisis. He probably never expected us to
get this far."
The thought of being used by Kohler incensed Langdon. Langdon's involvement had
given the Illuminati a
level of credibility. His credentials and publications had been quoted all night
by the media, and as
ridiculous as it was, the presence of a Harvard professor in Vatican City had
somehow raised the whole
emergency beyond the scope of paranoid delusion and convinced skeptics around
the world that the
Illuminati brotherhood was not only a historical fact, but a force to be
reckoned with.
"That BBC reporter," Langdon said, "thinks CERN is the new Illuminati lair."
"What!" Vittoria stumbled behind him. She pulled herself up and ran on. "He said
that!?"
"On air. He likened CERN to the Masonic lodges-an innocent organization
unknowingly harboring the
Illuminati brotherhood within."
"My God, this is going to destroy CERN."
Langdon was not so sure. Either way, the theory suddenly seemed less
far-fetched. CERN was the ultimate
scientific haven. It was home to scientists from over a dozen countries. They
seemed to have endless
private funding. And Maximilian Kohler was their director.
Kohler is Janus.
"If Kohler's not involved," Langdon challenged, "then what is he doing here?"
"Probably trying to stop this madness. Show support. Maybe he really is acting
as the Samaritan! He could
have found out who knew about the antimatter project and has come to share
information."
"The killer said he was coming to brand the camerlegno."
"Listen to yourself! It would be a suicide mission. Max would never get out
alive."
Langdon considered it. Maybe that was the point.
The outline of a steel gate loomed ahead, blocking their progress down the
tunnel. Langdon's heart almost
stopped. When they approached, however, they found the ancient lock hanging
open. The gate swung
freely.
Langdon breathed a sigh of relief, realizing as he had suspected, that the
ancient tunnel was in use.
Recently. As in today. He now had little doubt that four terrified cardinals had
been secreted through here
earlier.
They ran on. Langdon could now hear the sounds of chaos to his left. It was St.
Peter's Square. They were
getting close.
They hit another gate, this one heavier. It too was unlocked. The sound of St.
Peter's Square faded behind
them now, and Langdon sensed they had passed through the outer wall of Vatican
City. He wondered
where inside the Vatican this ancient passage would conclude. In the gardens? In
the basilica? In the papal
residence?
Then, without warning, the tunnel ended.
The cumbrous door blocking their way was a thick wall of riveted iron. Even by
the last flickers of his
torch, Langdon could see that the portal was perfectly smooth-no handles, no
knobs, no keyholes, no
hinges. No entry.
He felt a surge of panic. In architect-speak, this rare kind of door was called
a senza chiave-a one-way
portal, used for security, and only operable from one side-the other side.
Langdon's hope dimmed to black .
. . along with the torch in his hand.
He looked at his watch. Mickey glowed.
11:29 P.M.
With a scream of frustration, Langdon swung the torch and started pounding on
the door.
113
S omething was wrong.
Lieutenant Chartrand stood outside the Pope's office and sensed in the uneasy
stance of the soldier standing
with him that they shared the same anxiety. The private meeting they were
shielding, Rocher had said,
could save the Vatican from destruction. So Chartrand wondered why his
protective instincts were tingling.
And why was Rocher acting so strangely?
Something definitely was awry.
Captain Rocher stood to Chartrand's right, staring dead ahead, his sharp gaze
uncharacteristically distant.
Chartrand barely recognized the captain. Rocher had not been himself in the last
hour. His decisions made
no sense.
Someone should be present inside this meeting! Chartrand thought. He had heard
Maximilian Kohler bolt
the door after he entered. Why had Rocher permitted this?
But there was so much more bothering Chartrand. The cardinals. The cardinals
were still locked in the
Sistine Chapel. This was absolute insanity. The camerlegno had wanted them
evacuated fifteen minutes
ago! Rocher had overruled the decision and not informed the camerlegno.
Chartrand had expressed
concern, and Rocher had almost taken off his head. Chain of command was never
questioned in the Swiss
Guard, and Rocher was now top dog.
Half an hour, Rocher thought, discreetly checking his Swiss chronometer in the
dim light of the candelabra
lighting the hall. Please hurry.
Chartrand wished he could hear what was happening on the other side of the
doors. Still, he knew there was
no one he would rather have handling this crisis than the camerlegno. The man
had been tested beyond
reason tonight, and he had not flinched. He had confronted the problem head-on .
. . truthful, candid,
shining like an example to all. Chartrand felt proud right now to be a Catholic.
The Illuminati had made a
mistake when they challenged Camerlegno Ventresca.
At that moment, however, Chartrand's thoughts were jolted by an unexpected
sound. A banging. It was
coming from down the hall. The pounding was distant and muffled, but incessant.
Rocher looked up. The
captain turned to Chartrand and motioned down the hall. Chartrand understood. He
turned on his flashlight
and took off to investigate.
The banging was more desperate now. Chartrand ran thirty yards down the corridor
to an intersection. The
noise seemed to be coming from around the corner, beyond the Sala Clementina.
Chartrand felt perplexed.
There was only one room back there-the Pope's private library. His Holiness's
private library had been
locked since the Pope's death. Nobody could possibly be in there!
Chartrand hurried down the second corridor, turned another corner, and rushed to
the library door. The
wooden portico was diminutive, but it stood in the dark like a dour sentinel.
The banging was coming from
somewhere inside. Chartrand hesitated. He had never been inside the private
library. Few had. No one was
allowed in without an escort by the Pope himself.
Tentatively, Chartrand reached for the doorknob and turned. As he had imagined,
the door was locked. He
put his ear to the door. The banging was louder. Then he heard something else.
Voices! Someone calling
out!
He could not make out the words, but he could hear the panic in their shouts.
Was someone trapped in the
library? Had the Swiss Guard not properly evacuated the building? Chartrand
hesitated, wondering if he
should go back and consult Rocher. The hell with that. Chartrand had been
trained to make decisions, and
he would make one now. He pulled out his side arm and fired a single shot into
the door latch. The wood
exploded, and the door swung open.
Beyond the threshold Chartrand saw nothing but blackness. He shone his
flashlight. The room was
rectangular-oriental carpets, high oak shelves packed with books, a stitched
leather couch, and a marble
fireplace. Chartrand had heard stories of this place-three thousand ancient
volumes side by side with
hundreds of current magazines and periodicals, anything His Holiness requested.
The coffee table was
covered with journals of science and politics.
The banging was clearer now. Chartrand shone his light across the room toward
the sound. On the far wall,
beyond the sitting area, was a huge door made of iron. It looked impenetrable as
a vault. It had four
mammoth locks. The tiny etched letters dead center of the door took Chartrand's
breath away.
IL PASSETTO
Chartrand stared. The Pope's secret escape route! Chartrand had certainly heard
of Il Passetto, and he had
even heard rumors that it had once had an entrance here in the library, but the
tunnel had not been used in
ages! Who could be banging on the other side?
Chartrand took his flashlight and rapped on the door. There was a muffled
exultation from the other side.
The banging stopped, and the voices yelled louder. Chartrand could barely make
out their words through
the barricade.
". . . Kohler . . . lie . . . camerlegno . . ."
"Who is that?" Chartrand yelled.
". . . ert Langdon . . . Vittoria Ve . . ."
Chartrand understood enough to be confused. I thought you were dead!
". . . the door," the voices yelled. "Open . . . !"
Chartrand looked at the iron barrier and knew he would need dynamite to get
through there. "Impossible!"
he yelled. "Too thick!"
". . . meeting . . . stop . . . erlegno . . . danger . . ."
Despite his training on the hazards of panic, Chartrand felt a sudden rush of
fear at the last few words. Had
he understood correctly? Heart pounding, he turned to run back to the office. As
he turned, though, he
stalled. His gaze had fallen to something on the door . . . something more
shocking even than the message
coming from beyond it. Emerging from the keyholes of each of the door's massive
locks were keys.
Chartrand stared. The keys were here? He blinked in disbelief. The keys to this
door were supposed to be in
a vault someplace! This passage was never used-not for centuries!
Chartrand dropped his flashlight on the floor. He grabbed the first key and
turned. The mechanism was
rusted and stiff, but it still worked. Someone had opened it recently. Chartrand
worked the next lock. And
the next. When the last bolt slid aside, Chartrand pulled. The slab of iron
creaked open. He grabbed his
light and shone it into the passage.
Robert Langdon and Vittoria Vetra looked like apparitions as they staggered into
the library. Both were
ragged and tired, but they were very much alive.
"What is this!" Chartrand demanded. "What's going on! Where did you come from?"
"Where's Max Kohler?" Langdon demanded.
Chartrand pointed. "In a private meeting with the camer-"
Langdon and Vittoria pushed past him and ran down the darkened hall. Chartrand
turned, instinctively
raising his gun at their backs. He quickly lowered it and ran after them. Rocher
apparently heard them
coming, because as they arrived outside the Pope's office, Rocher had spread his
legs in a protective stance
and was leveling his gun at them. "Alt!"
"The camerlegno is in danger!" Langdon yelled, raising his arms in surrender as
he slid to a stop. "Open the
door! Max Kohler is going to kill the camerlegno!"
Rocher looked angry.
"Open the door!" Vittoria said. "Hurry!"
But it was too late.
From inside the Pope's office came a bloodcurdling scream. It was the
camerlegno.
114
T he confrontation lasted only seconds.
Camerlegno Ventresca was still screaming when Chartrand stepped past Rocher and
blew open the door of
the Pope's office. The guards dashed in. Langdon and Vittoria ran in behind
them.
The scene before them was staggering.
The chamber was lit only by candlelight and a dying fire. Kohler was near the
fireplace, standing
awkwardly in front of his wheelchair. He brandished a pistol, aimed at the
camerlegno, who lay on the floor
at his feet, writhing in agony. The camerlegno's cassock was torn open, and his
bare chest was seared
black. Langdon could not make out the symbol from across the room, but a large,
square brand lay on the
floor near Kohler. The metal still glowed red.
Two of the Swiss Guards acted without hesitation. They opened fire. The bullets
smashed into Kohler's
chest, driving him backward. Kohler collapsed into his wheelchair, his chest
gurgling blood. His gun went
skittering across the floor.
Langdon stood stunned in the doorway.
Vittoria seemed paralyzed. "Max . . ." she whispered.
The camerlegno, still twisting on the floor, rolled toward Rocher, and with the
trancelike terror of the early
witch hunts, pointed his index finger at Rocher and yelled a single word.
"ILLUMINATUS!"
"You bastard," Rocher said, running at him. "You sanctimonious bas-"
This time it was Chartrand who reacted on instinct, putting three bullets in
Rocher's back. The captain fell
face first on the tile floor and slid lifeless through his own blood. Chartrand
and the guards dashed
immediately to the camerlegno, who lay clutching himself, convulsing in pain.
Both guards let out exclamations of horror when they saw the symbol seared on
the camerlegno's chest.
The second guard saw the brand upside down and immediately staggered backward
with fear in his eyes.
Chartrand, looking equally overwhelmed by the symbol, pulled the camerlegno's
torn cassock up over the
burn, shielding it from view.
Langdon felt delirious as he moved across the room. Through a mist of insanity
and violence, he tried to
make sense of what he was seeing. A crippled scientist, in a final act of
symbolic dominance, had flown
into Vatican City and branded the church's highest official. Some things are
worth dying for, the Hassassin
had said. Langdon wondered how a handicapped man could possibly have overpowered
the camerlegno.
Then again, Kohler had a gun. It doesn't matter how he did it! Kohler
accomplished his mission!
Langdon moved toward the gruesome scene. The camerlegno was being attended, and
Langdon felt himself
drawn toward the smoking brand on the floor near Kohler's wheelchair. The sixth
brand? The closer
Langdon got, the more confused he became. The brand seemed to be a perfect
square, quite large, and had
obviously come from the sacred center compartment of the chest in the Illuminati
Lair. A sixth and final
brand, the Hassassin had said. The most brilliant of all.
Langdon knelt beside Kohler and reached for the object. The metal still radiated
heat. Grasping the wooden
handle, Langdon picked it up. He was not sure what he expected to see, but it
most certainly was not this.
Langdon stared a long, confused moment. Nothing was making sense. Why had the
guards cried out in
horror when they saw this? It was a square of meaningless squiggles. The most
brilliant of all? It was
symmetrical, Langdon could tell as he rotated it in his hand, but it was
gibberish.
When he felt a hand on his shoulder, Langdon looked up, expecting Vittoria. The
hand, however, was
covered with blood. It belonged to Maximilian Kohler, who was reaching out from
his wheelchair.
Langdon dropped the brand and staggered to his feet. Kohler's still alive!
Slumped in his wheelchair, the dying director was still breathing, albeit
barely, sucking in sputtering gasps.
Kohler's eyes met Langdon's, and it was the same stony gaze that had greeted
Langdon at CERN earlier
that day. The eyes looked even harder in death, the loathing and enmity rising
to the surface.
The scientist's body quivered, and Langdon sensed he was trying to move.
Everyone else in the room was
focused on the camerlegno, and Langdon wanted to call out, but he could not
react. He was transfixed by
the intensity radiating from Kohler in these final seconds of his life. The
director, with tremulous effort,
lifted his arm and pulled a small device off the arm of his wheelchair. It was
the size of a matchbox. He
held it out, quivering. For an instant, Langdon feared Kohler had a weapon. But
it was something else.
"G-give . . ." Kohler's final words were a gurgling whisper. "G-give this . . .
to the m-media." Kohler
collapsed motionless, and the device fell in his lap.
Shocked, Langdon stared at the device. It was electronic. The words SONY RUVI
were printed across the
front. Langdon recognized it as one of those new ultraminiature, palm-held
camcorders. The balls on this
guy! he thought. Kohler had apparently recorded some sort of final suicide
message he wanted the media to
broadcast . . . no doubt some sermon about the importance of science and the
evils of religion. Langdon
decided he had done enough for this man's cause tonight. Before Chartrand saw
Kohler's camcorder,
Langdon slipped it into his deepest jacket pocket. Kohler's final message can
rot in hell!
It was the voice of the camerlegno that broke the silence. He was trying to sit
up. "The cardinals," he
gasped to Chartrand.
"Still in the Sistine Chapel!" Chartrand exclaimed. "Captain Rocher ordered-"
"Evacuate . . . now. Everyone."
Chartrand sent one of the other guards running off to let the cardinals out.
The camerlegno grimaced in pain. "Helicopter . . . out front . . . get me to a
hospital."
115
I n St. Peter's Square, the Swiss Guard pilot sat in the cockpit of the parked
Vatican helicopter and rubbed
his temples. The chaos in the square around him was so loud that it drowned out
the sound of his idling
rotors. This was no solemn candlelight vigil. He was amazed a riot had not
broken out yet.
With less than twenty-five minutes left until midnight, the people were still
packed together, some praying,
some weeping for the church, others screaming obscenities and proclaiming that
this was what the church
deserved, still others chanting apocalyptic Bible verses.
The pilot's head pounded as the media lights glinted off his windshield. He
squinted out at the clamorous
masses. Banners waved over the crowd.
ANTIMATTER IS THE ANTICHRIST!
SCIENTIST=SATANIST
WHERE IS YOUR GOD NOW?
The pilot groaned, his headache worsening. He half considered grabbing the
windshield's vinyl covering
and putting it up so he wouldn't have to watch, but he knew he would be airborne
in a matter of minutes.
Lieutenant Chartrand had just radioed with terrible news. The camerlegno had
been attacked by Maximilian
Kohler and seriously injured. Chartrand, the American, and the woman were
carrying the camerlegno out
now so he could be evacuated to a hospital.
The pilot felt personally responsible for the attack. He reprimanded himself for
not acting on his gut.
Earlier, when he had picked up Kohler at the airport, he had sensed something in
the scientist's dead eyes.
He couldn't place it, but he didn't like it. Not that it mattered. Rocher was
running the show, and Rocher
insisted this was the guy. Rocher had apparently been wrong.
A new clamor arose from the crowd, and the pilot looked over to see a line of
cardinals processing
solemnly out of the Vatican onto St. Peter's Square. The cardinals' relief to be
leaving ground zero seemed
to be quickly overcome by looks of bewilderment at the spectacle now going on
outside the church.
The crowd noise intensified yet again. The pilot's head pounded. He needed an
aspirin. Maybe three. He
didn't like to fly on medication, but a few aspirin would certainly be less
debilitating than this raging
headache. He reached for the first-aid kit, kept with assorted maps and manuals
in a cargo box bolted
between the two front seats. When he tried to open the box, though, he found it
locked. He looked around
for the key and then finally gave up. Tonight was clearly not his lucky night.
He went back to massaging
his temples.
Inside the darkened basilica, Langdon, Vittoria, and the two guards strained
breathlessly toward the main
exit. Unable to find anything more suitable, the four of them were transporting
the wounded camerlegno on
a narrow table, balancing the inert body between them as though on a stretcher.
Outside the doors, the faint
roar of human chaos was now audible. The camerlegno teetered on the brink of
unconsciousness.
Time was running out.
116
I t was 11:39 P.M. when Langdon stepped with the others from St. Peter's
Basilica. The glare that hit his
eyes was searing. The media lights shone off the white marble like sunlight off
a snowy tundra. Langdon
squinted, trying to find refuge behind the façade's enormous columns, but the
light came from all
directions. In front of him, a collage of massive video screens rose above the
crowd.
Standing there atop the magnificent stairs that spilled down to the piazza
below, Langdon felt like a
reluctant player on the world's biggest stage. Somewhere beyond the glaring
lights, Langdon heard an
idling helicopter and the roar of a hundred thousand voices. To their left, a
procession of cardinals was now
evacuating onto the square. They all stopped in apparent distress to see the
scene now unfolding on the
staircase.
"Careful now," Chartrand urged, sounding focused as the group began descending
the stairs toward the
helicopter.
Langdon felt like they were moving underwater. His arms ached from the weight of
the camerlegno and the
table. He wondered how the moment could get much less dignified. Then he saw the
answer. The two BBC
reporters had apparently been crossing the open square on their way back to the
press area. But now, with
the roar of the crowd, they had turned. Glick and Macri were now running back
toward them. Macri's
camera was raised and rolling. Here come the vultures, Langdon thought.
"Alt!" Chartrand yelled. "Get back!"
But the reporters kept coming. Langdon guessed the other networks would take
about six seconds to pick
up this live BBC feed again. He was wrong. They took two. As if connected by
some sort of universal
consciousness, every last media screen in the piazza cut away from their
countdown clocks and their
Vatican experts and began transmitting the same picture-a jiggling action
footage swooping up the Vatican
stairs. Now, everywhere Langdon looked, he saw the camerlegno's limp body in a
Technicolor close-up.
This is wrong! Langdon thought. He wanted to run down the stairs and interfere,
but he could not. It
wouldn't have helped anyway. Whether it was the roar of the crowd or the cool
night air that caused it,
Langdon would never know, but at that moment, the inconceivable occurred.
Like a man awakening from a nightmare, the camerlegno's eyes shot open and he
sat bolt upright. Taken
entirely by surprise, Langdon and the others fumbled with the shifting weight.
The front of the table
dipped. The camerlegno began to slide. They tried to recover by setting the
table down, but it was too late.
The camerlegno slid off the front. Incredibly, he did not fall. His feet hit the
marble, and he swayed upright.
He stood a moment, looking disoriented, and then, before anyone could stop him,
he lurched forward,
staggering down the stairs toward Macri.
"No!" Langdon screamed.
Chartrand rushed forward, trying to reign in the camerlegno. But the camerlegno
turned on him, wild-eyed,
crazed. "Leave me!"
Chartrand jumped back.
The scene went from bad to worse. The camerlegno's torn cassock, having been
only laid over his chest by
Chartrand, began to slip lower. For a moment, Langdon thought the garment might
hold, but that moment
passed. The cassock let go, sliding off his shoulders down around his waist.
The gasp that went up from the crowd seemed to travel around the globe and back
in an instant. Cameras
rolled, flashbulbs exploded. On media screens everywhere, the image of the
camerlegno's branded chest
was projected, towering and in grisly detail. Some screens were even freezing
the image and rotating it 180
degrees.
The ultimate Illuminati victory.
Langdon stared at the brand on the screens. Although it was the imprint of the
square brand he had held
earlier, the symbol now made sense. Perfect sense. The marking's awesome power
hit Langdon like a train.
Orientation. Langdon had forgotten the first rule of symbology. When is a square
not a square? He had
also forgotten that iron brands, just like rubber stamps, never looked like
their imprints. They were in
reverse. Langdon had been looking at the brand's negative!
As the chaos grew, an old Illuminati quote echoed with new meaning: "A flawless
diamond, born of the
ancient elements with such perfection that all those who saw it could only stare
in wonder."
Langdon knew now the myth was true.
Earth, Air, Fire, Water.
The Illuminati Diamond.
117
R obert Langdon had little doubt that the chaos and hysteria coursing through
St. Peter's Square at this
very instant exceeded anything Vatican Hill had ever witnessed. No battle, no
crucifixion, no pilgrimage,
no mystical vision . . . nothing in the shrine's 2,000-year history could
possibly match the scope and drama
of this very moment.
As the tragedy unfolded, Langdon felt oddly separate, as if hovering there
beside Vittoria at the top of the
stairs. The action seemed to distend, as if in a time warp, all the insanity
slowing to a crawl . . .
The branded camerlegno . . . raving for the world to see . . .
The Illuminati Diamond . . . unveiled in its diabolical genius . . .
The countdown clock registering the final twenty minutes of Vatican history . .
.
The drama, however, had only just begun.
The camerlegno, as if in some sort of post-traumatic trance, seemed suddenly
puissant, possessed by
demons. He began babbling, whispering to unseen spirits, looking up at the sky
and raising his arms to
God.
"Speak!" the camerlegno yelled to the heavens. "Yes, I hear you!"
In that moment, Langdon understood. His heart dropped like a rock.
Vittoria apparently understood too. She went white. "He's in shock," she said.
"He's hallucinating. He
thinks he's talking to God!"
Somebody's got to stop this, Langdon thought. It was a wretched and embarrassing
end. Get this man to a
hospital!
Below them on the stairs, Chinita Macri was poised and filming, apparently
having located her ideal
vantage point. The images she filmed appeared instantly across the square behind
her on media screens . . .
like endless drive-in movies all playing the same grisly tragedy.
The whole scene felt epic. The camerlegno, in his torn cassock, with the
scorched brand on his chest,
looked like some sort of battered champion who had overcome the rings of hell
for this one moment of
revelation. He bellowed to the heavens.
"Ti sento, Dio! I hear you, God!"
Chartrand backed off, a look of awe on his face.
The hush that fell across the crowd was instant and absolute. For a moment it
was as if the silence had
fallen across the entire planet . . . everyone in front of their TVs rigid, a
communal holding of breath.
The camerlegno stood on the stairs, before the world, and held out his arms. He
looked almost Christlike,
bare and wounded before the world. He raised his arms to the heavens and,
looking up, exclaimed,
"Grazie! Grazie, Dio!"
The silence of the masses never broke.
"Grazie, Dio!" the camerlegno cried out again. Like the sun breaking through a
stormy sky, a look of joy
spread across his face. "Grazie, Dio!"
Thank you, God? Langdon stared in wonder.
The camerlegno was radiant now, his eerie transformation complete. He looked up
at the sky, still nodding
furiously. He shouted to the heavens, "Upon this rock I will build my church!"
Langdon knew the words, but he had no idea why the camerlegno could possibly be
shouting them.
The camerlegno turned back to the crowd and bellowed again into the night. "Upon
this rock I will build
my church!" Then he raised his hands to the sky and laughed out loud. "Grazie,
Dio! Grazie!"
The man had clearly gone mad.
The world watched, spellbound.
The culmination, however, was something no one expected.
With a final joyous exultation, the camerlegno turned and dashed back into St.
Peter's Basilica.
118
E leven-forty-two P.M.
The frenzied convoy that plunged back into the basilica to retrieve the
camerlegno was not one Langdon
had ever imagined he would be part of . . . much less leading. But he had been
closest to the door and had
acted on instinct.
He'll die in here, Langdon thought, sprinting over the threshold into the
darkened void. "Camerlegno!
Stop!"
The wall of blackness that hit Langdon was absolute. His pupils were contracted
from the glare outside, and
his field of vision now extended no farther than a few feet before his face. He
skidded to a stop.
Somewhere in the blackness ahead, he heard the camerlegno's cassock rustle as
the priest ran blindly into
the abyss.
Vittoria and the guards arrived immediately. Flashlights came on, but the lights
were almost dead now and
did not even begin to probe the depths of the basilica before them. The beams
swept back and forth,
revealing only columns and bare floor. The camerlegno was nowhere to be seen.
"Camerlegno!" Chartrand yelled, fear in his voice. "Wait! Signore!"
A commotion in the doorway behind them caused everyone to turn. Chinita Macri's
large frame lurched
through the entry. Her camera was shouldered, and the glowing red light on top
revealed that it was still
transmitting. Glick was running behind her, microphone in hand, yelling for her
to slow down.
Langdon could not believe these two. This is not the time!
"Out!" Chartrand snapped. "This is not for your eyes!"
But Macri and Glick kept coming.
"Chinita!" Glick sounded fearful now. "This is suicide! I'm not coming!"
Macri ignored him. She threw a switch on her camera. The spotlight on top glared
to life, blinding
everyone.
Langdon shielded his face and turned away in pain. Damn it! When he looked up,
though, the church
around them was illuminated for thirty yards.
At that moment the camerlegno's voice echoed somewhere in the distance. "Upon
this rock I will build my
church!"
Macri wheeled her camera toward the sound. Far off, in the grayness at the end
of the spotlight's reach,
black fabric billowed, revealing a familiar form running down the main aisle of
the basilica.
There was a fleeting instant of hesitation as everyone's eyes took in the
bizarre image. Then the dam broke.
Chartrand pushed past Langdon and sprinted after the camerlegno. Langdon took
off next. Then the guards
and Vittoria.
Macri brought up the rear, lighting everyone's way and transmitting the
sepulchral chase to the world. An
unwilling Glick cursed aloud as he tagged along, fumbling through a terrified
blow-by-blow commentary.
The main aisle of St. Peter's Basilica, Lieutenant Chartrand had once figured
out, was longer than an
Olympic soccer field. Tonight, however, it felt like twice that. As the guard
sprinted after the camerlegno,
he wondered where the man was headed. The camerlegno was clearly in shock,
delirious no doubt from his
physical trauma and bearing witness to the horrific massacre in the Pope's
office.
Somewhere up ahead, beyond the reach of the BBC spotlight, the camerlegno's
voice rang out joyously.
"Upon this rock I will build my church!"
Chartrand knew the man was shouting Scripture-Matthew 16:18, if Chartrand
recalled correctly. Upon this
rock I will build my church. It was an almost cruelly inapt inspiration-the
church was about to be destroyed.
Surely the camerlegno had gone mad.
Or had he?
For a fleeting instant, Chartrand's soul fluttered. Holy visions and divine
messages had always seemed like
wishful delusions to him-the product of overzealous minds hearing what they
wanted to hear-God did not
interact directly!
A moment later, though, as if the Holy Spirit Himself had descended to persuade
Chartrand of His power,
Chartrand had a vision.
Fifty yards ahead, in the center of the church, a ghost appeared . . . a
diaphanous, glowing outline. The pale
shape was that of the half-naked camerlegno. The specter seemed transparent,
radiating light. Chartrand
staggered to a stop, feeling a knot tighten in his chest. The camerlegno is
glowing! The body seemed to
shine brighter now. Then, it began to sink . . . deeper and deeper, until it
disappeared as if by magic into the
blackness of the floor.
Langdon had seen the phantom also. For a moment, he too thought he had witnessed
a magical vision. But
as he passed the stunned Chartrand and ran toward the spot where the camerlegno
had disappeared, he
realized what had just happened. The camerlegno had arrived at the Niche of the
Palliums-the sunken
chamber lit by ninety-nine oil lamps. The lamps in the niche shone up from
beneath, illuminating him like a
ghost. Then, as the camerlegno descended the stairs into the light, he had
seemed to disappear beneath the
floor.
Langdon arrived breathless at the rim overlooking the sunken room. He peered
down the stairs. At the
bottom, lit by the golden glow of oil lamps, the camerlegno dashed across the
marble chamber toward the
set of glass doors that led to the room holding the famous golden box.
What is he doing? Langdon wondered. Certainly he can't think the golden box-
The camerlegno yanked open the doors and ran inside. Oddly though, he totally
ignored the golden box,
rushing right past it. Five feet beyond the box, he dropped to his knees and
began struggling to lift an iron
grate embedded in the floor.
Langdon watched in horror, now realizing where the camerlegno was headed. Good
God, no! He dashed
down the stairs after him. "Father! Don't!"
As Langdon opened the glass doors and ran toward the camerlegno, he saw the
camerlegno heave on the
grate. The hinged, iron bulkhead fell open with a deafening crash, revealing a
narrow shaft and a steep
stairway that dropped into nothingness. As the camerlegno moved toward the hole,
Langdon grabbed his
bare shoulders and pulled him back. The man's skin was slippery with sweat, but
Langdon held on.
The camerlegno wheeled, obviously startled. "What are you doing!"
Langdon was surprised when their eyes met. The camerlegno no longer had the
glazed look of a man in a
trance. His eyes were keen, glistening with a lucid determination. The brand on
his chest looked
excruciating.
"Father," Langdon urged, as calmly as possible, "you can't go down there. We
need to evacuate."
"My son," the camerlegno said, his voice eerily sane. "I have just had a
message. I know-"
"Camerlegno!" It was Chartrand and the others. They came dashing down the stairs
into the room, lit by
Macri's camera.
When Chartrand saw the open grate in the floor, his eyes filled with dread. He
crossed himself and shot
Langdon a thankful look for having stopped the camerlegno. Langdon understood;
had read enough about
Vatican architecture to know what lay beneath that grate. It was the most sacred
place in all of
Christendom. Terra Santa. Holy Ground. Some called it the Necropolis. Some
called it the Catacombs.
According to accounts from the select few clergy who had descended over the
years, the Necropolis was a
dark maze of subterranean crypts that could swallow a visitor whole if he lost
his way. It was not the kind
of place through which they wanted to be chasing the camerlegno.
"Signore," Chartrand pleaded. "You're in shock. We need to leave this place. You
cannot go down there.
It's suicide."
The camerlegno seemed suddenly stoic. He reached out and put a quiet hand on
Chartrand's shoulder.
"Thank you for your concern and service. I cannot tell you how. I cannot tell
you I understand. But I have
had a revelation. I know where the antimatter is."
Everyone stared.
The camerlegno turned to the group. "Upon this rock I will build my church. That
was the message. The
meaning is clear."
Langdon was still unable to comprehend the camerlegno's conviction that he had
spoken to God, much less
that he had deciphered the message. Upon this rock I will build my church? They
were the words spoken by
Jesus when he chose Peter as his first apostle. What did they have to do with
anything?
Macri moved in for a closer shot. Glick was mute, as if shell-shocked.
The camerlegno spoke quickly now. "The Illuminati have placed their tool of
destruction on the very
cornerstone of this church. At the foundation." He motioned down the stairs. "On
the very rock upon which
this church was built. And I know where that rock is."
Langdon was certain the time had come to overpower the camerlegno and carry him
off. As lucid as he
seemed, the priest was talking nonsense. A rock? The cornerstone in the
foundation? The stairway before
them didn't lead to the foundation, it led to the necropolis! "The quote is a
metaphor, Father! There is no
actual rock!"
The camerlegno looked strangely sad. "There is a rock, my son." He pointed into
the hole. "Pietro è la
pietra."
Langdon froze. In an instant it all came clear.
The austere simplicity of it gave him chills. As Langdon stood there with the
others, staring down the long
staircase, he realized that there was indeed a rock buried in the darkness
beneath this church.
Pietro è la pietra. Peter is the rock.
Peter's faith in God was so steadfast that Jesus called Peter "the rock"-the
unwavering disciple on whose
shoulders Jesus would build his church. On this very location, Langdon
realized-Vatican Hill-Peter had
been crucified and buried. The early Christians built a small shrine over his
tomb. As Christianity spread,
the shrine got bigger, layer upon layer, culminating in this colossal basilica.
The entire Catholic faith had
been built, quite literally, upon St. Peter. The rock.
"The antimatter is on St. Peter's tomb," the camerlegno said, his voice
crystalline.
Despite the seemingly supernatural origin of the information, Langdon sensed a
stark logic in it. Placing the
antimatter on St. Peter's tomb seemed painfully obvious now. The Illuminati, in
an act of symbolic
defiance, had located the antimatter at the core of Christendom, both literally
and figuratively. The ultimate
infiltration.
"And if you all need worldly proof," the camerlegno said, sounding impatient
now, "I just found that grate
unlocked." He pointed to the open bulkhead in the floor. "It is never unlocked.
Someone has been down
there . . . recently."
Everyone stared into the hole.
An instant later, with deceptive agility, the camerlegno spun, grabbed an oil
lamp, and headed for the
opening.
119
T he stone steps declined steeply into the earth.
I'm going to die down here, Vittoria thought, gripping the heavy rope banister
as she bounded down the
cramped passageway behind the others. Although Langdon had made a move to stop
the camerlegno from
entering the shaft, Chartrand had intervened, grabbing Langdon and holding on.
Apparently, the young
guard was now convinced the camerlegno knew what he was doing.
After a brief scuffle, Langdon had freed himself and pursued the camerlegno with
Chartrand close on his
heels. Instinctively, Vittoria had dashed after them.
Now she was racing headlong down a precipitous grade where any misplaced step
could mean a deadly
fall. Far below, she could see the golden glow of the camerlegno's oil lamp.
Behind her, Vittoria could hear
the BBC reporters hurrying to keep up. The camera spotlight threw gnarled
shadows beyond her down the
shaft, illuminating Chartrand and Langdon. Vittoria could scarcely believe the
world was bearing witness
to this insanity. Turn off the damn camera! Then again, she knew the light was
the only reason any of them
could see where they were going.
As the bizarre chase continued, Vittoria's thoughts whipped like a tempest. What
could the camerlegno
possibly do down here? Even if he found the antimatter? There was no time!
Vittoria was surprised to find her intuition now telling her the camerlegno was
probably right. Placing the
antimatter three stories beneath the earth seemed an almost noble and merciful
choice. Deep undergroundmuch
as in Z-lab-an antimatter annihilation would be partially contained. There
would be no heat blast, no
flying shrapnel to injure onlookers, just a biblical opening of the earth and a
towering basilica crumbling
into a crater.
Was this Kohler's one act of decency? Sparing lives? Vittoria still could not
fathom the director's
involvement. She could accept his hatred of religion . . . but this awesome
conspiracy seemed beyond him.
Was Kohler's loathing really this profound? Destruction of the Vatican? Hiring
an assassin? The murders
of her father, the Pope, and four cardinals? It seemed unthinkable. And how had
Kohler managed all this
treachery within the Vatican walls? Rocher was Kohler's inside man, Vittoria
told herself. Rocher was an
Illuminatus. No doubt Captain Rocher had keys to everything-the Pope's chambers,
Il Passetto, the
Necropolis, St. Peter's tomb, all of it. He could have placed the antimatter on
St. Peter's tomb-a highly
restricted locale-and then commanded his guards not to waste time searching the
Vatican's restricted areas.
Rocher knew nobody would ever find the canister.
But Rocher never counted on the camerlegno's message from above.
The message. This was the leap of faith Vittoria was still struggling to accept.
Had God actually
communicated with the camerlegno? Vittoria's gut said no, and yet hers was the
science of entanglement
physics-the study of interconnectedness. She witnessed miraculous communications
every day-twin seaturtle
eggs separated and placed in labs thousands of miles apart hatching at
the same instant . . . acres of
jellyfish pulsating in perfect rhythm as if of a single mind. There are
invisible lines of communication
everywhere, she thought.
But between God and man?
Vittoria wished her father were there to give her faith. He had once explained
divine communication to her
in scientific terms, and he had made her believe. She still remembered the day
she had seen him praying
and asked him, "Father, why do you bother to pray? God cannot answer you."
Leonardo Vetra had looked up from his meditations with a paternal smile. "My
daughter the skeptic. So
you don't believe God speaks to man? Let me put it in your language." He took a
model of the human brain
down from a shelf and set it in front of her. "As you probably know, Vittoria,
human beings normally use a
very small percentage of their brain power. However, if you put them in
emotionally charged situations-like
physical trauma, extreme joy or fear, deep meditation-all of a sudden their
neurons start firing like crazy,
resulting in massively enhanced mental clarity."
"So what?" Vittoria said. "Just because you think clearly doesn't mean you talk
to God."
"Aha!" Vetra exclaimed. "And yet remarkable solutions to seemingly impossible
problems often occur in
these moments of clarity. It's what gurus call higher consciousness. Biologists
call it altered states.
Psychologists call it super-sentience." He paused. "And Christians call it
answered prayer." Smiling
broadly, he added, "Sometimes, divine revelation simply means adjusting your
brain to hear what your
heart already knows."
Now, as she dashed down, headlong into the dark, Vittoria sensed perhaps her
father was right. Was it so
hard to believe that the camerlegno's trauma had put his mind in a state where
he had simply "realized" the
antimatter's location?
Each of us is a God, Buddha had said. Each of us knows all.We need only open our
minds to hear our own
wisdom.
It was in that moment of clarity, as Vittoria plunged deeper into the earth,
that she felt her own mind open .
. . her own wisdom surface. She sensed now without a doubt what the camerlegno's
intentions were. Her
awareness brought with it a fear like nothing she had ever known.
"Camerlegno, no!" she shouted down the passage. "You don't understand!" Vittoria
pictured the multitudes
of people surrounding Vatican City, and her blood ran cold. "If you bring the
antimatter up . . . everyone
will die!"
Langdon was leaping three steps at a time now, gaining ground. The passage was
cramped, but he felt no
claustrophobia. His once debilitating fear was overshadowed by a far deeper
dread.
"Camerlegno!" Langdon felt himself closing the gap on the lantern's glow. "You
must leave the antimatter
where it is! There's no other choice!"
Even as Langdon spoke the words, he could not believe them. Not only had he
accepted the camerlegno's
divine revelation of the antimatter's location, but he was lobbying for the
destruction of St. Peter's
Basilica-one of the greatest architectural feats on earth . . . as well as all
of the art inside.
But the people outside . . . it's the only way.
It seemed a cruel irony that the only way to save the people now was to destroy
the church. Langdon
figured the Illuminati were amused by the symbolism.
The air coming up from the bottom of the tunnel was cool and dank. Somewhere
down here was the sacred
necropolis . . . burial place of St. Peter and countless other early Christians.
Langdon felt a chill, hoping
this was not a suicide mission.
Suddenly, the camerlegno's lantern seemed to halt. Langdon closed on him fast.
The end of the stairs loomed abruptly from out of the shadows. A wrought-iron
gate with three embossed
skulls blocked the bottom of the stairs. The camerlegno was there, pulling the
gate open. Langdon leapt,
pushing the gate shut, blocking the camerlegno's way. The others came thundering
down the stairs,
everyone ghostly white in the BBC spotlight . . . especially Glick, who was
looking more pasty with every
step.
Chartrand grabbed Langdon. "Let the camerlegno pass!"
"No!" Vittoria said from above, breathless. "We must evacuate right now! You
cannot take the antimatter
out of here! If you bring it up, everyone outside will die!"
The camerlegno's voice was remarkably calm. "All of you . . . we must trust. We
have little time."
"You don't understand," Vittoria said. "An explosion at ground level will be
much worse than one down
here!"
The camerlegno looked at her, his green eyes resplendently sane. "Who said
anything about an explosion at
ground level?"
Vittoria stared. "You're leaving it down here?"
The camerlegno's certitude was hypnotic. "There will be no more death tonight."
"Father, but-"
"Please . . . some faith." The camerlegno's voice plunged to a compelling hush.
"I am not asking anyone to
join me. You are all free to go. All I am asking is that you not interfere with
His bidding. Let me do what I
have been called to do." The camerlegno's stare intensified. "I am to save this
church. And I can. I swear
on my life."
The silence that followed might as well have been thunder.
120
E leven-fifty-one P.M.
Necropolis literally means City of the Dead.
Nothing Robert Langdon had ever read about this place prepared him for the sight
of it. The colossal
subterranean hollow was filled with crumbling mausoleums, like small houses on
the floor of a cave. The
air smelled lifeless. An awkward grid of narrow walkways wound between the
decaying memorials, most
of which were fractured brick with marble platings. Like columns of dust,
countless pillars of unexcavated
earth rose up, supporting a dirt sky, which hung low over the penumbral hamlet.
City of the dead, Langdon thought, feeling trapped between academic wonder and
raw fear. He and the
others dashed deeper down the winding passages. Did I make the wrong choice?
Chartrand had been the first to fall under the camerlegno's spell, yanking open
the gate and declaring his
faith in the camerlegno. Glick and Macri, at the camerlegno's suggestion, had
nobly agreed to provide light
to the quest, although considering what accolades awaited them if they got out
of here alive, their
motivations were certainly suspect. Vittoria had been the least eager of all,
and Langdon had seen in her
eyes a wariness that looked, unsettlingly, a lot like female intuition.
It's too late now, he thought, he and Vittoria dashing after the others. We're
committed.
Vittoria was silent, but Langdon knew they were thinking the same thing. Nine
minutes is not enough time
to get the hell out of Vatican City if the camerlegno is wrong.
As they ran on through the mausoleums, Langdon felt his legs tiring, noting to
his surprise that the group
was ascending a steady incline. The explanation, when it dawned on him, sent
shivers to his core. The
topography beneath his feet was that of Christ's time. He was running up the
original Vatican Hill!
Langdon had heard Vatican scholars claim that St. Peter's tomb was near the top
of Vatican Hill, and he
had always wondered how they knew. Now he understood. The damn hill is still
here!
Langdon felt like he was running through the pages of history. Somewhere ahead
was St. Peter's tomb-the
Christian relic. It was hard to imagine that the original grave had been marked
only with a modest shrine.
Not any more. As Peter's eminence spread, new shrines were built on top of the
old, and now, the homage
stretched 440 feet overhead to the top of Michelangelo's dome, the apex
positioned directly over the
original tomb within a fraction of an inch.
They continued ascending the sinuous passages. Langdon checked his watch. Eight
minutes. He was
beginning to wonder if he and Vittoria would be joining the deceased here
permanently.
"Look out!" Glick yelled from behind them. "Snake holes!"
Langdon saw it in time. A series of small holes riddled the path before them. He
leapt, just clearing them.
Vittoria jumped too, barely avoiding the narrow hollows. She looked uneasy as
they ran on. "Snake holes?"
"Snack holes, actually," Langdon corrected. "Trust me, you don't want to know."
The holes, he had just
realized, were libation tubes. The early Christians had believed in the
resurrection of the flesh, and they'd
used the holes to literally "feed the dead" by pouring milk and honey into
crypts beneath the floor.
The camerlegno felt weak.
He dashed onward, his legs finding strength in his duty to God and man. Almost
there. He was in incredible
pain. The mind can bring so much more pain than the body. Still he felt tired.
He knew he had precious
little time.
"I will save your church, Father. I swear it."
Despite the BBC lights behind him, for which he was grateful, the camerlegno
carried his oil lamp high. I
am a beacon in the darkness .I am the light. The lamp sloshed as he ran, and for
an instant he feared the
flammable oil might spill and burn him. He had experienced enough burned flesh
for one evening.
As he approached the top of the hill, he was drenched in sweat, barely able to
breathe. But when he
emerged over the crest, he felt reborn. He staggered onto the flat piece of
earth where he had stood many
times. Here the path ended. The necropolis came to an abrupt halt at a wall of
earth. A tiny marker read:
Mausoleum S.
La tomba di San Pietro.
Before him, at waist level, was an opening in the wall. There was no gilded
plaque here. No fanfare. Just a
simple hole in the wall, beyond which lay a small grotto and a meager, crumbling
sarcophagus. The
camerlegno gazed into the hole and smiled in exhaustion. He could hear the
others coming up the hill
behind him. He set down his oil lamp and knelt to pray.
Thank you, God. It is almost over.
Outside in the square, surrounded by astounded cardinals, Cardinal Mortati
stared up at the media screen
and watched the drama unfold in the crypt below. He no longer knew what to
believe. Had the entire world
just witnessed what he had seen? Had God truly spoken to the camerlegno? Was the
antimatter really going
to appear on St. Peter's-
"Look!" A gasp went up from the throngs.
"There!" Everyone was suddenly pointing at the screen. "It's a miracle!"
Mortati looked up. The camera angle was unsteady, but it was clear enough. The
image was unforgettable.
Filmed from behind, the camerlegno was kneeling in prayer on the earthen floor.
In front of him was a
rough-hewn hole in the wall. Inside the hollow, among the rubble of ancient
stone, was a terra cotta casket.
Although Mortati had seen the coffin only once in his life, he knew beyond a
doubt what it contained.
San Pietro.
Mortati was not naïve enough to think that the shouts of joy and amazement now
thundering through the
crowd were exaltations from bearing witness to one of Christianity's most sacred
relics. St. Peter's tomb
was not what had people falling to their knees in spontaneous prayer and
thanksgiving. It was the object on
top of his tomb.
The antimatter canister. It was there . . . where it had been all day . . .
hiding in the darkness of the
Necropolis. Sleek. Relentless. Deadly. The camerlegno's revelation was correct.
Mortati stared in wonder at the transparent cylinder. The globule of liquid
still hovered at its core. The
grotto around the canister blinked red as the LED counted down into its final
five minutes of life.
Also sitting on the tomb, inches away from the canister, was the wireless Swiss
Guard security camera that
had been pointed at the canister and transmitting all along.
Mortati crossed himself, certain this was the most frightful image he had seen
in his entire life. He realized,
a moment later, however, that it was about to get worse.
The camerlegno stood suddenly. He grabbed the antimatter in his hands and
wheeled toward the others. His
face showing total focus. He pushed past the others and began descending the
Necropolis the way he had
come, running down the hill.
The camera caught Vittoria Vetra, frozen in terror. "Where are you going!
Camerlegno! I thought you said-
"
"Have faith!" he exclaimed as he ran off.
Vittoria spun toward Langdon. "What do we do?"
Robert Langdon tried to stop the camerlegno, but Chartrand was running
interference now, apparently
trusting the camerlegno's conviction.
The picture coming from the BBC camera was like a roller coaster ride now,
winding, twisting. Fleeting
freeze-frames of confusion and terror as the chaotic cortege stumbled through
the shadows back toward the
Necropolis entrance.
Out in the square, Mortati let out a fearful gasp. "Is he bringing that up
here?"
On televisions all over the world, larger than life, the camerlegno raced upward
out of the Necropolis with
the antimatter before him. "There will be no more death tonight!"
But the camerlegno was wrong.
121
T he camerlegno erupted through the doors of St. Peter's Basilica at exactly
11:56 P.M. He staggered
into the dazzling glare of the world spotlight, carrying the antimatter before
him like some sort of numinous
offering. Through burning eyes he could see his own form, half-naked and
wounded, towering like a giant
on the media screens around the square. The roar that went up from the crowd in
St. Peter's Square was
like none the camerlegno had ever heard-crying, screaming, chanting, praying . .
. a mix of veneration and
terror.
Deliver us from evil, he whispered.
He felt totally depleted from his race out of the Necropolis. It had almost
ended in disaster. Robert Langdon
and Vittoria Vetra had wanted to intercept him, to throw the canister back into
its subterranean hiding
place, to run outside for cover. Blind fools!
The camerlegno realized now, with fearful clarity, that on any other night, he
would never have won the
race. Tonight, however, God again had been with him. Robert Langdon, on the
verge of overtaking the
camerlegno, had been grabbed by Chartrand, ever trusting and dutiful to the
camerlegno's demands for
faith. The reporters, of course, were spellbound and lugging too much equipment
to interfere.
The Lord works in mysterious ways.
The camerlegno could hear the others behind him now . . . see them on the
screens, closing in. Mustering
the last of his physical strength, he raised the antimatter high over his head.
Then, throwing back his bare
shoulders in an act of defiance to the Illuminati brand on his chest, he dashed
down the stairs.
There was one final act.
Godspeed, he thought. Godspeed.
Four minutes . . .
Langdon could barely see as he burst out of the basilica. Again the sea of media
lights bore into his retinas.
All he could make out was the murky outline of the camerlegno, directly ahead of
him, running down the
stairs. For an instant, refulgent in his halo of media lights, the camerlegno
looked celestial, like some kind
of modern deity. His cassock was at his waist like a shroud. His body was
scarred and wounded by the
hands of his enemies, and still he endured. The camerlegno ran on, standing
tall, calling out to the world to
have faith, running toward the masses carrying this weapon of destruction.
Langdon ran down the stairs after him. What is he doing? He will kill them all!
"Satan's work," the camerlegno screamed, "has no place in the House of God!" He
ran on toward a now
terrified crowd.
"Father!" Langdon screamed, behind him. "There's nowhere to go!"
"Look to the heavens! We forget to look to the heavens!"
In that moment, as Langdon saw where the camerlegno was headed, the glorious
truth came flooding all
around him. Although Langdon could not see it on account of the lights, he knew
their salvation was
directly overhead.
A star-filled Italian sky. The escape route.
The helicopter the camerlegno had summoned to take him to the hospital sat dead
ahead, pilot already in
the cockpit, blades already humming in neutral. As the camerlegno ran toward it,
Langdon felt a sudden
overwhelming exhilaration.
The thoughts that tore through Langdon's mind came as a torrent . . .
First he pictured the wide-open expanse of the Mediterranean Sea. How far was
it? Five miles? Ten? He
knew the beach at Fiumocino was only about seven minutes by train. But by
helicopter, 200 miles an hour,
no stops . . . If they could fly the canister far enough out to sea, and drop it
. . . There were other options
too, he realized, feeling almost weightless as he ran. La Cava Romana! The
marble quarries north of the
city were less than three miles away. How large were they? Two square miles?
Certainly they were
deserted at this hour! Dropping the canister there . . .
"Everyone back!" the camerlegno yelled. His chest ached as he ran. "Get away!
Now!"
The Swiss Guard standing around the chopper stood slack-jawed as the camerlegno
approached them.
"Back!" the priest screamed.
The guards moved back.
With the entire world watching in wonder, the camerlegno ran around the chopper
to the pilot's door and
yanked it open. "Out, son! Now!"
The guard jumped out.
The camerlegno looked at the high cockpit seat and knew that in his exhausted
state, he would need both
hands to pull himself up. He turned to the pilot, trembling beside him, and
thrust the canister into his hands.
"Hold this. Hand it back when I'm in."
As the camerlegno pulled himself up, he could hear Robert Langdon yelling
excitedly, running toward the
craft. Now you understand, the camerlegno thought. Now you have faith!
The camerlegno pulled himself up into the cockpit, adjusted a few familiar
levers, and then turned back to
his window for the canister.
But the guard to whom he had given the canister stood empty-handed. "He took
it!" the guard yelled.
The camerlegno felt his heart seize. "Who!"
The guard pointed. "Him!"
Robert Langdon was surprised by how heavy the canister was. He ran to the other
side of the chopper and
jumped in the rear compartment where he and Vittoria had sat only hours ago. He
left the door open and
buckled himself in. Then he yelled to the camerlegno in the front seat.
"Fly, Father!"
The camerlegno craned back at Langdon, his face bloodless with dread. "What are
you doing!"
"You fly! I'll throw!" Langdon barked. "There's no time! Just fly the blessed
chopper!"
The camerlegno seemed momentarily paralyzed, the media lights glaring through
the cockpit darkening the
creases in his face. "I can do this alone," he whispered. "I am supposed to do
this alone."
Langdon wasn't listening. Fly! he heard himself screaming. Now! I'm here to help
you! Langdon looked
down at the canister and felt his breath catch in his throat when he saw the
numbers. "Three minutes,
Father! Three!"
The number seemed to stun the camerlegno back to sobriety. Without hesitation,
he turned back to the
controls. With a grinding roar, the helicopter lifted off.
Through a swirl of dust, Langdon could see Vittoria running toward the chopper.
Their eyes met, and then
she dropped away like a sinking stone.
122
I nside the chopper, the whine of the engines and the gale from the open door
assaulted Langdon's senses
with a deafening chaos. He steadied himself against the magnified drag of
gravity as the camerlegno
accelerated the craft straight up. The glow of St. Peter's Square shrank beneath
them until it was an
amorphous glowing ellipse radiating in a sea of city lights.
The antimatter canister felt like deadweight in Langdon's hands. He held
tighter, his palms slick now with
sweat and blood. Inside the trap, the globule of antimatter hovered calmly,
pulsing red in the glow of the
LED countdown clock.
"Two minutes!" Langdon yelled, wondering where the camerlegno intended to drop
the canister.
The city lights beneath them spread out in all directions. In the distance to
the west, Langdon could see the
twinkling delineation of the Mediterranean coast-a jagged border of luminescence
beyond which spread an
endless dark expanse of nothingness. The sea looked farther now than Langdon had
imagined. Moreover,
the concentration of lights at the coast was a stark reminder that even far out
at sea an explosion might have
devastating effects. Langdon had not even considered the effects of a
ten-kiloton tidal wave hitting the
coast.
When Langdon turned and looked straight ahead through the cockpit window, he was
more hopeful.
Directly in front of them, the rolling shadows of the Roman foothills loomed in
the night. The hills were
spotted with lights-the villas of the very wealthy-but a mile or so north, the
hills grew dark. There were no
lights at all-just a huge pocket of blackness. Nothing.
The quarries! Langdon thought. La Cava Romana!
Staring intently at the barren pocket of land, Langdon sensed that it was plenty
large enough. It seemed
close, too. Much closer than the ocean. Excitement surged through him. This was
obviously where the
camerlegno planned to take the antimatter! The chopper was pointing directly
toward it! The quarries!
Oddly, however, as the engines strained louder and the chopper hurtled through
the air, Langdon could see
that the quarries were not getting any closer. Bewildered, he shot a glance out
the side door to get his
bearings. What he saw doused his excitement in a wave of panic. Directly beneath
them, thousands of feet
straight down, glowed the media lights in St. Peter's Square.
We're still over the Vatican!
"Camerlegno!" Langdon choked. "Go forward! We're high enough! You've got to
start moving forward!
We can't drop the canister back over Vatican City!"
The camerlegno did not reply. He appeared to be concentrating on flying the
craft.
"We've got less than two minutes!" Langdon shouted, holding up the canister. "I
can see them! La Cava
Romana! A couple of miles north! We don't have-"
"No," the camerlegno said. "It's far too dangerous. I'm sorry." As the chopper
continued to claw
heavenward, the camerlegno turned and gave Langdon a mournful smile. "I wish you
had not come, my
friend. You have made the ultimate sacrifice."
Langdon looked in the camerlegno's exhausted eyes and suddenly understood. His
blood turned to ice.
"But . . . there must be somewhere we can go!"
"Up," the camerlegno replied, his voice resigned. "It's the only guarantee."
Langdon could barely think. He had entirely misinterpreted the camerlegno's
plan. Look to the heavens!
Heaven, Langdon now realized, was literally where he was headed. The camerlegno
had never intended to
drop the antimatter. He was simply getting it as far away from Vatican City as
humanly possible.
This was a one-way trip.
123
I n St. Peter's Square, Vittoria Vetra stared upward. The helicopter was a speck
now, the media lights no
longer reaching it. Even the pounding of the rotors had faded to a distant hum.
It seemed, in that instant,
that the entire world was focused upward, silenced in anticipation, necks craned
to the heavens . . . all
peoples, all faiths . . . all hearts beating as one.
Vittoria's emotions were a cyclone of twisting agonies. As the helicopter
disappeared from sight, she
pictured Robert's face, rising above her. What had he been thinking? Didn't he
understand?
Around the square, television cameras probed the darkness, waiting. A sea of
faces stared heavenward,
united in a silent countdown. The media screens all flickered the same tranquil
scene . . . a Roman sky
illuminated with brilliant stars. Vittoria felt the tears begin to well.
Behind her on the marble escarpment, 161 cardinals stared up in silent awe. Some
folded their hands in
prayer. Most stood motionless, transfixed. Some wept. The seconds ticked past.
In homes, bars, businesses, airports, hospitals around the world, souls were
joined in universal witness.
Men and women locked hands. Others held their children. Time seemed to hover in
limbo, souls suspended
in unison.
Then, cruelly, the bells of St. Peter's began to toll.
Vittoria let the tears come.
Then . . . with the whole world watching . . . time ran out.
The dead silence of the event was the most terrifying of all.
High above Vatican City, a pinpoint of light appeared in the sky. For a fleeting
instant, a new heavenly
body had been born . . . a speck of light as pure and white as anyone had ever
seen.
Then it happened.
A flash. The point billowed, as if feeding on itself, unraveling across the sky
in a dilating radius of blinding
white. It shot out in all directions, accelerating with incomprehensible speed,
gobbling up the dark. As the
sphere of light grew, it intensified, like a burgeoning fiend preparing to
consume the entire sky. It raced
downward, toward them, picking up speed.
Blinded, the multitudes of starkly lit human faces gasped as one, shielding
their eyes, crying out in
strangled fear.
As the light roared out in all directions, the unimaginable occurred. As if
bound by God's own will, the
surging radius seemed to hit a wall. It was as if the explosion were contained
somehow in a giant glass
sphere. The light rebounded inward, sharpening, rippling across itself. The wave
appeared to have reached
a predetermined diameter and hovered there. For that instant, a perfect and
silent sphere of light glowed
over Rome. Night had become day.
Then it hit.
The concussion was deep and hollow-a thunderous shock wave from above. It
descended on them like the
wrath of hell, shaking the granite foundation of Vatican City, knocking the
breath out of people's lungs,
sending others stumbling backward. The reverberation circled the colonnade,
followed by a sudden torrent
of warm air. The wind tore through the square, letting out a sepulchral moan as
it whistled through the
columns and buffeted the walls. Dust swirled overhead as people huddled . . .
witnesses to Armageddon.
Then, as fast as it appeared, the sphere imploded, sucking back in on itself,
crushing inward to the tiny
point of light from which it had come.
124
N ever before had so many been so silent.
The faces in St. Peter's Square, one by one, averted their eyes from the
darkening sky and turned
downward, each person in his or her own private moment of wonder. The media
lights followed suit,
dropping their beams back to earth as if out of reverence for the blackness now
settling upon them. It
seemed for a moment the entire world was bowing its head in unison.
Cardinal Mortati knelt to pray, and the other cardinals joined him. The Swiss
Guard lowered their long
swords and stood numb. No one spoke. No one moved. Everywhere, hearts shuddered
with spontaneous
emotion. Bereavement. Fear. Wonder. Belief. And a dread-filled respect for the
new and awesome power
they had just witnessed.
Vittoria Vetra stood trembling at the foot of the basilica's sweeping stairs.
She closed her eyes. Through the
tempest of emotions now coursing through her blood, a single word tolled like a
distant bell. Pristine.
Cruel. She forced it away. And yet the word echoed. Again she drove it back. The
pain was too great. She
tried to lose herself in the images that blazed in other's minds . . .
antimatter's mind-boggling power . . . the
Vatican's deliverance . . . the camerlegno . . . feats of bravery . . . miracles
. . . selflessness. And still the
word echoed . . . tolling through the chaos with a stinging loneliness.
Robert.
He had come for her at Castle St. Angelo.
He had saved her.
And now he had been destroyed by her creation.
As Cardinal Mortati prayed, he wondered if he too would hear God's voice as the
camerlegno had. Does
one need to believe in miracles to experience them? Mortati was a modern man in
an ancient faith. Miracles
had never played a part in his belief. Certainly his faith spoke of miracles . .
. bleeding palms, ascensions
from the dead, imprints on shrouds . . . and yet, Mortati's rational mind had
always justified these accounts
as part of the myth. They were simply the result of man's greatest weakness-his
need for proof. Miracles
were nothing but stories we all clung to because we wished they were true.
And yet . . .
Am I so modern that I cannot accept what my eyes have just witnessed? It was a
miracle, was it not? Yes!
God, with a few whispered words in the camerlegno's ear, had intervened and
saved this church. Why was
this so hard to believe? What would it say about God if God had done nothing?
That the Almighty did not
care? That He was powerless to stop it? A miracle was the only possible
response!
As Mortati knelt in wonder, he prayed for the camerlegno's soul. He gave thanks
to the young chamberlain
who, even in his youthful years, had opened this old man's eyes to the miracles
of unquestioning faith.
Incredibly, though, Mortati never suspected the extent to which his faith was
about to be tested . . .
The silence of St. Peter's Square broke with a ripple at first. The ripple grew
to a murmur. And then,
suddenly, to a roar. Without warning, the multitudes were crying out as one.
"Look! Look!"
Mortati opened his eyes and turned to the crowd. Everyone was pointing behind
him, toward the front of St.
Peter's Basilica. Their faces were white. Some fell to their knees. Some
fainted. Some burst into
uncontrollable sobs.
"Look! Look!"
Mortati turned, bewildered, following their outstretched hands. They were
pointing to the uppermost level
of the basilica, the rooftop terrace, where huge statues of Christ and his
apostles watched over the crowd.
There, on the right of Jesus, arms outstretched to the world . . . stood
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca.
125
R obert Langdon was no longer falling.
There was no more terror. No pain. Not even the sound of the racing wind. There
was only the soft sound
of lapping water, as though he were comfortably asleep on a beach.
In a paradox of self-awareness, Langdon sensed this was death. He felt glad for
it. He allowed the drifting
numbness to possess him entirely. He let it carry him wherever it was he would
go. His pain and fear had
been anesthetized, and he did not wish it back at any price. His final memory
had been one that could only
have been conjured in hell.
Take me. Please . . .
But the lapping that lulled in him a far-off sense of peace was also pulling him
back. It was trying to
awaken him from a dream. No! Let me be! He did not want to awaken. He sensed
demons gathering on the
perimeter of his bliss, pounding to shatter his rapture. Fuzzy images swirled.
Voices yelled. Wind churned.
No, please! The more he fought, the more the fury filtered through.
Then, harshly, he was living it all again . . .
The helicopter was in a dizzying dead climb. He was trapped inside. Beyond the
open door, the lights of
Rome looked farther away with every passing second. His survival instinct told
him to jettison the canister
right now. Langdon knew it would take less than twenty seconds for the canister
to fall half a mile. But it
would be falling toward a city of people.
Higher! Higher!
Langdon wondered how high they were now. Small prop planes, he knew, flew at
altitudes of about four
miles. This helicopter had to be at a good fraction of that by now. Two miles
up? Three? There wasstill a
chance. If they timed the drop perfectly, the canister would fall only partway
toward earth, exploding a safe
distance over the ground and away from the chopper. Langdon looked out at the
city sprawling below them.
"And if you calculate incorrectly?" the camerlegno said.
Langdon turned, startled. The camerlegno was not even looking at him, apparently
having read Langdon's
thoughts from the ghostly reflection in the windshield. Oddly, the camerlegno
was no longer engrossed in
his controls. His hands were not even on the throttle. The chopper, it seemed,
was now in some sort of
autopilot mode, locked in a climb. The camerlegno reached above his head, to the
ceiling of the cockpit,
fishing behind a cable-housing, where he removed a key, taped there out of view.
Langdon watched in bewilderment as the camerlegno quickly unlocked the metal
cargo box bolted between
the seats. He removed some sort of large, black, nylon pack. He lay it on the
seat next to him. Langdon's
thoughts churned. The camerlegno's movements seemed composed, as if he had a
solution.
"Give me the canister," the camerlegno said, his tone serene.
Langdon did not know what to think anymore. He thrust the canister to the
camerlegno. "Ninety seconds!"
What the camerlegno did with the antimatter took Langdon totally by surprise.
Holding the canister
carefully in his hands, the camerlegno placed it inside the cargo box. Then he
closed the heavy lid and used
the key to lock it tight.
"What are you doing!" Langdon demanded.
"Leading us from temptation." The camerlegno threw the key out the open window.
As the key tumbled into the night, Langdon felt his soul falling with it.
The camerlegno then took the nylon pack and slipped his arms through the straps.
He fastened a waist
clamp around his stomach and cinched it all down like a backpack. He turned to a
dumbstruck Robert
Langdon.
"I'm sorry," the camerlegno said. "It wasn't supposed to happen this way." Then
he opened his door and
hurled himself into the night.
The image burned in Langdon's unconscious mind, and with it came the pain. Real
pain. Physical pain.
Aching. Searing. He begged to be taken, to let it end, but as the water lapped
louder in his ears, new images
began to flash. His hell had only just begun. He saw bits and pieces. Scattered
frames of sheer panic. He lay
halfway between death and nightmare, begging for deliverance, but the pictures
grew brighter in his mind.
The antimatter canister was locked out of reach. It counted relentlessly
downward as the chopper shot
upward. Fifty seconds. Higher. Higher. Langdon spun wildly in the cabin, trying
to make sense of what he
had just seen. Forty-five seconds. He dug under seats searching for another
parachute. Forty seconds. There
was none! There had to be an option! Thirty-five seconds. He raced to the open
doorway of the chopper and

