Dan Brown - Angels and Demons
he lowered himself deeper into the darkness, the bluish glow from above got
fainter. The only thing that got
stronger was the stench.
Twelve rungs down, it happened. Langdon's foot hit a spot that was slippery with
decay, and he faltered.
Lunging forward, he caught the ladder with his forearms to avoid plummeting to
the bottom. Cursing the
bruises now throbbing on his arms, he dragged his body back onto the ladder and
began his descent again.
Three rungs deeper, he almost fell again, but this time it was not a rung that
caused the mishap. It was a
bolt of fear. He had descended past a hollowed niche in the wall before him and
suddenly found himself
face to face with a collection of skulls. As he caught his breath and looked
around him, he realized the wall
at this level was honeycombed with shelflike openings-burial niches-all filled
with skeletons. In the
phosphorescent light, it made for an eerie collage of empty sockets and decaying
rib cages flickering
around him.
Skeletons by firelight, he grimaced wryly, realizing he had quite coincidentally
endured a similar evening
just last month. An evening of bones and flames. The New York Museum of
Archeology's candlelight
benefit dinner-salmon flambé in the shadow of a brontosaurus skeleton. He had
attended at the invitation of
Rebecca Strauss-one-time fashion model now art critic from the Times, a
whirlwind of black velvet,
cigarettes, and not-so-subtly enhanced breasts. She'd called him twice since.
Langdon had not returned her
calls. Most ungentlemanly, he chided, wondering how long Rebecca Strauss would
last in a stink-pit like
this.
Langdon was relieved to feel the final rung give way to the spongy earth at the
bottom. The ground beneath
his shoes felt damp. Assuring himself the walls were not going to close in on
him, he turned into the crypt.
It was circular, about twenty feet across. Breathing through his sleeve again,
Langdon turned his eyes to the
body. In the gloom, the image was hazy. A white, fleshy outline. Facing the
other direction. Motionless.
Silent.
Advancing through the murkiness of the crypt, Langdon tried to make sense of
what he was looking at. The
man had his back to Langdon, and Langdon could not see his face, but he did
indeed seem to be standing.
"Hello?" Langdon choked through his sleeve. Nothing. As he drew nearer, he
realized the man was very
short. Too short . . .
"What's happening?" Vittoria called from above, shifting the light.
Langdon did not answer. He was now close enough to see it all. With a tremor of
repulsion, he understood.
The chamber seemed to contract around him. Emerging like a demon from the
earthen floor was an old
man . . . or at least half of him. He was buried up to his waist in the earth.
Standing upright with half of him
below ground. Stripped naked. His hands tied behind his back with a red
cardinal's sash. He was propped
limply upward, spine arched backward like some sort of hideous punching bag. The
man's head lay
backward, eyes toward the heavens as if pleading for help from God himself.
"Is he dead?" Vittoria called.
Langdon moved toward the body. I hope so, for his sake. As he drew to within a
few feet, he looked down
at the upturned eyes. They bulged outward, blue and bloodshot. Langdon leaned
down to listen for breath
but immediately recoiled. "For Christ's sake!"
"What!"
Langdon almost gagged. "He's dead all right. I just saw the cause of death." The
he lowered himself deeper into the darkness, the bluish glow from above got
fainter. The only thing that got
stronger was the stench.
Twelve rungs down, it happened. Langdon's foot hit a spot that was slippery with
decay, and he faltered.
Lunging forward, he caught the ladder with his forearms to avoid plummeting to
the bottom. Cursing the
bruises now throbbing on his arms, he dragged his body back onto the ladder and
began his descent again.
Three rungs deeper, he almost fell again, but this time it was not a rung that
caused the mishap. It was a
bolt of fear. He had descended past a hollowed niche in the wall before him and
suddenly found himself
face to face with a collection of skulls. As he caught his breath and looked
around him, he realized the wall
at this level was honeycombed with shelflike openings-burial niches-all filled
with skeletons. In the
phosphorescent light, it made for an eerie collage of empty sockets and decaying
rib cages flickering
around him.
Skeletons by firelight, he grimaced wryly, realizing he had quite coincidentally
endured a similar evening
just last month. An evening of bones and flames. The New York Museum of
Archeology's candlelight
benefit dinner-salmon flambé in the shadow of a brontosaurus skeleton. He had
attended at the invitation of
Rebecca Strauss-one-time fashion model now art critic from the Times, a
whirlwind of black velvet,
cigarettes, and not-so-subtly enhanced breasts. She'd called him twice since.
Langdon had not returned her
calls. Most ungentlemanly, he chided, wondering how long Rebecca Strauss would
last in a stink-pit like
this.
Langdon was relieved to feel the final rung give way to the spongy earth at the
bottom. The ground beneath
his shoes felt damp. Assuring himself the walls were not going to close in on
him, he turned into the crypt.
It was circular, about twenty feet across. Breathing through his sleeve again,
Langdon turned his eyes to the
body. In the gloom, the image was hazy. A white, fleshy outline. Facing the
other direction. Motionless.
Silent.
Advancing through the murkiness of the crypt, Langdon tried to make sense of
what he was looking at. The
man had his back to Langdon, and Langdon could not see his face, but he did
indeed seem to be standing.
"Hello?" Langdon choked through his sleeve. Nothing. As he drew nearer, he
realized the man was very
short. Too short . . .
"What's happening?" Vittoria called from above, shifting the light.
Langdon did not answer. He was now close enough to see it all. With a tremor of
repulsion, he understood.
The chamber seemed to contract around him. Emerging like a demon from the
earthen floor was an old
man . . . or at least half of him. He was buried up to his waist in the earth.
Standing upright with half of him
below ground. Stripped naked. His hands tied behind his back with a red
cardinal's sash. He was propped
limply upward, spine arched backward like some sort of hideous punching bag. The
man's head lay
backward, eyes toward the heavens as if pleading for help from God himself.
"Is he dead?" Vittoria called.
Langdon moved toward the body. I hope so, for his sake. As he drew to within a
few feet, he looked down
at the upturned eyes. They bulged outward, blue and bloodshot. Langdon leaned
down to listen for breath
but immediately recoiled. "For Christ's sake!"
"What!"
Langdon almost gagged. "He's dead all right. I just saw the cause of death." The
sight was gruesome. The
man's mouth had been jammed open and packed solid with dirt. "Somebody stuffed a
fistful of dirt down
his throat. He suffocated."
"Dirt?" Vittoria said. "As in . . . earth?"
Langdon did a double take. Earth. He had almost forgotten. The brands. Earth,
Air, Fire, Water. The killer
had threatened to brand each victim with one of the ancient elements of science.
The first element was
Earth. From Santi's earthly tomb. Dizzy from the fumes, Langdon circled to the
front of the body. As he
did, the symbologist within him loudly reasserted the artistic challenge of
creating the mythical ambigram.
Earth? How? And yet, an instant later, it was before him. Centuries of
Illuminati legend whirled in his
mind. The marking on the cardinal's chest was charred and oozing. The flesh was
seared black. La lingua
pura . . .
Langdon stared at the brand as the room began to spin.
"Earth," he whispered, tilting his head to see the symbol upside down. "Earth."
Then, in a wave of horror, he had one final cognition. There are three more.
68
D espite the soft glow of candlelight in the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati
was on edge. Conclave had
officially begun. And it had begun in a most inauspicious fashion.
Half an hour ago, at the appointed hour, Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca had entered
the chapel. He walked to
the front altar and gave opening prayer. Then, he unfolded his hands and spoke
to them in a tone as direct
as anything Mortati had ever heard from the altar of the Sistine.
"You are well aware," the camerlegno said, "that our four preferiti are not
present in conclave at this
moment. I ask, in the name of his late Holiness, that you proceed as you must .
. . with faith and purpose.
May you have only God before your eyes." Then he turned to go.
"But," one cardinal blurted out, "where are they?"
The camerlegno paused. "That I cannot honestly say."
"When will they return?"
"That I cannot honestly say."
"Are they okay?"
"That I cannot honestly say."
"Will they return?"
There was a long pause.
"Have faith," the camerlegno said. Then he walked out of the room.
The doors to the Sistine Chapel had been sealed, as was the custom, with two
heavy chains on the outside.
Four Swiss Guards stood watch in the hallway beyond. Mortati knew the only way
the doors could be
opened now, prior to electing a Pope, was if someone inside fell deathly ill, or
if the preferiti arrived.
Mortati prayed it would be the latter, although from the knot in his stomach he
was not so sure.
Proceed as we must, Mortati decided, taking his lead from the resolve in the
camerlegno's voice. So he had
called for a vote. What else could he do?
It had taken thirty minutes to complete the preparatory rituals leading up to
this first vote. Mortati had
waited patiently at the main altar as each cardinal, in order of seniority, had
approached and performed the
specific balloting procedure.
Now, at last, the final cardinal had arrived at the altar and was kneeling
before him.
"I call as my witness," the cardinal declared, exactly as those before him,
"Christ the Lord, who will be my
judge that my vote is given to the one who before God I think should be
elected."
The cardinal stood up. He held his ballot high over his head for everyone to
see. Then he lowered the ballot
to the altar, where a plate sat atop a large chalice. He placed the ballot on
the plate. Next he picked up the
plate and used it to drop the ballot into the chalice. Use of the plate was to
ensure no one secretly dropped
multiple ballots.
After he had submitted his ballot, he replaced the plate over the chalice, bowed
to the cross, and returned to
his seat.
The final ballot had been cast.
Now it was time for Mortati to go to work.
Leaving the plate on top of the chalice, Mortati shook the ballots to mix them.
Then he removed the plate
and extracted a ballot at random. He unfolded it. The ballot was exactly two
inches wide. He read aloud for
everyone to hear.
"Eligo in summum pontificem . . ." he declared, reading the text that was
embossed at the top of every
ballot. I elect as Supreme Pontiff . . . Then he announced the nominee's name
that had been written beneath
it. After he read the name, he raised a threaded needle and pierced the ballot
through the word Eligo,
carefully sliding the ballot onto the thread. Then he made note of the vote in a
logbook.
Next, he repeated the entire procedure. He chose a ballot from the chalice, read
it aloud, threaded it onto the
line, and made note in his log. Almost immediately, Mortati sensed this first
vote would be failed. No
consensus. After only seven ballots, already seven different cardinals had been
named. As was normal, the
handwriting on each ballot was disguised by block printing or flamboyant script.
The concealment was
ironic in this case because the cardinals were obviously submitting votes for
themselves. This apparent
conceit, Mortati knew, had nothing to do with self-centered ambition. It was a
holding pattern. A defensive
maneuver. A stall tactic to ensure no cardinal received enough votes to win . .
. and another vote would be
forced.
The cardinals were waiting for their preferiti . . .
When the last of the ballots had been tallied, Mortati declared the vote
"failed."
He took the thread carrying all the ballots and tied the ends together to create
a ring. Then he lay the ring of
ballots on a silver tray. He added the proper chemicals and carried the tray to
a small chimney behind him.
Here he lit the ballots. As the ballots burned, the chemicals he'd added created
black smoke. The smoke
flowed up a pipe to a hole in the roof where it rose above the chapel for all to
see. Cardinal Mortati had just
sent his first communication to the outside world.
One balloting. No Pope.
69
N early asphyxiated by fumes, Langdon struggled up the ladder toward the light
at the top of the pit.
Above him he heard voices, but nothing was making sense. His head was spinning
with images of the
branded cardinal.
Earth . . . Earth . . .
As he pushed upward, his vision narrowed and he feared consciousness would slip
away. Two rungs from
the top, his balance faltered. He lunged upward trying to find the lip, but it
was too far. He lost his grip on
the ladder and almost tumbled backward into the dark. There was a sharp pain
under his arms, and
suddenly Langdon was airborne, legs swinging wildly out over the chasm.
The strong hands of two Swiss Guards hooked him under the armpits and dragged
him skyward. A moment
later Langdon's head emerged from the Demon's hole, choking and gasping for air.
The guards dragged
him over the lip of the opening, across the floor, and lay him down, back
against the cold marble floor.
For a moment, Langdon was unsure where he was. Overhead he saw stars . . .
orbiting planets. Hazy figures
raced past him. People were shouting. He tried to sit up. He was lying at the
base of a stone pyramid. The
familiar bite of an angry tongue echoed inside the chapel, and then Langdon
knew.
Olivetti was screaming at Vittoria. "Why the hell didn't you figure that out in
the first place!"
Vittoria was trying to explain the situation.
Olivetti cut her off midsentence and turned to bark orders to his men. "Get that
body out of there! Search
the rest of the building!"
Langdon tried to sit up. The Chigi Chapel was packed with Swiss Guards. The
plastic curtain over the
chapel opening had been torn off the entryway, and fresh air filled Langdon's
lungs. As his senses slowly
returned, Langdon saw Vittoria coming toward him. She knelt down, her face like
an angel.
"You okay?" Vittoria took his arm and felt his pulse. Her hands were tender on
his skin.
"Thanks." Langdon sat up fully. "Olivetti's mad."
Vittoria nodded. "He has a right to be. We blew it."
"You mean I blew it."
"So redeem yourself. Get him next time."
Next time? Langdon thought it was a cruel comment. There is no next time! We
missed our shot!
Vittoria checked Langdon's watch. "Mickey says we've got forty minutes. Get your
head together and help
me find the next marker."
"I told you, Vittoria, the sculptures are gone. The Path of Illumination is-"
Langdon halted.
Vittoria smiled softly.
Suddenly Langdon was staggering to his feet. He turned dizzying circles, staring
at the artwork around him.
Pyramids, stars, planets, ellipses. Suddenly everything came back. This is the
first altar of science! Not the
Pantheon! It dawned on him now how perfectly Illuminati the chapel was, far more
subtle and selective
than the world famous Pantheon. The Chigi was an out of the way alcove, a
literal hole-in-the-wall, a
tribute to a great patron of science, decorated with earthly symbology. Perfect.
Langdon steadied himself against the wall and gazed up at the enormous pyramid
sculptures. Vittoria was
dead right. If this chapel was the first altar of science, it might still
contain the Illuminati sculpture that
served as the first marker. Langdon felt an electrifying rush of hope to realize
there was still a chance. If the
marker were indeed here, and they could follow it to the next altar of science,
they might have another
chance to catch the killer.
Vittoria moved closer. "I found out who the unknown Illuminati sculptor was."
Langdon's head whipped around. "You what?"
"Now we just need to figure out which sculpture in here is the-"
"Wait a minute! You know who the Illuminati sculptor was?" He had spent years
trying to find that
information.
Vittoria smiled. "It was Bernini." She paused. "The Bernini."
Langdon immediately knew she was mistaken. Bernini was an impossibility.
Gianlorenzo Bernini was the
second most famous sculptor of all time, his fame eclipsed only by Michelangelo
himself. During the 1600s
Bernini created more sculptures than any other artist. Unfortunately, the man
they were looking for was
supposedly an unknown, a nobody.
Vittoria frowned. "You don't look excited."
"Bernini is impossible."
"Why? Bernini was a contemporary of Galileo. He was a brilliant sculptor."
"He was a very famous man and a Catholic."
"Yes," Vittoria said. "Exactly like Galileo."
"No," Langdon argued. "Nothing like Galileo. Galileo was a thorn in the
Vatican's side. Bernini was the
Vatican's wonder boy. The church loved Bernini. He was elected the Vatican's
overall artistic authority. He
practically lived inside Vatican City his entire life!"
"A perfect cover. Illuminati infiltration."
Langdon felt flustered. "Vittoria, the Illuminati members referred to their
secret artist as il maestro ignotothe
unknown master."
"Yes, unknown to them. Think of the secrecy of the Masons-only the upper-echelon
members knew the
whole truth. Galileo could have kept Bernini's true identity secret from most
members . . . for Bernini's
own safety. That way, the Vatican would never find out."
Langdon was unconvinced but had to admit Vittoria's logic made strange sense.
The Illuminati were
famous for keeping secret information compartmentalized, only revealing the
truth to upper-level members.
It was the cornerstone of their ability to stay secret . . . very few knew the
whole story.
"And Bernini's affiliation with the Illuminati," Vittoria added with a smile,
"explains why he designed
those two pyramids."
Langdon turned to the huge sculpted pyramids and shook his head. "Bernini was a
religious sculptor.
There's no way he carved those pyramids."
Vittoria shrugged. "Tell that to the sign behind you."
Langdon turned to the plaque:
ART OF THE CHIGI CHAPEL
While the architecture is Raphael's,
all interior adornments are those of Gianlorenzo Bernini.
Langdon read the plaque twice, and still he was not convinced. Gianlorenzo
Bernini was celebrated for his
intricate, holy sculptures of the Virgin Mary, angels, prophets, Popes. What was
he doing carving
pyramids?
Langdon looked up at the towering monuments and felt totally disoriented. Two
pyramids, each with a
shining, elliptical medallion. They were about as un-Christian as sculpture
could get. The pyramids, the
stars above, the signs of the Zodiac. All interior adornments are those of
Gianlorenzo Bernini. If that were
true, Langdon realized, it meant Vittoria had to be right. By default, Bernini
was the Illuminati's unknown
master; nobody else had contributed artwork to this chapel! The implications
came almost too fast for
Langdon to process.
Bernini was an Illuminatus.
Bernini designed the Illuminati ambigrams.
Bernini laid out the path of Illumination.
Langdon could barely speak. Could it be that here in this tiny Chigi Chapel, the
world-renowned Bernini
had placed a sculpture that pointed across Rome toward the next altar of
science?
"Bernini," he said. "I never would have guessed."
"Who other than a famous Vatican artist would have had the clout to put his
artwork in specific Catholic
chapels around Rome and create the Path of Illumination? Certainly not an
unknown."
Langdon considered it. He looked at the pyramids, wondering if one of them could
somehow be the
marker. Maybe both of them? "The pyramids face opposite directions," Langdon
said, not sure what to
make of them. "They are also identical, so I don't know which . . ."
"I don't think the pyramids are what we're looking for."
"But they're the only sculptures here."
Vittoria cut him off by pointing toward Olivetti and some of his guards who were
gathered near the
demon's hole.
Langdon followed the line of her hand to the far wall. At first he saw nothing.
Then someone moved and he
caught a glimpse. White marble. An arm. A torso. And then a sculpted face.
Partially hidden in its niche.
Two life-size human figures intertwined. Langdon's pulse accelerated. He had
been so taken with the
pyramids and demon's hole, he had not even seen this sculpture. He moved across
the room, through the
crowd. As he drew near, Langdon recognized the work was pure Bernini-the
intensity of the artistic
composition, the intricate faces and flowing clothing, all from the purest white
marble Vatican money
could buy. It was not until he was almost directly in front of it that Langdon
recognized the sculpture itself.
He stared up at the two faces and gasped.
"Who are they?" Vittoria urged, arriving behind him.
Langdon stood astonished. "Habakkuk and the Angel," he said, his voice almost
inaudible. The piece was a
fairly well-known Bernini work that was included in some art history texts.
Langdon had forgotten it was
here.
"Habakkuk?"
"Yes. The prophet who predicted the annihilation of the earth."
Vittoria looked uneasy. "You think this is the marker?"
Langdon nodded in amazement. Never in his life had he been so sure of anything.
This was the first
Illuminati marker. No doubt. Although Langdon had fully expected the sculpture
to somehow "point" to the
next altar of science, he did not expect it to be literal. Both the angel and
Habakkuk had their arms
outstretched and were pointing into the distance.
Langdon found himself suddenly smiling. "Not too subtle, is it?"
Vittoria looked excited but confused. "I see them pointing, but they are
contradicting each other. The angel
is pointing one way, and the prophet the other."
Langdon chuckled. It was true. Although both figures were pointing into the
distance, they were pointing in
totally opposite directions. Langdon, however, had already solved that problem.
With a burst of energy he
headed for the door.
"Where are you going?" Vittoria called.
"Outside the building!" Langdon's legs felt light again as he ran toward the
door. "I need to see what
direction that sculpture is pointing!"
"Wait! How do you know which finger to follow?"
"The poem," he called over his shoulder. "The last line!"
" 'Let angels guide you on your lofty quest?' " She gazed upward at the
outstretched finger of the angel.
Her eyes misted unexpectedly. "Well I'll be damned!"
70
G unther Glick and Chinita Macri sat parked in the BBC van in the shadows at the
far end of Piazza del
Popolo. They had arrived shortly after the four Alpha Romeos, just in time to
witness an inconceivable
chain of events. Chinita still had no idea what it all meant, but she'd made
sure the camera was rolling.
As soon as they'd arrived, Chinita and Glick had seen a veritable army of young
men pour out of the Alpha
Romeos and surround the church. Some had weapons drawn. One of them, a stiff
older man, led a team up
the front steps of the church. The soldiers drew guns and blew the locks off the
front doors. Macri heard
nothing and figured they must have had silencers. Then the soldiers entered.
Chinita had recommended they sit tight and film from the shadows. After all,
guns were guns, and they had
a clear view of the action from the van. Glick had not argued. Now, across the
piazza, men moved in and
out of the church. They yelled to each other. Chinita adjusted her camera to
follow a team as they searched
the surrounding area. All of them, though dressed in civilian clothes, seemed to
move with military
precision. "Who do you think they are?" she asked.
"Hell if I know." Glick looked riveted. "You getting all this?"
"Every frame."
Glick sounded smug. "Still think we should go back to Pope-Watch?"
Chinita wasn't sure what to say. There was obviously something going on here,
but she had been in
journalism long enough to know that there was often a very dull explanation for
interesting events. "This
could be nothing," she said. "These guys could have gotten the same tip you got
and are just checking it
out. Could be a false alarm."
Glick grabbed her arm. "Over there! Focus." He pointed back to the church.
Chinita swung the camera back to the top of the stairs. "Hello there," she said,
training on the man now
emerging from the church.
"Who's the dapper?"
Chinita moved in for a close-up. "Haven't seen him before." She tightened in on
the man's face and smiled.
"But I wouldn't mind seeing him again."
Robert Langdon dashed down the stairs outside the church and into the middle of
the piazza. It was getting
dark now, the springtime sun setting late in southern Rome. The sun had dropped
below the surrounding
buildings, and shadows streaked the square.
"Okay, Bernini," he said aloud to himself. "Where the hell is your angel
pointing?"
He turned and examined the orientation of the church from which he had just
come. He pictured the Chigi
Chapel inside, and the sculpture of the angel inside that. Without hesitation he
turned due west, into the
glow of the impending sunset. Time was evaporating.
"Southwest," he said, scowling at the shops and apartments blocking his view.
"The next marker is out
there."
Racking his brain, Langdon pictured page after page of Italian art history.
Although very familiar with
Bernini's work, Langdon knew the sculptor had been far too prolific for any
nonspecialist to know all of it.
Still, considering the relative fame of the first marker-Habakkuk and the
Angel-Langdon hoped the second
marker was a work he might know from memory.
Earth, Air, Fire, Water, he thought. Earth they had found-inside the Chapel of
the Earth-Habakkuk, the
prophet who predicted the earth's annihilation.
Air is next. Langdon urged himself to think. A Bernini sculpture that has
something to do with Air! He was
drawing a total blank. Still he felt energized. I'm on the path of Illumination!
It is still intact!
Looking southwest, Langdon strained to see a spire or cathedral tower jutting up
over the obstacles. He saw
nothing. He needed a map. If they could figure out what churches were southwest
of here, maybe one of
them would spark Langdon's memory. Air, he pressed. Air. Bernini. Sculpture.
Air. Think!
Langdon turned and headed back up the cathedral stairs. He was met beneath the
scaffolding by Vittoria
and Olivetti.
"Southwest," Langdon said, panting. "The next church is southwest of here."
Olivetti's whisper was cold. "You sure this time?"
Langdon didn't bite. "We need a map. One that shows all the churches in Rome."
The commander studied him a moment, his expression never changing.
Langdon checked his watch. "We only have half an hour."
Olivetti moved past Langdon down the stairs toward his car, parked directly in
front of the cathedral.
Langdon hoped he was going for a map.
Vittoria looked excited. "So the angel's pointing southwest? No idea which
churches are southwest?"
"I can't see past the damn buildings." Langdon turned and faced the square
again. "And I don't know
Rome's churches well enou-" He stopped.
Vittoria looked startled. "What?"
Langdon looked out at the piazza again. Having ascended the church stairs, he
was now higher, and his
view was better. He still couldn't see anything, but he realized he was moving
in the right direction. His
eyes climbed the tower of rickety scaffolding above him. It rose six stories,
almost to the top of the
church's rose window, far higher than the other buildings in the square. He knew
in an instant where he
was headed.
Across the square, Chinita Macri and Gunther Glick sat glued to the windshield
of the BBC van.
"You getting this?" Gunther asked.
Macri tightened her shot on the man now climbing the scaffolding. "He's a little
well dressed to be playing
Spiderman if you ask me."
"And who's Ms. Spidey?"
Chinita glanced at the attractive woman beneath the scaffolding. "Bet you'd like
to find out."
"Think I should call editorial?"
"Not yet. Let's watch. Better to have something in the can before we admit we
abandoned conclave."
"You think somebody really killed one of the old farts in there?"
Chinita clucked. "You're definitely going to hell."
"And I'll be taking the Pulitzer with me."
71
T he scaffolding seemed less stable the higher Langdon climbed. His view of
Rome, however, got better
with every step. He continued upward.
He was breathing harder than he expected when he reached the upper tier. He
pulled himself onto the last
platform, brushed off the plaster, and stood up. The height did not bother him
at all. In fact, it was
invigorating.
The view was staggering. Like an ocean on fire, the red-tiled rooftops of Rome
spread out before him,
glowing in the scarlet sunset. From that spot, for the first time in his life,
Langdon saw beyond the pollution
and traffic of Rome to its ancient roots-Città di Dio-The city of God.
Squinting into the sunset, Langdon scanned the rooftops for a church steeple or
bell tower. But as he looked
farther and farther toward the horizon, he saw nothing. There are hundreds of
churches in Rome, he
thought. There must be one southwest of here! If the church is even visible, he
reminded himself. Hell, if the
church is even still standing!
Forcing his eyes to trace the line slowly, he attempted the search again. He
knew, of course, that not all
churches would have visible spires, especially smaller, out-of-the-way
sanctuaries. Not to mention, Rome
had changed dramatically since the 1600s when churches were by law the tallest
buildings allowed. Now,
as Langdon looked out, he saw apartment buildings, high-rises, TV towers.
For the second time, Langdon's eye reached the horizon without seeing anything.
Not one single spire. In
the distance, on the very edge of Rome, Michelangelo's massive dome blotted the
setting sun. St. Peter's
Basilica. Vatican City. Langdon found himself wondering how the cardinals were
faring, and if the Swiss
Guards' search had turned up the antimatter. Something told him it hadn't . . .
and wouldn't.
The poem was rattling through his head again. He considered it, carefully, line
by line. From Santi's
earthly tomb with demon's hole. They had found Santi's tomb. 'Cross Rome the
mystic elements unfold.
The mystic elements were Earth, Air, Fire, Water. The path of light is laid, the
sacred test. The path of
Illumination formed by Bernini's sculptures. Let angels guide you on your lofty
quest.
The angel was pointing southwest . . .
"Front stairs!" Glick exclaimed, pointing wildly through the windshield of the
BBC van. "Something's
going on!"
Macri dropped her shot back down to the main entrance. Something was definitely
going on. At the bottom
of the stairs, the military-looking man had pulled one of the Alpha Romeos close
to the stairs and opened
the trunk. Now he was scanning the square as if checking for onlookers. For a
moment, Macri thought the
man had spotted them, but his eyes kept moving. Apparently satisfied, he pulled
out a walkie-talkie and
spoke into it.
Almost instantly, it seemed an army emerged from the church. Like an American
football team breaking
from a huddle, the soldiers formed a straight line across the top of the stairs.
Moving like a human wall,
they began to descend. Behind them, almost entirely hidden by the wall, four
soldiers seemed to be
carrying something. Something heavy. Awkward.
Glick leaned forward on the dashboard. "Are they stealing something from the
church?"
Chinita tightened her shot even more, using the telephoto to probe the wall of
men, looking for an opening.
One split second, she willed. A single frame. That's all I need. But the men
moved as one. Come on! Macri
stayed with them, and it paid off. When the soldiers tried to lift the object
into the trunk, Macri found her
opening. Ironically, it was the older man who faltered. Only for an instant, but
long enough. Macri had her
frame. Actually, it was more like ten frames.
"Call editorial," Chinita said. "We've got a dead body."
Far away, at CERN, Maximilian Kohler maneuvered his wheelchair into Leonardo
Vetra's study. With
mechanical efficiency, he began sifting through Vetra's files. Not finding what
he was after, Kohler moved
to Vetra's bedroom. The top drawer of his bedside table was locked. Kohler pried
it open with a knife from
the kitchen.
Inside Kohler found exactly what he was looking for.
72
L angdon swung off the scaffolding and dropped back to the ground. He brushed
the plaster dust from
his clothes. Vittoria was there to greet him.
"No luck?" she said.
He shook his head.
"They put the cardinal in the trunk."
Langdon looked over to the parked car where Olivetti and a group of soldiers now
had a map spread out on
the hood. "Are they looking southwest?"
She nodded. "No churches. From here the first one you hit is St. Peter's."
Langdon grunted. At least they were in agreement. He moved toward Olivetti. The
soldiers parted to let
him through.
Olivetti looked up. "Nothing. But this doesn't show every last church. Just the
big ones. About fifty of
them."
"Where are we?" Langdon asked.
Olivetti pointed to Piazza del Popolo and traced a straight line exactly
southwest. The line missed, by a
substantial margin, the cluster of black squares indicating Rome's major
churches. Unfortunately, Rome's
major churches were also Rome's older churches . . . those that would have been
around in the 1600s.
"I've got some decisions to make," Olivetti said. "Are you certain of the
direction?"
Langdon pictured the angel's outstretched finger, the urgency rising in him
again. "Yes, sir. Positive."
Olivetti shrugged and traced the straight line again. The path intersected the
Margherita Bridge, Via Cola di
Riezo, and passed through Piazza del Risorgimento, hitting no churches at all
until it dead-ended abruptly
at the center of St. Peter's Square.
"What's wrong with St. Peter's?" one of the soldiers said. He had a deep scar
under his left eye. "It's a
church."
Langdon shook his head. "Needs to be a public place. Hardly seems public at the
moment."
"But the line goes through St. Peter's Square," Vittoria added, looking over
Langdon's shoulder. "The
square is public."
Langdon had already considered it. "No statues, though."
"Isn't there a monolith in the middle?"
She was right. There was an Egyptian monolith in St. Peter's Square. Langdon
looked out at the monolith
in the piazza in front of them. The lofty pyramid. An odd coincidence, he
thought. He shook it off. "The
Vatican's monolith is not by Bernini. It was brought in by Caligula. And it has
nothing to do with Air."
There was another problem as well. "Besides, the poem says the elements are
spread across Rome. St.
Peter's Square is in Vatican City. Not Rome."
"Depends who you ask," a guard interjected.
Langdon looked up. "What?"
"Always a bone of contention. Most maps show St. Peter's Square as part of
Vatican City, but because it's
outside the walled city, Roman officials for centuries have claimed it as part
of Rome."
"You're kidding," Langdon said. He had never known that.
"I only mention it," the guard continued, "because Commander Olivetti and Ms.
Vetra were asking about a
sculpture that had to do with Air."
Langdon was wide-eyed. "And you know of one in St. Peter's Square?"
"Not exactly. It's not really a sculpture. Probably not relevant."
"Let's hear it," Olivetti pressed.
The guard shrugged. "The only reason I know about it is because I'm usually on
piazza duty. I know every
corner of St. Peter's Square."
"The sculpture," Langdon urged. "What does it look like?" Langdon was starting
to wonder if the
Illuminati could really have been gutsy enough to position their second marker
right outside St. Peter's
Church.
"I patrol past it every day," the guard said. "It's in the center, directly
where that line is pointing. That's
what made me think of it. As I said, it's not really a sculpture. It's more of a
. . . block."
Olivetti looked mad. "A block?"
"Yes, sir. A marble block embedded in the square. At the base of the monolith.
But the block is not a
rectangle. It's an ellipse. And the block is carved with the image of a
billowing gust of wind." He paused.
"Air, I suppose, if you wanted to get scientific about it."
Langdon stared at the young soldier in amazement. "A relief!" he exclaimed
suddenly.
Everyone looked at him.
"Relief," Langdon said, "is the other half of sculpture!" Sculpture is the art
of shaping figures in the round
and also in relief. He had written the definition on chalkboards for years.
Reliefs were essentially twodimensional
sculptures, like Abraham Lincoln's profile on the penny. Bernini's
Chigi Chapel medallions
were another perfect example.
"Bassorelievo?" the guard asked, using the Italian art term.
"Yes! Bas-relief!" Langdon rapped his knuckles on the hood. "I wasn't thinking
in those terms! That tile
you're talking about in St. Peter's Square is called the West Ponente-the West
Wind. It's also known as
Respiro di Dio."
"Breath of God?"
"Yes! Air! And it was carved and put there by the original architect!"
Vittoria looked confused. "But I thought Michelangelo designed St. Peter's."
"Yes, the basilica!" Langdon exclaimed, triumph in his voice. "But St. Peter's
Square was designed by
Bernini!"
As the caravan of Alpha Romeos tore out of Piazza del Popolo, everyone was in
too much of a hurry to
notice the BBC van pulling out behind them.
73
G unther Glick floored the BBC van's accelerator and swerved through traffic as
he tailed the four
speeding Alpha Romeos across the Tiber River on Ponte Margherita. Normally Glick
would have made an
effort to maintain an inconspicuous distance, but today he could barely keep up.
These guys were flying.
Macri sat in her work area in the back of the van finishing a phone call with
London. She hung up and
yelled to Glick over the sound of the traffic. "You want the good news or bad
news?"
Glick frowned. Nothing was ever simple when dealing with the home office. "Bad
news."
"Editorial is burned we abandoned our post."
"Surprise."
"They also think your tipster is a fraud."
"Of course."
"And the boss just warned me that you're a few crumpets short of a proper tea."
Glick scowled. "Great. And the good news?"
"They agreed to look at the footage we just shot."
Glick felt his scowl soften into a grin. I guess we'll see who's short a few
crumpets. "So fire it off."
"Can't transmit until we stop and get a fixed cell read."
Glick gunned the van onto Via Cola di Rienzo. "Can't stop now." He tailed the
Alpha Romeos through a
hard left swerve around Piazza Risorgimento.
Macri held on to her computer gear in back as everything slid. "Break my
transmitter," she warned, "and
we'll have to walk this footage to London."
"Sit tight, love. Something tells me we're almost there."
Macri looked up. "Where?"
Glick gazed out at the familiar dome now looming directly in front of them. He
smiled. "Right back where
we started."
The four Alpha Romeos slipped deftly into traffic surrounding St. Peter's
Square. They split up and spread
out along the piazza perimeter, quietly unloading men at select points. The
debarking guards moved into
the throng of tourists and media vans on the edge of the square and instantly
became invisible. Some of the
guards entered the forest of pillars encompassing the colonnade. They too seemed
to evaporate into the
surroundings. As Langdon watched through the windshield, he sensed a noose
tightening around St.
Peter's.
In addition to the men Olivetti had just dispatched, the commander had radioed
ahead to the Vatican and
sent additional undercover guards to the center where Bernini's West Ponente was
located. As Langdon
looked out at the wide-open spaces of St. Peter's Square, a familiar question
nagged. How does the
Illuminati assassin plan to get away with this? How will he get a cardinal
through all these people and kill
him in plain view? Langdon checked his Mickey Mouse watch. It was 8:54 P.M. Six
minutes.
In the front seat, Olivetti turned and faced Langdon and Vittoria. "I want you
two right on top of this
Bernini brick or block or whatever the hell it is. Same drill. You're tourists.
Use the phone if you see
anything."
Before Langdon could respond, Vittoria had his hand and was pulling him out of
the car.
The springtime sun was setting behind St. Peter's Basilica, and a massive shadow
spread, engulfing the
piazza. Langdon felt an ominous chill as he and Vittoria moved into the cool,
black umbra. Snaking
through the crowd, Langdon found himself searching every face they passed,
wondering if the killer was
among them. Vittoria's hand felt warm.
As they crossed the open expanse of St. Peter's Square, Langdon sensed Bernini's
sprawling piazza having
the exact effect the artist had been commissioned to create-that of "humbling
all those who entered."
Langdon certainly felt humbled at the moment. Humbled and hungry, he realized,
surprised such a
mundane thought could enter his head at a moment like this.
"To the obelisk?" Vittoria asked.
Langdon nodded, arching left across the piazza.
"Time?" Vittoria asked, walking briskly, but casually.
"Five of."
Vittoria said nothing, but Langdon felt her grip tighten. He was still carrying
the gun. He hoped Vittoria
would not decide she needed it. He could not imagine her whipping out a weapon
in St. Peter's Square and
blowing away the kneecaps of some killer while the global media looked on. Then
again, an incident like
that would be nothing compared to the branding and murder of a cardinal out
here.
Air, Langdon thought. The second element of science. He tried to picture the
brand. The method of murder.
Again he scanned the sprawling expanse of granite beneath his feet-St. Peter's
Square-an open desert
surrounded by Swiss Guard. If the Hassassin really dared attempt this, Langdon
could not imagine how he
would escape.
In the center of the piazza rose Caligula's 350-ton Egyptian obelisk. It
stretched eighty-one feet skyward to
the pyramidal apex onto which was affixed a hollow iron cross. Sufficiently high
to catch the last of the
evening sun, the cross shone as if magic . . . purportedly containing relics of
the cross on which Christ was
crucified.
Two fountains flanked the obelisk in perfect symmetry. Art historians knew the
fountains marked the exact
geometric focal points of Bernini's elliptical piazza, but it was an
architectural oddity Langdon had never
really considered until today. It seemed Rome was suddenly filled with ellipses,
pyramids, and startling
geometry.
As they neared the obelisk, Vittoria slowed. She exhaled heavily, as if coaxing
Langdon to relax along with
her. Langdon made the effort, lowering his shoulders and loosening his clenched
jaw.
Somewhere around the obelisk, boldly positioned outside the largest church in
the world, was the second
altar of science-Bernini's West Ponente-an elliptical block in St. Peter's
Square.
Gunther Glick watched from the shadows of the pillars surrounding St. Peter's
Square. On any other day
the man in the tweed jacket and the woman in khaki shorts would not have
interested him in the least. They
appeared to be nothing but tourists enjoying the square. But today was not any
other day. Today had been a
day of phone tips, corpses, unmarked cars racing through Rome, and men in tweed
jackets climbing
scaffolding in search of God only knew what. Glick would stay with them.
He looked out across the square and saw Macri. She was exactly where he had told
her to go, on the far
side of the couple, hovering on their flank. Macri carried her video camera
casually, but despite her
imitation of a bored member of the press, she stood out more than Glick would
have liked. No other
reporters were in this far corner of the square, and the acronym "BBC" stenciled
on her camera was
drawing some looks from tourists.
The tape Macri had shot earlier of the naked body dumped in the trunk was
playing at this very moment on
the VCR transmitter back in the van. Glick knew the images were sailing over his
head right now en route
to London. He wondered what editorial would say.
He wished he and Macri had reached the body sooner, before the army of
plainclothed soldiers had
intervened. The same army, he knew, had now fanned out and surrounded this
piazza. Something big was
about to happen.
The media is the right arm of anarchy, the killer had said. Glick wondered if he
had missed his chance for a
big scoop. He looked out at the other media vans in the distance and watched
Macri tailing the mysterious
couple across the piazza. Something told Glick he was still in the game . . .
74
L angdon saw what he was looking for a good ten yards before they reached it.
Through the scattered
tourists, the white marble ellipse of Bernini's West Ponente stood out against
the gray granite cubes that
made up the rest of the piazza. Vittoria apparently saw it too. Her hand tensed.
"Relax," Langdon whispered. "Do your piranha thing."
Vittoria loosened her grip.
As they drew nearer, everything seemed forbiddingly normal. Tourists wandered,
nuns chatted along the
perimeter of the piazza, a girl fed pigeons at the base of the obelisk.
Langdon refrained from checking his watch. He knew it was almost time.
The elliptical stone arrived beneath their feet, and Langdon and Vittoria slowed
to a stop-not overeagerlyjust
two tourists pausing dutifully at a point of mild interest.
"West Ponente," Vittoria said, reading the inscription on the stone.
Langdon gazed down at the marble relief and felt suddenly naïve. Not in his art
books, not in his numerous
trips to Rome, not ever had West Ponente's significance jumped out at him.
Not until now.
The relief was elliptical, about three feet long, and carved with a rudimentary
face-a depiction of the West
Wind as an angel-like countenance. Gusting from the angel's mouth, Bernini had
drawn a powerful breath
of air blowing outward away from the Vatican . . . the breath of God. This was
Bernini's tribute to the
second element . . . Air . . . an ethereal zephyr blown from angel's lips. As
Langdon stared, he realized the
significance of the relief went deeper still. Bernini had carved the air in five
distinct gusts . . . five! What
was more, flanking the medallion were two shining stars. Langdon thought of
Galileo. Two stars, five gusts,
ellipses, symmetry . . . He felt hollow. His head hurt.
Vittoria began walking again almost immediately, leading Langdon away from the
relief. "I think
someone's following us," she said.
Langdon looked up. "Where?"
Vittoria moved a good thirty yards before speaking. She pointed up at the
Vatican as if showing Langdon
something on the dome. "The same person has been behind us all the way across
the square." Casually,
Vittoria glanced over her shoulder. "Still on us. Keep moving."
"You think it's the Hassassin?"
Vittoria shook her head. "Not unless the Illuminati hires women with BBC
cameras."
When the bells of St. Peter's began their deafening clamor, both Langdon and
Vittoria jumped. It was time.
They had circled away from West Ponente in an attempt to lose the reporter but
were now moving back
toward the relief.
Despite the clanging bells, the area seemed perfectly calm. Tourists wandered. A
homeless drunk dozed
awkwardly at the base of the obelisk. A little girl fed pigeons. Langdon
wondered if the reporter had scared
the killer off. Doubtful, he decided, recalling the killer's promise. I will
make your cardinals media
luminaries.
As the echo of the ninth bell faded away, a peaceful silence descended across
the square.
Then . . . the little girl began to scream.
75
L angdon was the first to reach the screaming girl.
The terrified youngster stood frozen, pointing at the base of the obelisk where
a shabby, decrepit drunk sat
slumped on the stairs. The man was a miserable sight . . . apparently one of
Rome's homeless. His gray hair
hung in greasy strands in front of his face, and his entire body was wrapped in
some sort of dirty cloth. The
girl kept screaming as she scampered off into the crowd.
Langdon felt an upsurge of dread as he dashed toward the invalid. There was a
dark, widening stain
spreading across the man's rags. Fresh, flowing blood.
Then, it was as if everything happened at once.
The old man seemed to crumple in the middle, tottering forward. Langdon lunged,
but he was too late. The
man pitched forward, toppled off the stairs, and hit the pavement facedown.
Motionless.
Langdon dropped to his knees. Vittoria arrived beside him. A crowd was
gathering.
Vittoria put her fingers on the man's throat from behind. "There's a pulse," she
declared. "Roll him."
Langdon was already in motion. Grasping the man's shoulders, he rolled the body.
As he did, the loose rags
seemed to slough away like dead flesh. The man flopped limp onto his back. Dead
center of his naked chest
was a wide area of charred flesh.
Vittoria gasped and pulled back.
Langdon felt paralyzed, pinned somewhere between nausea and awe. The symbol had
a terrifying
simplicity to it.
"Air," Vittoria choked. "It's . . . him."
Swiss Guards appeared from out of nowhere, shouting orders, racing after an
unseen assassin.
Nearby, a tourist explained that only minutes ago, a dark-skinned man had been
kind enough to help this
poor, wheezing, homeless man across the square . . . even sitting a moment on
the stairs with the invalid
before disappearing back into the crowd.
Vittoria ripped the rest of the rags off the man's abdomen. He had two deep
puncture wounds, one on either
side of the brand, just below his rib cage. She cocked the man's head back and
began to administer mouth
to mouth. Langdon was not prepared for what happened next. As Vittoria blew, the
wounds on either side
of the man's midsection hissed and sprayed blood into the air like blowholes on
a whale. The salty liquid
hit Langdon in the face.
Vittoria stopped short, looking horrified. "His lungs . . ." she stammered.
"They're . . . punctured."
Langdon wiped his eyes as he looked down at the two perforations. The holes
gurgled. The cardinal's lungs
were destroyed. He was gone.
Vittoria covered the body as the Swiss Guards moved in.
Langdon stood, disoriented. As he did, he saw her. The woman who had been
following them earlier was
crouched nearby. Her BBC video camera was shouldered, aimed, and running. She
and Langdon locked
eyes, and he knew she'd gotten it all. Then, like a cat, she bolted.
76
C hinita Macri was on the run. She had the story of her life.
Her video camera felt like an anchor as she lumbered across St. Peter's Square,
pushing through the
gathering crowd. Everyone seemed to be moving in the opposite direction than her
. . . toward the
commotion. Macri was trying to get as far away as possible. The man in the tweed
jacket had seen her, and
now she sensed others were after her, men she could not see, closing in from all
sides.
Macri was still aghast from the images she had just recorded. She wondered if
the dead man was really who
she feared he was. Glick's mysterious phone contact suddenly seemed a little
less crazy.
As she hurried in the direction of the BBC van, a young man with a decidedly
militaristic air emerged from
the crowd before her. Their eyes met, and they both stopped. Like lightning, he
raised a walkie-talkie and
spoke into it. Then he moved toward her. Macri wheeled and doubled back into the
crowd, her heart
pounding.
As she stumbled through the mass of arms and legs, she removed the spent video
cassette from her camera.
Cellulose gold, she thought, tucking the tape under her belt flush to her
backside and letting her coat tails
cover it. For once she was glad she carried some extra weight. Glick, where the
hell are you!
Another soldier appeared to her left, closing in. Macri knew she had little
time. She banked into the crowd
again. Yanking a blank cartridge from her case, she slapped it into the camera.
Then she prayed.
She was thirty yards from the BBC van when the two men materialized directly in
front of her, arms folded.
She was going nowhere.
"Film," one snapped. "Now."
Macri recoiled, wrapping her arms protectively around her camera. "No chance."
One of the men pulled aside his jacket, revealing a sidearm.
"So shoot me," Macri said, amazed by the boldness of her voice.
"Film," the first one repeated.
Where the devil is Glick? Macri stamped her foot and yelled as loudly as
possible, "I am a professional
videographer with the BBC! By Article 12 of the Free Press Act, this film is
property of the British
Broadcast Corporation!"
The men did not flinch. The one with the gun took a step toward her. "I am a
lieutenant with the Swiss
Guard, and by the Holy Doctrine governing the property on which you are now
standing, you are subject to
search and seizure."
A crowd had started to gather now around them.
Macri yelled, "I will not under any circumstances give you the film in this
camera without speaking to my
editor in London. I suggest you-"
The guards ended it. One yanked the camera out of her hands. The other forcibly
grabbed her by the arm
and twisted her in the direction of the Vatican. "Grazie," he said, leading her
through a jostling crowd.
Macri prayed they would not search her and find the tape. If she could somehow
protect the film long
enough to-
Suddenly, the unthinkable happened. Someone in the crowd was groping under her
coat. Macri felt the
video yanked away from her. She wheeled, but swallowed her words. Behind her, a
breathless Gunther
Glick gave her a wink and dissolved back into the crowd.
77
R obert Langdon staggered into the private bathroom adjoining the Office of the
Pope. He dabbed the
blood from his face and lips. The blood was not his own. It was that of Cardinal
Lamassé, who had just
died horribly in the crowded square outside the Vatican. Virgin sacrifices on
the altars of science. So far,
the Hassassin had made good on his threat.
Langdon felt powerless as he gazed into the mirror. His eyes were drawn, and
stubble had begun to darken
his cheeks. The room around him was immaculate and lavish-black marble with gold
fixtures, cotton
towels, and scented hand soaps.
Langdon tried to rid his mind of the bloody brand he had just seen. Air. The
image stuck. He had witnessed
three ambigrams since waking up this morning . . . and he knew there were two
more coming.
Outside the door, it sounded as if Olivetti, the camerlegno, and Captain Rocher
were debating what to do
next. Apparently, the antimatter search had turned up nothing so far. Either the
guards had missed the
canister, or the intruder had gotten deeper inside the Vatican than Commander
Olivetti had been willing to
entertain.
Langdon dried his hands and face. Then he turned and looked for a urinal. No
urinal. Just a bowl. He lifted
the lid.
As he stood there, tension ebbing from his body, a giddy wave of exhaustion
shuddered through his core.
The emotions knotting his chest were so many, so incongruous. He was fatigued,
running on no food or
sleep, walking the Path of Illumination, traumatized by two brutal murders.
Langdon felt a deepening
horror over the possible outcome of this drama.
Think, he told himself. His mind was blank.
As he flushed, an unexpected realization hit him. This is the Pope's toilet, he
thought. I just took a leak in
the Pope's toilet. He had to chuckle. The Holy Throne.
78
I n London, a BBC technician ejected a video cassette from a satellite receiver
unit and dashed across the
control room floor. She burst into the office of the editor-in-chief, slammed
the video into his VCR, and
pressed play.
As the tape rolled, she told him about the conversation she had just had with
Gunther Glick in Vatican City.
In addition, BBC photo archives had just given her a positive ID on the victim
in St. Peter's Square.
When the editor-in-chief emerged from his office, he was ringing a cowbell.
Everything in editorial
stopped.
"Live in five!" the man boomed. "On-air talent to prep! Media coordinators, I
want your contacts on line!
We've got a story we're selling! And we've got film!"
The market coordinators grabbed their Rolodexes.
"Film specs!" one of them yelled.
"Thirty-second trim," the chief replied.
"Content?"
"Live homicide."
The coordinators looked encouraged. "Usage and licensing price?"
"A million U.S. per."
Heads shot up. "What!"
"You heard me! I want top of the food chain. CNN, MSNBC, then the big three!
Offer a dial-in preview.
Give them five minutes to piggyback before BBC runs it."
"What the hell happened?" someone demanded. "The prime minister get skinned
alive?"
The chief shook his head. "Better."
At that exact instant, somewhere in Rome, the Hassassin enjoyed a fleeting
moment of repose in a
comfortable chair. He admired the legendary chamber around him. I am sitting in
the Church of
Illumination, he thought. The Illuminati lair. He could not believe it was still
here after all of these
centuries.
Dutifully, he dialed the BBC reporter to whom he had spoken earlier. It was
time. The world had yet to
hear the most shocking news of all.
79
V ittoria Vetra sipped a glass of water and nibbled absently at some tea scones
just set out by one of the
Swiss Guards. She knew she should eat, but she had no appetite. The Office of
the Pope was bustling now,
echoing with tense conversations. Captain Rocher, Commander Olivetti, and half a
dozen guards assessed
the damage and debated the next move.
Robert Langdon stood nearby staring out at St. Peter's Square. He looked
dejected. Vittoria walked over.
"Ideas?"
He shook his head.
"Scone?"
His mood seemed to brighten at the sight of food. "Hell yes. Thanks." He ate
voraciously.
The conversation behind them went quiet suddenly when two Swiss Guards escorted
Camerlegno
Ventresca through the door. If the chamberlain had looked drained before,
Vittoria thought, now he looked
empty.
"What happened?" the camerlegno said to Olivetti. From the look on the
camerlegno's face, he appeared to
have already been told the worst of it.
Olivetti's official update sounded like a battlefield casualty report. He gave
the facts with flat efficacy.
"Cardinal Ebner was found dead in the church of Santa Maria del Popolo just
after eight o'clock. He had
been suffocated and branded with the ambigrammatic word 'Earth.' Cardinal
Lamassé was murdered in St.
Peter's Square ten minutes ago. He died of perforations to the chest. He was
branded with the word 'Air,'
also ambigrammatic. The killer escaped in both instances."
The camerlegno crossed the room and sat heavily behind the Pope's desk. He bowed
his head.
"Cardinals Guidera and Baggia, however, are still alive."
The camerlegno's head shot up, his expression pained. "This is our consolation?
Two cardinals have been
murdered, commander. And the other two will obviously not be alive much longer
unless you find them."
"We will find them," Olivetti assured. "I am encouraged."
"Encouraged? We've had nothing but failure."
"Untrue. We've lost two battles, signore, but we're winning the war. The
Illuminati had intended to turn
this evening into a media circus. So far we have thwarted their plan. Both
cardinals' bodies have been
recovered without incident. In addition," Olivetti continued, "Captain Rocher
tells me he is making
excellent headway on the antimatter search."
Captain Rocher stepped forward in his red beret. Vittoria thought he looked more
human somehow than the
other guards-stern but not so rigid. Rocher's voice was emotional and
crystalline, like a violin. "I am
hopeful we will have the canister for you within an hour, signore."
"Captain," the camerlegno said, "excuse me if I seem less than hopeful, but I
was under the impression that
a search of Vatican City would take far more time than we have."
"A full search, yes. However, after assessing the situation, I am confident the
antimatter canister is located
in one of our white zones-those Vatican sectors accessible to public tours-the
museums and St. Peter's
Basilica, for example. We have already killed power in those zones and are
conducting our scan."
"You intend to search only a small percentage of Vatican City?"
"Yes, signore. It is highly unlikely that an intruder gained access to the inner
zones of Vatican City. The
fact that the missing security camera was stolen from a public access area-a
stairwell in one of the
museums-clearly implies that the intruder had limited access. Therefore he would
only have been able to
relocate the camera and antimatter in another public access area. It is these
areas on which we are focusing
our search."
"But the intruder kidnapped four cardinals. That certainly implies deeper
infiltration than we thought."
"Not necessarily. We must remember that the cardinals spent much of today in the
Vatican museums and
St. Peter's Basilica, enjoying those areas without the crowds. It is probable
that the missing cardinals were
taken in one of these areas."
"But how were they removed from our walls?"
"We are still assessing that."
"I see." The camerlegno exhaled and stood up. He walked over to Olivetti.
"Commander, I would like to
hear your contingency plan for evacuation."
"We are still formalizing that, signore. In the meantime, I am faithful Captain
Rocher will find the
canister."
Rocher clicked his boots as if in appreciation of the vote of confidence. "My
men have already scanned
two-thirds of the white zones. Confidence is high."
The camerlegno did not appear to share that confidence.
At that moment the guard with a scar beneath one eye came through the door
carrying a clipboard and a
map. He strode toward Langdon. "Mr. Langdon? I have the information you
requested on the West
Ponente."
Langdon swallowed his scone. "Good. Let's have a look."
The others kept talking while Vittoria joined Robert and the guard as they
spread out the map on the Pope's
desk.
The soldier pointed to St. Peter's Square. "This is where we are. The central
line of West Ponente's breath
points due east, directly away from Vatican City." The guard traced a line with
his finger from St. Peter's
Square across the Tiber River and up into the heart of old Rome. "As you can
see, the line passes through
almost all of Rome. There are about twenty Catholic churches that fall near this
line."
Langdon slumped. "Twenty?"
"Maybe more."
"Do any of the churches fall directly on the line?"
"Some look closer than others," the guard said, "but translating the exact
bearing of the West Ponente onto
a map leaves margin for error."
Langdon looked out at St. Peter's Square a moment. Then he scowled, stroking his
chin. "How about fire?
Any of them have Bernini artwork that has to do with fire?"
Silence.
"How about obelisks?" he demanded. "Are any of the churches located near
obelisks?"
The guard began checking the map.
Vittoria saw a glimmer of hope in Langdon's eyes and realized what he was
thinking. He's right! The first
two markers had been located on or near piazzas that contained obelisks! Maybe
obelisks were a theme?
Soaring pyramids marking the Illuminati path? The more Vittoria thought about
it, the more perfect it
seemed . . . four towering beacons rising over Rome to mark the altars of
science.
"It's a long shot," Langdon said, "but I know that many of Rome's obelisks were
erected or moved during
Bernini's reign. He was no doubt involved in their placement."
"Or," Vittoria added, "Bernini could have placed his markers near existing
obelisks."
Langdon nodded. "True."
"Bad news," the guard said. "No obelisks on the line." He traced his finger
across the map. "None even
remotely close. Nothing."
Langdon sighed.
Vittoria's shoulders slumped. She'd thought it was a promising idea. Apparently,
this was not going to be
as easy as they'd hoped. She tried to stay positive. "Robert, think. You must
know of a Bernini statue
relating to fire. Anything at all."
"Believe me, I've been thinking. Bernini was incredibly prolific. Hundreds of
works. I was hoping West
Ponente would point to a single church. Something that would ring a bell."
"Fuòco," she pressed. "Fire. No Bernini titles jump out?"
Langdon shrugged. "There's his famous sketches of Fireworks, but they're not
sculpture, and they're in
Leipzig, Germany."
Vittoria frowned. "And you're sure the breath is what indicates the direction?"
"You saw the relief, Vittoria. The design was totally symmetrical. The only
indication of bearing was the
breath."
Vittoria knew he was right.
"Not to mention," he added, "because the West Ponente signifies Air, following
the breath seems
symbolically appropriate."
Vittoria nodded. So we follow the breath. But where?
Olivetti came over. "What have you got?"
"Too many churches," the soldier said. "Two dozen or so. I suppose we could put
four men on each
church-"
"Forget it," Olivetti said. "We missed this guy twice when we knew exactly where
he was going to be. A
mass stakeout means leaving Vatican City unprotected and canceling the search."
"We need a reference book," Vittoria said. "An index of Bernini's work. If we
can scan titles, maybe
something will jump out."
"I don't know," Langdon said. "If it's a work Bernini created specifically for
the Illuminati, it may be very
obscure. It probably won't be listed in a book."
Vittoria refused to believe it. "The other two sculptures were fairly
well-known. You'd heard of them
both."
Langdon shrugged. "Yeah."
"If we scan titles for references to the word 'fire,' maybe we'll find a statue
that's listed as being in the
right direction."
Langdon seemed convinced it was worth a shot. He turned to Olivetti. "I need a
list of all Bernini's work.
You guys probably don't have a coffee-table Bernini book around here, do you?"
"Coffee-table book?" Olivetti seemed unfamiliar with the term.
"Never mind. Any list. How about the Vatican Museum? They must have Bernini
references."
The guard with the scar frowned. "Power in the museum is out, and the records
room is enormous. Without
the staff there to help-"
"The Bernini work in question," Olivetti interrupted. "Would it have been
created while Bernini was
employed here at the Vatican?"
"Almost definitely," Langdon said. "He was here almost his entire career. And
certainly during the time
period of the Galileo conflict."
Olivetti nodded. "Then there's another reference."
Vittoria felt a flicker of optimism. "Where?"
The commander did not reply. He took his guard aside and spoke in hushed tones.
The guard seemed
uncertain but nodded obediently. When Olivetti was finished talking, the guard
turned to Langdon.
"This way please, Mr. Langdon. It's nine-fifteen. We'll have to hurry."
Langdon and the guard headed for the door.
Vittoria started after them. "I'll help."
Olivetti caught her by the arm. "No, Ms. Vetra. I need a word with you." His
grasp was authoritative.
Langdon and the guard left. Olivetti's face was wooden as he took Vittoria
aside. But whatever it was
Olivetti had intended to say to her, he never got the chance. His walkie-talkie
crackled loudly.
"Commandante?"
Everyone in the room turned.
The voice on the transmitter was grim. "I think you better turn on the
television."
80
W hen Langdon had left the Vatican Secret Archives only two hours ago, he had
never imagined he
would see them again. Now, winded from having jogged the entire way with his
Swiss Guard escort,
Langdon found himself back at the archives once again.
His escort, the guard with the scar, now led Langdon through the rows of
translucent cubicles. The silence
of the archives felt somehow more forbidding now, and Langdon was thankful when
the guard broke it.
"Over here, I think," he said, escorting Langdon to the back of the chamber
where a series of smaller vaults
lined the wall. The guard scanned the titles on the vaults and motioned to one
of them. "Yes, here it is.
Right where the commander said it would be."
Langdon read the title. ATTIVI VATICANI. Vatican assets? He scanned the list of
contents. Real estate . .
. currency . . . Vatican Bank . . . antiquities . . . The list went on.
"Paperwork of all Vatican assets," the guard said.
Langdon looked at the cubicle. Jesus. Even in the dark, he could tell it was
packed.
"My commander said that whatever Bernini created while under Vatican patronage
would be listed here as
an asset."
Langdon nodded, realizing the commander's instincts just might pay off. In
Bernini's day, everything an
artist created while under the patronage of the Pope became, by law, property of
the Vatican. It was more
like feudalism than patronage, but top artists lived well and seldom complained.
"Including works placed in
churches outside Vatican City?"
The soldier gave him an odd look. "Of course. All Catholic churches in Rome are
property of the Vatican."
Langdon looked at the list in his hand. It contained the names of the twenty or
so churches that were
located on a direct line with West Ponente's breath. The third altar of science
was one of them, and
Langdon hoped he had time to figure out which it was. Under other circumstances,
he would gladly have
explored each church in person. Today, however, he had about twenty minutes to
find what he was looking
for-the one church containing a Bernini tribute to fire.
Langdon walked to the vault's electronic revolving door. The guard did not
follow. Langdon sensed an
uncertain hesitation. He smiled. "The air's fine. Thin, but breathable."
"My orders are to escort you here and then return immediately to the security
center."
"You're leaving?"
"Yes. The Swiss Guard are not allowed inside the archives. I am breaching
protocol by escorting you this
far. The commander reminded me of that."
"Breaching protocol?" Do you have any idea what is going on here tonight? "Whose
side is your damn
commander on!"
All friendliness disappeared from the guard's face. The scar under his eye
twitched. The guard stared,
looking suddenly a lot like Olivetti himself.
"I apologize," Langdon said, regretting the comment. "It's just . . . I could
use some help."
The guard did not blink. "I am trained to follow orders. Not debate them. When
you find what you are
looking for, contact the commander immediately."
Langdon was flustered. "But where will he be?"
The guard removed his walkie-talkie and set it on a nearby table. "Channel one."
Then he disappeared into
the dark.
81
T he television in the Office of the Pope was an oversized Hitachi hidden in a
recessed cabinet opposite
his desk. The doors to the cabinet were now open, and everyone gathered around.
Vittoria moved in close.
As the screen warmed up, a young female reporter came into view. She was a
doe-eyed brunette.
"For MSNBC news," she announced, "this is Kelly Horan-Jones, live from Vatican
City." The image
behind her was a night shot of St. Peter's Basilica with all its lights blazing.
"You're not live," Rocher snapped. "That's stock footage! The lights in the
basilica are out."
Olivetti silenced him with a hiss.
The reporter continued, sounding tense. "Shocking developments in the Vatican
elections this evening. We
have reports that two members of the College of Cardinals have been brutally
murdered in Rome."
Olivetti swore under his breath.
As the reporter continued, a guard appeared at the door, breathless. "Commander,
the central switchboard
reports every line lit. They're requesting our official position on-"
"Disconnect it," Olivetti said, never taking his eyes from the TV.
The guard looked uncertain. "But, commander-"
"Go!"
The guard ran off.
Vittoria sensed the camerlegno had wanted to say something but had stopped
himself. Instead, the man
stared long and hard at Olivetti before turning back to the television.
MSNBC was now running tape. The Swiss Guards carried the body of Cardinal Ebner
down the stairs
outside Santa Maria del Popolo and lifted him into an Alpha Romeo. The tape
froze and zoomed in as the
cardinal's naked body became visible just before they deposited him in the trunk
of the car.
"Who the hell shot this footage?" Olivetti demanded.
The MSNBC reporter kept talking. "This is believed to be the body of Cardinal
Ebner of Frankfurt,
Germany. The men removing his body from the church are believed to be Vatican
Swiss Guard." The
reporter looked like she was making every effort to appear appropriately moved.
They closed in on her
face, and she became even more somber. "At this time, MSNBC would like to issue
our viewers a
discretionary warning. The images we are about to show are exceptionally vivid
and may not be suitable
for all audiences."
Vittoria grunted at the station's feigned concern for viewer sensibility,
recognizing the warning as exactly
what it was-the ultimate media "teaser line." Nobody ever changed channels after
a promise like that.
The reporter drove it home. "Again, this footage may be shocking to some
viewers."
"What footage?" Olivetti demanded. "You just showed-"
The shot that filled the screen was of a couple in St. Peter's Square, moving
through the crowd. Vittoria
instantly recognized the two people as Robert and herself. In the corner of the
screen was a text overlay:
COURTESY OF THE BBC. A bell was tolling.
"Oh, no," Vittoria said aloud. "Oh . . . no."
The camerlegno looked confused. He turned to Olivetti. "I thought you said you
confiscated this tape!"
Suddenly, on television, a child was screaming. The image panned to find a
little girl pointing at what
appeared to be a bloody homeless man. Robert Langdon entered abruptly into the
frame, trying to help the
little girl. The shot tightened.
Everyone in the Pope's office stared in horrified silence as the drama unfolded
before them. The cardinal's
body fell face first onto the pavement. Vittoria appeared and called orders.
There was blood. A brand. A
ghastly, failed attempt to administer CPR.
"This astonishing footage," the reporter was saying, "was shot only minutes ago
outside the Vatican. Our
sources tell us this is the body of Cardinal Lamassé from France. How he came to
be dressed this way and
why he was not in conclave remain a mystery. So far, the Vatican has refused to
comment." The tape began
to roll again.
"Refused comment?" Rocher said. "Give us a damn minute!"
The reporter was still talking, her eyebrows furrowing with intensity. "Although
MSNBC has yet to
confirm a motive for the attack, our sources tell us that responsibility for the
murders has been claimed by a
group calling themselves the Illuminati."
Olivetti exploded. "What!"
". . . find out more about the Illuminati by visiting our website at-"
"Non é posibile!" Olivetti declared. He switched channels.
This station had a Hispanic male reporter. "-a satanic cult known as the
Illuminati, who some historians
believe-"
Olivetti began pressing the remote wildly. Every channel was in the middle of a
live update. Most were in
English.
"-Swiss Guards removing a body from a church earlier this evening. The body is
believed to be that of
Cardinal-"
"-lights in the basilica and museums are extinguished leaving speculation-"
"-will be speaking with conspiracy theorist Tyler Tingley, about this shocking
resurgence-"
"-rumors of two more assassinations planned for later this evening-"
"-questioning now whether papal hopeful Cardinal Baggia is among the missing-"
Vittoria turned away. Everything was happening so fast. Outside the window, in
the settling dark, the raw
magnetism of human tragedy seemed to be sucking people toward Vatican City. The
crowd in the square
thickened almost by the instant. Pedestrians streamed toward them while a new
batch of media personnel
unloaded vans and staked their claim in St. Peter's Square.
Olivetti set down the remote control and turned to the camerlegno. "Signore, I
cannot imagine how this
could happen. We took the tape that was in that camera!"
The camerlegno looked momentarily too stunned to speak.
Nobody said a word. The Swiss Guards stood rigid at attention.
"It appears," the camerlegno said finally, sounding too devastated to be angry,
"that we have not contained
this crisis as well as I was led to believe." He looked out the window at the
gathering masses. "I need to
make an address."
Olivetti shook his head. "No, signore. That is exactly what the Illuminati want
you to do-confirm them,
empower them. We must remain silent."
"And these people?" The camerlegno pointed out the window. "There will be tens
of thousands shortly.
Then hundreds of thousands. Continuing this charade only puts them in danger. I
need to warn them. Then
we need to evacuate our College of Cardinals."
"There is still time. Let Captain Rocher find the antimatter."
The camerlegno turned. "Are you attempting to give me an order?"
"No, I am giving you advice. If you are concerned about the people outside, we
can announce a gas leak
and clear the area, but admitting we are hostage is dangerous."
"Commander, I will only say this once. I will not use this office as a pulpit to
lie to the world. If I announce
anything at all, it will be the truth."
"The truth? That Vatican City is threatened to be destroyed by satanic
terrorists? It only weakens our
position."
The camerlegno glared. "How much weaker could our position be?"
Rocher shouted suddenly, grabbing the remote and increasing the volume on the
television. Everyone
turned.
On air, the woman from MSNBC now looked genuinely unnerved. Superimposed beside
her was a photo of
the late Pope. " . . . breaking information. This just in from the BBC . . ."
She glanced off camera as if to
confirm she was really supposed to make this announcement. Apparently getting
confirmation, she turned
and grimly faced the viewers. "The Illuminati have just claimed responsibility
for . . ." She hesitated. "They
have claimed responsibility for the death of the Pope fifteen days ago."
The camerlegno's jaw fell.
Rocher dropped the remote control.
Vittoria could barely process the information.
"By Vatican law," the woman continued, "no formal autopsy is ever performed on a
Pope, so the Illuminati
claim of murder cannot be confirmed. Nonetheless, the Illuminati hold that the
cause of the late Pope's
death was not a stroke as the Vatican reported, but poisoning."
The room went totally silent again.
Olivetti erupted. "Madness! A bold-faced lie!"
Rocher began flipping channels again. The bulletin seemed to spread like a
plague from station to station.
Everyone had the same story. Headlines competed for optimal sensationalism.
MURDER AT THE VATICAN
POPE POISONED
SATAN TOUCHES HOUSE OF GOD
The camerlegno looked away. "God help us."
As Rocher flipped, he passed a BBC station. "-tipped me off about the killing at
Santa Maria de Popolo-"
"Wait!" the camerlegno said. "Back."
Rocher went back. On screen, a prim-looking man sat at a BBC news desk.
Superimposed over his
shoulder was a still snapshot of an odd-looking man with a red beard. Underneath
his photo, it said:
GUNTHER GLICK-LIVE IN VATICAN CITY. Reporter Glick was apparently reporting by
phone, the
connection scratchy. ". . . my videographer got the footage of the cardinal
being removed from the Chigi
Chapel."
"Let me reiterate for our viewers," the anchorman in London was saying, "BBC
reporter Gunther Glick is
the man who first broke this story. He has been in phone contact twice now with
the alleged Illuminati
assassin. Gunther, you say the assassin phoned only moments ago to pass along a
message from the
Illuminati?"
"He did."
"And their message was that the Illuminati were somehow responsible for the
Pope's death?" The
anchorman sounded incredulous.
"Correct. The caller told me that the Pope's death was not a stroke, as the
Vatican had thought, but rather
that the Pope had been poisoned by the Illuminati."
Everyone in the Pope's office froze.
"Poisoned?" the anchorman demanded. "But . . . but how!"
"They gave no specifics," Glick replied, "except to say that they killed him
with a drug known as . . ."-there
was a rustling of papers on the line-"something known as Heparin."
The camerlegno, Olivetti, and Rocher all exchanged confused looks.
"Heparin?" Rocher demanded, looking unnerved. "But isn't that . . . ?"
The camerlegno blanched. "The Pope's medication."
Vittoria was stunned. "The Pope was on Heparin?"
"He had thrombophlebitis," the camerlegno said. "He took an injection once a
day."
Rocher looked flabbergasted. "But Heparin isn't a poison. Why would the
Illuminati claim-"
"Heparin is lethal in the wrong dosages," Vittoria offered. "It's a powerful
anticoagulant. An overdose
would cause massive internal bleeding and brain hemorrhages."
Olivetti eyed her suspiciously. "How would you know that?"
"Marine biologists use it on sea mammals in captivity to prevent blood clotting
from decreased activity.
Animals have died from improper administration of the drug." She paused. "A
Heparin overdose in a
human would cause symptoms easily mistaken for a stroke . . . especially in the
absence of a proper
autopsy."
The camerlegno now looked deeply troubled.
"Signore," Olivetti said, "this is obviously an Illuminati ploy for publicity.
Someone overdosing the Pope
would be impossible. Nobody had access. And even if we take the bait and try to
refute their claim, how
could we? Papal law prohibits autopsy. Even with an autopsy, we would learn
nothing. We would find
traces of Heparin in his body from his daily injections."
"True." The camerlegno's voice sharpened. "And yet something else troubles me.
No one on the outside
knew His Holiness was taking this medication."
There was a silence.
"If he overdosed with Heparin," Vittoria said, "his body would show signs."
Olivetti spun toward her. "Ms. Vetra, in case you didn't hear me, papal
autopsies are prohibited by Vatican
Law. We are not about to defile His Holiness's body by cutting him open just
because an enemy makes a
taunting claim!"
Vittoria felt shamed. "I was not implying . . ." She had not meant to seem
disrespectful. "I certainly was not
suggesting you exhume the Pope . . ." She hesitated, though. Something Robert
told her in the Chigi passed
like a ghost through her mind. He had mentioned that papal sarcophagi were above
ground and never
cemented shut, a throwback to the days of the pharaohs when sealing and burying
a casket was believed to
trap the deceased's soul inside. Gravity had become the mortar of choice, with
coffin lids often weighing
hundreds of pounds. Technically, she realized, it would be possible to-
"What sort of signs?" the camerlegno said suddenly.
Vittoria felt her heart flutter with fear. "Overdoses can cause bleeding of the
oral mucosa."
"Oral what?"
"The victim's gums would bleed. Post mortem, the blood congeals and turns the
inside of the mouth
black." Vittoria had once seen a photo taken at an aquarium in London where a
pair of killer whales had
been mistakenly overdosed by their trainer. The whales floated lifeless in the
tank, their mouths hanging
open and their tongues black as soot.
The camerlegno made no reply. He turned and stared out the window.
Rocher's voice had lost its optimism. "Signore, if this claim about poisoning is
true . . ."
"It's not true," Olivetti declared. "Access to the Pope by an outsider is
utterly impossible."
"If this claim is true," Rocher repeated, "and our Holy Father was poisoned,
then that has profound
implications for our antimatter search. The alleged assassination implies a much
deeper infiltration of
Vatican City than we had imagined. Searching the white zones may be inadequate.
If we are compromised
to such a deep extent, we may not find the canister in time."
Olivetti leveled his captain with a cold stare. "Captain, I will tell you what
is going to happen."
"No," the camerlegno said, turning suddenly. "I will tell you what is going to
happen." He looked directly
at Olivetti. "This has gone far enough. In twenty minutes I will be making a
decision whether or not to
cancel conclave and evacuate Vatican City. My decision will be final. Is that
clear?"
Olivetti did not blink. Nor did he respond.
The camerlegno spoke forcefully now, as though tapping a hidden reserve of
power. "Captain Rocher, you
will complete your search of the white zones and report directly to me when you
are finished."
Rocher nodded, throwing Olivetti an uneasy glance.
The camerlegno then singled out two guards. "I want the BBC reporter, Mr. Glick,
in this office
immediately. If the Illuminati have been communicating with him, he may be able
to help us. Go."
The two soldiers disappeared.
Now the camerlegno turned and addressed the remaining guards. "Gentlemen, I will
not permit any more
loss of life this evening. By ten o'clock you will locate the remaining two
cardinals and capture the monster
responsible for these murders. Do I make myself understood?"
"But, signore," Olivetti argued, "we have no idea where-"
"Mr. Langdon is working on that. He seems capable. I have faith."
With that, the camerlegno strode for the door, a new determination in his step.
On his way out, he pointed
to three guards. "You three, come with me. Now."
The guards followed.
In the doorway, the camerlegno stopped. He turned to Vittoria. "Ms. Vetra. You
too. Please come with
me."
Vittoria hesitated. "Where are we going?"
He headed out the door. "To see an old friend."
82
A t CERN, secretary Sylvie Baudeloque was hungry, wishing she could go home. To
her dismay,
Kohler had apparently survived his trip to the infirmary; he had phoned and
demanded-not asked,
demanded-that Sylvie stay late this evening. No explanation.
Over the years, Sylvie had programmed herself to ignore Kohler's bizarre mood
swings and eccentricitieshis
silent treatments, his unnerving propensity to secretly film meetings with
his wheelchair's porta-video.
She secretly hoped one day he would shoot himself during his weekly visit to
CERN's recreational pistol
range, but apparently he was a pretty good shot.
Now, sitting alone at her desk, Sylvie heard her stomach growling. Kohler had
not yet returned, nor had he
given her any additional work for the evening. To hell with sitting here bored
and starving, she decided.
She left Kohler a note and headed for the staff dining commons to grab a quick
bite.
She never made it.
As she passed CERN's recreational "suites de loisir"- a long hallway of lounges
with televisions-she
noticed the rooms were overflowing with employees who had apparently abandoned
dinner to watch the
news. Something big was going on. Sylvie entered the first suite. It was packed
with byte-heads-wild young
computer programmers. When she saw the headlines on the TV, she gasped.
TERROR AT THE VATICAN
Sylvie listened to the report, unable to believe her ears. Some ancient
brotherhood killing cardinals? What
did that prove? Their hatred? Their dominance? Their ignorance?
And yet, incredibly, the mood in this suite seemed anything but somber.
Two young techies ran by waving T-shirts that bore a picture of Bill Gates and
the message: AND THE
GEEK SHALL INHERIT THE EARTH!
"Illuminati!" one shouted. "I told you these guys were real!"
"Incredible! I thought it was just a game!"
"They killed the Pope, man! The Pope!"
"Jeez! I wonder how many points you get for that?"
They ran off laughing.
Sylvie stood in stunned amazement. As a Catholic working among scientists, she
occasionally endured the
antireligious whisperings, but the party these kids seemed to be having was
all-out euphoria over the
church's loss. How could they be so callous? Why the hatred?
For Sylvie, the church had always been an innocuous entity . . . a place of
fellowship and introspection . . .
sometimes just a place to sing out loud without people staring at her. The
church recorded the benchmarks
of her life-funerals, weddings, baptisms, holidays-and it asked for nothing in
return. Even the monetary
dues were voluntary. Her children emerged from Sunday School every week
uplifted, filled with ideas
about helping others and being kinder. What could possibly be wrong with that?
It never ceased to amaze her that so many of CERN's so-called "brilliant minds"
failed to comprehend the
importance of the church. Did they really believe quarks and mesons inspired the
average human being? Or
that equations could replace someone's need for faith in the divine?
Dazed, Sylvie moved down the hallway past the other lounges. All the TV rooms
were packed. She began
wondering now about the call Kohler had gotten from the Vatican earlier.
Coincidence? Perhaps. The
Vatican called CERN from time to time as a "courtesy" before issuing scathing
statements condemning
CERN's research-most recently for CERN's breakthroughs in nanotechnology, a
field the church
denounced because of its implications for genetic engineering. CERN never cared.
Invariably, within
minutes after a Vatican salvo, Kohler's phone would ring off the hook with
tech-investment companies


