THE SHOT HEARD ROUND THE NATION
(1981–1982)
Jordan arrived on the University of North Carolina campus in August
1981 with a basketball scholarship; he majored in geography. He roomed
with Buzz Peterson, a reserve from a prominent business family whom
he had befriended when both were prep All-Americas. “What impressed
me most about Michael was his love for his parents and family,” Peterson
recalled. He described Jordan as “a fun guy to be around,” but “deadly
serious” on the basketball court.
North Carolina had supplanted UCLA as the nation’s premier collegiate
basketball program. The Tar Heels had reached the NCAA Final Four six
times during coach Dean Smith’s tenure and were eliminated in the 1981
NCAA semifinals. North Carolina was ranked Number 1 in preseason
polls and returned four starters, including senior Jimmy Black, junior
James Worthy, and sophomores Sam Perkins and Matt Doherty. Smith’s
very disciplined program featured the team over the individual. Smith
believed that the maximum results were achieved when players sacrificed
individuality for the team.
Smith realized that Jordan was a little apprehensive and brought him
along slowly. Some Emsley A. Laney High School friends predicted that
Jordan would not succeed in basketball there and urged him to attend
the University of North Carolina-Wilmington. “They thought I’d sit on
the bench for four years, come home and work at the local gas station,”
Jordan recalled. Jordan initially doubted if he could compete with the
talented North Carolina players and did not dominate his freshman year.
“I thought I would go in and be a flop,” Jordan admitted. “Everyone was
expecting so much.” Smith encouraged him to have fun playing basketball
and work diligently, and assured him “you will get the opportunity to
play.” Jordan followed his advice and gradually gained self-confidence.
Jordan quickly learned that he could fulfill expectations during campus
pickup games with Worthy, Mitch Kupchak, and Al Wood before the Tar
Heels’ first practice. Wood was guarding Jordan, with the score tied and
the next basket to determine the winner. Jordan went to the baseline,
drove past Wood and seven-foot Geff Crompton, and dunked the ball.
The game winner gave him motivation to push further. Jordan began
telling upperclassmen in pickup games that he would dunk the ball and
usually backed up his promises. He amazed teammates with his offensive
acceleration, exceptional moves to the basket, and dazzling defensive
plays. Upperclassmen considered him cocky, but he assured Smith that
he could help North Carolina immediately.
Worthy, Perkins, Black, and Doherty were pictured on the front cover
of Sports Illustrated ’s annual preseason college basketball issue. Larry Keith,
college basketball editor, told Smith that the picture would look peculiar
with just four players and urged him to include Jordan. “He made himself
and the others available,” Keith said, “but he was adamant about not
letting a freshman get that attention.”
Jordan desperately wanted to make the starting five. During Smith’s
20-year tenure, Phil Ford, Mike O’Koren, and Worthy were the only
freshmen starters. Freshmen practiced against the varsity but usually made
cameo appearances in games because Smith feared they would make critical
mistakes. Jordan battled junior Jimmy Braddock and Peterson to replace
guard Al Wood. Smith regarded Braddock as a better outside shooter and
ball handler; considered Peterson very athletic, more experienced, better
coached, and a finer pure shooter; and regarded Jordan a better jumper,
quicker, a superior defender, and more motivated. He did not know that
Jordan possessed a compulsion to be the best and a rare ability to motivate
himself.
Jordan readily learned the guard position and new defensive techniques.
He had played forward in high school, but Smith wanted him to play big
guard. Smith did not name players as starters unless they demonstrated
superior skill and defensive execution. Jordan mastered the guard drills
so quickly that Smith knew he would see extensive action. To contend
for a starting position, however, Jordan needed to be a more complete
player defensively. Smith and Williams pushed Jordan to work harder in
practices. Jordan assured Williams, “I’m working as hard as everyone else.”
Williams replied, “But Michael, you told me you wanted to be the best.
And if you want to be the best, then you have to work harder than anyone
else.” Jordan responded, “Coach, I understand. You’ll see. Watch.” He
consequently began to take his game to another level.
Smith spent considerable time explaining defensive techniques and
how to counter backdoor plays. Jordan had been taught to turn and defend
facing the ball, but Smith wanted him to look over his shoulder and see
both player and ball. Smith walked through each step of this technique
with him. Jordan amazed Smith by executing the technique perfectly at
the next practice.
Two preseason Blue-White scrimmages helped Smith determine the
starting lineup. Jordan convinced Smith “he knew our principles defensively
better than most freshmen.” Two days before the season opener, Smith
selected Jordan over Braddock at big guard. His athletic ability, quickness,
offensive creativity, enthusiasm, work ethic, and innate athletic intelligence
impressed Smith. Smith informed Jordan that he was starting just before the
first game against the University of Kansas at Charlotte Coliseum. Jordan
was jubilant about joining Worthy, Perkins, Doherty, and Black in the starting
lineup.
North Carolina proved ideal for Jordan, who played with experienced,
talented teammates in a demanding, disciplined program. Smith’s tightly
organized practices challenged Jordan and proved excellent learning
experiences for him. Jordan worked hard to improve, learned quickly,
and showed exceptional concentration; but his defense, passing skills,
and outside shot needed improvement. According to Smith, Jordan’s
exceptionally large hands made it more difficult for him to shoot.
Smith and about half the players called him Michael; the North
Carolina media guide and remaining teammates referred to him as Mike.
Sports information director Rick Brewer asked him how he preferred to
be listed in the media guide. Jordan replied that he had no preference.
Brewer claimed that Michael sounded better. Jordan nodded his approval
and has been called that ever since. He wore uniform Number 23 and
long, loose-fitting baggy shorts.
Opponents often used a zone defense against North Carolina in
1981–1982, denying Worthy and Perkins the ball on the inside, while
giving Jordan, Doherty, and Black open shots. Smith advised his guards
not to take quick outside shots, but rather wait patiently for high
percentage shots. North Carolina implemented Smith’s strategy well,
averaging 67 points and restricting opponents to just 55 points. The
Tar Heels shot 53.7 percent, with Perkins and Worthy both averaging
more than 57 percent, Jordan more than 53 percent, and Doherty and
Black more than 51 percent. Opponents often resorted to ball control,
but the Tar Heels used their four corners delay game with leads.
On December 26, North Carolina defeated second-ranked University of
Kentucky, 82–69, at the New Jersey Meadowlands. The Wildcats applied
a packed-in zone, forcing the Tar Heels to rely on jump shots. Jordan shot
inconsistently in the first half, but finished with 19 points in 35 minutes.
North Carolina was ranked first nationally by midseason, and Jordan was
the leading scorer.
North Carolina and the second-ranked University of Virginia, led
by seven foot, four inch center Ralph Sampson, split two regular- season
games and shared first place in the ACC. Wake Forest University inflicted
the Tar Heels’ only other loss when influenza sidelined Perkins. North
Carolina faced Virginia in the ACC tournament championship game
to determine which school would stay in the NCAA East Regional at
nearby Charlotte and Raleigh. No national champion had ever reached
the NCAA Final Four from outside its natural region. Jordan spent five
days in the infirmary with a bad throat infection but recovered by the
ACC tournament.
In that ACC title game, Jordan converted four consecutive jump shots
to give North Carolina a 44–43 lead with 7 minutes and 34 seconds left.
Smith instructed the Tar Heels to spread their offense with his patented
four corners and not shoot again unless Sampson and the Virginia zone
moved away from the basket. The Cavaliers let nearly five minutes elapse
before starting to foul North Carolina. With 28 seconds left, Virginia
accumulated enough fouls to send Doherty to the line. Doherty converted
one foul shot, giving the Tar Heels a 45–43 lead. After North Carolina
regained possession, Doherty sank two more free throws with three seconds
remaining. Sampson’s meaningless dunk at the buzzer produced the 47–45
final score.
James Madison University nearly upset the Tar Heels in the second
round of the NCAA East regionals at Charlotte. Worthy scored North
Carolina’s last five points, giving the Tar Heels a narrow 52–50 victory.
North Carolina spread the court late in the second halves to preserve
victories over the University of Alabama and Villanova University at
Raleigh and make the NCAA Final Four.
In the NCAA semifinals at the Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana,
the Tar Heels shot 76 percent in the second half to defeat the high- scoring
University of Houston, 68–63. Houston featured All-America guard Rob
Williams, Hakeem Olajuwon, and Clyde Drexler. Perkins tallied 25 points
and 10 rebounds, but Williams tallied only two points.
North Carolina faced Georgetown University in the NCAA championship
game before 61,612 fans and a huge national television audience.
Georgetown, coached by John Thompson, played pressure defense
with 7-foot 1-inch All-America freshman Patrick Ewing and three quick
guards. North Carolina countered with speed, power, finesse, and excellent
passing. Smith had not won an NCAA title in six previous Final Four
appearances.
Georgetown displayed tenacious defense, with Ewing being called for
goaltending on five of the first nine North Carolina shots. The Hoyas
led, 32–31, at halftime. Ewing and Eric “Sleepy” Floyd combined for 18
points; Worthy tallied 18 points. Jordan delivered the best performance
of his freshman season, leading both teams with nine rebounds, scoring
12 points in the first 24 minutes, setting up two monster dunks by
Worthy, and playing great defense. He prevented a sure Ewing basket by
intercepting a pass and finding Worthy for another flying slam dunk to
give the Tar Heels a 57–56 lead. North Carolina used its four corners
offense. Black drew Ewing’s fourth foul and converted both free throws,
widening the lead to 59–56 with 5 minutes and 30 seconds left. After
Georgetown’s Fred Brown made two free throws, North Carolina ran two
minutes off the clock. Jordan spotted a slight opening and drove down the
middle lane to the basket. Ewing tried to block his path. Jordan, already
airborne, switched the ball to his left hand and laid it up just over Ewing’s
outstretched arm. The ball touched high off the glass and gently through
the net, giving the Tar Heels a 61–58 lead. Georgetown regained the lead,
62–61, on baskets by Ewing and Floyd.
Smith called a timeout with 32 seconds left. He preferred to get the
ball inside to Worthy or Perkins, but he figured Georgetown’s pressure
defense would deny them the ball. Smith anticipated that Jordan would
be open and instructed the other players to pass the ball to him for the
final shot. “Take the first great shot, and pound the boards,” he instructed
Jordan. Smith uncharacteristically trusted a talented freshman to take the
decisive shot. He tapped him on the knee and said, “If it comes to you,
Michael, knock it in.”
When play resumed, Jordan breathed deeply and just waited. Black took
the inbound pass but found neither Worthy nor Perkins open. He faked
a pass to Perkins and passed to Jordan, who sank an open 16-foot corner
jump shot with 17 seconds left to put North Carolina ahead, 63–62. The
arena roared at what North Carolinians termed “The Shot.” Jordan shut
his eyes after releasing the ball and admitted, “I honestly did not know that
the shot had gone in until Georgetown took the ball out of bounds.” At
crunch time, Jordan always wanted the ball. “He didn’t have a hesitation
or a doubt that he was going to shoot the ball,” Doherty recollected. A
picture of Jordan launching the shot became the cover of the Chapel Hill
phone book.
The Hoyas pushed the ball down court quickly, but Jordan blocked
the lane when Fred Brown tried to pass to Floyd. Brown instead threw
an errant pass to Worthy, who missed two foul shots with two seconds
remaining. Georgetown’s desperation 50-foot shot missed at the buzzer,
preserving North Carolina’s 63–62 victory. Smith, who won his first
NCAA title, told Thompson, “It was the best team we played all year,
and it was our best game.” The Tar Heels shot 53.2 percent in the classic
game; the Hoyas converted 52.9 percent. Worthy led North Carolina
with 28 points and won the NCAA Final Four Award, and Ewing paced
Georgetown with 23 points.
The decisive basket marked the making of the legendary Jordan. Fogler
observed, “That kid doesn’t realize it yet, but he’s part of history now.
People will remember that shot 25 years from now.”  The 19-year-old
Jordan won acclaim for his graceful success under immense pressure, performing
in a way that few freshmen could. Classmate Davis Love noted,
“He wanted the ball in that situation. How many freshmen would have
that confidence to take it, then make it?” Smith, impressed with Jordan’s
intelligence and court savvy, was amazed by how often he played heroic
roles at crunch time. Although later winning six NBA titles, Jordan considered
the 1981 NCAA Championship his favorite moment. “It’s hard
to outrank Carolina,” he explained,“because that started everything. The
confidence, the knowledge, and everything I gained from that, is without
question the beginning of Michael Jordan.”  James warned him, “Your
life will never be the same after that shot.”
Michael’s dramatic shot relieved Smith, who had taken six previous
North Carolina teams to the NCAA Final Four without winning a
national title. Smith gleamed, “I would never have to answer another
question about not winning a national championship. That so-called
monkey was off my back.” At a press conference, Smith acknowledged,
“we were the best team in college basketball in 1982.” He added, “We were
solid defensively, difficult to stop on offense, and a good rebounding team.
Also we were mentally tough.” Besides playing smart and unselfishly, his
youthful squad remained healthy.
Several Tar Heels won personal accolades, and the NCAA title benefited
the basketball program. Worthy was named national Player of the Year
and made first team All-America with Perkins. Jordan garnered NCAA
Freshman of the Year honors, averaging 13.5 points and four rebounds in
34 games and performing brilliantly in the clutch. North Carolina signed
another highly rated recruiting class, featuring center Brad Daugherty and
guards Steve Hale and Curtis Hunter.JORDAN’S FINAL CURTAIN CALL (2002–2003)
Jordan kept a low profile for about three months. He saw his sons,
Jeffrey and Marcus, play basketball for the Rising Stars AAU squad that
practiced in Deerfield, Illinois, near his Highland Park estate. Jordan ate
low-fat lunches, practiced with the Wizards draft picks, and exercised
at Hoops the Gym. He spent part of the summer golfing and at casinos.
Jordan told ESPN in late August that he could not endure another
season in pain and notified the Wizards not to expect his return. He
left open the possibility of changing his mind at the last minute. Jordan
gradually strengthened his knee over the summer.
During the off-season, Washington made several roster changes. In
September, the Wizards traded Hamilton to Detroit for veteran point
guard Jerry Stackhouse. Hamilton challenged Jordan’s learning-to-win
rhetoric too much and did not want to be regarded as Jordan’s sidekick any
longer. Washington acquired small forward Byron Russell from Utah and
point guard Larry Hughes from Golden State. Washington also drafted
power forward Jared Jeffries from Indiana University, traded Alexander to
the New Orleans Hornets, selected guard Juan Dixon of the University of
Maryland, and obtained veteran forward Charles Oakley from Chicago.
The Wizards expected these moves to make them an Eastern Conference
contender and planned to rely on Stackhouse, Brown, Hughes, and
Oakley. Stackhouse demonstrated playoff scoring ability, and Hughes and
Russell provided defensive skills. Washington added Patrick Ewing as
assistant coach and planned to activate him if it needed a tall veteran for
a playoff run.
In late September, Jordan announced his return to the Wizards. He was
fitted with orthotic shoes to help his right knee and could decide when
to play as the sixth man off the bench. Washington hoped Jordan could
play himself into shape, return to the starting lineup by February, and
lead the Wizards to the Eastern Conference playoffs. Jordan did not play
until the fifth exhibition game and spent most of training camp tutoring
younger players. He performed the less colorful role of the jump shooter,
converting “like an aging Hollywood leading man” from “an action hero
to a venerable character actor.” 25
Jordan performed inconsistently during the first few games. The Wizards
lost the season-opener, 74–68, at Toronto on October 30, nearly plunging
to an all-time franchise scoring low. Jordan tallied his eight points in
the first half, missing six shots and two free throws in the fourth quarter.
The Wizards routed Boston, 114–69, in the home opener the next night,
as Jordan netted 21 points, including three consecutive jump shots, in 21
minutes.
After being blanked for the first three quarters and scoring just six
points in a victory over Cleveland at the MCI Center on November 6,
Jordan rebounded with 25 points to edge the Los Angeles Lakers, 100–99,
two nights later and 27 points in a loss to Seattle on November 12. He
recorded only six points four nights later, when the Wizards set a franchise
record for fewest points allowed in a 95–65 rout over Miami.
Washington finished November with six consecutive losses, dropping
to 6–10. When winless Memphis upset the visiting Wizards on November
23, Jordan complained about lack of playing time. On Thanksgiving Day,
he revealed his intention to retire as a player at the end of the season. He
notched 29 points in a loss at Indiana on November 29 in his last game
as sixth man.
Jordan started 34 games between November 30 and the All-Star
break, with Washington winning 18. He led the Wizards just nine times
in scoring, making 50 percent of his shots only nine times. Washington
snapped its six-game losing streak with a 103–78 rout over Milwaukee
at home on December 3. Jordan amassed 25 points, including the first
nine of the second quarter, to ignite the blowout. His 21 points the next
night featured two crucial free throws to seal an 88–83 win at Detroit. In
a season-high 40 minutes of playing time at Toronto on December 15, he
missed eight of nine shots for just two points. Jordan still contributed to
the 95–82 victory with nine assists and eight rebounds. He warned the
media, however, not to question his scoring ability. Jordan responded
with 30 points in a triumph at Atlanta on December 17 and 33 points in
a win over visiting Memphis the next night.
Washington still performed inconsistently, owning a lackluster 24–25
mark at the All-Star break. The Wizards won five consecutive games,
twice over Chicago, from December 31 through January 8. Jordan tallied
41 points, including 12 of Washington’s first 13 fourth-quarter points, in
a 107–104 double-overtime home win over Indiana at home on January
4. In his final game at Chicago on January 24, the United Center crowd
gave teary-eyed Jordan a two-minute standing ovation when he delivered
an emotional impromptu farewell speech in a 104–97 loss. Jordan even
rang up 45 points in a 109–104 victory over New Orleans on February 1.
On February 9, Jordan appeared in his 13th All-Star Game at Phillips
Arena in Atlanta, Georgia. The classic marked the highest rated NBA
game the Turner Network Television had carried. Fans did not vote
him as a starting guard for the first time, as he trailed Tracy McGrady
by more than 230,000 votes and Allen Iverson by more than 70,000
votes. McGrady and Iverson both offered Jordan a starting spot, but he
was resigned to substituting. Isiah Thomas plotted to get him to start.
The public address announcer named Jordan as a last-minute starter,
but he tried to wave off the call. The Eastern All-Stars refused to begin
the game until Jordan agreed to start. He finished that quarter hitting
just 2 of 10 shots.
Halftime featured a tribute to Jordan. Singer Mariah Carey serenaded
him wearing dresses and miniskirts looking like jerseys chronicling Jordan’s
career with the Bulls, the Wizards, and Team U.S.A. After she sang her
signature “Hero,” the other All-Stars gathered around Carey’s stage and
joined the crowd in giving Jordan a two-minute standing ovation. Jordan
delivered his farewell address: “I leave the game of basketball in good
hands. So many great stars still in the game, so many great stars rising and
playing the game. I passed on the things that Dr. J. and some of the great
players—Magic Johnson, Larry Bird—passed on to me, I pass on to these
All-Stars here as well as the rest of the players in the NBA. The game’s
going to be fun to watch and I’m going to sit back and enjoy watching it.” 26
The newer stars dominated after intermission. McGrady and Iverson
mirrored Jordan with third-quarter scoring sprees. Jordan made two free
throws, surpassing Abdul-Jabbar as the career All-Star scoring leader
with 252 points. He showed flashes of past form converting six of seven
second-half shots, giving him 18 points, but he missed a game-winning
shot near the end with the score tied. After resting during most of the
first overtime, Jordan made a jump shot with just 4.8 seconds left to put
the East ahead, 138–136. Kobe Bryant, however, denied Jordan an opportunity
to be the hero, sinking two foul shots to send the contest to second
overtime. Jordan was too exhausted to play in the second overtime, in
which the West prevailed, 155–145. Sam Smith of the Chicago Tribune
wrote, “There are moments, but no more miracles.” 27
The Wizards struggled mightily after the All-Star Game, dropping 20
of 33 contests. A groin injury to Jerry Stackhouse forced Jordan to carry
the offensive load for several games. On February 21, four nights after
celebrating his 40th birthday, Jordan became the first 40-year-old to tally
at least 40 points in an NBA game. He capped a 43-point performance
with a left-handed layup, upsetting defending Eastern Conference champion
New Jersey, 89–86, at the MCI Center. The game marked the 119th
and final time he attained at least 40 points. Jordan took 30 of the Wizards’
56 shots, tallying nearly half of their points, and grabbed 10 rebounds. “He
did virtually everything a player can do,” 28 Michael Leahy wrote. Jordan
contributed 30 points in a home loss to league-leading Dallas on February
23 and 25 points in a 83–78 victory at Indiana two nights later. Despite
a bruised left thigh, he notched 35 points, including the first 10 overtime
points, in a 100–98 thriller over visiting Houston.
In late February, Jordan lamented, “I’m going down with no bullets
left.” 29 He defied injury through sheer determination and constant electrostimulation
therapy. After hurting his back against Toronto on March
4, Jordan summoned trainers to his house that night to apply stimulation.
He barely got out of bed the next morning, but he kept the Wizards in
playoff contention with a 99–80 win over the Los Angeles Clippers.
New York edged Washington, 97–96, in Jordan’s Madison Square
Garden finale on March 9, dropping the Wizards two games behind the
final playoff spot. After making just two first-quarter shots, he scored 19
of the Wizards’ 22 points in a six-minute span of the second quarter. He
took only two third-quarter shots, but he sank consecutive baskets and
two foul shots to slice the deficit to 96–94 with 9.6 seconds left. Shandon
Anderson missed one of two free throws for the Knicks. Latrell Sprewell
fouled Jordan, who converted both shots. Jordan did not repeat his second-
quarter heroics, finishing with 39 points.
Jordan was frustrated as he continued to try to instill a winning attitude
in the Wizards and criticized his teammates for lackluster performance.
“It’s very disappointing when a forty-year-old man has more desire than
twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-three-year-old people,” 30 he complained.
Jordan wanted his teammates to keep up with him, but they did not desire
to emulate him. In a crushing setback at Phoenix on March 21, he scored
just 14 points and yet outplayed his teammates. “I’m not going to try to
save this team,” 31 he told teammates at halftime. “My job is not to carry
this team like I did in ’84 for the Bulls.” 32
NBA franchises honored Jordan on his farewell visits. Denver gave
him a motorcycle. On April 11, the largest crowd ever to attend an
indoor sporting event in South Florida witnessed Miami president Pat
Riley elevate Jordan’s Number 23 uniform to the rafters of American
Airlines Arena. The Heat had never retired a player uniform in their
15-year history. Washington recorded its last victory that night, defeating
Miami, 91–87. Jordan nearly scored the winning basket against visiting
Atlanta on April 12. His 13-foot jump shot with 18 seconds left put
the Wizards ahead, 100–99, but the Hawks snatched the game at the
buzzer.
Washington lost Jordan’s home finale to New York, 93–79, on April
14. He led the Wizards with 21 points and 8 rebounds, departing with 2
minutes and 2 seconds left in the fourth quarter. The MCI Center erupted
with applause that lasted beyond the final buzzer, lauding the player
responsible for selling out the arena for 82 consecutive games. Jordan
had rescued the franchise from a $20 million loss to a $30 million profit
in two years. The Jumbotron broadcast kudos from Dean Smith, Pippen,
and others. Wizards owner Abe Pollin gave Jordan a plaque and donated
computer labs to 18 public high schools in Washington, D.C. Wizards
teammates curiously did not give him a retirement present, nor did Jordan
address the crowd.
The next night, Washington dropped its season finale at Philadelphia,
93–79. Jordan made one last jump shot, dunk, post-up shot, and fadeaway
jumper before exiting with six minutes left. The usually hostile Wachovia
Center crowd began chanting for him to return. Jordan reentered the contest
with 2 minutes and 35 seconds remaining and was fouled 49 seconds
later, converting his last two free throws for 15 points. When he left,
the throng gave him a standing three-minute ovation before he bowed,
waved, and thanked the crowd.
Jordan ended his legendary playing career at age 40, starting in 67
contests and being the only Wizard to appear in all 82 games. He paced
Washington in points (1,640), baskets (679), steals (123), and minutes
played (3,031), ranking 25th in NBA scoring with a 20.0-point average.
Jordan averaged 6.1 rebounds, 3.8 assists, and 1.5 steals, shooting 45
percent from the field and 82 percent from the free-throw line. Besides
scoring at least 30 points nine times and 40 points three times, he finished
his storied career as the NBA’s all-time leader in scoring average (30.12
points) and third on the NBA’s all-time scoring list (32,292 points). 33
Jordan, however, missed six potential game-winners and could not
elevate his teammates to his standard. The Wizards remained in playoff
contention until the last week, finishing fifth in the Atlantic Division
with a 37–45 record. Washington won all four games,—in which Jordan,
Stackhouse, and Larry Hughes each scored at least 20 points—but the
team blew several fourth-quarter leads partly because Jordan could not
close games. Washington led the NBA in attendance for the second
straight season, averaging 20,173 fans at the MCI Center and 19,311
on the road. The Wizards sold out 78 of 82 games, including a franchiserecord-
tying 41 home contests.
What legacies did Michael Jordan leave with the Wizards? He had alleviated
some financial pressures on the franchise and had assembled some
young players, “a group that doesn’t know how to apply their talents right
now.” 34 Washington Post columnist Michael Wilbon claimed that Jordan
gave the franchise hope. The crowded MCI Center thought that a Wizard
victory was possible in any of his games. Jordan improved the Wizard’s
financial situation enormously, netting gigantic profits through sold-out
games and merchandise and removing the liabilities of long-term player
contracts that gave the Wizards $5-$12 million of salary cap room entering
the summer 2003. He also developed a sound scouting and personnel
infrastructure, spending money wisely and hiring knowledgeable friends,
including Rod Higgins as assistant general manager.
Jordan’s player comeback, however, fell short of his superpower status.
Unlike at Chicago, Jordan did not take the Wizards to an NBA title
or even an NBA playoff. He enjoyed spectacular scoring performances
against Charlotte and New Jersey, but he did not replicate the winning
that had made him legendary. He had won six NBA championships, five
MVP awards, and 10 scoring titles with the Bulls, but he ended his last
season without sinking a game-winning shot.
Pollin and his aides conducted postseason exit interviews with Jordan’s
teammates. Some protested that Jordan influenced decisions on their
playing time and even wanted Collins to bench players who would not
pass the ball to him. Others complained that Jordan received credit when
Washington won, and the rest of the team was blamed when the Wizards
lost. Pollin, meanwhile, objected that Jordan remained in Chicago while
serving as a Washington executive and devoted inordinate time to his
business enterprises and other commitments.
Jordan assumed that he would resume his director of basketball operations
position. He expected to become a major, if not majority, owner of
the Wizards. According to Pollin, however, several MCI Center employees
opposed his return to executive authority. The New York Times on
May 4 quoted a Washington official who said that the Wizards were split
between workers Jordan enlisted and those employees loyal to Pollin. 35
Jordan had strained relations with Wizards president Susan O’Malley,
who conducted business operations and used him as a marketing tool.
Jordan occasionally had resisted her requests for help in marketing
and public relations activities. He had denied her request when he was
headed toward the locker room to chat briefly with several season ticket
holders.
Jordan dined with Leonsis and two of his partners for four hours on
May 7 to discuss his future. Pollin had asked Jordan to develop a plan
to end Washington’s six-year playoff drought. Leonsis called Pollin
the next morning to relate the details of the dinner. Jordan met with
Pollin for 18 minutes that morning. Pollin told Jordan that he wanted
to explore a different direction for franchise leadership, but Pollin did
not explain what Jordan had done wrong or give him an opportunity
to present his plan. Jordan had made some questionable administrative
decisions, including drafting Brown and influencing Hamilton’s trade to
Detroit for Stackhouse. He reportedly told Pollin that he had anticipated
becoming a Wizards owner, but Pollin supposedly replied that he did not
want him as his partner. The firing stunned Jordan, who reportedly was
not given any explanation.
Jordan, meanwhile, explored other basketball options. Robert Johnson,
the first African American NBA owner, asked him to become an executive
for the new Charlotte Bobcats franchise that would replace the departed
Hornets for the 2004–2005 season. Jordan declined the offer at that time
because he was not given a share of ownership for free or final authority
over basketball decisions. He attempted to acquire the Milwaukee Bucks
from U.S. Senator Herb Kohl of Wisconsin in 2003, but Kohl ultimately
did not sell that club. His attempts to acquire the Phoenix Suns and the
Miami Heat did not materialize either.
Jordan watched a few Chicago Bulls games at the United Center and
saw the 2004 All-Star Game in Los Angeles. He often was invited to other
sporting events, including Chicago Cubs games; he kept in shape and
played golf in celebrity charity tournaments. In January 2004, he hosted
the Michael Jordan Celebrity Invitational Golf Tournament on Paradise
Island in the Bahamas, near one of his favorite casinos. Jordan promoted
his Jordan Brand clothing line and still associated with Nike, but his
commercial impact had waned. Jordan lived in a world of fewer cheers
and laurels and hoped to find the serenity that frequently eludes legends.
The Jordan legacy still carries on. Jeffrey and Marcus, both left-handed,
attend Loyola Academy, a Jesuit high school in Wilmette, Illinois, north
of Chicago. Jeffrey, a 6-foot, 2-inch, 170 pound senior, resembles Jordan
with his contagious smile, penetrating stare, and determined look and
enjoys conversing with others. He has made All-Catholic League twice
in basketball as a combination point and shooting guard and attended
the 2005 Nike All-American camp at Indianapolis, Indiana, performing
with the sons of other former NBA stars. He plans to play at the University
of Illinois as a walk-on. Marcus, a 6-foot 3-inch sophomore who wears
prescription sports goggles, is projected as a top conference, major college
point guard with keen court awareness.
Jeffrey and Marcus share several personal qualities. Both demonstrate
“an explosive first step, a fearless slashing style and the trademark Jordan
competitiveness.” They exhibit intelligence, maturity, and poise, play
unselfishly, act politely, and blend well with teammates. Jeffrey reflected,
“our parents did a good job of preparing us for what it was going to be like
in high school and the media.” 36
Jeffrey and Marcus do not try to follow in their illustrious father’s footsteps,
however. Jordan attends most of their games and sometimes shouts
encouragement, but does not interfere with Coach Bryan Tucker. He
watches a lot of basketball video with them and often discusses their play
following games, but insists, “I just want them to be themselves” and “to
enjoy themselves.” 37
In October 2005, Atria Books published Jordan’s inspiring memoir,
Driven from Within. He discussed how authenticity, integrity, passion,
commitment, and other qualities have influenced his life and described
how challenging events have made him realize the importance of these
qualities, pushing him to newer heights both on and off the court. Jordan
also celebrated the people who have encouraged, supported, and tested
him throughout his remarkable life.
In 2006, Jordan fulfilled his dream of sharing ownership of an NBA
club in North Carolina. On June 15, he became second largest shareholder
of the Charlotte Bobcats. Johnson, who had known Jordan for 17
years, named him part owner and manager of basketball operations, with
final authority on player personnel decisions. NBA Commissioner David
Stern beamed, “We’re elated to have Michael back in the league, in
both in an ownership and a management position, in an area of the country
that’s important to him and where his contributions have been so well
recognized.” 
Jordan’s marriage, however, did not survive. He and Juanita had tried
to resolve their differences after Juanita initially filed for divorce in
2002. Their reconciliation effort ultimately failed. The couple separated
in February 2006, with Juanita remaining at their suburban Highland
Park estate and Jordan living in Chicago. On December 29, 2006, they
filed for divorce in Lake County Circuit Court, citing “irreconcilable
differences.” In a statement issued through their lawyers, Michael and
Juanita announced that they “mutually and amicably decided to end
their 17-year marriage.” They retained joint custody of their three teenage
children. Court papers did not disclose any monetary figures, merely
indicating that Michael and Juanita had reached “a fair and equitable
settlement” on the division of property, child support, parenting time, and
other issues. The Jordans realized that “future attempts at reconciliation
would be impracticable and not in the best interests of the family.”
A MOVE TO THE HEAD OF THE CLASS
(1982–1983)
Under Smith, Jordan learned tight all-around team play and mastered
rebounding and defense. After the title season, Smith told Jordan that he
needed to improve his defense. As a freshman, Jordan did not win one
defensive game award. If he worked hard on his defense over the summer,
he could become a more complete player. Smith explained that good
defense ultimately won games and remained consistent even when the
offense struggled. Jordan worked so diligently on his defense that summer
that he became more interested in defense than offense. Smith also asked
Jordan to improve his left-handed dribble and his outside shot because
the ACC was adopting the shot clock and three-point shot. Jordan toiled
assiduously on each facet of his game. His extraordinary athletic gifts,
determination, and work ethic astonished Smith. “I have never seen
that kind of improvement in anyone, ever,” Smith observed. “We weren’t
prepared for the exponential leap he made in his game.” 32 Besides being
more mature physically, Jordan was a more consistent shooter and savvier
player.
By August, Jordan exhibited new confidence and a quiet swagger. He
already possessed the qualities to become a great player, but his confidence
matched his physical talent. Jordan looked impressive during preseason
pickup games against established NBA players Mike O’Koren, Al Wood,
Dudley Bradley, Phil Ford, Mitch Kupchak, and Walter Davis, Tar Heel
returnees Perkins and Doherty, and incoming freshmen. He once soared
over Davis to dunk the ball with tongue wagging and eyes wide open.
During these games, Jordan became the most dominant player. Besides
scoring at will, he elevated the weaker phases of his game and performed
moves that could not be taught.
Jordan seemed bigger, faster, and stronger at fall practice. He had grown
from six feet, four inches to six feet, six inches and ran the 40-yard sprint
in 4.39 seconds, .16 of a second faster than during his freshman year.
His height and speed complemented his talent, passion, and willingness
to accept coaching advice, making him a dominant player. He almost
always won the one-on-one drills against Hale, Peterson, and Braddock,
frequently dunking the ball. After observing one practice, Philadelphia
76ers coach Billy Cunningham proclaimed “He’s going to be the greatest
player who ever came out of here.” 33
Jordan needed to win whether in practice, basketball games, or other
activities. At some practices, Smith played Jordan with four nonstarters
to let him experience the desperation of getting blown out in scrimmages.
Jordan developed a disdain for losing and the foundation of a killer
instinct. Smith often stacked five-on-five games against him, but his team
usually prevailed anyway. Every competition meant life or death for him,
occasionally landing him in trouble. Jordan, Peterson, and their dates
were playing Monopoly one night. Jordan threw the Monopoly board and
stormed out of the room when Peterson built hotels on Boardwalk and
Park Place. “I stayed with my sister that night,” he recalled. “I just couldn’t
face Buzz.” 34
As a sophomore, Jordan played small forward. Although Worthy and
Black graduated, North Carolina ranked first nationally in 1982–1983
preseason polls. Jordan, Perkins, Doherty, Braddock, and Warren Martin
returned from the national championship team; 16-year-old center
Daugherty and guards Hunter and Hale gave the Tar Heels considerable
depth. Injuries, however, intervened. Jordan broke his hand and played
with a hard cast during the first four games, and injuries also slowed Perkins
and Daugherty. North Carolina dropped its first two games at the University
of Missouri and St. John’s University and struggled to win three of
its next four contests. Jordan showcased his exceptional defensive ability,
natural basketball instincts, and blazing speed, usually being assigned to
guard two players. He often freelanced, stealing the ball at very opportunity.
His 22-foot jump shot against Tulane University forced overtime in
North Carolina’s initial victory. In late December, the Tar Heels won the
Rainbow Classic in Honolulu, Hawaii. Jordan’s road to glory continued
on January 12 at Chapel Hill, where he blocked Chuck Driesell’s shot to
preserve a 72–71 victory over the University of Maryland. In the rematch
at College Park later that month, Jordan took an outlet pass from Perkins,
accelerated toward the basket, and launched an experimental Air Jordan
dunk. He moved laterally while elevating toward the basket. “Before you
know it,” he recalled, “I’m cranking the ball back, rocking it left to right,
cuffing it before I put it down. Every breakaway after that seemed like a
chance to try something new.” 35
North Carolina defeated Virginia twice. The Tar Heels snapped the topranked
Cavaliers’ 34-game winning streak in January in Charlottesville,
where Perkins tallied a career-high 36 points in the 101–95 upset. Near
the end, Jordan stunned the crowd by soaring across the lane to block
Ralph Sampson’s shot. North Carolina extended its victory streak to
18 games against Virginia at Chapel Hill on February 10, when Jordan
sparked a comeback. Virginia exploited Sampson’s enormous size, amassing
a 16-point lead with nine minutes left, and still led, 63–53, with 4
minutes and 12 seconds left. Braddock’s three pointer, coupled with two
free throws each by Doherty and Perkins, sliced the margin to 63–60 with
2 minutes and 54 seconds remaining. Jordan scored with 1 minute and
7 seconds left and stole the ball from Rick Carlisle. After driving toward
the basket, he ascended with his arm cocked and slam-dunked the ball to
put North Carolina ahead, 64–63. The crowd reached a frenzied pitch.
After Carlisle missed a last second shot, Jordan snatched the rebound to
preserve the victory.
The Tar Heels finished eighth nationally with a 28–8 record, sharing
first place in the ACC with Virginia. Injuries sidelined Peterson and
Hunter for the rest of the season, and Daugherty played with a stress
foot fracture. North Carolina lost to eventual NCAA champion North
Carolina State University in the ACC Tournament semifinals at Atlanta.
The University of Georgia upset the Tar Heels, 82–77, in the NCAA East
regional finals at Syracuse, New York, abruptly ending North Carolina’s
quest to repeat as national champions. Georgia continually penetrated
North Carolina’s trapping defense.
Jordan, benefiting from the ACC’s three-point shot experiment,
averaged 20.0 points and 5.5 rebounds in 36 games and won 12 defensive
game awards. He earned numerous honors, including All-Atlantic Coast
Conference, All-America team, and The Sporting News College Player of
the Year, and he ranked second to Sampson in the Associated Press Player
of the Year balloting. Jordan led the ACC in scoring and recorded 78
steals, trailing only Dudley Bradley in the North Carolina record books.
The Sporting News described his court versatility, “He soars through the
air, he rebounds, he scores (more than 1,100 points in two years, a school
record), he guards two men at once, he vacuums up loose balls, he blocks
shots, he makes steals. Most important, he makes late plays that win
games.” 
The next afternoon, Jordan told Roy Williams that he had been playing
basketball for two consecutive years without a respite and wanted a
breather. Williams encouraged him to take time off and was surprised
to find him practicing that night in the gym. Jordan responded that he
needed to improve his game.
Jordan toured that summer with various All-Star teams and starred
in the Pan-American Games in Caracas, Venezuela, where the U.S.
basketball team won a gold medal. The South American trip intensified
his interest in cultural geography. Peter Alfano observed, “He can excite a
crowd like a Sunday morning preacher and lift a team to new heights, and
yet people are impressed by his unassuming nature and friendly manner.
There are times when he seems too good to be real.” 37 Jordan also enjoyed
playing golf with roommate Peterson and future pro golfer Davis Love.
WELCOME TO THE NBA (1984–1985)
The Chicago Bulls, who owned the second worst NBA record in 1983–
1984, desperately needed a superstar to move them out of the doldrums.
The Bulls had not made the NBA playoffs since 1980–1981 and had won
more games than it lost only twice in nine seasons. They selected third
after the Houston Rockets and Portland Trail Blazers in the NBA draft
on June 20 at the Conrad Hilton Hotel in New York City. Houston chose
Hakeem Olajuwon, a 7-foot Nigerian center and University of Houston
star, and Portland picked Sam Bowie, a 7-foot 1-inch University of
Kentucky center. Olajuwon developed into an NBA star, winning two
NBA titles.
Chicago Bulls general manager Rod Thorn drafted Jordan. He preferred
a center, but Olajuwon was not available. “Jordan isn’t going to turn this
franchise around,” Thorn predicted. “I wouldn’t ask him to.” Chicago fans,
who had assembled two floors below, enthusiastically shouted “ Jordan,
Jordan” loud enough for Thorn to hear. Bulls assistant coach Mike
Thibault observed, “He’s one of those players who comes along once a
decade,” 1 and Chicago Tribune columnist Bernie Lincicome ventured that
Jordan “maybe the greatest natural basketball talent, inch for inch, in this
young decade.” 2
Jordan performed that August on the star-studded U.S. basketball
team, which included Patrick Ewing of Georgetown University and Steve
Alford of Indiana University, at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games.
The American squad, coached by Bob Knight of Indiana, moved faster,
leaped higher, and drove stronger, routing opponents by 32 points per
game and overwhelming Spain, 96–65, for the gold medal. “We can put
any five we have out there and get the job done,” 3 Jordan insisted.
Jordan, the flashiest Olympian, penetrated zone defenses for at least
one dunk per game. He dunked three shots against Uruguay and sank a
28-foot jump shot at the first half buzzer against Spain. He finished that
preliminary game with 24 points, the best for any American Olympian.
After the gold medal game, Fernando Martin of Spain described Jordan,
“Jump, jump, jump. Very quick. Very fast. Very very good.” 4
Knight remarked that Jordan possessed immense talent, exhibited
natural leadership, played tenacious defense, and was very competitive
and coachable. An ultimate perfectionist, however, Knight considered
Jordan a subpar shooting guard and occasionally admonished him during
games. When Jordan carelessly dribbled the ball out of bounds against
West Germany, Knight bellowed, “Michael, get in the game!” 5 During
the gold medal game against Spain, Knight yelled, “when are you going
to start setting some screens—all you do is rebound and score!” Jordan
smiled, “Coach, didn’t I read some place where you said I was the quickest
player you ever coached?” Knight responded affirmatively. “Coach, I
set those screens faster than you could see them,” 6 Jordan answered. He
became one of the most reliable perimeter players and contributed mightily
to the gold medal. He likened Knight to Dean Smith except that the
former used four-letter words while the latter used the four-corner offense.
George Raveling, assistant Olympic coach, lauded Jordan as “probably the
best athlete playing college basketball.” 7 After receiving his gold medal,
Jordan touchingly placed it around Deloris’s neck.
The Olympics enhanced Jordan’s leverage in contract negotiations with
the Bulls. Agents Donald Dell and David Falk of the ProServ Agency represented
him. He signed a seven-year, $6.3 million contract, larger than
any NBA rookie except for Olajuwon and Ralph Sampson. At a Chicago
press conference, he revealed, “I’m anxious to meet the team and start
fitting in with them.” 8
Dell also lined up prospective advertisers, giving assurance that Jordan
had “a charisma that transcends his sport” and that he belonged “in a
category with Arnold Palmer or Arthur Ashe.” 9 Michael, articulate, well
mannered, and hardworking, was a mass-market icon who appealed to all
demographic groups, transcending age and race barriers. Falk obtained a
commercial endorsement with struggling Nike athletic shoes. He believed
that the popular Jordan could increase Nike shoe sales and profit handsomely
from those sales. Jordan signed a seven-year contract with Nike,
which designed the signature Air Jordan shoe. Nike guaranteed him $18
million and a royalty on every Air Jordan shoe sold. The Air Jordans sold
very well in the United States, Europe, and Asia. The hype and demand
for the Air Jordans even sparked “shoe-jackings,” where young boys were
robbed of their sneakers at gunpoint. The innovation of designer Tinker
Hatfield spurred the basketball shoe industry to new heights. The Air 180
Shoe, introduced in 1991, likewise featured Jordan and was advertised
worldwide. Jordan admitted, “I never knew it could be nation-based—or,
if you want, world-based.” 10 He also endorsed McDonald’s fast-food chain,
Wilson Sporting Goods basketballs, Coca-Cola, Chevrolet automobiles,
Johnson Products, Excelsior International, and Guy LaRoche watches.
Jordan, who possessed an effervescent smile, owned a townhouse in
Northbrook, a Chicago suburb. Before being married, he handled his
personal shopping and housecleaning. Jordan spent free time watching
videotapes of games, following stock car racing, bowling, playing pool,
and listening to music. He often sought the counsel of coach Smith on
basketball and other matters and enjoyed little social life, considering
“the game (his) wife.” 11 He traveled to home games in his silver Corvette,
often chatting with maintenance and food-concession workers and signing
autographs.
Jordan began practicing with the Bulls in September 1984, dominating
the camp with his work ethic. He played primarily for the love of the game
rather than financial remuneration, always arriving first at practice and
leaving last. Jordan never relaxed in practice because he was the highest
paid Bull and wanted teammates to understand he was worth it. He felt
pressure “to prove I deserved to play on that level.” 12 He worked diligently
to improve his jump shot and was virtually unstoppable in one-on-one
drills. After watching Jordan make a resounding dunk, coach Kevin Loughery
told general manager Thorn,“I think we’ve hit the jackpot.” 13
Jordan exhibited exceptional athletic ability and boundless energy,
using superior speed, jumping ability, strength, and huge hands to create
his shot. Loughery dismissed practice early once because Jordan was
exhausting his teammates. He also devised a strategy in practice to hone
Jordan’s skills as a clutch player. At practice, Loughery pitted the five
best players against the next five best in a simulated game. Jordan’s team
usually built an 8–1 or 9–2 lead, with 11 baskets needed to win. Loughery
then switched Jordan to the losing team. Jordan, who usually got that
team back in the scrimmage game, built his confidence the most during
those workouts.
Jordan initially found the transition to the NBA somewhat difficult.
The North Carolina basketball program had been first rate, well designed,
and brilliantly organized with outstanding coaches. The Tar Heels recruited
many excellent, committed players who always worked hard in practices
and games in premier facilities and with clearly defined goals. The Bulls
program paled by comparison. Loughery was a good coach, but his assistants
did not match North Carolina’s. The Bulls practiced at subpar
Angel Guardian, a converted orphanage, and played regular games in
aged Chicago Stadium before small crowds. They had limited scouting
and videotaping resources. Jordan called his teammates “The Looney
Tunes,” very talented, but lacking goals, the passion to win, and mental
toughness. The roster was riddled with substance abusers and partygoers.
Quintin Dailey and Orlando Woolridge later entered drug rehabilitation;
and Steve Johnson, Jawann Oldham, Sidney Green, and Ennis Whatley
faded into mediocrity. Jordan seldom socialized with teammates except for
Rod Higgins, refusing to drink alcohol or take drugs and deploring their
late night lifestyle.
Jordan performed well in exhibition games, leading the Bulls in scoring
with a 22.7-point average and helping Chicago finish 5–2. Thorn declared
“there are certain guys who seem to bring out the best in their teammates.
I think Michael Jordan has the potential to be like that. He is a terrific
offensive player—a great, great player.” 14 Jordan considered Loughery,
who had coached Julius Erving in the American Basketball Association,
an ideal first coach. “He understood my skills and provided me with the
freedom to develop,” Jordan observed. Jordan initially liked Erving more
than either Magic Johnson or Larry Bird. He wanted to convince his
teammates, coaches, and owners that he possessed the right skills and
motivation and hoped to dominate and excel. “I tried to win every drill,
every scrimmage.” 
The Bulls built a promotional campaign around Jordan, billing him
as Chicago’s newest athletic star. Newspapers advertised “Here Comes
Mr. Jordan” in “his first starring role since the Olympics.” Movie critic
Gene Siskel rated him four stars. Jordan, however, wanted to ensure that
the “Whole New Breed” Bulls was something he contributed to rather
than inspired. He vowed, “to help make this basketball team into a winner.
And I want to have fun.”  His personality inspired teammates to
perform better and gave Bulls fans extra adrenaline.
At the outset, Jordan preferred to lead through example rather than
words. He was reluctant to speak to veteran teammates, most of whom
were paid lower salaries. “My leadership came from action, all action,” he
noted. He never became good friends with Dailey or Woolridge because
“I was stealing some of their thunder.”
Jordan ignited a swift transformation of the floundering Bulls. He
excited spectators with his youthful enthusiasm and charm and provided
endless enjoyment and entertainment, dunking the ball and defying
gravity with amazing shots. WGN, the Chicago superstation that carried
15 Bulls home games, attracted 30,000 more households the year Jordan
joined the team. The Bulls drew more than 1 million fans. Their average
Chicago Stadium attendance rose 87 percent, from 6,365 to 11,887, as
ticket sales climbed from $2 million to $3 million. The Bulls drew crowds
best on the road, selling out in eight of Jordan’s first 13 road appearances.
More than 19,000 witnessed his Madison Square Garden debut in New
York. He also drew sellout crowds at Los Angeles, Portland, Golden Gate,
Milwaukee, Detroit, and Indianapolis.
Jordan enjoyed a spectacular rookie season, operating the Bulls offense,
penetrating the basket, scoring at least 40 points seven times, and nabbing
NBA Rookie of the Month honors twice. Acrobatic on the fast break
and breathtaking in the air, he portrayed both mental toughness and
willpower. Chicago won during his debut, 109–93, over the Washington
Bullets at Chicago Stadium on October 26, as he netted 16 points. “The
first NBA game I ever saw was one I played in,” 18 he recollected. Jeff
Ruland knocked him down after a drive. Jordan sank two free throws
and drove right at him in the next series. The next night at Milwaukee,
he astonished Bucks Coach Don Nelson by taking off from near the foul
line on a long dunk attempt. Nelson was amazed to see him convert the
basket like only Julius Erving had done.
In his next NBA game on October 29, Jordan set a Bulls record by
exploding for 22 fourth-quarter points in a 116–110 home victory over
Milwaukee. Bob Love had scored 21 points in a quarter in 1972. The
Bulls overcame a nine-point deficit in the fourth quarter when Loughery
decided to revolve the offense around Jordan. Sidney Moncrief, two-time
NBA Defensive Player of the Year, could not stop Jordan. Nelson assigned
more players to guard Jordan, but he still tallied a game-high 37 points.
“He was sensational,” exclaimed Nelson. “Down the stretch, we couldn’t
do anything with him.” 19 The game marked a significant milestone for
Jordan and the Bulls. “That is when . . . I felt like I earned my stripes,” he
reflected, “and the city of Chicago started to believe we could change the
fortunes of the Bulls.” 20 On November 13, Jordan broke the Bulls’ singlegame
scoring record with 45 points to edge the visiting San Antonio
Spurs, 120–117. “Nobody knew Michael would play this well as quickly
as he has,” Thorn acknowledged. “He’s been a tremendous player
from day one.” 21
Chicago slumped in late November, but Jordan helped the Bulls return
to the win column in December. On December 7, his 20-foot desperation
jump shot at the buzzer nosed the New York Knicks, 95–93, at home.
Jordan’s 32 points and 12 rebounds on December 22 handed the visiting
Boston Celtics their worst defeat, 108–85, in two years. Celtic legend
Larry Bird had never seen one player transform a team like Jordan had.
“Even at this stage of his career,” Bird raved, “he’s doing more than I
ever did.” 22 Five nights later at home, Jordan equaled his club singlegame
scoring record with 45 points, including a season-best 20 baskets
and 6 slam dunks, and added 11 assists, 7 rebounds, and 3 steals in a
112–108 triumph over the Cleveland Cavaliers. During a cradle jam, he
shook the ball twice before dunking it. Jordan improvised the cradle jam,
double pumping the ball underhanded and spreading his legs to maintain
altitude while dunking the ball.
Jordan led the Bulls to eight victories in 15 January games. On
January 5, he tallied 42 points in a loss to New York at Madison Square
Garden. At Chicago Stadium nine nights later, Jordan performed the
first triple-double in Bulls history with 35 points, 15 assists, and 14
rebounds in a 122–113 triumph over the Denver Nuggets. Despite a
sprained ankle, he scored 45 points with 10 rebounds and 8 assists on
January 26 in a 117–104 home victory over the Atlanta Hawks. Jordan’s
yeoman-like performance helped earn him his first NBA Player of the
Week Award.
Jerry Reinsdorf, a wealthy Chicago real-estate developer, bought the
Bulls for only $16 million. The franchise had lost money throughout
its two decades of existence. An executive committee, including Lester
Crown, Phillip Klutznick, Jonathan Kovler, and William Wirtz, had
operated the team.
The Bulls limped through February with just two wins. Jordan tallied 41
points in a February home loss to Boston and was voted the first rookie to
start in the All-Star Game since Isiah Thomas in 1982, outpolling legends
Bird and Julius Erving. He trailed only Dominique Wilkins in the slamdunk
contest at the Indianapolis Hoosier Dome. Some NBA All-Stars
resented his overnight commercial success with the Air Jordans. When
Jordan wore clanking gold chains and a sweat suit boldly bearing the Nike
logo in the slam-dunk competition, several veterans considered his action
disrespectful. “I thought I was doing Nike a favor,” Jordan explained. “They
had invested so much in me.” 23 In the February 10 classic, Jordan was nervous
and scored just seven points because Eastern Conference teammates
gave him little opportunity to handle the ball. Two nights later, he broke
his Bulls single-game scoring record again with a season high 49 points,
including 19 baskets, in a 139–126 overtime home victory against the
Detroit Pistons. Teammates were amazed that Jordan strengthened during
the grueling NBA 82-game season. Sidney Green conceded, “Michael
Jordan is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help us
God.” 24
Jordan started March by thrilling home fans with his second tripledouble,
recording 21 points, 10 rebounds, and 10 assists in a 109–104
victory over New York. He recorded 92 points, 27 rebounds, and 25 assists
in one three-game stretch, scoring at least 30 points in four consecutive
contests. Jordan tallied 35 points in a loss at Cleveland on March 28,
giving him a team record 2,043 points for the season. Six nights later, the
Bulls clinched their first playoff berth in seven years.
Chicago finished third in the Central Division behind Milwaukee, with
a 38–44 mark, recording 11 more victories than in 1983–1984. Jordan
became just the sixth rookie to lead the NBA in points with 2,313. He
ranked third in scoring with a 28.2 point average and fourth in steals with
2.39 per game, easily capturing NBA Rookie of the Year honors and winning
the Seagram Award for best NBA player. His point average marked
the highest for a rookie since Kareem Abdul-Jabbar in 1969–1970 and
sixth best all-time. He broke six Chicago records and led the Bulls in scoring,
free throw percentage (.845), rebounds (534 or 6.5 per game), assists
(837 or 5.9 per game), steals (196 or 2.4 per game), and minutes played
(3,144). Jordan became only the third NBA player to lead his team in
scoring, rebounding, and assists. Jerry West, former Los Angeles Lakers
star, boasted, “He’s the only player I’ve seen who reminds me of me.” 25
Jordan captivated the NBA his rookie season. According to Jim
Naughton, “With his blinding speed and his ability to soar upwards and
then momentarily hang in midair, thwarting more earthbound defenders,
Jordan mesmerized crowds with his Njinsky-esque physical artistry and,
especially, his balletic slam-dunks.” 26 Experts marveled at his scoring,
rebounding, and defense. He often stopped his opponents’ best guard or
forward, but could not elevate his teammates to a championship level and
often alienated them with his intensity, showboating, and commercial
successes.
Milwaukee eliminated Chicago, three games to one, in the opening
round of the Eastern Conference playoffs. Jordan tallied 35 points, including
a jump shot with 17 seconds left, to give the Bulls their lone victory,
109–107, on April 24 at Chicago Stadium.
Chicago’s firing of coach Kevin Loughery disappointed Jordan. Reinsdorf
wanted the Bulls to play team-oriented basketball, but Loughery centered
the offense on Jordan and shaped him into the game’s most dominant
player. Jordan related exceptionally well to Loughery. “He was a player’s
coach,” Jordan recollected. “He liked my game and wanted me to be
the leader.” 27 Loughery, who preferred one-on-one style basketball,
enabled Jordan to demonstrate his skills and develop self-confidence.
Jordan quickly realized that confidence was the most important quality to
have in the NBA. Loughery’s decision to let him test his individual skills
convinced him that he could become a great player. Stan Albeck replaced
Loughery.
Reinsdorf appointed Jerry Krause, former sportswriter and Chicago
White Sox scout, to replace general manager Thorn. Krause, nicknamed
“Crumbs” by Jordan because of his disheveled appearance, wanted the
Bulls to retain only Michael, Dave Corzine, and Higgins and hired veteran
Tex Winter as assistant coach. He acquired Charles Oakley, an exceptional
rebounder that the Bulls sorely needed, from Cleveland in the June
draft. Krause also obtained guard John Paxson, an ideal supplement to
Jordan, from San Antonio.
SOPHOMORE INJURY JINX (1985–1986)
During Jordan’s second season, Chicago won all eight exhibition games,
as coach Albeck let him run the offense. Jordan scored at least 30 points
in three contests, but realized he should pass the ball more. “I may have to
score less and pass more this season,”28 he admitted.
Jordan led the Bulls to three consecutive wins to start the 1985–1986
season, averaging 31 points, 6.5 rebounds, and 4.5 assists. He contributed
29 points, including three crucial baskets down the stretch, in the opening
home game 116–115 overtime victory against Cleveland on October 25.
After pacing Chicago to a 121–118 victory the next night over Detroit,
he broke a bone in his left foot on October 29 in a 111–105 triumph over
the Golden State Warriors. With 45 seconds left in the second quarter,
Jordan landed awkwardly after leaping high for a rebound and severely
jammed his left ankle. “It felt like something popped out of place when
I came down flat on my foot,” 29 he revealed. Although the initial x-ray
films were negative, Jordan experienced difficulty stopping and starting.
He hobbled on crutches and nursed his left foot, which was wrapped in a
protective brace.
A computed tomography (CT) scan on November 5 showed that
Jordan had fractured the navicular tarsal bone in his left foot. In a state of
disbelief, Jordan revealed, “I went home and cried. It was like a part of my
life had been taken away, and there was nothing I could do.” 30 Chicago
anticipated that Jordan would be sidelined for two months, but he missed
most of the NBA season. The slow recovery frustrated Jordan, who desperately
wanted to return to action by the All-Star break, and forced him
to learn more self-discipline and patience. He watched the Bulls from his
living room sofa and threw soda cans at the television when teammates
lacked the resilience to fight.
As his foot healed and the pain lessened, Jordan became convinced that
he was ready to play. He visited Dr. John Hefferon, Bulls orthopedist, hoping
his cast would be removed soon. Hefferon, leery of making that decision,
consulted other orthopedists in Eugene, Oregon and Cleveland, Ohio. The
next CT scan four weeks later indicated that Jordan could put stress on his
left foot. The doctor gave him a removable split instead of another cast.
Jordan asked the Bulls for permission in mid-January to return to the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, to take a geography class,
improve his conditioning, and shoot baskets several hours daily. He owned
a condominium there and conversed with his many friends, including the
North Carolina coaching staff. Unbeknownst to Bulls officials, Jordan
began testing his left foot in pickup games. The experience convinced
him how much he really loved basketball. In mid-March, he informed
Chicago that his injury had healed and that he could resume playing.
Reinsdorf, Krause, and the Bulls’ doctors wanted Jordan to forgo the
remainder of the season because he already had missed more than 50
games. “I was scared to death,” Krause recalled. “I didn’t want to go down
in history as the guy who put Michael Jordan back in too soon.” 31 Jordan,
Reinsdorf, Krause, and the Bulls’ doctors conversed at least twice.
Dr. Stan James told them that Jordan’s risk of breaking the bone again
stood at 10 percent. Jordan, an extremely passionate competitor who
was separated from his main source of enjoyment, desperately wanted to
return. He knew his body better than Bulls executives did and estimated
that the odds were 85 to 90 percent that he would not reinjure his foot.
The disagreement soured relations between Jordan and Krause. Krause
initially rebuffed Jordan’s pleas to play. Jordan claimed that Krause did not
want him to return that season so that the Bulls would miss the playoffs
and qualify for the NBA lottery, where the seven teams with the worst
records received an opportunity to draft the best collegians available that
year. “You’re trying to lose games,” he confronted Krause, “so you can get
a better draft pick.” 32 Krause viewed basketball as a business and wanted
to control the Bulls organization, but Jordan wanted to determine his
fate. He wanted to participate in the game he had been involved with
for a long time, but management insisted on safeguarding its multimillion
dollar investment. “That’s when I really felt used,” 33 he revealed.
Jordan insisted that Chicago could still make the playoffs if he returned.
The Bulls ranked ninth in the Eastern Conference with a 22– 45 record, one
spot below making the playoffs. Reinsdorf permitted Jordan to practice two
hours daily, but Krause and Albeck limited him to just seven minutes a half.
Tim Hallam sat at the scorer’s table with a stopwatch to make sure Jordan
did not exceed his limit. After missing 64 games, Jordan returned on March
15 to the Bulls. With 5:59 left in the second quarter against Milwaukee, he
entered the game to a standing ovation in Chicago Stadium and immediately
dunked the ball over 7-foot 3-inch center Randy Breuer. He tallied 12 points
in just 12 minutes in the overtime loss. Chicago dropped its first five games
after Jordan returned. Jordan scored 13 points in seven minutes in the fourth
quarter on March 17 in a setback at Atlanta, setting a Bulls record for most
steals in a quarter, with five. He complained that his limited playing time disrupted
team chemistry. When Albeck left him in one game for an extra three
minutes, Krause warned him he would be fired if that occurred again.
Reinsdorf upgraded Jordan’s playing time to 10 minutes a half and then
increased it two minutes per game. Jordan’s 19 points in 19 minutes sparked
a 111–98 home win over New York on March 25, and his 24 points in 23
minutes four nights later lifted the visiting Bulls to a 106–96 triumph over
the Knicks. Chicago won four of its final six games, as Jordan averaged
29.6 points, and overtook Cleveland for the last playoff spot. Albeck upset
Jordan by removing him with just 30 seconds left on April 3 when the Bulls
trailed the Indiana Pacers by just one point because he had reached his 28-
minute limit. Jordan averaged more than 1 point a minute in a reserve role.
He scored 10 points in the first quarter in his first start, helping Chicago
vanquish visiting Milwaukee, 107–101. Reinsdorf waived Jordan’s playing
time restriction four days later, when the host Bulls clinched the final playoff
spot at home by defeating Washington, 105–103.
Chicago finished fourth in the Central Division at 30–52, 27 games
behind Milwaukee, as Jordan averaged a career-low 22.8 points in 18
games. The Bulls entered the first round of the Eastern Conference playoffs
as heavy underdogs against Boston. The Celtics boasted the NBA’s best
record at 67–15 with Bird, Kevin McHale, Robert Parish, Dennis Johnson,
and Danny Ainge.
Undaunted by the formidable challenge, Jordan captivated the nation
with some of the greatest playoff performances in NBA history. Boston
bested Chicago, 123–104, in Game 1 on April 17, but Jordan dazzled the
Boston Garden crowd with 49 points. He single handedly kept the Bulls
ahead nearly the entire first half.
Jordan tallied 30 first-half points in the Game 2 on April 20 before a
national television audience. The prototype of the new super player, he
dribbled, drove, jumped, shot, and passed without any perceptive weakness.
Jordan froze Johnson and blew by Bird as he banked a shot from the right
side, soared by McHale for an over-the-shoulder, no-look reverse slam dunk,
and jumped over Ainge for a jam. The Boston Garden crowd shifted from
disbelief to apprehension to admiration, as Jordan added 22 second-half
points and converted two free throws to send the game into overtime. At
the end of the first overtime, he missed a jump shot that would have won the
game. The Celtics prevailed, 135–131, in double overtime. An exhausted
Jordan played 53 minutes, the final 39 minutes without a rest. He broke the
NBA single-game playoff scoring record with 63 points, surpassing Elgin
Baylor’s 62 points on April 14, 1962. Jordan converted 22 of 41 shots from
the field and 19 of 21 free throws. Of his 22 baskets, 13 were jump shots, 7
came on drives, 1 was a dunk, and 1 resulted from goaltending.
Jordan performed at an unprecedented playoff level against the best
NBA team. He drew 10 fouls from Bill Walton, Johnson, Ainge, Parish, and
McHale, among the best NBA defensive players. “No one can guard him,”
Johnson claimed. Bird, who paced Boston with 36 points, was amazed that
any player could put on such a dazzling performance against the Boston
Celtics and proclaimed, “I think he’s God disguised as Michael Jordan.” 34
Ainge concurred, “he was so good you were tempted to stop playing and
just watch. It was not just what he did, but the way he did it.” 35 Ray Sons of
the Chicago Tribune penned, “He painted his own masterpiece on the ceiling
of basketball’s Sistine Chapel, and he didn’t need a scaffold to lift him
there.” 36 Jordan even admitted, “I don’t think I had ever played a game as
good as that one.” 37 The double-overtime marathon loss, however, erased
any sense of personal accomplishment for Jordan. “I’d give all the points
back if we could have won the game. I wanted to win so badly.” 38
Boston doubled-teamed Jordan in the Game 3 finale two nights later at
Chicago Stadium. Because he experienced much more difficulty getting
the ball, Chicago dropped the game, 122–104, and lost the series, 3–0.
Although Jordan averaged 43.7 points, the Celtics exhibited their superior
talent, mental toughness, sense of purpose, and depth.
Krause fired Albeck as head coach, hiring youthful, intense, intelligent
Doug Collins. Collins wanted Jordan to take the summer easy to
prevent reinjuring the foot. Jordan reminded Collins, “too many people
who didn’t know anything about me or my body were telling me what
to do. . . . I never want to go through that again.” 39 He refrained from
basketball workouts all summer for the first time in several years, but
played for the North Carolina alumni against the University of Nevada
Las Vegas alumni. Collins let Jordan run the Bulls’ offense.
JORDAN’S FIRST SCORING TITLE (1986–1987)
Jordan wanted the Bulls to draft guard Johnny Dawkins of Duke
University. To Jordan’s dismay, however, Krause selected 7-foot forward
Brad Sellers of Ohio State University and Stacey King of the University
of Oklahoma. He traded forward Orlando Woolridge to the New Jersey
Nets for draft rights to King and acquired point guard Steve Colter from
the Portland Trail Blazers. Jordan argued that Sellers lacked the physical
strength to sustain NBA punishment and criticized Colter, too.
Jordan thought about basketball all summer and entered the 1986–
1987 season more mentally prepared to play than ever before. Doctors
reported that his foot had healed completely and that he possessed very
little body fat. He tallied 36 points before a sellout crowd of 22,500 at the
debut of the Dean Dome in Chapel Hill and averaged 33 points in eight
exhibition contests.
Jordan played intensely and relentlessly during team practices. His
presence and daily work ethic made his teammates work harder. During
one scrimmage, he accused Collins of intentionally misstating the score
so that his team would lose. Jordan stormed out of practice and delayed
reporting for the Bulls’ flight the next day until a few seconds before takeoff.
When Collins removed him from scrimmages, Jordan often checked
back into the game a minute later to work on his defense or post moves.
“Every day he had this need to show you he was the best,” 40 Collins
recalled. He practiced at an intensity level not attainable by teammates.
Chicago opened the 1986–1987 season on November 1 with a
108–103 victory at New York. Jordan dominated the first half with 16 points
and several steals and assists. At halftime, Collins told him, “You don’t
have to do it all.” Jordan scored 20 of the Bulls’ 31 fourth-quarter points,
including the final 11 points. With two minutes left, he assured Collins,
“I’m not going to let you lose your first game.” 41 Jordan tallied 50 points in
a regular season game for the first time, setting a Madison Square Garden
record for most points by an opponent.
Chicago won five of its first six games, as Jordan garnered NBA
Player of the Month honors. He averaged 39.4 points, 5.6 rebounds,
and 2.8 steals during the first week. He netted the final eight points,
including a game-ending slam dunk after being knocked to the floor, in
a 104–99 triumph over host Cleveland on November 2, and scored 16
of his 34 points in the fourth quarter to give the Bulls a 111–104 home
win over San Antonio two nights later. His 39-point performance in
a 101–86 victory over the visiting Phoenix Suns featured a decisive
cradle jam. “Jordan is so great,” Phoenix coach John MacLeod proclaimed,
“it takes five guys just to hold him to 20 points.” Chicago edged
Atlanta, 112–110, four nights later at home, where Jordan challenged
three defenders for the winning layup. “It was your routine, twisting,
360-degree, double-pump, reverse lay-up,” 42 coach Collins explained.
He outscored Bird, 48–37, in a decisive loss to Boston on November 14
at Chicago Stadium.
A week later, Jordan led a spectacular Bulls home comeback with 40
points in a 101–99 triumph over New York. He set an NBA record by
scoring Chicago’s final 18 points in the last 6 minutes and 29 seconds and
stole the ball three times in the last three minutes. He made a running
bank shot with 13 seconds left against three defenders and sank a 22-foot
jump shot to clinch the win. Collins conceded, “its kind of nice to have a
nuclear weapon on your team.” 43
Jordan soared to even greater heights, tallying at least 40 points in nine
consecutive contests. Wilt Chamberlain remains the only NBA player
with longer consecutive game streaks, notching 14 in 1961 and 10 in 1962.
Jordan began his string with 41 points on November 28 in a setback to
the Los Angeles Lakers, matching The Forum single-game scoring record
set by Jerry West in 1969. He netted 40 points, including two baskets and
free throws in the last 46 seconds, to defeat the host Seattle SuperSonics,
115–109, in overtime on December 2 and exceeded 40 points in consecutive
road losses to the Utah Jazz, Phoenix, and San Antonio. The streak
continued on December 9 with 40 points in a 106–100 home win over
Denver, 41 points in a loss the next night at Atlanta, and 41 points in a
106–93 victory at Milwaukee on December 12.
Chicago ironically finished just 3–6 during Jordan’s scoring barrage. He
averaged 41.1 points during that span, but was reluctant to pass the ball
to teammates except for Oakley. His nine-game streak abruptly ended the
next night in a home loss to Milwaukee when he tumbled after driving to
the basket with five seconds left in the first half. After lying motionless for
nearly six minutes, Jordan appeared sparingly in the second half. Despite
the injury, he connected for at least 40 points in wins over New Jersey,
Indiana, and Cleveland.
The Bulls made their first regular-season national television appearance
with Jordan on Christmas against New York at Madison Square
Garden. CBS billed the contest as “a Michael Jordan showcase.” Jordan
scored 30 points, but was triple-teamed and shot poorly in the 86–85 loss.
Despite suffering influenza and a 101-degree fever two nights later, he still
tallied 44 points in a 105–93 home victory over Indiana. “When I’m sick,
I always play better,” Jordan claimed. “My concentration level is much
higher.” 44
Although Jordan dominated the NBA in scoring, Chicago just split
its first 42 games through January. Collins asked him to move from big
guard to small forward to enable guards Paxson and Sedale Threatt to
play simultaneously. Jordan tallied 47 points, including 17 last-quarter
points, in a 124–118 home win on January 3 over Detroit. Five nights
later, he thrilled Chicago Stadium spectators with 53 points, lifting the
Bulls to a 121–117 triumph over Portland. His next test came on January
17 at home against the Philadelphia 76ers. Michael responded with 47
points, including 16 in the fourth quarter, 10 rebounds, and 6 assists in the
109–85 rout. He followed with 20 third-quarter points in a 117–96 trouncing
of Cleveland six nights later and 49 points in a setback at Philadelphia
on January 30. Coach Matt Guokas, of the 76ers, who wondered if Jordan
could tally all the Bulls points in a game, added, “I’d certainly like to see
him try. He is certainly capable of doing it.” 45
Jordan received more than 1.4 million votes for the All-Star game,
shattering Magic Johnson’s all-time record. Paxson explained, “He’s such
an easy person to like. Wherever he goes, people want to touch him, say
‘hi’ to him. He is one of God’s special children.” 46 In the NBA Slam-
Dunk semifinals on February 7 at the Seattle Skydome, Jordan replicated
the dunk that Erving had made at the inaugural 1976 competition. As
the capacity crowd roared, he moved down the court, accelerated to full
speed, gained momentum as he passed midcourt, and catapulted off the
free-throw line to complete a thunderous double-pump slam. “I added a
little with the pump,” he explained, “but the roots started with Dr. J.” 47
Jordan bested Jerome Kersey of Portland in the slam-dunk finals,
146–140, to claim the $12,500 prize. He flaunted hang time with a slashing
slam, ducking the rim as he floated by. Next came a swooping cradle
jam in which he double-pumped the ball underhanded and spread his legs
to maintain his altitude. Then, Jordan assaulted the hoop from the left
side with a sideswiping rock-a-baby. He dribbled the full length of the
court, took off at the foul line, leveled off in midair, and rose again for the
dunk. Jordan credited his move to instinct and intuition. “I never know
until I get there what’s going to happen,” 48 he said. His dominance did
not extend to next day’s All-Star Game, as he tallied a disappointing 11
points for the Eastern Conference as a point guard in the 154–149 loss to
the Western Conference.
Jordan often dazzled Chicago Stadium crowds in February. He registered
45 points, including 16 final-period points, in a 106–98 victory over
Seattle on February 13. Nine days later, his 43 points and season-high
eight steals lifted Chicago past Cleveland, 102–98. Jordan struck for 43
points, 6 assists, and 5 blocked shots in a 113–103 win over Atlanta. He
dominated the first three quarters with 39 points, recording 15 points in
one five-minute span. On February 26, Jordan broke the Bulls’ regularseason
scoring record with 58 points to overwhelm New Jersey, 128–113.
Chet Walker held the previous single-game mark with 56 points in 1972.
Jordan made 16 of 25 field goals and 26 of 27 fouls shots, third best in
NBA history. He notched 17 points in both the first and second quarters,
including Chicago’s last 11 points in the first stanza and 15 of their last 17
points in the second. With just 2 minutes and 44 seconds left, he made a
soaring reverse layup and free throw to break Walker’s record.
In March, Jordan snagged NBA Player of the Month honors for a second
time with several memorable road masterpieces. He soared to new heights
on March 4 with an NBA season-high 61 points, including 22 baskets
and 17 free throws, to edge Detroit, 125–120, in overtime at the Pontiac
Silverdome. Jordan notched 26 fourth-quarter points, a one-period record
against Detroit, making the Bulls’ first 13 points and 24 of their first 26
points. His hanging fall-away jump shot in the waning seconds of regulation
sent the contest into overtime. In a setback at Philadelphia a week
later, he tied The Spectrum single-game scoring record with 49 points.
His 40 points and acrobatic moves keyed a 114–97 romp over the Los
Angeles Clippers on March 19 at the Forum. “All the people came out to
see me play, and to see if all the ink about Michael Jordan was true,” 49 he
observed. He also netted 44 points in a heartbreaking defeat at Houston
on March 16, 40 points in a 112–97 win at the Sacramento Kings on
March 21, and 46 points in a loss at Portland the next night.
Jordan’s masterpieces continued at Chicago Stadium. He tallied 56
points, including 22 of 32 field goals, and eight steals to nose Philadelphia,
93–91, on March 24. His 36 points en route to a 101–75 romp over
Washington one week later clinched a third consecutive playoff appearance.
Jordan became the only NBA player except for Chamberlain to
record three consecutive 50-point games, garnering 53 points in a 116–95
rout over Indiana on April 12. He converted 14 of his first 16 first-half
shots and on seven consecutive possessions for 13 fourth-quarter points.
His 50-point performance the next night sparked a seven-point triumph
over Milwaukee.
Jordan matched his NBA season-high 61 points, including 22 baskets
and 17 free throws, in falling to Atlanta on April 16. He recorded his
3,001st point of the 1986–1987 season on a layup, joining Chamberlain
as the only other NBA hoopster to reach that plateau. Jordan tallied 23
straight points, including the last 17 of the first half, a feat Chamberlain
never accomplished. “But these records and marks meant nothing,” he
reflected. “I’d rather have had the win because it would have clinched
the seventh playoff spot in the Eastern conference.” 50 Atlanta coach
Mike Fratello exhausted ways of defending Jordan.
Despite Jordan’s stellar performance, Chicago finished a lackluster
40–42. The Bulls placed a disappointing fifth in the Central Division, 17
games behind Atlanta. Jordan led the NBA in scoring for the first time
with 3,041 points, third highest in NBA history, and a career-best 37.1
points average, fifth highest in NBA history. The NBA had not witnessed
such prolific scoring since Chamberlain averaged 50.4 points and Elgin
Baylor averaged 38.3 points in 1962. Jordan reached at least 60 points
twice, 50 points in eight games, 40 points 28 more times, and 30 points 26
other times. The Bulls finished 22–15 when Jordan registered at least 40
points. He netted 40 points against every NBA team, producing the top
three and seven of the top 10 NBA scoring performances, and outscored
his next three teammates combined. Oakley averaged 13.1 rebounds,
second best in the NBA.
Jordan made the All-NBA team for the first time, but Magic Johnson,
who led the Los Angeles Lakers to the NBA title, won the NBA Most
Valuable Player Award. He scored 35.4 percent of Chicago’s points and
paced the Bulls in steals and blocked shots, becoming the first NBA
guard to record more than 200 steals and 100 blocked shots in the same
season and blocking more shots than 13 NBA starting centers. Besides
ranking second on Chicago in assists and third in rebounds, he led the
NBA in minutes played, with 3,281, and averaged more than 38 minutes
a game.
Boston again swept the Bulls in the first round of the NBA Eastern Conference
playoffs. At Boston Garden, Jordan scored 35 points in a Game 1
108–104 defeat on April 23 and 42 points in the Game 2 105–96 setback
three days later. The Celtics eliminated Chicago, 105–94, on April 28 at
Chicago Stadium. Although Michael experienced his greatest offensive
season, the Bulls still did not survive the first playoff round.