SOFTWARE
Software refers to computer programs that are designed by a computer programmer or, more likely, a team of computer programmers, to perform a particular function. The software is either embedded in a device, such as a hand-held device or appliance, or installed on a computer. 
Software comes in many different types for many different users. Examples of these types include the computer's disk operating system (DOS) software; user interface; programming software; browsers; entertainment software, such as gaming; communications software; and utility software, such as word processing, spreadsheets, databases, and publishing. 
OPERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE 
The hardware components of a computer need instructions to order to work transparently to the user. These instructions constitute the operating system of the computer, frequently referred to as DOS, and are the first files to be installed on a hard drive. Several of these files are hidden from the user to prevent file corruption. The instructions in these files inform the various components of the computer system about such tasks as recognition of components, communications, data processing, internal data transfer, and memory management. The operating system also includes utility programs such as media formatting, addition and deletion of new hardware and software, and printing queues.The operating system of a desktop computer is based on single-user design. When the computer is added to a computer network, another layer of computer operating system is required. This layer, referred to as the network operating system, instructs the computer about the presence of a network interface card installed in the computer and its address, and controls the flow of data and command traffic to and from the computer. This ability allows the computer to share peripherals on the network system and to access outside systems such as the Internet. 
USER INTERFACE 
Operating systems are complicated and often not intuitive to the user. Therefore, a software program called a graphical user interface (GUI) runs over the operating system to make the operating system easier for the user to operate. More importantly, GUIs allow a "family" or "suite" of products to share the same screen and operational design, making the learning of new software much easier. For example, the screen-design menu system provides identical icons for common commands among software packages, such as save, print, spell-checking, help, and basic document formatting. Microsoft's Windows is an industry leader. The Microsoft Office Suite, for example, offers word processing, spreadsheets, publishing, and database software that share a common interface and, therefore, a common screen design and tool menus. 
PROGRAMMING SOFTWARE 
Computer programmers program in a variety of computer languages. These languages are actually software that use more intuitive codes than the digital machine languages (0s and 1s) but that actually translate to machine language for use by the computer's central processing unit. C++ and Visual Basic are computer languages that do not require the programmer to know machine language.Specific computer programming language is necessary to create nonlinear products that can be accessed through the World Wide Web path of addresses used on the Internet. That universal language is the hypertext markup language (HTML). Many software packages, most notably Microsoft's Frontpage and Macromedia's Dreamweaver, are available to make programming in HTML easier and most efficient. 
BROWSERS 
Access to software produced for access to the Internet requires a browser for searching the Internet from the computer desktop. Software produced in HTML is hosted on computers called servers. The address access path to the respective server and software is called the URL (uniform resource locator). Commercially successful Internet browsers include Netscape Navigator and Microsoft's Internet Explorer. 
Software called search engines are also available for searching the Internet for specific items. Google, for example, is a search engine that can search the Internet for virtually any topic. EBay is another software interface that specializes in bidding sales by individuals. 
ENTERTAINMENT 
Software for the entertainment market has been accelerating in demand since the 1990s, particularly for children and young adults. Specific hardware is often required to operate the software, such as a joystick, handheld device, or console. The handheld GameBoy and console PlayStation, for example, require frequent new software to sustain the market. Much of that software comes on cartridges, using Plug-N-Play technology, so that users can maintain libraries that do not require the installation process required on desktop computers. 
COMMUNICATIONS 
In addition to browsers and operating systems, users have many other personal communication needs that require desktop-loaded software. One such need involves faxing information from one location to another. That capability has become so routine that taxpayers often submit their tax forms via electronic mail (e-mail) and users employ fax machines for such mundane tasks as renewing memberships, car registrations, and driver licenses.Another communications need is transfer between personal devices. For example, personal digital assistants and cellular telephones communicate with desktop computers through data transfer. A technology that has become popular are transfers from the photographic feature of a cellular phone to a desktop for color printing. While most handheld devices are manufactured with embedded software, the desktop computer requires software in order to know how to handle and process images.A frequently used software is for e-mail. E-mail has evolved into a comprehensive tool for communication between individuals and groups. Microsoft's Outlook is a common e-mail facility included in the Microsoft Office Suite. Capacities include creation of e-mail address files, communication with Listservs (online discussion forums), and use of document attachments. The maintenance of e-mail logs of messages is an important part of document retention. Courts now recognize e-mail messages and attachments as legal evidence.Communication software does pose hazards. Computer viruses can be attached to e-mail messages, address books, and attachments. The hazzards of spam, unsolicited e-mail, and software that allows people to access and track another person's computer equipment require a software solution. Detection software to protect users from these desktop invasions is critical to efficient operation. Another necessary protection is called a firewall, which is software that scrambles the Internet protocol address of the desktop computer so that electronic communications cannot be tracked back to the computer that originated the communication. This is absolutely essential when the users of a particular desktop computer may be children who are vulnerable to predators. 
UTILITY SOFTWARE 
A number of software packages include tools that are needed by many business users. These packages include word processing, spreadsheets, database management, and publishing. Often bundled into a family or suite of software, such packages can be purchased and installed together.Word processing is a text-preparation tool. This software allows users to produce such documents as letters, memorandums, and reports. Elements of document style such as line spacing, font selection, paragraph indentions, bolding, italics, and centering can all be accomplished with relative ease. Templates of preset-up documents are also available. The documents are saved to both online and off-line media. Advanced features such as tables, rudimentary spreadsheets, and database structures are not available in word-processing packages.Word processing has evolved into more than a document-preparation program. Now that spell-checkers are accompanied by grammar and style checking and other advanced features, word processing has become a narrative tool that can aid in the creation process of such artistic works as stories, poems, plays, and portfolios.Spreadsheet software, such as Microsoft Excel, is an essentially quantitative tool wherein data in cell locations are placed in rows and columns in matrix format. That makes data easy to structure. Rows and columns can be individually designed. Cell contents can be numeric data, alphanumeric data, or algorithms. Algorithms allow new data to be generated through formula results. Advanced features include financial and statistical functions. 
Database software, such as Microsoft Access, allows users to maintain records of related information. For example, database software can be used to maintain the records of the customers of insurance companies. Fields of related information might include name, contact information, type and amount of insurance carried, date of last contact, benefit information, and billing information. These fields of information are relational to the key field of name and the fields together represent a record.This software maintains the integrity of the data structure while allowing printing in many different ways, such as forms, according to the various needs of the user. Another major feature of this software is the ability to search the records for particular needs. In an inventory database, for example, a purchasing query could be done for all merchandise at or near the inventory minimum of the particular item. 
Publishing software, such as Microsoft Publisher and Adobe Pagemaker, allow users to create pamphlets, fliers, and other creative documents using layout design. Style elements include such features as imported images, text and graphic boxes, and rich color, as well as portrait and landscape layouts. 
An important software design feature referred to as object linking and embedding, allows software to share "objects" that are pieces of other data. For example, a spreadsheet object can be brought into a word-processing document. Any time the spreadsheet object is updated in the original spreadsheet software, the object is automatically updated in the destination document. The word-processing document, in this example, would automatically be updated without even opening the word-processing software or document.Software serves the limitless needs of business and entertainment. The market for software is as dynamic as the changing needs and wants of users.
SIMULATION SOFTWARE 
Companies that engage in e-commerce rely on software for a variety of things, from ensuring security, operating servers, and managing customer relationships to providing visitors with online shopping carts and payment systems. By definition, software consists of instructions that tell computers what to do. Although it's customary to view hardware and software as separate and distinct elements that work in tandem to make a computers operate, the two are actually enmeshed together at many different levels. Software normally is placed in one of two different categories: system software and applications. Applications are software programs that users apply to various tasks, ranging from enjoyment to productivity. One particularly useful kind of application allows companies to generate simulations—models or pictures of what might happen in different situations.In the past, simulation software was used almost exclusively in the fields of industrial engineering and statistics. In the 1960s, conducting simulations on large mainframe computers was a difficult task. However, by the early 2000s business professionals in many different industries were using simulation software to model different business scenarios and solve problems. For the most successful companies, this form of software had become a necessary tool for doing business because the global business climate was complicated and uncertain. A number of factors—including pressure from investors, the demands of customers, the impact of new technologies, domestic and international government regulations, legal issues, the environment, and even the cost of shipping products—made it difficult for corporate executives to make important decisions and position their companies for success.By allowing companies to experiment with new ideas in artificial environments without taking any risks, simulation software evolved into a powerful tool for making more efficient, effective decisions, and for allocating resources in the most optimal ways. As Darwin magazine explained: "Simulation software doesn't draw conclusions for the user, but it reduces the time an executive needs to glean valuable insights from reams of data. Using it maximizes both a computer's remarkable ability to crunch through thousands of figures and details as well as the human capacity for generating insights and making decisions."Many companies perform simulations or create models using spreadsheet programs like Microsoft Excel. When VisiCalc, the first spreadsheet program for desktop computers, was introduced in 1979, it changed the financial world. Banks and other companies were able to save hours of work by automating certain financial tasks, and it became possible to conduct a virtually unlimited number of "what if" scenarios simply by plugging in different sets of numbers. This approach was especially valuable to investors, legitimate and otherwise. 
The simulations created by spreadsheets often are one component of the overall decision-making process. For example, at oil company Royal Dutch/Shell, they became an important part of an approach called scenario planning. The purpose of scenario planning is to identify several different stories about, or visions of, how large-scale forces will have an impact over time. Peter Schwartz, one of the pioneers of scenario planning, used spreadsheets to add a quantitative complement to the narrow scenarios his department created at Royal Dutch/Shell, thus making them more appealing and convincing to the company's management.In addition to using spreadsheets alone, companies also rely on other types of software programs that focus specifically on simulation. Many of these applications work with spreadsheet programs. In the early 2000s, leading companies used software products that helped them analyze decisions. Working in tandem with spreadsheet applications like Microsoft Excel, these programs created diagrams, decision trees, and other graphical representations of data from the spreadsheet. These could include sequences of choices and possible events in chronological order. Software products like these also were able to help users evaluate the potential risks involved in a decision and see which variables were the most important or influential. In addition to decision tree analysis, these applications relied on other techniques to provide simulations. Among them were various forecasting methods, including a mathematical technique known as linear programming, which involves allocating resources optimally in order to meet objectives; and Monte Carlo simulation, which is useful for modeling random events. 
Although simulation software can be applied to many different e-commerce situations, one particularly prominent application involves the management of company supply chains. Supply chains can include all of the different parties or entities that are involved (including suppliers, distributors, and production facilities) in the process of taking parts or raw goods and turning them into finished products. Simulation software can be used to emulate changes or fluctuations in any given number of variables (like supply and demand) so that companies can see how changes in some variables impact the conditions of others. This allows them to better prepare themselves, increase the supply chain's efficiency, and find the optimal balance between customer satisfaction and cost savings.Another critical application of simulation software is in a company's warehouse. Many companies that achieved success in the world of brick-and-mortar commerce quickly discovered that that e-commerce was a different game. Rather than shipping relatively small numbers of large orders to retail chains or distributors, high volumes of smaller orders for individual consumers must be processed. This presents a new set of requirements for retailers, such as providing customers with real-time information about available products in inventory. This also changes the way products get moved behind the scenes in a company's warehouse. 
In the early 2000s, companies relied on a complex array of warehouse management software (WMS), overhead scanners, conveyor belt systems, wireless computer networks, wearable computers, hand-held bar code scanners, and portable printers to streamline operations and automate the movement of goods through their warehouses, many of which had become very sophisticated operations. Some e-tailers used simulation software to generate models or simulations of their existing warehouses, based on the conditions different variables. For example, software can be used to emulate what would happen if an e-tailer were faced with a sudden influx of orders, a shortage in warehouse workers, or both. Software also can be used to figure out optimal ways to configure the physical layout of a warehouse, based on how goods and people move through it. 
As explained in Warehousing Management, "Computer simulation models can represent all the detail of a warehousing facility, such as operating strategies, docking areas, conveyors, picking and storage, just to name a few. When a model is executed in the computer, simulated time advances the model just as the warehouse would actually operate. The model automatically collects statistics on bottlenecks, equipment utilization, inventory and throughput, and generates reports for analysis and optimization." 
As computers continue to play central roles in everyday business processes and the business world becomes more complex, simulation software likely will continue to be an essential tool for successful companies. According to Michael Schrage, author of Serious Play: How the World's Best Companies Simulate to Innovate, simulation technology will play an increasing role in the corporate world during the early 2000s, becoming as commonplace as spreadsheets or e-mail.
Computer software 
Computer software is a package of specific instructions (a program) written in a defined order that tells a computer what to do and how to do it. It is the "brain" that tells the "body," or hardware, of a computer what to do. "Hardware" refers to all the visible components in a computer system: electrical connections, silicon chips, disc drives, monitor, keyboard, printer, etc. Without software, a computer can do nothing; it is only a collection of circuits and metal in a box. 
History 
The first modern computers were developed by the United States military during World War II (1939–45) to calculate the paths of artillery shells and bombs. These computers used vacuum tubes that had on-off switches. The settings had to be reset by hand for each operation. 
These very early computers used the familiar decimal digits (0 to 9) to represent data (information). Computer engineers found it difficult to work with 10 different digits. John von Neumann (1903–1957), a Hungarian-born American mathematician, decided in 1946 to abandon the decimal system in favor of the binary system (a system using only 0 and 1; "bi" means two). That system has been used ever since.
How a computer uses the binary system 
Although computers perform seemingly amazing feats, they actually understand only two things: whether an electrical "on" or "off" condition exists in their circuits. The binary numbering system works well in this situation because it uses only the 0 and 1 bi nary digits (later shortened to bits ). Binary 1 represents on and binary 0 represents off. Program instructions are sent to the computer by combining bits together in groups of six or eight. This process takes care of the instructional part of programs.
Computer hardware: The physical equipment used in a computer system.
Computer program: Another name for computer software, a series of commands or instructions that a computer can interpret and execute.
Computer codes
Data—in the form of decimal numbers, letters, and special characters—also has to be available in the computer. For this purpose, the EBCDIC and ASCII codes were developed.
EBCDIC (pronounced EB-see-dick) stands for Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code. It was developed by IBM Corporation and is used in most of its computers. In EBCDIC, eight bits are used to represent a single character.
ASCII (pronounced AS-key) is American Standard Code for Information Interchange. ASCII is a seven-bit code developed in a joint effort by several computer manufacturers to create a standard code that could be used on any computer, regardless who made it. ASCII is used in most personal computers today and has been adopted as a standard by the U.S. government.
The development of computer languages
The first modern computer was named ENIAC for Electronic Numerical Integrator And Calculator. It was assembled in 1946. Most programming was done by and for military and scientific users. That began to change after Grace Hopper, an American computer scientist and naval officer, developed FLOW-MATIC, or assembly language, as it came to be called. It uses short names (known as mnemonics or memory aids) to represent common sequences of instructions. These instructions are in turn translated back into the zeroes and ones of machine language when the program is run. This was an important step toward developing "user-friendly" computer software. FLOW-MATIC was one of the first "highlevel" computer languages.
Soon, other high-level computer languages were developed. By 1957, IBM had created FORTRAN, a language specifically designed for scientific and engineering work involving complicated mathematical formulas. FORTRAN stands for FORmula TRANslater. It became the first high-level programming language to be used by many computer users. COBOL (COmmon Business Oriented Language) was developed in 1959 to help businesses organize records and manage data files.
During the first half of the 1960s, two professors at Dartmouth College developed BASIC (Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code). This was the first widespread computer language designed for and used by nonprofessional programmers. It was extremely popular throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Its popularity was increased by the development and sale of personal computers, many of which already had BASIC programmed into their memories.
Types of computer software
The development of high-level languages helped to make computers common objects in workplaces and homes. Computers, of course, must have the high-level language command translated back into machine language before they can act on it. The programs needed to translate high-level language back into machine language are called translator programs. They represent another type of computer software.
Operating system software is yet another type of software that must be in a computer before it can read and use commercially available software packages. Before a computer can use application software, such as a word-processing or a game-playing package, the computer must run the instructions through the operating system software. This contains many built-in instructions, so that each piece of application software does not have to repeat simple instructions, like telling the computer how to print something out. DOS (Disc Operating System) is a popular operating system software program for many personal computers used today.
Application software. Once some type of operating system software is loaded into a computer, the computer can load and understand many other types of software. Software can tell computers how to create documents, to solve simple or complex calculations for business people and scientists, to play games, to create images, to maintain and sort files, and to complete hundreds of other tasks.
Word-processing software makes writing, rewriting, editing, correcting, arranging, and rearranging words convenient. Database software enables computer users to organize and retrieve lists, facts, and inventories, each of which may include thousands of items. Graphics software lets you draw and create images.
Desktop publishing software allow people to arrange photos, pictures, and words on a page before any printing is done. With desktop publishing and word-processing software, there is no need for cutting and pasting layouts. Entire books can be written and formatted by the author. The printed copy or even just a computer disk with the file can be delivered to a traditional printer without the need to reenter all the words on a typesetting machine.
Software for games can turn a computer into a spaceship, a battlefield, or an ancient city. As computers get more powerful, computer games get more realistic and sophisticated.
Communications software allows people to send and receive computer files and faxes over phone lines. Transferring files, sending and receiving data, using data stored on another computer, and electronic mail (e-mail) systems that allow people to receive messages in their own "mailboxes" are some common uses of communications software.
The Y2K hubbub
As the end of the 1990s approached, the world became preoccupied or perhaps even obsessed with the coming of the year 2000, nicknamed "Y2K" (Y for year and 2 times K, a standard designation for a thousand). Many feared that at the stroke of midnight between December 31, 1999, and January 1, 2000, computers and computer-assisted devices would come crashing down.The so-called Y2K bug was a fault built into computer software because early developers of computer programs were uncertain that computers would even have a future. To save on memory and storage wherever possible, these developers built in standardized dates with two digits each for the day, month, and year. For instance, January 2, 1961, was read as 010261. However, this short form could also mean January 2, 1561, or January 2, 2161. 
By the mid-1970s, programmers were beginning to recognize the potential obstacle. They began experimenting with plugging 2000-plus dates into their systems and software; they quickly found the dates did not compute. However, it was not until 1995 that the U.S. Congress, the media, and the public all seemed to "discover" that the end was drawing near. As of 1999, 1.2 trillion lines of computer code needed to be fixed. Left uncorrected, the Y2K bug could have fouled computers that controlled power grids, air traffic, banking systems, and phone networks, among other systems. In response, businesses and governments around the world spent over $200 billion to reprogram and test vulnerable computers.When the year 2000 became a reality, the anticipated computer glitches never materialized: power plants kept working, airplanes kept flying, and nuclear missiles were kept on the ground. Problems that did arise were minor and were quickly fixed with hardly anyone noticing. There were many other added benefits of the money and time spent on the Y2K problem: Businesses and governments upgraded their computers and other equipment. With the help of the World Bank and other Y2K funders, poorer countries were given machines and Internet connections they were allowed to keep. Many U.S. businesses weeded out older machines, combined similar systems, and catalogued their software and computers. In the end, individuals, businesses, and countries learned to work together to overcome a common problem.
Computer Software Security
Computer software security refers to the use of software to prevent damage to computer files, programs, and operating systems, as well as to monitor a personal computer (PC) or laptop for theft.Anti-virus software. A recommended feature for any computer that is connected to the Internet is software that protects the computer from viruses. Like biological viruses, computer viruses need the machinery of another host, in this case a computer, to make new copies of themselves and infect another host computer. There are upwards of 100,000 known viruses, with new viruses being detected literally every day.
Viruses can enter computers via different routes. A common route is as an attachment to an email. When the email is opened the virus is triggered to disrupt whatever computer code it has been targeted towards. Viruses that target email addresses can distribute themselves to other computer very quickly. An infamous example is the "Love" virus, which infected millions of computers worldwide within hours of its release in May 2000.
There are a wide variety of anti-virus software programs available that will recognize, quarantine and destroy many of these viruses. Anti-virus programs need to be updated frequently (often accomplished automatically "on-line" with some vendors products) to keep pace with the appearance of new viruses.
Theft. Next to viruses, theft represents the biggest security issue for computer users. Various hardware options are designed to lessen the chance of theft. Anti-theft software is also available. There are several software programs that aim to lessen the usability, and so the appeal, of a stolen computer (particularly laptop computers). In one setup, a registered identifier number is beamed out when the stolen computer is hooked up to the Internet. Proprietary software can detect and even track the location of the sending computer. Another strategy uses motion-sensing software that is adjusted to the motion patterns of the normal user. A different range of motions that are uncharacteristic of the principle user can trigger an audio alarm. As well, the computer is triggered to shut down and reboot. The user then needs to supply a complicated password to use the computer and even to read the scrambled files (see below) from the hard drive. This protection occurs even when the computer is shut off.Data encryption and ownership. Encryption is the scrambling of the data so as to make the data undecipherable. Encryption programs can scramble the data that is resident in the computer as well as data sent to another computer via email. The message can be reassembled to the original format if the receiving computer has an encryption program installed. 
With contracts being sent over the Internet, the ownership and legal status of such information has become an important issue. Digital signatures can be affixed to a document sent via the Internet to establish ownership, in the same way that a signature on a paper contract is legally binding. Countries including the United States have sanctioned the use of digital signatures.
Authorization and intrusion. Software programs allow a hierarchy of approvals to be established for access to data. In a company, for example, senior managers can be authorized to view and even manipulate data that more junior personnel do not have access to. Other programs act as guardians of the data, and detect any unauthorized or unusual actions on the computer. 
Computers connected to the Internet are often equipped with software known as a firewall. The firewall functions to monitor incoming transmissions and to restrict those that are deemed suspicious. It is a controlled gateway that limits who and what can pass through. A number of vendors offer firewall programs. Like anti-virus software, these programs can and should be frequently updated, since those who seek to maliciously gain remote access to computers are constantly developing methods to thwart the firewall barrier.
CONSUMER SOFTWARE PIRACY
The unauthorized use, possession, downloading, duplication, distribution, or sale of copyrighted computer software.
copyright infringement is a serious problem for the computer software industry. Programs can be copied easily on a personal computer, thus making detecting and prosecuting infringements of software copyrights extremely difficult. By estimates of the Software Publisher's Association, nearly 25 percent of all software in use in the United States is pirated (acquired through unlawful copying), and domestic and international losses ran to $10.9 billion in 2001 alone. The growth of computer networks, especially the internet, presents further problems by providing the means for the almost effortless transmission of data. In the 1990s, Congress strengthened protections for software, and aggressive litigation by the computer industry targeted corporations, individuals, and counterfeiters in an effort to clamp down on this massive theft. Yet during the early 2000s, law enforcement remained difficult as software pirates turned to new technologies to share files illegally.
The Copyright Act gives exclusive rights to the authors of computer software. Their work is a type of intellectual property, which the law treats differently from tangible property. Software companies own their copyrighted programs even after selling them to consumers. For consumers, buying software is different from buying a car: Purchasers of cars are called owners, whereas purchasers of software are called licensees. Although software buyers own the disc or CD-ROM on which the software is stored, they are entitled to use it in only a specific, limited way. The law provides that manufacturers, as owners of the copyright, retain the exclusive right to reproduce and distribute copies of the software. Consumers, as licensees, do not have the same right. They may only copy the software onto a single computer and make another copy for archival purposes.
Consumers break the law when they make unauthorized copies of software. Whether for profit, free distribution, or personal use, such duplication constitutes copyright infringement. Copyright owners can sue infringers for damages that may include profits made by the infringers, or statutory damages of up to $100,000 for each work infringed. The penalties are more severe when software copying is done
Software Publisher's Association
The Software Publisher's Association (SPA) is an 1,100-member trade group representing the legal interests of U.S. software companies. Founded in 1988, SPA fights copyright infringement from its offices in Washington, D.C., and Paris. SPA is a division of the Software & Information Industry Association (SIIA), which offers rewards of up to $50,000 to individuals who report verifiable corporate end-user piracy to SIIA through the SIIA hotline or through the SIIA Corporate End-User Piracy Internet Report Form. Its chief goal is to eliminate the unauthorized duplication of computer programs.
On December 16, 1997, President bill clinton signed into law the No Electronic Theft (NET) Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-147, 111 Stat.2678. The act was passed to address a loophole in copyright law, which was successfully exploited by a 21-year-old MIT student, David LaMacchia, who escaped federal prosecution for distributing free copyrighted software on the Web. The NET Act punishes software pirates who willfully copy, distribute, and traffic in protected software on the Web whether or not they enjoy a financial gain. David LaMacchia set up a bulletin board on the Internet which he named "Cynosure." LaMacchia then solicited bulletin board correspondents to upload popular software applications such as Excel, WordPerfect, and various computer games such as Sim City. He then transferred the uploaded software to a second encrypted address, named "Cynosure II." Users who had access to the Cynosure password could then download the software. The worldwide traffic generated by the offer of free software attracted the notice of university and federal authorities. During the brief six-week life of Cynosure, software copyright holders claim to have lost one million dollars as a result of the free trafficking of their products. Even though a federal grand jury returned a one-count indictment charging LaMacchia with conspiring with unknown persons to violate the wire-fraud statute, the government could not prosecute under the criminal copyright statute because there was no evidence that LaMacchia made any profit.
SPA efforts are targeted primarily at the U.S. market, where the industry generates approximately 60 percent of its revenues and where, SPA estimates, nearly 85 percent of losses to software piracy occur. Successes in cracking down on infringement have made SPA a major player in copyright law. The organization's enforcement actions netted $14 million in recoveries between 1988 and 1995. Among these were a half-million-dollar settlement against a corporation, resulting from an audit, and a $350,000 settlement in May 1991 from a successful lawsuit against Parametrix, an environmental engineering firm. In 2002, in a case originating from SIIA, Yaroslav Suris, 27, of Brooklyn, New York, was convicted of one felony count of Criminal Infringement of a Copyright, in violation of 17 U.S.C. 506(a)(1) and 18 U.S.C. 2319.Suris was sentenced to two months incarceration, followed by 14 months of home detention. He was also ordered to pay $290,556 in restitution for computer piracy.
In the area of lobbying, SPA has asked Congress for tougher legislation designed to stop copyright infringement over computer networks, especially the Internet. SPA anti-piracy department conducts public education campaigns and distributes auditing software that allows businesses and organizations to ensure that they are following the law.According to SPA, Web framing can be a form of piracy when a viewing window is created for all or a portion of a Web page or a particular piece of content residing on a Web page. Problems with framing typically arise when the manner in which the Web site is framed removes, obscures, or alters navigation tools, links, indicators of source, trademarks, logos, or advertising located on the Website that is framed. Framing of third-party content into another Web page raises many legal issues, including passing off content as one's own, unfair competition, trademark infringement, trademark dilution, misappropriation, and perhaps copyright infringement.
SOFTWARE HOSTING 
The pace of technological evolution is particularly quick in the Information Age. After purchasing new computer systems, consumers soon find them outdated. The same is true for corporate enterprises that invest large sums to purchase and implement new hardware and software solutions, only to find that continual upgrades and modifications are necessary. For reasons like these, in the early 2000s many companies were turning to application service providers (ASPs) for hosted software solutions. ASPs are third-party organizations that host software programs at one or more of their own facilities, and on their own equipment. They charge clients to use these applications remotely, either via the Internet or some other form of network access. 
By using hosted software solutions from ASPs, companies—especially small and medium-sized companies with limited financial means—found a sound alternative to purchasing and implementing applications on their own. This was very important, because in addition to the licensing and product fees associated with software, companies often need to spend additional monies integrating new applications with existing ones, buying special equipment like servers, performing regular maintenance and upgrades, and so on. Depending on the situation, most of these issues are normally handled by ASPs, leaving client companies free to focus on their core business competencies.Although integration with existing systems and compromised security were leading drawbacks, ASPs were growing in popularity because they provided companies with turnkey solutions that enabled them to avoid hassles and enter new markets quickly. They also provided scalability, which was very important for e-commerce companies in an era of constantly fluctuating market conditions. Hosted solutions can be easily scaled up or down, depending on a company's size or situation.
Virtually any software application can be offered on a hosted basis, and those related to e-commerce were especially popular. A February 2001 report from Zona Research, commissioned by the ASP Industry Consortium, found that among those using ASPs, communications, financial/accounting, and e-commerce were the three most popular uses. Other uses included human resources, customer relationship management, project management, education and training, and sales force automation.
The arrangements between clients and ASPs were very diverse in the early 2000s, much like the e-commerce industry itself. While some companies purchased a small number of hosted software applications, others looked to ASPs for total information technology solutions. Furthermore, different fee schedules and payment models existed, ranging from monthly subscription arrangements to ones involving charges per user or per transaction. Some agreements included the simple provision of a hosted application, while more sophisticated arrangements also included customer service and technical support as part of the deal.
In addition to a myriad of arrangements, diversity flourished within the ASP industry itself in terms of the range of ASP models employed. In addition to those companies that offered hosted software as one additional distribution method, "pure-play" ASPs licensed software from many different companies and then offered it as suite of programs for clients. Additionally, some ASPs were quite general, while others offered experience and applications specific to a particular industry. One common thread was that most new software companies were involved with software hosting in some way. According to some industry analysts, beginning in 2000, many venture capitalists were reluctant to or would not provide funding for new software companies that didn't at least offer hosting as an option.
One organization using hosted software in the early 2000s was the Salvation Army, a leading evangelical and social services provider known for its sound fiscal management. The Salvation Army's southern territory, which includes 2,314 centers of operation in 15 states, was able to realize a number of concrete benefits by using hosted applications from ASP ManagedOps Inc. instead of purchasing a new accounting system outright. The hosted solution met the Salvation Army's needs by connecting 1,000 geographically distributed users and enabling them to quickly consolidate financial data. At the same time, it saved them the expense of hiring 50 information-technology professionals to operate the new system. 
The outlook for ASPs and software hosting was very bright in the early 2000s. July 2001 research findings from the Aberdeen Group, which included most of the aforementioned categories in which hosted software is used, projected global ASP revenues would increase from $3 billion to approximately $16 billion by 2005. Findings from IDC Research, released about the same time, projected ASP revenues would climb to $24 billion by 2005, with the United States representing the largest market. Wireless technology was an emerging area for ASPs. Information-Week presented figures from International Data Corp. that estimated spending on wireless access to ASPs would climb to $732 million by 2004. Another sign that ASPs are here to say was the formation of a trade association. With more than 700 members in 30 different countries, the ASP Industry Consortium was a "global advocacy group promoting the application service provider industry by sponsoring research and articulating the strategic and measurable benefits of this delivery model."
Tax Preparation Software 
Faced with a tax code which inevitably changes from year to year, many small business owners choose to use one of the many tax preparation software packages which are now widely available. These packages are available for computers running any of the more popular operating systems—Apple OS, Unix, or Windows—and most use a spreadsheet format. 
The advantages to using tax preparation software are many. First, they result in more complete and accurate returns. The typical paper tax return has an error rate of 20 percent. Because of built-in math calculators and other automatic checks, electronic tax preparation reduces this error rate to less than 1 percent. Tax preparation software packages may also steer the taxpayer toward greater savings or little-known deductions, paying for themselves with the returns they yield. But even if no direct tax savings are realized, many analysts believe that use of the software saves many business owners a considerable amount of time, thus freeing them to use their talents in other business areas. 
Purchasing the software to prepare tax returns, no matter which package is purchased, will undoubtedly be less expensive than hiring an accountant. Of course, a CPA can be creative and intuitive about individual circumstances in a way that a computer program can not. But unless the finances for the year are extremely complicated, the best of these software programs should be sufficient to meet the requirements of most small enterprises. Of course, the old adage "garbage in, garbage out" applies here. A small business owner that is not comfortable with accounting and finance may choose to enlist the aid of an accountant even if the software option seems alluring. Some entrepreneurs prepare the taxes themselves and then have an accountant review and sign off on the results. Using an accountant may also be comforting for some because in the event of an audit, the small business owner will not have to face the IRS without the expert knowledge of the CPA that originally prepared the tax return. 
COMPONENTS OF THE PACKAGES 
Data Entry 
All of the software packages have more than one option for entering data into the IRS-accepted forms. The user can always opt for the simple method of entering figures into the forms without assistance from the program, using the software mainly to double-check figures and calculate final amounts. All of the software packages also have an interview function, which asks easily understandable questions to which the user responds by clicking yes or no boxes. This function specifies which schedules are required by the IRS, and which sections of the basic 1040 and schedules can be bypassed. Depending on the program, there may be a third route—a "fast track" interview, through which the user can select specific parts of the interview to fill out, speeding up the process and avoiding the sections which are not pertinent to the case at hand. 
Many of the programs also have importing features, which allow the user to pull data from other programs directly into the tax preparation. Generally, these work primarily with Quicken and QuickBooks. If the small business owner already uses one of these applications to calculate tax-related expenses, it is relatively quick and easy to transfer information, cutting down on duplicated work. Almost all of the packages also allow the user to import last year's tax information, provided it was prepared with the same package.
Filing
When it comes to methods of filing, most of the packages provide several options for the user to choose between. The forms can be filled out electronically and then printed and mailed to the IRS to be processed in a paper version. Some of the packages offer the abbreviated Form 1040PC, which is also submitted as a hard copy. And some of the packages allow the user to file electronically, although most charge an additional fee for this option (around $10). 
Features and Help 
All of the software packages automatically check for mathematical mistakes and warn of possible errors when questionable data is entered into a field. Most of the programs can offer advice—some from specific tax experts—about how to maximize the return and minimize taxes paid. Some of the programs offer complete IRS tax guides which can be directly accessed, and some offer only abbreviated versions of this information. Another feature often offered in these tax preparation software packages is one that can alert the user to potential audit flags resulting from data entered. Several packages offer a review option after the forms are completed; this option can provide advice on what to do differently to pay fewer taxes the next time around. 
Most software packages include the option to do state tax preparation in addition to the federal forms. Since some packages do not cover all 50 states, it is important when buying the software to be sure that it includes the forms necessary for the state in which one is operating. The state return supplement may be included in the original price or may be priced separately. Prices for the packages range from around $20 to more than $75, plus state supplements and filing fees.
DECIDING WHICH PACKAGE TO USE 
Choosing a package will depend on how complicated the company's tax return is likely to be. A few of the products can manage even very complicated scenarios, while the few at the bottom of the price range tend to be better for simple personal tax returns. For the small business owner, who may be dealing with self-employment taxes, home-work environments, and partnerships, it is probably worthwhile to purchase one of the more detailed programs. As of 2005, the two most popular tax software packages were Turbo Tax by Intuit, and Tax Cut by H&R Block.With the advent of high-speed Internet connections and improved Internet security, more and more tax preparation is taking place online. Growing numbers of small businesses are contracting with application service providers (ASPs) that specialize in tax preparation. ASPs provide tax preparation applications on their Web sites and also maintain huge databases to store clients' data. Users connect to the ASP's remote computer over the Internet, access their files with a password, and use the software provided to prepare their taxes online.
Operating systems
Common features
Process management
Interrupts
Memory management
File system
Device drivers
Networking (TCP/IP, UDP)
Security (Process/Memory protection)
I/O
An operating system (OS) is a set of programs that manages computer hardware resources, and provides common services for application software. The operating system is the most important type of system software in a computer system. Without an operating system, a user cannot run an application program on their computer, unless the application program is self booting.Time-sharing operating systems schedule tasks for efficient use of the system and may also include accounting for cost allocation of processor time, mass storage, printing, and other resources.For hardware functions such as input and output and memory allocation, the operating system acts as an intermediary between application programs and the computer hardware,although the application code is usually executed directly by the hardware and will frequently call the OS or be interrupted by it. Operating systems are found on almost any device that contains a computer—from cellular phones and video game consoles to supercomputers and web servers.Examples of popular modern operating systems include Linux, Android, iOS, Mac OS X, and Microsoft Windows.
Types
Real-time A real-time operating system is a multitasking operating system that aims at executing real-time applications. Real-time operating systems often use specialized scheduling algorithms so that they can achieve a deterministic nature of behavior. The main objective of real-time operating systems is their quick and predictable response to events. They have an event-driven or time-sharing design and often aspects of both. An event-driven system switches between tasks based on their priorities or external events while time-sharing operating systems switch tasks based on clock interrupts. Multi-user vs. Single-user A multi-user operating system allows multiple users to access a computer system concurrently. Time-sharing system can be classified as multi-user systems as they enable a multiple user access to a computer through the sharing of time. Single-user operating systems, as opposed to a multi-user operating system, are usable by a single user at a time. Being able to have multiple accounts on a Windows operating system does not make it a multi-user system. Rather, only the network administrator is the real user. But for a Unix-like operating system, it is possible for two users to login at a time and this capability of the OS makes it a multi-user operating system. Multi-tasking vs. Single-tasking When only a single program is allowed to run at a time, the system is grouped under a single-tasking system. However, when the operating system allows the execution of multiple tasks at one time, it is classified as a multi-tasking operating system. Multi-tasking can be of two types: pre-emptive or co-operative. In pre-emptive multitasking, the operating system slices the CPU time and dedicates one slot to each of the programs. Unix-like operating systems such as Solaris and Linux support pre-emptive multitasking. Cooperative multitasking is achieved by relying on each process to give time to the other processes in a defined manner. MS Windows prior to Windows 2000 used to support cooperative multitasking. Distributed A distributed operating system manages a group of independent computers and makes them appear to be a single computer. The development of networked computers that could be linked and communicate with each other, gave rise to distributed computing. Distributed computations are carried out on more than one machine. When computers in a group work in cooperation, they make a distributed system. Embedded Embedded operating systems are designed to be used in embedded computer systems. They are designed to operate on small machines like PDAs with less autonomy. They are able to operate with a limited number of resources. They are very compact and extremely efficient by design. Windows CE and Minix 3 are some examples of embedded operating systems.
Summary 
Early computers were built to perform a series of single tasks, like a calculator. Operating systems did not exist in their modern and more complex forms until the early 1960s.[4] Some operating system features were developed in the 1950s, such as monitor programs that could automatically run different application programs in succession to speed up processing. Hardware features were added that enabled use of runtime libraries, interrupts, and parallel processing. When personal computers by companies such as Apple Inc., Atari, IBM and Amiga became popular in the 1980s, vendors added operating system features that had previously become widely used on mainframe and mini computers. Later, many features such as graphical user interface were developed specifically for personal computer operating systems.An operating system consists of many parts. One of the most important components is the kernel, which controls low-level processes that the average user usually cannot see: it controls how memory is read and written, the order in which processes are executed, how information is received and sent by devices like the monitor, keyboard and mouse, and decides how to interpret information received from networks. The user interface is a component that interacts with the computer user directly, allowing them to control and use programs. The user interface may be graphical with icons and a desktop, or textual, with a command line. Application programming interfaces provide services and code libraries that let applications developers write modular code reusing well defined programming sequences in user space libraries or in the operating system itself. Which features are considered part of the operating system is defined differently in various operating systems. For example, Microsoft Windows considers its user interface to be part of the operating system, while many versions of Linux do not.
Memory management 
Among other things, a multiprogramming operating system kernel must be responsible for managing all system memory which is currently in use by programs. This ensures that a program does not interfere with memory already used by another program. Since programs time share, each program must have independent access to memory. 
Cooperative memory management, used by many early operating systems, assumes that all programs make voluntary use of the kernel's memory manager, and do not exceed their allocated memory. This system of memory management is almost never seen any more, since programs often contain bugs which can cause them to exceed their allocated memory. If a program fails, it may cause memory used by one or more other programs to be affected or overwritten. Malicious programs or viruses may purposefully alter another program's memory, or may affect the operation of the operating system itself. With cooperative memory management, it takes only one misbehaved program to crash the system. 
Memory protection enables the kernel to limit a process' access to the computer's memory. Various methods of memory protection exist, including memory segmentation and paging. All methods require some level of hardware support which doesn't exist in all computers. 
In both segmentation and paging, certain protected mode registers specify to the CPU what memory address it should allow a running program to access. Attempts to access other addresses will trigger an interrupt which will cause the CPU to re-enter supervisor mode, placing the kernel in charge. This is called a segmentation violation or Seg-V for short, and since it is both difficult to assign a meaningful result to such an operation, and because it is usually a sign of a misbehaving program, the kernel will generally resort to terminating the offending program, and will report the error.
Windows 3.1-Me had some level of memory protection, but programs could easily circumvent the need to use it. A general protection fault would be produced, indicating a segmentation violation had occurred; however, the system would often crash anyway.
Multitasking 
Main articles: Computer multitasking and Process management  
Further information: Context switch, Preemptive multitasking, and Cooperative multitasking 
Multitasking refers to the running of multiple independent computer programs on the same computer; giving the appearance that it is performing the tasks at the same time. Since most computers can do at most one or two things at one time, this is generally done via time-sharing, which means that each program uses a share of the computer's time to execute. 
An operating system kernel contains a piece of software called a scheduler which determines how much time each program will spend executing, and in which order execution control should be passed to programs. Control is passed to a process by the kernel, which allows the program access to the CPU and memory. Later, control is returned to the kernel through some mechanism, so that another program may be allowed to use the CPU. This so-called passing of control between the kernel and applications is called a context switch. 
An early model which governed the allocation of time to programs was called cooperative multitasking. In this model, when control is passed to a program by the kernel, it may execute for as long as it wants before explicitly returning control to the kernel. This means that a malicious or malfunctioning program may not only prevent any other programs from using the CPU, but it can hang the entire system if it enters an infinite loop. 
Modern operating systems extend the concepts of application preemption to device drivers and kernel code, so that the operating system has preemptive control over internal run-times as well.
The philosophy governing preemptive multitasking is that of ensuring that all programs are given regular time on the CPU. This implies that all programs must be limited in how much time they are allowed to spend on the CPU without being interrupted. To accomplish this, modern operating system kernels make use of a timed interrupt. A protected mode timer is set by the kernel which triggers a return to supervisor mode after the specified time has elapsed. 
On many single user operating systems cooperative multitasking is perfectly adequate, as home computers generally run a small number of well tested programs. Windows NT was the first version of Microsoft Windows which enforced preemptive multitasking, but it didn't reach the home user market until Windows XP (since Windows NT was targeted at professionals).
Device drivers 
Main article: Device driver 
A device driver is a specific type of computer software developed to allow interaction with hardware devices. Typically this constitutes an interface for communicating with the device, through the specific computer bus or communications subsystem that the hardware is connected to, providing commands to and/or receiving data from the device, and on the other end, the requisite interfaces to the operating system and software applications. It is a specialized hardware-dependent computer program which is also operating system specific that enables another program, typically an operating system or applications software package or computer program running under the operating system kernel, to interact transparently with a hardware device, and usually provides the requisite interrupt handling necessary for any necessary asynchronous time-dependent hardware interfacing needs.The key design goal of device drivers is abstraction. Every model of hardware (even within the same class of device) is different. Newer models also are released by manufacturers that provide more reliable or better performance and these newer models are often controlled differently. Computers and their operating systems cannot be expected to know how to control every device, both now and in the future. To solve this problem, operating systems essentially dictate how every type of device should be controlled. The function of the device driver is then to translate these operating system mandated function calls into device specific calls. In theory a new device, which is controlled in a new manner, should function correctly if a suitable driver is available. This new driver will ensure that the device appears to operate as usual from the operating system's point of view. 
Under versions of Windows before Vista and versions of Linux before 2.6, all driver execution was co-operative, meaning that if a driver entered an infinite loop it would freeze the system. More recent revisions of these operating systems incorporate kernel preemption, where the kernel interrupts the driver to give it tasks, and then separates itself from the process until it receives a response from the device driver, or gives it more tasks to do. 
Networking 
Currently most operating systems support a variety of networking protocols, hardware, and applications for using them. This means that computers running dissimilar operating systems can participate in a common network for sharing resources such as computing, files, printers, and scanners using either wired or wireless connections. Networks can essentially allow a computer's operating system to access the resources of a remote computer to support the same functions as it could if those resources were connected directly to the local computer. This includes everything from simple communication, to using networked file systems or even sharing another computer's graphics or sound hardware. Some network services allow the resources of a computer to be accessed transparently, such as SSH which allows networked users direct access to a computer's command line interface. 
Client/server networking allows a program on a computer, called a client, to connect via a network to another computer, called a server. Servers offer (or host) various services to other network computers and users. These services are usually provided through ports or numbered access points beyond the server's network address[disambiguation needed]. Each port number is usually associated with a maximum of one running program, which is responsible for handling requests to that port. A daemon, being a user program, can in turn access the local hardware resources of that computer by passing requests to the operating system kernel. 
Many operating systems support one or more vendor-specific or open networking protocols as well, for example, SNA on IBM systems, DECnet on systems from Digital Equipment Corporation, and Microsoft-specific protocols (SMB) on Windows. Specific protocols for specific tasks may also be supported such as NFS for file access. Protocols like ESound, or esd can be easily extended over the network to provide sound from local applications, on a remote system's sound hardware. 
Security 
Main article: Computer security 
A computer being secure depends on a number of technologies working properly. A modern operating system provides access to a number of resources, which are available to software running on the system, and to external devices like networks via the kernel.The operating system must be capable of distinguishing between requests which should be allowed to be processed, and others which should not be processed. While some systems may simply distinguish between "privileged" and "non-privileged", systems commonly have a form of requester identity, such as a user name. To establish identity there may be a process of authentication. Often a username must be quoted, and each username may have a password. Other methods of authentication, such as magnetic cards or biometric data, might be used instead. In some cases, especially connections from the network, resources may be accessed with no authentication at all (such as reading files over a network share). Also covered by the concept of requester identity is authorization; the particular services and resources accessible by the requester once logged into a system are tied to either the requester's user account or to the variously configured groups of users to which the requester belongs. 
In addition to the allow/disallow model of security, a system with a high level of security will also offer auditing options. These would allow tracking of requests for access to resources (such as, "who has been reading this file?"). Internal security, or security from an already running program is only possible if all possibly harmful requests must be carried out through interrupts to the operating system kernel. If programs can directly access hardware and resources, they cannot be secured. 
External security involves a request from outside the computer, such as a login at a connected console or some kind of network connection. External requests are often passed through device drivers to the operating system's kernel, where they can be passed onto applications, or carried out directly. Security of operating systems has long been a concern because of highly sensitive data held on computers, both of a commercial and military nature. The United States Government Department of Defense (DoD) created the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) which is a standard that sets basic requirements for assessing the effectiveness of security. This became of vital importance to operating system makers, because the TCSEC was used to evaluate, classify and select computer systems being considered for the processing, storage and retrieval of sensitive or classified information. 
Network services include offerings such as file sharing, print services, email, web sites, and file transfer protocols (FTP), most of which can have compromised security. At the front line of security are hardware devices known as firewalls or intrusion detection/prevention systems. At the operating system level, there are a number of software firewalls available, as well as intrusion detection/prevention systems. Most modern operating systems include a software firewall, which is enabled by default. A software firewall can be configured to allow or deny network traffic to or from a service or application running on the operating system. Therefore, one can install and be running an insecure service, such as Telnet or FTP, and not have to be threatened by a security breach because the firewall would deny all traffic trying to connect to the service on that port. 
An alternative strategy, and the only sandbox strategy available in systems that do not meet the Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements, is the operating system not running user programs as native code, but instead either emulates a processor or provides a host for a p-code based system such as Java. 
Internal security is especially relevant for multi-user systems; it allows each user of the system to have private files that the other users cannot tamper with or read. Internal security is also vital if auditing is to be of any use, since a program can potentially bypass the operating system, inclusive of bypassing auditing.

