SCPRPIONS HOROSCOP
Scorpios are the most intense, profound, powerful characters in the zodiac. Even when they appear self-controlled and calm there is a seething intensity of emotional energy under the placid exterior. They are like the volcano not far under the surface of a calm sea, it may burst into eruption at any moment. But those of us who are particularly perceptive will be aware of the harnessed aggression, the immense forcefulness, magnetic intensity, and often strangely hypnotic personality under the tranquil, but watchful composure of Scorpio. In conventional social gatherings they are pleasant to be with, thoughtful in conversation, dignified, and reserved, yet affable and courteous; they sometimes possess penetrating eyes which make their shyer companions feel naked and defenseless before them.In their everyday behavior they give the appearance of being withdrawn from the center of activity, yet those who know them will recognize the watchfulness that is part of their character. They need great self-discipline, because they are able to recognize the qualities in themselves that make them different from other humans, and to know their utterly conventional natures can be used for great good, or great evil. Their tenacity and willpower are immense, their depth of character and passionate conviction overwhelming, yet they are deeply sensitive and easily moved by their emotions. Their sensitivity, together with a propensity for extreme likes and dislikes make them easily hurt, quick to detect insult or injury to themselves (often when none is intended) and easily aroused to ferocious anger. This may express itself in such destructive speech or action that they make lifelong enemies by their outspokenness, for they find it difficult not to be overly critical of anything or anyone to whom they take a dislike.They can harness their abundant energy constructively, tempering their self-confidence with shrewdness and their ambition with magnanimity toward others provided they like them. They relate to fellow workers only as leaders and can be blunt to those they dislike to the point of cruelty. In fact they are not above expressing vindictiveness in deliberate cruelty. They are too demanding, too unforgiving of faults in others, perhaps because they are not aware of the shortcomings within themselves, and extravagantly express their self-disgust in unreasonable resentment against their fellows. They do, however, make excellent friends, provided that their companions do nothing to impugn the honor of which Scorpios are very jealous. Part of the negative side of the Scorpio nature is a tendency to discard friends once they cease to be useful, but the decent native is aware of, and fights this tendency.They are fortunate in that their strong reasoning powers are tempered with imagination and intuition, and these gifts, together with critical perception and analytical capacity, can enable the Scorpions to penetrate to profundities beyond the average. They have a better chance of becoming geniuses than the natives of any other sign.But charismatic "twice-born" characters such as they can sink into the extremes of depravity if they take the wrong path, and the intensity of their nature exaggerates their harmful tendencies into vices far greater than the normal.Rebelliousness against all conventions, political extremism to the point where hatred of the Establishment makes them utterly unscrupulous terrorists. Brooding resentment, aggressive and sadistic brutality, total arrogance, morbid jealousy, extreme volatility of temperament, these are some of their vices. At the other extreme is the procrastinator, the man or woman who is capable of so much that they do nothing and become indolent and self-indulgent, requiring extravagant praise and flattery from those whom they make their cronies.Being so gifted, they can find fulfillment in many employments. Their inner intensity can result in the ice-cold self-control and detachment of the surgeon, the concentration of the research scientist, and the heroism of the soldier. Any profession in which analysis, investigation, research, dealing with practicalities, and the solving of mysteries are relevant, can appeal to them. So police and detective work, espionage and counterespionage, the law, physics or psychology may attract them, and they can become masters of the written and spoken word. They may be most persuasive orators and find fulfillment as diplomats or preachers and, if they make the Church their profession, their inner intensity can express itself in the spiritual fervor of the mystic or the thaumaturgy.The Scorpion is one intense little creature, with enough poison in its own tail to disable or kill a much larger opponent. But the problem with this kind of built-in biological weaponry is that it must be mastered in order to be used most effectively. You Scorpios can use your "stinger" for self-defense, using your powerful emotional awareness to render your opponent harmless. But there is a sexual component of poisonous tail also, and until Scorpio learns to control those strong urges, Scorpio may find yourself in uncomfortable situations.Scorpio is the only sign that has three animal totems. First, there is the well-known Scorpion with its active tail. Second, as the Scorpio learns to master its passion and hold its instincts at bay, it changes into the Eagle. The Eagle has more perspective, for it flies high above the surface of circumstances, swooping down with its power only to kill prey for food. In its third form, the Scorpion becomes the always-peaceful dove. The real meaning of Scorpio is thus shown. Scorpio is about metamorphosis. Scorpios transform the painful poisons of possessive passion into a higher consciousness based on universal love.The Scorpio motto might be "What is hidden is more interesting than what is obvious." You are the detectives of the zodiac. Your magnetic personality draws others to you. But you can also be secretive yourself, for you learn early on that when you express everything, others may be scared by the power of your feelings. You desperately want to have someone to merge with your feelings, but can become cold and withdrawn when hurt in love. You have the magic to light up the dark, but sometimes you would benefit by looking at the positive side of things rather than going into the darkness at all.Element: Water Astrologically, the water element symbolizes emotion. Water runs deep; it seeks its own level and will flow until it has found it. The cycle of water is endless with the snows falling in the mountains and melting. The mountain streams join to make the great rivers that run to the sea. The tides and currents churn the oceans. Similarly, our feelings are flowing as they connect the present with past experiences. Sometimes the waters are so deep that we cannot put words to our feelings. The water of Scorpio is fixed and frozen, but it is a mistake to think that ice doesn't flow. It does flow -- and with great power. Think of a glacier, moving so very slowly, yet with enough power to flatten a forest or even a mountain.Eighth House: Transformation Since the Second House is the House of Possessions, the Eighth House opposite it, is about what other people have. This can include sexual issues, for they usually involve another person. It is also about the ultimate transformation -- death -- but not necessarily your own. It could be said that the Eighth House is what we don't know and what we cannot understand. It is surely a House of Hidden Power.Key Planet: Pluto Pluto is the Lord of the Underworld. If this sounds scary, it demands a bit more explanation, for Pluto symbolizes everything that is beneath our consciousness. This isn't about the Hell where we are punished. Rather, it is the Hell that William Blake describes as a place "so beautiful that it would torment an angel to insanity." As the key planet for Scorpio, Pluto is intense and powerful, representing those things that we don't or can't understand. And it is from these hidden Plutonic spaces that magical transformations arise. This scorpio horoscope section contains lucky day for scorpio, lucky number for scorpio, lucky color for scorpio, lucky gems for scorpio, lucky talisman for scorpio, positive qualities for scorpio, negative qualities for scorpio and scorpio traits. THE Zodiacal Sign of Scorpio commences on October 21st, but for seven days it does not come into its full power until on or about October 28th. Prom this date onwards it is in full strength until November "20th and is then for seven days gradually losing its strength on account of becoming overlapped by the "cusp" of the incoming sign - Sagittarius. 
Symbols for Scorpio are the scorpion, a ground-dwelling killer with a poisonous sting in its tail and the eagle, a far-seeing predator soaring above petty problems into the spiritual sky. People born in this section of the year seem to be filled with inherent contradiction. The best and the worst seem to make this period their chosen battlefield.Up to nearly twenty years of age they are usually extremely pore-minded, virtuous, and religious, but once their nature is roused they are often found to swing in the opposite direction. At the same time the greatest saints have been found in this period.People who were born in this section of the year have great magnetic power, and as speakers appeal to the emotions and sentiments of their public more than to logic, but they sway their audiences as they choose. They are the searchers of the zodiac and have an insatiable desire for knowledge on every level. From spiritual and intellectual revelations, these people want the edge on everybody else.In dangerous situations and in sudden crises they remain cool and very determined. Many of the very best surgeons have been found in this period. Representatives of this sign often become workaholics. They drive themselves hard, and usually drive others unmercifully. They despise weakness in themselves or in others.Their worst fault is that they are too adaptable to the people with whom they come in contact.They always lead double lives one for the eyes of the world and another for themselves.In business and politics they have clever ideas, but they are best as advisers of others. One of their main problems is that they have a habit to "put off things until tomorrow.Such people usually excel in settling other people's quarrels and bringing enemies together to shake hands.They have incredible personal magnetism, so no other class of people makes more friends or have more enemies than those born in this period, but their strong personality carries them through like a resistless wave.The sex quality plays a vital part in their lives. The women attract men and the men attract women; but in cases where the will and ambition are dominant these people can control their strong sex-natures. Relationships are a kind of mystery for them so anyone involved with them must prepare for profound changes in themselves, their mysterious partner and the relationship itself. Usually these people are interested in marriage and long-term commitment. To an avarage Scorpio, love is an intensely passionate and enduring emotion that may be directed at one person only.People in this Sign should, above all, be encouraged to have ambition, for it is the one thing that will save them; for it they mil make any sacrifice or deny themselves any pleasure, and so accomplish more work than any other class. In general they need to dominate relationships and rarely display their true feelings even at the most open and communicative moments. Although this people may not intentionally set out to be mysterious, they manage to appear enigmatic anyway. They hate being crossed or manipulated, and can react to such treatment with sarcasm and vengefulness. In their home life the men are inclined to be dogmatic, and expect to rule; but their influence over women is so great that they are almost always forgiven.Sooner or later, they generally become interested in occult matters, they readily develop unusual clairvoyant powers, and quite often gain fame and distinction as writers, painters or poets. They are natural philosophers, deep students of Nature, and observe and analyze other persons' characters better than any other class.Usually persons born in this sign have, or make, two sources of income. They often have to go through a great deal of trouble, difficulty and sooner or later success and fame nearly always find them. 
Today horoscopeTomorrow horoscopeWeekly horoscopeMonthly horoscope Scorpio - The Sign of the Scorpion.When we speak about the representatives of the Scorpio's sign , we recollect unusual people with difficult or even tragical destiny. Even if Scorpio by birth is on the top of a social ladder, he often doomed to live suffering as it was, for example, with the wife of French king, Louis. She was hanged. There is such quality incorporated in the personality of this sign that is not peculiar for any other. It is self-destruction. That is strange enough, but it is a way of his development and realizations in this life.These people as a rule only has a few friends and expects loyalty from them. They will find their most lasting friendships with people born in their own period and between June 21 and July 20-27, from February 19 to March 20-27. 
These people as a rule are very slight and thin in their early years, but put on weight and are inclined to corpulence after reaching middle life. Scorpio rules the reproductive organs and excretory system, so those with Scorpio active in their charts suffer headaches, infections and fevers, along with various illnesses to do with what used to be called the secret parts. Later the heart is also inclined to be their weakest organ, and they should be careful not to overstrain it in exercise, or in work. 
The colors most suitable for persons of this period are all shades of crimson and blue 
The birth stones for this period are the turquoise, the ruby, and all red stones. 
Where is life taking you? Is there a higher power at work? A passionate lover? Find out with Free astrology reading.The 2012 year is the year of the water Dragon.
Is 2012 Your Number? Get a free sample Numerology One-Year Forecast.  
 › Add to FavoritesGoto HoroscopeZodiac SignsDescription of Scorpio signMarch 21 to April 20 - Aries sign description and personality. The first zodiacal sign, it is representing the beginning of all things in the world.April 21 to May 21 - Taurus is the second sign of the zodiac, having a fixed earth classification and ruled by the planet Venus.May 22 to June 21 - Gemini is the third sign of the zodiac, having a mutable air classification and ruled by the planet Mercury.
June 22 to July 22 - Cancer is the fourth sign of the zodiac, having a cardinal water classification and ruled by the moon.July 23 to August 23 - Leo is the fifth sign of the zodiac, having a fixed fire classification and ruled by the sun.
August 24 to September 22 - Virgo is the sixth sign of the zodiac, having a mutable earth classification and ruled by the planet Mercury.September 23 to October 22 - Libra is the seventh sign of the zodiac, having a cardinal air classification and ruled by the planet Venus.October 23 to November 21 - Scorpio is the eighth sign of the zodiac, having a fixed water classification and ruled by the planets Mars and Pluto.
November 22 to December 21 - Sagittarius is the ninth sign of the zodiac, having a mutable fire classification and ruled by the planet JupiterDecember 22 to January 20 - Capricorn is the tenth sign of the zodiac, having a cardinal earth classification and ruled by the planet Saturn.January 21 to February 19 - Aquarius is the eleventh sign of the zodiac, having a fixed air classification and ruled by the planets Saturn and Uranus.February 20 to March 20 - Pisces is the twelfth sign of the zodiac, having a mutable water classification and ruled by the planets Jupiter and Neptune.
Goto Horoscope home page. Daily, weekly and monthly horoscope for each zodiacal sign. Astrological predictions showing the positions of the planets at a particular time and place.Add this site to your favorite links. Goto Horoscope - guide to your personality based on astrology and law of nature.Daily horoscope and free astrology report - the configuration of the planets, the sun, and the moon in the sky at a particular moment.
Meaning of 12 signs of the Zodiac. Because of their many desirable qualities, sometimes it may be difficult to understand all their possibilities.Scorpio meaning. Retreating into a protective shell is fever solution; Scorpio should make a conscious effort to incorporate their social tricks with their personal emotions.THE Zodiacal Sign of Scorpio commences on October 21st, but for seven days it does not come into its full power until on or about October 28th. Prom this date onwards it is in full strength until November "20th and is then for seven days gradually losing its strength on account of becoming overlapped by the "cusp" of the incoming sign - Sagittarius. Symbols for Scorpio are the scorpion, a ground-dwelling killer with a poisonous sting in its tail and the eagle, a far-seeing predator soaring above petty problems into the spiritual sky.People born in this section of the year seem to be filled with inherent contradiction. The best and the worst seem to make this period their chosen battlefield.Up to nearly twenty years of age they are usually extremely pore-minded, virtuous, and religious, but once their nature is roused they are often found to swing in the opposite direction. At the same time the greatest saints have been found in this period.People who were born in this section of the year have great magnetic power, and as speakers appeal to the emotions and sentiments of their public more than to logic, but they sway their audiences as they choose. They are the searchers of the zodiac and have an insatiable desire for knowledge on every level. From spiritual and intellectual revelations, these people want the edge on everybody else.In dangerous situations and in sudden crises they remain cool and very determined. Many of the very best surgeons have been found in this period. Representatives of this sign often become workaholics. They drive themselves hard, and usually drive others unmercifully. They despise weakness in themselves or in others.Their worst fault is that they are too adaptable to the people with whom they come in contact.They always lead double lives one for the eyes of the world and another for themselves.In business and politics they have clever ideas, but they are best as advisers of others. One of their main problems is that they have a habit to "put off things until tomorrow.Such people usually excel in settling other people's quarrels and bringing enemies together to shake hands.They have incredible personal magnetism, so no other class of people makes more friends or have more enemies than those born in this period, but their strong personality carries them through like a resistless wave.The sex quality plays a vital part in their lives. The women attract men and the men attract women; but in cases where the will and ambition are dominant these people can control their strong sex-natures. Relationships are a kind of mystery for them so anyone involved with them must prepare for profound changes in themselves, their mysterious partner and the relationship itself. Usually these people are interested in marriage and long-term commitment. To an avarage Scorpio, love is an intensely passionate and enduring emotion that may be directed at one person only.People in this Sign should, above all, be encouraged to have ambition, for it is the one thing that will save them; for it they mil make any sacrifice or deny themselves any pleasure, and so accomplish more work than any other class.In general they need to dominate relationships and rarely display their true feelings even at the most open and communicative moments. Although this people may not intentionally set out to be mysterious, they manage to appear enigmatic anyway. They hate being crossed or manipulated, and can react to such treatment with sarcasm and vengefulness.In their home life the men are inclined to be dogmatic, and expect to rule; but their influence over women is so great that they are almost always forgiven.Sooner or later, they generally become interested in occult matters, they readily develop unusual clairvoyant powers, and quite often gain fame and distinction as writers, painters or poets. They are natural philosophers, deep students of Nature, and observe and analyze other persons' characters better than any other class.Usually persons born in this sign have, or make, two sources of income. They often have to go through a great deal of trouble, difficulty and sooner or later success and fame nearly always find them.Today horoscopeTomorrow horoscopeWeekly horoscopeMonthly horoscope Scorpio - The Sign of the Scorpion When we speak about the representatives of the Scorpio's sign , we recollect unusual people with difficult or even tragical destiny. Even if Scorpio by birth is on the top of a social ladder, he often doomed to live suffering as it was, for example, with the wife of French king, Louis. She was hanged. There is such quality incorporated in the personality of this sign that is not peculiar for any other. It is self-destruction. That is strange enough, but it is a way of his development and realizations in this life. 
FriendsThese people as a rule only has a few friends and expects loyalty from them. They will find their most lasting friendships with people born in their own period and between June 21 and July 20-27, from February 19 to March 20-27.Health These people as a rule are very slight and thin in their early years, but put on weight and are inclined to corpulence after reaching middle life. Scorpio rules the reproductive organs and excretory system, so those with Scorpio active in their charts suffer headaches, infections and fevers, along with various illnesses to do with what used to be called the secret parts. Later the heart is also inclined to be their weakest organ, and they should be careful not to overstrain it in exercise, or in work. 
ColorThe colors most suitable for persons of this period are all shades of crimson and blue Stones The birth stones for this period are the turquoise, the ruby, and all red stones.Fortunetelling Where is life taking you? Is there a higher power at work? A passionate lover? Find out with Free astrology reading.The 2012 year is the year of the water Dragon.Is 2012 Your Number? Get a free sample Numerology One-Year Forecast.  
Add to FavoritesGoto HoroscopeZodiac SignsDescription of Scorpio signMarch 21 to April 20 - Aries sign description and personality. The first zodiacal sign, it is representing the beginning of all things in the world.April 21 to May 21 - Taurus is the second sign of the zodiac, having a fixed earth classification and ruled by the planet Venus.May 22 to June 21 - Gemini is the third sign of the zodiac, having a mutable air classification and ruled by the planet Mercury.June 22 to July 22 - Cancer is the fourth sign of the zodiac, having a cardinal water classification and ruled by the moon.July 23 to August 23 - Leo is the fifth sign of the zodiac, having a fixed fire classification and ruled by the sun.August 24 to September 22 - Virgo is the sixth sign of the zodiac, having a mutable earth classification and ruled by the planet Mercury.September 23 to October 22 - Libra is the seventh sign of the zodiac, having a cardinal air classification and ruled by the planet Venus.October 23 to November 21 - Scorpio is the eighth sign of the zodiac, having a fixed water classification and ruled by the planets Mars and Pluto.November 22 to December 21 - Sagittarius is the ninth sign of the zodiac, having a mutable fire classification and ruled by the planet Jupiter.December 22 to January 20 - Capricorn is the tenth sign of the zodiac, having a cardinal earth classification and ruled by the planet Saturn.January 21 to February 19 Aquarius is the eleventh sign of the zodiac, having a fixed air classification and ruled by the planets Saturn and Uranus.February 20 to March 20 - Pisces is the twelfth sign of the zodiac, having a mutable water classification and ruled by the planets Jupiter and Neptune.Goto Horoscope home page. Daily, weekly and monthly horoscope for each zodiacal sign. Astrological predictions showing the positions of the planets at a particular time and place.Add this site to your favorite links. Goto Horoscope - guide to your personality based on astrology and law of nature.Daily horoscope and free astrology report - the configuration of the planets, the sun, and the moon in the sky at a particular moment.Meaning of 12 signs of the Zodiac. Because of their many desirable qualities, sometimes it may be difficult to understand all their possibilities.Scorpio meaning. Retreating into a protective shell is fever solution; Scorpio should make a conscious effort to incorporate their social tricks with their personal emotions.The sound of wedding bells could still be ringing for you but someone is too busy to notice right now. You will have to be very practical with your new plans when you finally figure out what they are in about three weeks. By then you could take the plunge and even decide to secretly elope. You have been doing quite a bit of traveling lately but after this week it begins to taper off and get back to normal.Vrishchika ( Scorpio ), the eight sign in the Rashichakra, is the deepest and most intense of any of the signs. Serious, fearless, stubborn at times, intense and passionate, Jatakas of this sign are not to be taken lightly. They live life on their own terms and are in ultimate control of their destiny.Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) are serious in their mission to learn about others: they will concentrate on the essential questions, gleaning the secrets that lie within, travelling in a world of black and white with little use for grey. They have an insatiable curiosity, which rouses their investigative spirits. These people love to probe and know how to get to the bottom of things. In this their keen sense of intuition certainly helps. They will promote their agenda and ensure that things go forward. This is often overbearing for others (it can be) and even self-destructive. However like the mascot, they too have tremendous regenerative powers and promptly re-grow its lost tail. Undaunted, the Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) charge ahead, determined to succeed.Even though the Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) will work very hard, if probed, their complex and secretive nature makes them suspicious and they will clam up and withdraw further. But at the same time they are also surprisingly resourceful. Vrishchika ( Scorpio ) is ruled by the planets Mangal (Mars) and Pluto - the God of war and the God of the underworld, respectively.
Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) are unconcerned with the superficial. Their immense intuition gives them an insight into others' lives. They are very passionate and intense in everything they do which often inspires fear or awe in others. They possess the overwhelming ability to strip away all veneer to get to the core of any issue. They can be very loyal friends, at the same time, they also have the making of fantastic enemies. The desire to avenge or take revenge or get even runs deep in them - and the hypnotic stare and vital force overwhelms those around them.
Intense, dominating, ruthless, energetic, passionate and committed Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) lead the battle of life with their keen intellect and admirable qualities of patience and creativity. They are definitely not gregarious, social, kind and always ready to please types. However, they are genuine and often above petty gains though not necessarily above conspiracy and manipulation. If such a need arises, they will devote considerable time and energy to develop strategies and plot revenge against the enemies. Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) move with a sense of purpose and possess an inner strength and a great capacity to endure hardships. But their innate masochism enables them to destroy even something that they have nurtured with great care and love. Though they can easily change course if it suits them better, their dynamic, fascinating and often mysterious face draws many towards them.Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) are ideal for the sciences and do extremely well as physicians and surgeons. They also do well as Architecture and mechanics. They make excellent commanders and some excel in fine arts, literature, and journalism. Fame, fortune and success come easily to them. In business too they are able to plan their investments strategies shrewdly towards making big money often losing patience and making it on the sly than honourable means.Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) are perhaps the most mysterious and difficult to understand and often have a love-hate relationship with food. Their planetary combination makes them motivated, penetrating and aware, not missing much, intuitive, probing and much focused on knowing who's who and what's what. Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) need lots of space to move and can lose their temper (and even become vengeful) if someone gets in their way. They make good of given opportunities and convert today's loss into tomorrow's victory.Motto for Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ): still waters run deep. They are also emotional though less likely to show it and guard their secrets well.But once the tempest within the Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) dies down, they regain their determination and loyal posture. They also make subtle manipulation to get what they want, but are powerful and passionate as well, qualities, which serve them well so long these don't deteriorate into self-indulgence or compulsions. They love competition in both work and play drawing great strength from their determination, passion and motivation.Never say die Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) are intense, passionate lovers, who are hard to forget. They instinctively know what their partners want. Sweeping many off with magnetic charm they seldom distinguish between a passing fancy and true love - Involvement is always passionate deal with the Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ). Very jealous over proprietarial rights, Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) make ideal life partner in fellow water signs - Karka ( Cancer ), Vrishchika ( Scorpio ) and Meena ( Pisces ) as they understand Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) the best. The home of the Vrishchikajatakas ( people born under scorpio ) will be comfortable and classy, but Spartan, as they prefer the minimalist style. The scorpions are quite serious in nature mixed with a blend of jealousy. The sign comprises of the last charan of Vishakha, full Anuradha and Jyeshta Nakshatras. The people with this sign are trustworthy, honest, truthful and sincere. They have big teeth, big jaws, fair complexion, medium height and fat body. They are of medium height and possess fat body appearance.They are short tempered, self-confident and courageous people. They normally seek jobs associated with chemicals, army and technology. They are also successful in business. They are violent and do not care for repercussions in scuffles and trifles. They sometimes harm their health by addictions. They use rough language and are straightforward in their speech. They do and finish their work quite fast but irritate others by their nature.They speak less but believe more in action. They are learned, intelligent, and helpful to others and do social work. They may have a thick nose but are attractive. They believe in religion. They are repellent to opposite sex. The early stages of their lives are usually marked with hardships, but destiny shines to them between 32-35 of their age.They are clever in earning. They don't have good relations with their brothers and sisters. They may have scars on hands and legs. They are impatient and love rituals more than truth. Though they are outspoken, a soft heart within them worries about children usually surrounding them.An individual's date and time of birth has been used for thousands of years to foretell their likely destiny in life. A daily horoscope was at one time in our history only available to very important people. In Western Astrology everyone is designated one of the twelve zodiac signs depending on when they are born. Most of us know which Sun sign we are and are aware of the places we can find horoscopes for perusal. We will usually also recognize the typical characteristics associated with our star sign. For example if you are a Scorpio you are intelligent, typically bursting with energy and like to make your own mind up about things. Reading your stars for the day can give advice on how best to direct your energies and thoughts. Recorded planetary movement and known personality traits are used together to assemble a daily horoscope for Scorpio. Planet locations in our Solar System between October the 24th and November the 22nd are believed to reveal the likely happenings in a Scorpio's life. A today horoscope delivers this little bit of planet influenced insight on a day by day basis. It combines Astrologer's recordings of celestial motions and influences during this period with the conventional character of Scorpio. This blend of information is then translated as a general horoscope. For an insight into what the day holds and how to handle it a today horoscope is the ideal consultatory guide. A Scorpio daily horoscope can be sourced from numerous places and is often an everyday feature in lots of newspapers. Both women's and men's magazines usually have a regular spot for horoscopes. Some of the best daily horoscope readings can also be found quickly on the internet. Finding out predictions for the next 24 hours can fill you with optimism and help you smile your way through the day. They can remind you of your finest qualities and discourage you from displaying your worst. They are exceptionally good if you need to arrange a favorable time to do something. You are able to take quick glance at your stars to see if today would be a good day to do it. The classic mannerisms and thoughts of each star sign are considered alongside the plotted activity of the planets. So the content of a Scorpio daily horoscope will be based on both these aspects of astrological input. A representative Scorpio is generally determined in their approach to life but they tend to be a little too emotional occasionally. These good and bad traits will be highlighted within horoscope texts for this particular sign. A Scorpio person is fairly intuitive and so frequently benefits highly from the guidance they acquire from horoscopes. These constant reminders of our behaviors and common tendencies can be extremely useful to keep us aware of our self and how we present to others. A daily horoscope for Scorpio will be focused on and around their passionate but obstinate nature. It will be concentrated on circumstantial likelihoods while including the typified character and usual conduct. It's enlightening news can be sort of personalized and rather informative. Scorpio is sometimes described as a jealous natured person or prone to be a bit secretive. These weaker parts of the personality can be mentioned in a Scorpio daily horoscope and advice may be given on how to avoid their appearance. A daily horoscope sometimes also helps to get a person's emotions in perspective if they could have over reacted to something or someone.Searching for a today horoscope in periodicals or online is easy and available every day of the year. On your birthday is will only take a few minutes to check your daily horoscope for Scorpio to assess the probability of a fabulous day. The today horoscope on this special occasion will more often than not give you a couple of tips to enjoying and getting the most out of your actual birth date. A personal Astrology presentation of your totally unique birthday details can be a fascinating gift to receive. Once reserved only for the elite these individual astrological chartings are now quite easy to arrange and buy. For horoscope enthusiasts they can make a great surprise present. 
Today horoscope readings are unisex in their conversational messages of advice and suitable for adults of all ages. Some people use the unbiased counsel and encouragement in a Scorpio daily horoscope to help them take the day in their stride. It can be a supportive friend in times of need and help a person better understand the world and the people closest to them. A daily horoscope is brilliant for motivation purposes and steering you in the right direction. It can be effective at assisting someone to view their image and get to know themselves and their habits, weak and strong, in a different light. It is just perfect for learning about your individuality and original style. 01 Sep - 07 Sep: - This is a propitious time for new investments as well as fresh gains from existing ones. Auspicious transit of planets shall give you quick results of your efforts put in professional matters. students shall have plenty of new opportunities for jobs. Which one is best that may put you in dilemma? Sportsperson may achieve applause of their good performance. You will spend thoughtfully and make an extra buck on your stock building. You handle everything that comes your way with confidence. This will not only make you very happy but you will also realize that you have actually gained much more. Policeperson might get injured while on duty.08 Sep - 15 Sep: - The first two days of the week there may be some uncertain happenings and activities which may put you in depression take care while driving, pick pocketing, theft, and difference of opinions with colleagues and subordinates in the office / work area. You will spend money to beautify your office or home. In addition to all the hard work that you have put in, there will be times of entertaining with family & friends. There will be heavy expenses, Secret deals and money making opportunities too. Students have to extra careful in their studies. Some love affairs may put them in confusion and disorientation of mind.16 Sep - 22 Sep: - Planetary transition in this week shall improve your status. Some strong desire or wish of yours will be met or fulfilled. Some unexpected huge financial gains on 16 Sept are possible. Yours name, fame and recognition will enhance. Though you Spend money in materialistic pleasures but you are charitable too & help the needy. Writers, publishers and media (print) may be recognized or a written work will get a huge success. On 18th, 19th Sept you will get busy in organizing religious ceremony at home. There will also the settlement of outstanding legal battles. You may also find your lost item back in this week. Enjoy!
23 Sep - 30 Sep: - The family and rituals, spiritual interests will take precedence in the week. You will also explore higher plane of consciousness. Astrologers, Tantric & natives who are related to ceremonial acts will be highly benefited. Psychology, esoteric, occult sciences and life after death will all excite you. Be careful in money transaction and banking formalities. You will spend time in hobbies, fun, gambling and speculation. But postpone the idea of buying a new vehicle in this week. Those, working in abroad may come back to their native place; students shall do better and give you happiness by their satisfying performance.You’ve had your break from reality in by the end of year 2010 and now you’re ready to jump right back into things with both feet in year 2011. You’ll still feel the demands pulling on you but they will be of a different nature. But they will come in handy when you make that big move that is coming up.
If you happen to fall in love this year, there is a high chance you will like that person because you both have so much in common. You feel warmth and coziness in your relationships as now your loved ones can help you a great deal in performing your role and responsibilities. You are likely to have a better control on areas of work and health. Benefits may also come through co-workers or employees. Your get-up-and-go attitude helps you fill emptiness and vagueness with love and compassion. There is emotional reciprocity and sharing and caring occupies most of your time. Also you don’t have to push everything yourself, give others a chance and influence them with your charm.There is harmony all around still your personal happiness would be constantly challenged over issues of failures/mistakes. You may be seeking isolation already and busy finding out “the right way”. The relationships that you forge this year are likely to have mystical/secret elements; perhaps you are not prepared yet to bring them face to face with the world. You are likely to sort through the junk, the burden and keep only those things/people that you truly need. This is the time when you seek a transformed feeling of safety and peace in all your close relationships and you tend to influence everyone with your renewed lifestyle and expressions.So to sum it up, year 2011 will be a turning point in your love life as you seem to be reviewing all your relationships and moving towards a more spiritual side of life. Swallow your pride, embrace your lover and show them just how much they are needed in your life. You don’t have to go it alone. With the right communication and portrayal of your understanding and behavior, it will come back to you two fold creating a stronger bond between you and your loved ones.Characteristics.You have a strong and dominating personality, with strong will power. But this is sometimes misleading as you basically have a kindly disposition, unless you have an ‘enemy’ in which case you are quick-tempered, and vindictive. Generally, you never forget a grudge, and take revenge even after a long time. You do not prefer a frontal attack, and opt for indirect means. Subtle strategies and conspiracies hold a special fascination for you. Therefore, you must be specially beware of Scorpio’s who may happen to be your ‘enemies.’ You are not only subtle, but energetic too. Generally, people around you are quick to note that you have a keen and penetrating intellect, combined with great dynamism. You are also analytical, skilful and patient, and have literary abilities and creative talents. Love Life 
You are considered ‘very sexy’, and are intense lovers, with the attraction being more of physical craving than pure love. It is probable that there may be a tragedy in the first part of your life, and you may marry a second time. If this sorrow is not due to the death of the spouse, it may be connected with the death of some other deeply loved one.Physical Appearance Generally fine boned with a glowing complexion, large eyes, a pert nose and a charming smile, you tend to walk with a gliding movement. Your bodily actions are usually soft and refined instead of being clumsy and ungainly Health 
You are extremely energetic and recuperate very quickly from illness. You need to be careful from these diseases i.e. Bladder disorder, genitor urinary diseases, prostate or menstrual problems, piles are likely. Profession and business 
The most suitable professions for you are those related to music, art and scientific pursuits. You also do well as doctors, particularly, as surgeons in departments of public health. You make good architects, executives in industry, officers in the military and navy, chemists, heads of institutions, mechanical engineers, machinists, sales managers, etc. In journalism and literature, you often succeed as critics. You are shrewd at business matters, and financially, you generally do well. But you like to make a lot of money all at once. 
 


 
 

 




 













