HEPATÝT B
Hepatitis B is an infectious illness caused by hepatitis B virus (HBV) which infects the liver of hominoidea, including humans, and causes an inflammation called hepatitis. Originally known as "serum hepatitis",[1] the disease has caused epidemics in parts of Asia and Africa, and it is endemic in China.[2] About a quarter of the world's population, more than 2 billion people, have been infected with the hepatitis B virus.[3] This includes 350 million chronic carriers of the virus.[4] Transmission of hepatitis B virus results from exposure to infectious blood or body fluids such as semen and vaginal fluids, while viral DNA has been detected in the saliva, tears, and urine of chronic carriers with high titer DNA in serum. Perinatal infection is a major route of infection in endemic (mainly developing) countries.[5] Other risk factors for developing HBV infection include working in a health care setting, transfusions, and dialysis, acupuncture, tattooing, extended overseas travel and residence in an institution. [6] [3][7] However, Hepatitis B viruses cannot be spread by casual contact, such as holding hands, sharing eating utensils or drinking glasses, breast-feeding, kissing, hugging, coughing, or sneezingThe acute illness causes liver inflammation, vomiting, jaundice and rarely, death. Chronic hepatitis B may eventually cause cirrhosis and liver cancer—a fatal disease with very poor response to current chemotherapy.[9] The infection is preventable by vaccinationHepatitis B virus is an hepadnavirus—hepa from hepatotrophic and dna because it is a DNA virus[11]—and it has a circular genome composed of partially double-stranded DNA. The viruses replicate through an RNA intermediate form by reverse transcription, and in this respect they are similar to retroviruses.[12] Although replication takes place in the liver, the virus spreads to the blood where virus-specific proteins and their corresponding antibodies are found in infected people. Blood tests for these proteins and antibodies are used to diagnose the infection.Contents:Signs and symptoms Mechanisms Pathogenesis Transmission Virology Structure Genome Replication Serotypes and genotypes Diagnosis
Prevention Treatment Prognosis Reactivation Epidemiology History.Signs and symptomsAcute infection with hepatitis B virus is associated with acute viral hepatitis – an illness that begins with general ill-health, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, body aches, mild fever, dark urine, and then progresses to development of jaundice. It has been noted that itchy skin has been an indication as a possible symptom of all hepatitis virus types. The illness lasts for a few weeks and then gradually improves in most affected people. A few patients may have more severe liver disease (fulminant hepatic failure), and may die as a result of it. The infection may be entirely asymptomatic and may go unrecognized.Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus may be either asymptomatic or may be associated with a chronic inflammation of the liver (chronic hepatitis), leading to cirrhosis over a period of several years. This type of infection dramatically increases the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cancer). Chronic carriers are encouraged to avoid consuming alcohol as it increases their risk for cirrhosis and liver cancer. Hepatitis B virus has been linked to the development of Membranous glomerulonephritis Mechanisms Pathogenes is Hepatitis B virus primarily interferes with the functions of the liver by replicating in liver cells, known as hepatocytes. The receptor is not yet known, though there is evidence that the receptor in the closely related duck hepatitis B virus is carboxypeptidase D.[16][17] HBV virions (DANE particle) bind to the host cell via the preS domain of the viral surface antigen and are subsequently internalized by endocytosis. PreS and IgA receptors are accused of this interaction. HBV-preS specific receptors are primarily expressed on hepatocytes; however, viral DNA and proteins have also been detected in extrahepatic sites, suggesting that cellular receptors for HBV may also exist on extrahepatic cells.During HBV infection, the host immune response causes both hepatocellular damage and viral clearance. Although the innate immune response does not play a significant role in these processes, the adaptive immune response, particularly virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), contributes to most of the liver injury associated with HBV infection. CTLs eliminate HBV infection by killing infected cells and producing antiviral cytokines, which are then used to purge HBV from viable hepatocytes.[19] Although liver damage is initiated and mediated by the CTLs, antigen-nonspecific inflammatory cells can worsen CTL-induced immunopathology, and platelets activated at the site of infection may facilitate the accumulation of CTLs in the liver.TransmissionTransmission of hepatitis B virus results from exposure to infectious blood or body fluids containing blood. Possible forms of transmission include sexual contact, blood transfusions, re-use of contaminated needles & syringes, and vertical transmission from mother to child during childbirth. Without intervention, a mother who is positive for HBsAg confers a 20% risk of passing the infection to her offspring at the time of birth. This risk is as high as 90% if the mother is also positive for HBeAg. HBV can be transmitted between family members within households, possibly by contact of nonintact skin or mucous membrane with secretions or saliva containing HBV.[21][22] However, at least 30% of reported hepatitis B among adults cannot be associated with an identifiable risk factor.[23] And Shi et al. showed that breastfeeding after proper immunopro-phylaxis did not contribute to MTCT transmission of HBV.VirologyMain article: Hepatitis B virus Structure The genome organisation of HBV. The genes overlap. Hepatitis B virus replication.Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a member of the Hepadnavirus family.[11] The virus particle, (virion) consists of an outer lipid envelope and an icosahedral nucleocapsid core composed of protein. The nucleocapsid encloses the viral DNA and a DNA polymerase that has reverse transcriptase activity.[12] The outer envelope contains embedded proteins which are involved in viral binding of, and entry into, susceptible cells. The virus is one of the smallest enveloped animal viruses, with a virion diameter of 42 nm, but pleomorphic forms exist, including filamentous and spherical bodies lacking a core. These particles are not infectious and are composed of the lipid and protein that forms part of the surface of the virion, which is called the surface antigen (HBsAg), and is produced in excess during the life cycle of the virus.GenomeThe genome of HBV is made of circular DNA, but it is unusual because the DNA is not fully double-stranded. One end of the full length strand is linked to the viral DNA polymerase. The genome is 3020–3320 nucleotides long (for the full-length strand) and 1700–2800 nucleotides long (for the short length-strand).[26] The negative-sense, (non-coding), is complementary to the viral mRNA. The viral DNA is found in the nucleus soon after infection of the cell. The partially double-stranded DNA is rendered fully double-stranded by completion of the (+) sense strand and removal of a protein molecule from the (-) sense strand and a short sequence of RNA from the (+) sense strand. Non-coding bases are removed from the ends of the (-) sense strand and the ends are rejoined. There are four known genes encoded by the genome, called C, X, P, and S. The core protein is coded for by gene C (HBcAg), and its start codon is preceded by an upstream in-frame AUG start codon from which the pre-core protein is produced. HBeAg is produced by proteolytic processing of the pre-core protein. The DNA polymerase is encoded by gene P. Gene S is the gene that codes for the surface antigen (HBsAg). The HBsAg gene is one long open reading frame but contains three in frame "start" (ATG) codons that divide the gene into three sections, pre-S1, pre-S2, and S. Because of the multiple start codons, polypeptides of three different sizes called large, middle, and small (pre-S1 + pre-S2 + S, pre-S2 + S, or S) are produced.[27] The function of the protein coded for by gene X is not fully understood but it is associated with the development of liver cancer. It stimulates genes that promote cell growth and inactivates growth regulating molecules.ReplicationThe life cycle of hepatitis B virus is complex. Hepatitis B is one of a few known non-retroviral viruses which use reverse transcription as a part of its replication process. The virus gains entry into the cell by binding to an unknown receptor on the surface of the cell and enters it by endocytosis. Because the virus multiplies via RNA made by a host enzyme, the viral genomic DNA has to be transferred to the cell nucleus by host proteins called chaperones. The partially double stranded viral DNA is then made fully double stranded and transformed into covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) that serves as a template for transcription of four viral mRNAs. The largest mRNA, (which is longer than the viral genome), is used to make the new copies of the genome and to make the capsid core protein and the viral DNA polymerase. These four viral transcripts undergo additional processing and go on to form progeny virions which are released from the cell or returned to the nucleus and re-cycled to produce even more copies.[27][29] The long mRNA is then transported back to the cytoplasm where the virion P protein synthesizes DNA via its reverse transcriptase activity.Serotypes and genotypesThe virus is divided into four major serotypes (adr, adw, ayr, ayw) based on antigenic epitopes presented on its envelope proteins, and into eight genotypes (A-H) according to overall nucleotide sequence variation of the genome. The genotypes have a distinct geographical distribution and are used in tracing the evolution and transmission of the virus. Differences between genotypes affect the disease severity, course and likelihood of complications, and response to treatment and possibly vaccination.Genotypes differ by at least 8% of their sequence and were first reported in 1988 when six were initially described (A-F).[32] Two further types have since been described (G and H).[33] Most genotypes are now divided into subgenotypes with distinct properties.Genotype A is most commonly found in the Americas, Africa, India and Western Europe. Genotype B is most commonly found in Asia and the United States. Genotype B1 dominates in Japan, B2 in China and Vietnam while B3 confined to Indonesia. B4 is confined to Vietnam. All these strains specify the serotype ayw1. B5 is most common in the Philippines. Genotype C is most common in Asia and the United States. Subgenotype C1 is common in Japan, Korea and China. C2 is common in China, South-East Asia and Bangladesh and C3 in Oceania. All these strains specify the serotype adrq. C4 specifying ayw3 is found in Aborigines from Australia.[35] Genotype D is most commonly found in Southern Europe, India and the United States and has been divided into 8 subtypes (D1-D8). In Turkey genotype D is also the most common type. A pattern of defined geographical distribution is less evident with D1-D4 where these subgenotypes are widely spread within Europe, Africa and Asia. This may be due to their divergence having occurred before than of genotypes B and C. D4 appears to be the oldest split and is still the dominating subgenotype of D in Oceania. Type E is most commonly found in West and Southern Africa. Type F is most commonly found in Central and South America and has been divided into two subgroups (F1 and F2). Genotype G has an insertion of 36 nucleotides in the core gene and is found in France and the United States.[36] Type H is most commonly found in Central and South America and California in United States. Africa has five genotypes (A-E). Of these the predominant genotypes are A in Kenya, B and D in Egypt, D in Tunisia, A-D in South Africa and E in Nigeria.[35] Genotype H is probably split off from genotype F within the New World.Diagnosis Hepatitis B viral antigens and antibodies detectable in the blood following acute infection.Hepatitis B viral antigens and antibodies detectable in the blood of a chronically infected person. Ground glass hepatocytes as seen in a chronic hepatitis B. Liver biopsy. H&E stain.The tests, called assays, for detection of hepatitis B virus infection involve serum or blood tests that detect either viral antigens (proteins produced by the virus) or antibodies produced by the host. Interpretation of these assays is complex.The hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is most frequently used to screen for the presence of this infection. It is the first detectable viral antigen to appear during infection. However, early in an infection, this antigen may not be present and it may be undetectable later in the infection as it is being cleared by the host. The infectious virion contains an inner "core particle" enclosing viral genome. The icosahedral core particle is made of 180 or 240 copies of core protein, alternatively known as hepatitis B core antigen, or HBcAg. During this 'window' in which the host remains infected but is successfully clearing the virus, IgM antibodies to the hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc IgM) may be the only serological evidence of disease.Shortly after the appearance of the HBsAg, another antigen named as the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) will appear. Traditionally, the presence of HBeAg in a host's serum is associated with much higher rates of viral replication and enhanced infectivity; however, variants of the hepatitis B virus do not produce the 'e' antigen, so this rule does not always hold true. During the natural course of an infection, the HBeAg may be cleared, and antibodies to the 'e' antigen (anti-HBe) will arise immediately afterwards. This conversion is usually associated with a dramatic decline in viral replication.If the host is able to clear the infection, eventually the HBsAg will become undetectable and will be followed by IgG antibodies to the hepatitis B surface antigen and core antigen, (anti-HBs and anti HBc IgG).[11] The time between the removal of the HBsAg and the appearance of anti-HBs is called the window period. A person negative for HBsAg but positive for anti-HBs has either cleared an infection or has been vaccinated previously.Individuals who remain HBsAg positive for at least six months are considered to be hepatitis B carriers.[38] Carriers of the virus may have chronic hepatitis B, which would be reflected by elevated serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels and inflammation of the liver, as revealed by biopsy. Carriers who have seroconverted to HBeAg negative status, particularly those who acquired the infection as adults, have very little viral multiplication and hence may be at little risk of long-term complications or of transmitting infection to others.
PCR tests have been developed to detect and measure the amount of HBV DNA, called the viral load, in clinical specimens. These tests are used to assess a person's infection status and to monitor treatment.[40] Individuals with high viral loads, characteristically have ground glass hepatocytes on biopsy.PreventionMain article: Hepatitis B vaccineHBsAgSeveral vaccines have been developed for the prevention of hepatitis B virus infection. These rely on the use of one of the viral envelope proteins (hepatitis B surface antigen or HBsAg). The vaccine was originally prepared from plasma obtained from patients who had long-standing hepatitis B virus infection. However, currently, it is made using a synthetic recombinant DNA technology that does not contain blood products. One cannot be infected with hepatitis B from this vaccine.
The risk of vertical transmission to the newborn can be drastically reduced from 20%-90% to 5%-10% by administering to the newborn hepatitis B vaccine (HBV 1) and hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) within 12 hours of birth, followed by a second dose of hepatitis B vaccine (HBV 2) at 1-2 months and a third dose at and no earlier than 6 months (24 weeks). Since 2% of infants vaccinated will not develop immunity after the first three dose series, infants born to hepatitis B positive mothers are tested at 9 months for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and the antibody to the hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs); if post-vaccination test results indicate that the child is still susceptible, a second three dose series at (0, 1 and 6 months) is administered. If the child is still susceptible after the second series, a third series is not recommended.Following vaccination, hepatitis B surface antigen may be detected in serum for several days; this is known as vaccine antigenaemia.[43] The vaccine is administered in either two-, three-, or four-dose schedules into infants and adults, which provides protection for 85–90% of individuals.[44] Protection has been observed to last 12 years in individuals who show adequate initial response to the primary course of vaccinations, and that immunity is predicted to last at least 25 years.Unlike hepatitis A, hepatitis B does not generally spread through water and food. Instead, it is transmitted through body fluids; prevention is thus the avoidance of such transmission: unprotected sexual contact, blood transfusions, re-use of contaminated needles and syringes, and vertical transmission during child birth. Infants may be vaccinated at birth.Shi, et al. showed that besides the WHO recommended joint immunoprophylaxis starting from the newborn, multiple injections of small doses of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIg, 200–400 IU per month),[47][48] or oral lamivudine (100 mg per day) in HBV carrier mothers with a high degree of infectiousness (>106 copies/ml) in late pregnancy (the last three months of pregnancy),[49][50] effectively and safely prevent HBV intrauterine transmission, which provide new insight into prevention of HBV at the earliest stage.TreatmentAcute hepatitis B infection does not usually require treatment because most adults clear the infection spontaneously.[51] Early antiviral treatment may only be required in fewer than 1% of patients, whose infection takes a very aggressive course (fulminant hepatitis) or who are immunocompromised. On the other hand, treatment of chronic infection may be necessary to reduce the risk of cirrhosis and liver cancer. Chronically infected individuals with persistently elevated serum alanine aminotransferase, a marker of liver damage, and HBV DNA levels are candidates for therapy.Although none of the available drugs can clear the infection, they can stop the virus from replicating, thus minimizing liver damage. Currently, there are seven medications licensed for treatment of hepatitis B infection in the United States. These include antiviral drugs lamivudine (Epivir), adefovir (Hepsera), tenofovir (Viread), telbivudine (Tyzeka) and entecavir (Baraclude) and the two immune system modulators interferon alpha-2a and PEGylated interferon alpha-2a (Pegasys). The use of interferon, which requires injections daily or thrice weekly, has been supplanted by long-acting PEGylated interferon, which is injected only once weekly.[53] However, some individuals are much more likely to respond than others and this might be because of the genotype of the infecting virus or the patient's heredity. The treatment reduces viral replication in the liver, thereby reducing the viral load (the amount of virus particles as measured in the blood).Infants born to mothers known to carry hepatitis B can be treated with antibodies to the hepatitis B virus (HBIg). When given with the vaccine within twelve hours of birth, the risk of acquiring hepatitis B is reduced 90%.[55] This treatment allows a mother to safely breastfeed her child.Response to treatment differs between the genotypes. Interferon treatment may produce an e antigen seroconversion rate of 37% in genotype A but only a 6% seroconversion in type D. Genotype B has similar seroconversion rates to type A while type C seroconverts only in 15% of cases. Sustained e antigen loss after treatment is ~45% in types A and B but only 25–30% in types C and D.In July 2005, researchers identified an association between a host-derived DNA-binding protein and the amount of HBV replication in the liver. Controlling the level of production of this protein could be used to treat hepatitis B.Treatment lasts from 6 months to a year, depending on medication and genotype.PrognosisHepatitis B virus infection may either be acute (self-limiting) or chronic (long-standing). Persons with self-limiting infection clear the infection spontaneously within weeks to months.Children are less likely than adults to clear the infection. More than 95% of people who become infected as adults or older children will stage a full recovery and develop protective immunity to the virus. However, this drops to 30% for younger children, and only 5% of newborns that acquire the infection from their mother at birth will clear the infection.[59] This population has a 40% lifetime risk of death from cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma.[53] Of those infected between the age of one to six, 70% will clear the infection.Hepatitis D (HDV) can only occur with a concomitant hepatitis B infection, because HDV uses the HBV surface antigen to form a capsid.[61] Co-infection with hepatitis D increases the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer.[62] Polyarteritis nodosa is more common in people with hepatitis B infection.ReactivationHepatitis B virus DNA persists in the body after infection and in some people the disease recurs.[63] Although rare, reactivation is seen most often in people with impaired immunity.[64] HBV goes through cycles of replication and non-replication. Approximately 50% of patients experience acute reactivation. Male patients with baseline ALT of 200 UL/L are three times more likely to develop a reactivation than patients with lower levels. Patients who undergo chemotherapy are at risk for HBV reactivation. The current view is that immunosuppressive drugs favor increased HBV replication while inhibiting cytotoxic T cell function in the liver.EpidemiologySee also: Hepatitis B in China 2002 estimate of disability-adjusted life year for hepatitis B per 100,000 inhabitants.In 2004, an estimated 350 million individuals were infected worldwide. National and regional prevalence ranges from over 10% in Asia to under 0.5% in the United States and northern Europe. Routes of infection include vertical transmission (such as through childbirth), early life horizontal transmission (bites, lesions, and sanitary habits), and adult horizontal transmission (sexual contact, intravenous drug use).[67] The primary method of transmission reflects the prevalence of chronic HBV infection in a given area. In low prevalence areas such as the continental United States and Western Europe, injection drug abuse and unprotected sex are the primary methods, although other factors may also be important.[68] In moderate prevalence areas, which include Eastern Europe, Russia, and Japan, where 2–7% of the population is chronically infected, the disease is predominantly spread among children. In high prevalence areas such as China and South East Asia, transmission during childbirth is most common, although in other areas of high endemicity such as Africa, transmission during childhood is a significant factor.[69] The prevalence of chronic HBV infection in areas of high endemicity is at least 8%. As of 2010, China has 120 million infected people, followed by India and Indonesia with 40 million and 12 million respectively. According to WHO, an estimated 600,000 people die every year related to the infection.HistoryThe earliest record of an epidemic caused by hepatitis B virus was made by Lurman in 1885.[71] An outbreak of smallpox occurred in Bremen in 1883 and 1,289 shipyard employees were vaccinated with lymph from other people. After several weeks, and up to eight months later, 191 of the vaccinated workers became ill with jaundice and were diagnosed as suffering from serum hepatitis. Other employees who had been inoculated with different batches of lymph remained healthy. Lurman's paper, now regarded as a classical example of an epidemiological study, proved that contaminated lymph was the source of the outbreak. Later, numerous similar outbreaks were reported following the introduction, in 1909, of hypodermic needles that were used, and more importantly reused, for administering Salvarsan for the treatment of syphilis. The virus was not discovered until 1965 when Baruch Blumberg, then working at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), discovered the Australia antigen (later known to be hepatitis B surface antigen, or HBsAg) in the blood of Australian aboriginal people.[72] Although a virus had been suspected since the research published by MacCallum in 1947,[73] D.S. Dane and others discovered the virus particle in 1970 by electron microscopy.[74] By the early 1980s the genome of the virus had been sequenced,[75] and the first vaccines were being tested.Hepatitis B is a viral infection that attacks the liver and can cause both acute and chronic disease. 
The virus is transmitted through contact with the blood or other body fluids of an infected person - not through casual contact.About 2 billion people worldwide have been infected with the virus and about 350 million live with chronic infection. An estimated 600 000 persons die each year due to the acute or chronic consequences of hepatitis B.About 25% of adults who become chronically infected during childhood later die from liver cancer or cirrhosis (scarring of the liver) caused by the chronic infection. The hepatitis B virus is 50 to 100 times more infectious than HIV.Hepatitis B virus is an important occupational hazard for health workers. Hepatitis B is preventable with a safe and effective vaccine.Hepatitis B is a potentially life-threatening liver infection caused by the hepatitis B virus. It is a major global health problem and the most serious type of viral hepatitis. It can cause chronic liver disease and puts people at high risk of death from cirrhosis of the liver and liver cancer. Worldwide, an estimated two billion people have been infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV), and more than 350 million have chronic (long-term) liver infections. A vaccine against hepatitis B has been available since 1982. Hepatitis B vaccine is 95% effective in preventing HBV infection and its chronic consequences, and is the first vaccine against a major human cancer.SymptomsHepatitis B virus can cause an acute illness with symptoms that last several weeks, including yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice), dark urine, extreme fatigue, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. People can take several months to a year to recover from the symptoms. HBV can also cause a chronic liver infection that can later develop into cirrhosis of the liver or liver cancer. Who is most at risk for chronic disease?The likelihood that an HBV infection will become chronic depends upon the age at which a person becomes infected, with young children who become infected with HBV being the most likely to develop chronic infections. About 90% of infants infected during the first year of life develop chronic infections; 30% to 50% of children infected between one to four years of age develop chronic infections. About 25% of adults who become chronically infected during childhood die from HBV-related liver cancer or cirrhosis. About 90% of healthy adults who are infected with HBV will recover and be completely rid of the virus within six months.Where is hepatitis B most common?Hepatitis B is endemic in China and other parts of Asia. Most people in the region become infected with HBV during childhood. In these regions, 8% to 10% of the adult population are chronically infected. Liver cancer caused by HBV is among the first three causes of death from cancer in men, and a major cause of cancer in women. High rates of chronic infections are also found in the Amazon and the southern parts of eastern and central Europe. In the Middle East and Indian sub-continent, an estimated 2% to 5% of the general population is chronically infected. Less than 1% of the population in western Europe and North American is chronically infected.Transmission Hepatitis B virus is transmitted between people by contact with the blood or other body fluids (i.e. semen and vaginal fluid) of an infected person. Modes of transmission are the same for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), but HBV is 50 to 100 times more infectious Unlike HIV, HBV can survive outside the body for at least 7 days. During that time, the virus can still cause infection if it enters the body of a person who is not infected.Common modes of transmission in developing countries are:perinatal (from mother to baby at birth)early childhood infections (inapparent infection through close interpersonal contact with infected household contacts)unsafe injections practices blood transfusions sexual contact In many developed countries (e.g. those in western Europe and North America), patterns of transmission are different than those mentioned above. Today, the majority of infections in these countries are transmitted during young adulthood by sexual activity and injecting drug use. HBV is a major infectious occupational hazard of health workers. HBV is not spread by contaminated food or water, and cannot be spread casually in the workplace.The virus incubation period is 90 days on average, but can vary from about 30 to 180 days. HBV may be detected 30 to 60 days after infection and persist for widely variable periods of time.Treatment There is no specific treatment for acute hepatitis B. Care is aimed at maintaining comfort and adequate nutritional balance, including replacement of fluids that are lost from vomiting and diarrhoea.Chronic hepatitis B can be treated with drugs, including interferon and anti-viral agents, which can help some patients. Treatment can cost thousands of dollars per year and is not available to most patients in developing countries. Liver cancer is almost always fatal, and often develops in people at an age when they are most productive and have family responsibilities. In developing countries, most people with liver cancer die within months of diagnosis. In higher income countries, surgery and chemotherapy can prolong life for up to a few years in some patients. Patients with cirrhosis are sometimes given liver transplants, with varying success. Prevention All infants should receive the hepatitis B vaccine: this is the mainstay of hepatitis B prevention. The vaccine can be given as either three or four separate doses, as part of existing routine immunization schedules. In areas where mother-to-infant spread of HBV is common, the first dose of vaccine should be given as soon as possible after birth (i.e. within 24 hours). The complete vaccine series induces protective antibody levels in more than 95% of infants, children and young adults. After age 40, protection following the primary vaccination series drops below 90%. At 60 years old, protective antibody levels are achieved in only 65 to 75% of those vaccinated. Protection lasts at least 20 years and should be lifelong.All children and adolescents younger than 18 years old and not previously vaccinated should receive the vaccine. People in high risk groups should also be vaccinated, including:persons with high-risk sexual behaviour; 
partners and household contacts of HBV infected persons;injecting drug users; persons who frequently require blood or blood products;recipients of solidorgantransplantation; those at occupational risk of HBV infection, including health care workers; and international travellers to countries with high rates of HBV.The vaccine has an outstanding record of safety and effectiveness. Since 1982, over one billion doses of hepatitis B vaccine have been used worldwide. In many countries where 8% to 15% of children used to become chronically infected with HBV, vaccination has reduced the rate of chronic infection to less than 1% among immunized children.As of December 2006, 164 countries vaccinate infants against hepatitis B during national immunization programmes - a major increase compared with 31 countries in 1992, the year that the World Health Assembly passed a resolution to recommend global vaccination against hepatitis B.Hepatitis B is a liver disease. Hepatitis * means inflammation of the liver. Inflammation is the painful, red swelling that results when tissues of the body become injured or infected. Inflammation can cause organs to not work properly.AIDS: Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. AIDS is caused by infection with a virus called human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This virus is passed from one person to another through infected blood and body fluids through unprotected sex and sharing needles. Acute Hepatitis B: 90 percent of people with hepatitis B will have acute infection. Nearly all will recover on their own without lasting health problems.Anti-virals: These medications are one of the available treatments for chronic hepatitis B. These medications minimise the hepatitis B virus from replicating or making copies of itself.Body Fluids: These are fluids that can be passed from one person to another through sex or by sharing needles or personal items. Body fluids include semen, vaginal fluids and saliva. Chronic Hepatitis B: Some 10 percent of people who become infected with the hepatitis B virus are chronically infected.2 This means they may have the virus for life. Left untreated, chronic hepatitis B can develop into a serious liver disease. Cirrhosis: Cirrhosis of the liver is characterised by permanent and severe scarring of the liver caused by chronic liver inflammation. Cirrhosis is also the main cause of primary liver cancer.Fibrosis: Fibrosis occurs when healthy liver cells are damaged by the hepatitis B virus, which are replaced by mild to moderate scar tissue, called fibrous tissue. The liver is still able to carry out all normal functions and people may experience little to no symptoms.Hepatitis A: Hepatitis A is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis A virus. It is generally spread by coming into contact with the faeces of an infected person. This happens because of poor sanitary habits such as not washing your hands after going to the bathroom. Hepatitis B: Hepatitis B is caused by the hepatitis B virus and is one of the most common infectious diseases in the world. It is passed from an infected person to another through blood and body fluids. Hepatitis B Blood Test: Your medical professional will take a small amount of your blood to determine if you have the hepatitis B virus.Hepatitis B Vaccine: There are vaccines to prevent hepatitis B. They are not always available to everyone in every country. They cannot help if you have already been infected with the virus. Hepatitis C: Hepatitis C is caused by the hepatitis C virus. It is generally spread through blood transfusions. In most countries, donated blood is now checked for the virus before it is given to someone. Hepatitis D: Hepatitis D is caused by the hepatitis D virus. The hepatitis D virus needs the hepatitis B virus to survive. Sometimes people with hepatitis B also get hepatitis D because both are passed from one person to the other through blood and body fluids. Hepatitis E: Hepatitis E is caused by the hepatitis E virus. Similar to the hepatitis A virus, it is spread by coming into contact with the faeces of an infected person. Hepatitis G: Not a lot is known about the hepatitis G virus or even if it causes illness. It may be transmitted through contaminated blood in blood transfusions. Hepatocytes: Cells in the liverHIV: HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It is the virus that causes AIDS. It is passed from one person to the other through infected blood and body fluids.Immune System: The body’s immune system is found throughout the body in cells and organs. The immune system is the body’s defense system and it fights infections. Inflammation: When the liver first becomes infected with hepatitis B, mild to moderate swelling will occur. Liver inflammation can also lead to more serious conditions such as fibrosis, cirrhosis and liver cancer.Interferons: Interferons are a kind of drug treatment used to treat chronic hepatitis B. They work by boosting the body’s immune system to fight the hepatitis B virus. Intravenously: Intravenous therapy or IV therapy is giving medications or fluids to people directly into a vein. Liver: The liver is the largest and one of the most important organs in the body. The liver stores fats, sugars, vitamins and other nutrients that our body needs to keep going. It also helps the body get rid of toxins and infections. Liver Cancer: Malignant tumours that form on the liver. Hepatitis B is responsible for 80% of all primary liver cancer worldwide.
Liver Disease: This term applies to many diseases and disorders that cause the liver function improperly or cease functioning. Liver Transplant: A liver transplant occurs when a diseased liver is replaced by a healthy one obtained from an organ donor. 
Medications for Hepatitis B: For people with chronic hepatitis B, there are two kinds of medications: anti-virals and interferons. Anti-virals work by stopping the virus from replicating or making copies of itself. Interferons work by helping the body’s immune system fight infection. Resistance: Resistance occurs when a medication stops working as a result of the virus developing an immunity to the medication. 
Symptoms of Hepatitis B: Symptoms may include tiredness, nausea, stomach pain and weight loss. They also can include not feeling hungry or feeling pain in the joints. In some people, the skin and eyes may become yellow. A person’s urine may be dark coloured and the stools or bowel movement may be whitish. Only about 30 percent of people with hepatitis B have any symptoms.Toxins: These are poisons that the body produces. Toxins can cause disease.Unprotected Sex: Having unprotected sex is having sex without a condom. Condoms can help stop the spread of infection from one person to another. Viral Load: Viral load is the amount of virus in the blood. A lesser amount of virus means there is less risk for serious liver disease. Virus: A virus is an infectious agent too small to see. It replicates or makes copies of itself inside the body’s cells. This causes disease. If you have hepatitis B, one of the best things you can do is to stop drinking or cut down as much as you can. Drinking alcohol can cause the liver to become even more damaged in people infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV).There are many things that happen to your body when you drink alcohol, such as:
It stresses out your liver, which is already trying to fight HBV Your body’s natural defenses will not work as well to fight HBVmAlcohol helps the hepatitis B virus to make more copies ofitself The drugs to treat hepatitis B may not work as well Doctors may not prescribe HBV medicines if you drink alcohol It Is Important to Remember:Alcohol can cause serious health problems for someone with hepatitis B.If possible, it is best to stop drinking. If you can’t stop drinking, try to cut down on the amount that you drink.For many people, it is not easy to stop drinking or to drink less alcohol. If you are having problems, talk with your doctor, counselor or anyone you feel comfortable with to learn about ways to help you stop.There are a lot of things you can do to help keep your liver healthy. In 1981, the Food and Drug Administration approved the first vaccine for hepatitis B, which was plasma-derived (i.e. made from blood products). This vaccine was discontinued in 1990 and is no longer available in the U.S. The currently used hepatitis B vaccines are made synthetically (i.e. they do not contain blood products) and have been available in the U.S. since 1986. You cannot get hepatitis B from the vaccine. Learn more.This safe and effective vaccine is recommended for all infants at birth and for children up to 18 years. Adults, especially those who fall into a high-risk group, should also seriously consider getting the hepatitis B vaccine.Common side effects include soreness, swelling and redness at the injection site. The vaccine may not be recommended for those with documented yeast allergies or a history of an adverse reaction to the vaccine. The HBV is a DNA virus with 4 major subtypes all of which share a common antigenic determinant, "a" which is located on the HBsAg. There are two additional pairs of mutually exclusive subtypic determinants d or y, and w or r, constituting the four major subtypes: adr, ayr, adw, and ayw. The subtypes have no clinical significance in terms of severity of disease, progression to chronicity or response to treatment but they are used in epidemiological studies to trace an infection. To date, six different genotypes of the HBV have been identified (A-E). How these genotypes affect pathogenesis or clinical outcome is not known. There is some evidence that genotype C results in more severe liver disease and genotype B may be associated with the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).Epidemiology The only natural host of HBV is the human being and chronic carriers are the only reservoir of this virus in nature. It is estimated that over 35% of Iranians have been exposed to the HBV and about 3% are chronic carriers4, ranging from 1.7% in Fars Province to over 5% in Sistan and Balouchestan . In a study performed on 250,000 healthy volunteer blood donors in Tehran, 3.6% of male and 1.6% of female donors were HBsAg carriers. Anti-HBc antibody was detected in 37% of this population. Thus, it appears that 8% of Iranians infected by HBV will become chronic carriers.Among Iranian cirrhotics, 70-84% have evidence of exposure to HBV and 51-56% are carriers.6,7 In addition, Iranian patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) show a 72% rate of exposure (as judged by a positive HBcAb) and a 46% carrier rate.7 These data suggest that HBV is the most common cause of cirrhosis and HCC in Iran. The neonatal vaccination program launched in 1992 is not expected to change these figures for the general population before the year 2002. Following the neonatal vaccination programs which was begun in 1989 in Saudi Arabia, the overall HBsAg carrier rate in children younger than 12 years dropped from 6.7% in 1989 to 0.3% in 1997.8 A similar phenomenon is expected in Iran.Mode of transmission HBV is mainly transmitted by the parenteral route. Before routine tests on blood donors, blood transfusion was a very common mode of HBV transmission. Although it is now very rare for blood and blood product transfusion to transmit the disease, it still continues to do so. This could be due to many factors, including testing during incubation period, low level carriers, and S-mutant strains. Some investigators suggest that blood donors also be screened for anti-HBc and/or HBV DNA (Table 2). Another common mode of transmission is through the percutaneous route which occurs through the sharing of needles by intravenous drug users or reuse of contaminated sharp instruments for tattoos, acupuncture, or ear piercing. Over 25% of intravenous drug users in prison (8.4% of all prisoners) in southern Iran were HBV carriers (unpublished data). As a group, prisoners are considered to be at high risk of developing the infection. Sexual transmission is the most important mode of spread of HBV in most developed countries and accounts for approximately 30% of acute HBV infections in the United States. Interestingly, in contrast to HIV, the risk of heterosexual transmission is greater when the infected individual is female than when the infected individual is male.9 Over 75% of the wives of male Iranian carriers have natural immunity against HBV.10The rate of neonatal HBV infection from infected mothers (perinatal transmission) is less than 10% in Western countries. In one Iranian study, over 50% of mothers of HBsAg positive individuals were also carriers.10 It may be concluded that over 50% of Iranian carriers have contracted the infection perinatally making this route the most likely route of transmission of HBV in Iran. In highly endemic regions, the rate of perinatal infection can be as high as 90%, especially if the mother is HBeAg or HBV DNA positive.11 Perinatal transmission may occur at three different times: In-utero, during delivery, or after birth. Vaccination of neonates born to HBV positive carriers has a high success rate (95%). Thus, infection probably occurs predominantly at or after birth. Cesarean section does not prevent maternal-infant transmission and is not indicated. Breast-feeding also does not appear to significantly increase the risk of transmission.Health care environment is another source of viral transmission. There are many reports of HBV infections acquired through infected surgeons, dentists, the equipment they use, and needle stick injuries. Some medical specialties are associated with greater risk of transmission of HBV: dentistry, thoracic surgery, obstetrics and gynecology, general surgery, orthopedic surgery, neurosurgery, cardiology, gastroenterology and nephrology. Needle stick injury by an infected needle can result in transmission of HBV in 12% of cases (2-5% if HBeAg is negative and 27-40% if HBeAg is positive) whereas the probability is only 0.29% for HIV.Health workers are at particular risk of developing the infection. In a study from Egypt combined HBsAg and anti-HBs frequencies by occupational group were: Nonprofessional staff 60% dentists 32%, graduate nurses 33%, physicians 29%, and student nurses 26%.12 In a similar study performed on the health workers of the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), 23% had evidence of exposure to HBV and 1.8% had a positive HBsAg. In this study, the laboratory personnel were found to be at higher risk than other health workers (RR: 8.8).In spite of HBsAg screening of hemodialysis patients, this technique is another well-known source of transmission. Unfortunately renal failure patients on hemodialysis fare poorly once infected with HBV. Progression to chronicity and cirrhosis is the rule (over 80%) in these cases and liver transplantation is often not successful.Acute infection Acute hepatitis B is the most common cause of hepatitis among Iranian adults. Only a third of acute infections present with an icteric sign, the rest are either totally asymptomatic or only have flu-like symptoms.During the prodromal period, a serum sickness-like syndrome develops in 10-20% of patients. Malaise, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, low-grade fever, myalgia, and easy fatigability usually follow. Extrahepatic complications are also sometimes observed (Table 3). Occasionally right upper quadrant or midepigastric pain or taste and smell disorders are seen. Smokers may have a distaste for smoking. Jaundice usually begins within 10 days of the onset of prodromal symptoms as the constitutional symptoms subside and it may persist for 1 to 3 months.Physical examination may be normal except for jaundice, mildly tender hepatomegaly and a low-grade fever. Splenomegaly may be found in approximately 5 to 15% of patients. Occasionally, mild lymph node enlargement, palmar erythema or spider nevi is also seen. About 0.1 to 0.5% of acute cases progress to fulminant hepatitis. Hepatitis B is the most common cause of fulminant hepatitis in Iran.5 Such patients present with encephalopathy, spontaneous bleeding due to coagulopathy, and a progressive decrease in liver span. It should be noted that due to massive destruction of hepatocytes, the HBsAg may be undetectable in fulminant hepatitis and serum aminotransferase levels may not be as high as non-fulminant acute hepatitis B. The mortality of fulminant hepatitis B is over 80% and the only effective treatment is urgent liver transplantation. Following fulminant HBV infection the recurrence of HBV in a liver transplant is uncommon.Chronic infection Patients not able to clear the virus as judged by a positive HBsAg six months after the acute episode are unlikely to spontaneously recover and are known as chronic cases. In these patients, spontaneous clearance of HBsAg occurs at an annual rate of only 0.5-2%. Spontaneous loss of HBeAg and serum HBV DNA occurs in 10 to 15% of cases.The risk of chronicity is inversely proportional to the age at infection. Less than 5% of immunocompetent adults with acute HBV infection progress to chronic infection, but 30% of children infected between the ages of 1 and 5 years and up to 90% of those infected during infancy will develop chronic infection.11, 14 Chronicity seems to be more common in males as also reported in studies from Iran.15 Although some other Iranian studies do not show such male preponderance.16 There are many known factors which favor progression to chronicity (Table 4). The old practice of classifying chronic cases under healthy carriers, chronic persistent or chronic active hepatitis should no longer be used. Instead, the degree of activity of the disease should be assessed by histological examination and staging.Patients with chronic disease are usually asymptomatic or have non-specific symptoms such as fatigue. In advanced cases, signs of cirrhosis and liver decompensation such as portal hypertension, ascites, variceal bleedings, hepatic encephalopathy, renal and hepatorenal failure and hepatocellular carcinoma would also prevail. Hepatocellular carcinoma is an important sequel of chronic HBV infection and all chronic carriers should be screened annually, or preferably bi-annually, by a-feto-protein and/or ultrasonography.Mutants Among the many mutants of the HBV, the most important are probably the precore mutant, the S mutant, and the YMDD variants.The precore mutant has a mutation in the precore area of its genome, which renders the virus incapable of producing HBeAg. Some investigators believe that the HBeAg is responsible for producing some degrees of immune tolerance. There are many reports that this mutant causes a more severe disease and is less responsive to treatment.17,18 Unfortunately, it is estimated that almost 58% of HBV infections in Iran are precore mutants.19 In addition to being less responsive to treatment, the treatment of precore mutants may be delayed by the false impression that a negative HBeAg indicates a non-replicative infection and thus, does not require treatment. Such practice should be discouraged. Transaminase levels have been shown to reflect histologic activity in HbeAg-negative chronic HBV carriers with an accuracy of 72-75%.20 In one study HBV DNA (by bDNA assay) was detectable in 46% of HbeAg-negative patients with ALT above normal versus 7% of patients with normal ALT. If the HBeAg is negative but liver enzyme levels are elevated, an HBV DNA testing and/or histologic examination of the liver is indicated.Less frequently, a mutation may occur in the S gene affecting the "a" determinant of the HBsAg. Since the "a" determinant is the target for immunization against HBV, such S mutants are vaccine escape mutants and a subject which has received effective immunization against HBV through vaccination may still acquire infection with this mutant. In the future, it may be necessary to produce a bivalent vaccine also covering the mutant "a" determinant. Fortunately, the S mutant is not frequently reported throughout the world. Very few vaccines escape mutants and have been reported in Iran(unpublished data). Another concern with these mutants is that monoclonal commercial tests for HBsAg directed at the "a" determinant may fail to detect the HBsAg produced by these mutants. This phenomenon may partially explain the occasional transmission of HBV hepatitis by blood or blood products in spite of donor screening for HBsAg. Tests using polyclonal antibodies against HBsAg will overcome this problem.YMDD variants mainly occur during the treatment of chronic HBV. The YMDD region on the viral polymerase is an area where most reverse transcriptor inhibitors such as lamivudine or famciclovir exert their effect. Variations in this area result in partial resistance to these drugs. Unfortunately the appearance of YMDD variants is induced by the use of lamivudine. After a year of lamivudine therapy, 24% of patients show evidence of YMDD variants.Serologic markers and diagnostic tests:HBsAg The HBsAg appears in the serum 1 to 10 weeks after an acute exposure to HBV and approximately 2 to 6 weeks before the onset of symptoms or elevation of transaminases. In patients who recover from HBV infection, HBsAg usually becomes negative after 4 to 6 months. Persistence of HBsAg for more than 6 months defines chronic infection.Anti-HBs This is the only protective antibody among antibodies produced against HBV. The appearance of anti-HBs indicates recovery from the acute disease and development of immunity. There may be a gap between the disappearance of HBsAg and appearance of anti-HBs. This period is classically known as the window period during which the only marker of HBV infection is the anti-HBc (see be- low). By the introduction of more sensitive tests for HBsAg and anti-HBs, this phenomenon is less frequently observed.The protective anti-HBs antibody is directed against the "a" determinant of HBsAg. Coexistence of HBsAg and anti-HBs has been reported in about 24% of HBsAg-positive individuals.22 In most instances, the antibodies are directed against one of the determinants other than the "a" determinant and are unable to neutralize the circulating virions.23 These cases should therefore be regarded as chronic infections.HBeAg is a marker of active HBV replication and infectivity. Its presence is usually associated with high infectivity of blood and increased mother to child transmission. It is usually associated with other replication markers such as HBV DNA polymerase or HBV DNA in serum. Positive HBeAg has been reported in 9.4-13.8% of otherwise healthy Iranian blood donors carrying theHBsAg.Precore mutants do not produce the HBeAg and may be actively replicating in the absence of detectable HBeAg in the serum. Patients with precore mutants may still have anti-HBe antibodies in their sera.Anti-HBe The appearance of this antibody follows the disappearance of HBeAg and usually marks non-replicative viral infection and inactive disease or response to treatment. It should be noted however that in Iran about 58% of HBV infections are precore mutants19 and may have anti-HBe in spite of being actively replicating. Thus, an undetectable HBeAg or the presence of anti-HBe per-se should never be assumed to indicate non-replicative infection.HBcAg This antigen is an intracellular antigen that is expressed in infected hepatocytes and is not detectable in serum.Anti-HBc This is not a protective antibody and its presence indicates exposure to HBV. IgM anti-HBc indicates acute infection and IgG anti-HBc indicates remote exposure or chronic infection. During the window period (see above) in addition to HBV DNA, IgM anti-HBc may be the only serologic marker of acute HBV infection. Occasionally anti-HBc may also be the only indicator of remote infection. In one study on 4930 subjects in Iran, 5.13% were only positive for anti-HBc, without any detectable HBsAg.HBV DNA There are various methods for detecting HBV DNA in the serum which can be grouped into PCR assays and non-PCR assays. The non-PCR assays include the hybridization and branched DNA (bDNA) assays which can detect 106 and 105 particles/ml respectively. The PCR assays can detect as low as 1-10 particles/ml. The PCR test is the first test to become abnormal in HBV infections, often 2-3 weeks before HBsAg can be detected in the serum.Not recognizing the difference between the extremely sensitive PCR assays and the less sensitive non-PCR ones has been a source of confusion. HBV DNA, when detected using non-PCR assays, just like the HBeAg, can be considered to represent replicative viral infection. On the other hand, HBV DNA when detected by PCR assays does not necessarily indicate active viral replication. HBV DNA may remain detectable by PCR assays for many years even when the patient is considered to have cleared the infection HBsAg hasbecomeundetectable.TreatmentAcute cases of HBV infection require no treatment. Over 90% of acute cases will spontaneously clear the virus within 6 months. Again, not all chronic cases require treatment. The usual approach is that if the liver enzymes are not elevated, the patient is only followed every 6 months for signs of activation and progression to HCC. If liver enzymes are elevated, a liver biopsy is indicated. The degree of histologic inflammation should be graded using the HAI system and an HAI score of 4 or greater indicates the need for treatment.There are currently two treatment modalities approved for treating chronic HBV infections; interferon-a (IFN), an immune modulator, and recently lamivudine (LAM), a reverse transcriptor inhibitor.Interferon-a is usually administered as subcutaneous injections in doses of 5 million units (MU) daily or 10 MU three times a week for 16-24 weeks. In Iranian patients we recommend a course of 24 weeks. There is no evidence that prolonging treatment over 24 weeks results in better response rates. Loss of viral replication markers (HBeAg and serum HBV DNA by non-PCR assays) within 12 months of initiation of treatment can be achieved in 30 to 40% of patients. Some patients respond during the follow-up period, after treatment has been stopped.Reactivation occurs in 10-20% of responders and usually occurs in the first post-treatment year.30,31 Loss of HBsAg is less common and occurs in only 5 to 10% of patients.29 Among responders, serum HBV DNA (by hybridizing methods) usually becomes undetectable early during treatment but HBeAg to anti-HBe seroconversion may be delayed. Precore mutant infections are more difficult to treat and there is a high relapse rate.Probably the most troublesome side effect of IFN is emotional liability; characterized by anxiety, irritability, depression, and even suicidal tendencies. Another troublesome side effect of IFN is its ability to cause anemia and hemolysis which makes it a poor choice in anemic patients such as thalassemics and hemophiliacs. IFN is an immune system stimulant so it will worsen autoimmune diseases such as autoimmune hepatitis making it essential to rule out autoimmune hepatitis before starting IFN. Thyroid disease is particularly important and thyroid tests are ordered before starting IFN. IFN can promote destruction of hepatocytes and is thus not given to patients with advanced hepatic disease and cirrhosis, it may perpetuate hepatic decompensation. Other side effects include influenza-like symptoms, fatigue, hair loss, anorexia and weight loss.Predictors of better response to IFN include high pretreatment ALT levels, low serum HBV DNA levels, adult-acquired infection, female sex, active liver inflammation, and absence of HIV and HDV co-infection. Long-term disease and Asian origin is predictive of a poor response.There is also some evidence that IFN may be helpful in treating patients with extrahepatic manifestations of chronic HBV infection such as polyarteritis nodosa and glomerular diseases.Lamivudine (Zeffix?, Epivir?), a reverse transcriptor inhibitor, can be given at a dose of 100mg daily for one year.32,33 Shorter treatment periods result in high relapse rates but at this dosage, it has an effectiveness comparable to IFN, although recurrence is still a concern.34 Asians are known to respond less favorably to lamivudine. But even in these patients, prolonging the treatment period to 2 years results in better response rates. A recent trial on 358 Chinese patients showed a 17% response rate after one year and 27% after two years of therapy.35 In Iran, we currently recommend 2 years of treatment with 100mg lamivudine daily.LAM is also effective in HBeAg negative patients36 where IFN therapy has not been so successful17,18 Longer treatment periods are under study especially for treating the precore mutants which are less responsive to IFN. LAM is generally better tolerated and, in contrast to IFN, can be safely used in patients with advanced liver disease and anemia. Acute exacerbations of chronic HBV infection occurs after withdrawal of lamivudine therapy in approximately 16-17% of patients, especially with shorter durations of therapy. But this exacerbation is considered to be of little clinical significance.Recently, lamivudine has been adopted by the Iranian Ministry of Health and will soon be covered by major insurance companies. LAM could be the first choice for patients in whom IFN is not considered to be safe, i.e. cirrhotics, thalassemics, hemophiliacs, etc. It may also be used as a de-novo therapy for chronic hepatitis B. LAM can induce the appearance of YMDD variants but the variants disappear within 6 months of drug discontinuation . The appearance of these variants is marked by a moderate increase in serum aminotransferase levels. Although, it does not approach the pretreatment levels.32 The YMDD variants, although partially but still are responsive to LAM and LAM is not discontinued in patients developing these variants.It is of interest that the combination of IFN and LAM is less effective than either alone38,39 and they should not be given together.The D particle The hepatitis D virus (HDV), also known as the delta or D particle, can only superinfect patients already infected with HBV. There is some evidence that HDV favors the precore variant of HBV.The superinfection of HDV on a previous carrier of HBV usually results in a flare-up of hepatic disease or occasionally, progression to fulminant hepatic failure. These cases also carry a 90% risk of becoming chronic HDV carriers.42 In the remaining cases, superinfection resolves with persistence of the original HBV infection or rarely, with clearance of the HBsAg. HDV has a strong inhibitory effect on HBV replication. It is frequently observed that HBV DNA becomes undetectable even by sensitive PCR assays.43.Depending on region, up to 60% of chronic HBV carriers are also infected with the D particle. About 50% of Iranian cirrhotics are anti-HDV positive.In Iran, 2.4-14% of otherwise healthy HBsAg carriers and 50% of cirrhotics are infected with the HDV.16,44,45 A similar report from Uzbekistan states that 14% of HBV carriers under the age of 14 are HDV positive.46 Similarly, in Saudi Arabia, 13.6% of drug-dependent HBsAg-positive patients are HDV positive.47 Among HBsAg positive Iranian hemodialysis patients, 44.5% are also infected with HDV.Patients with chronic hepatitis D often have significant splenomegaly and report a previous episode of acute hepatitis, presumably corresponding to the primary superinfection. This is in contrast to the ordinary HBsAg carrier who rarely gives a history of acute hepatitis.Treatment of HDV hepatitis is no different from that of the underlying HBV infection but the long-term response rate is only about 15-20%, less than lone HBV infection.Prevention Because of the relatively low cost of production and the abundant source of HBsAg positive plasma in endemic countries, worldwide about 80% of all vaccines produced are plasma-derived.48 However, the vaccine currently available in Iran is a recombinant vaccine. This vaccine is produced by cloning the S gene, which encodes the HBsAg, through the use of a plasmid vector inserted into common baker's yeast.The vaccine is usually administered in 3 doses of 20?g at 0, 1 and 6 months in the deltoid muscle (not gluteal). The dose for individuals less than 19 years of age is 10?g. For immune suppressed patients or those requiring chronic hemodialysis, a double dose of 40?g is recommended. Anti-HBs levels of 10 mIU/mL or higher are thought to be protective. Vaccination has been reported to result in adequate protection in about 90% of cases. The overall seroconversion rate to vaccine among 4,087 Saudi children up to 12 years of age was about 77%. Seroconversion rate in those vaccinated at birth was 77% compared with 71% in those vaccinated at school entry.8 Unpublished data from Zahedan, eastern Iran, also indicates 78.5% effectiveness whereas another study from Sanandaj, western Iran reports 92.6% effectiveness in newborns.49 Nevertheless, routine post-vaccination testing to document anti-HBs seroconversion is unnecessary except in health care workers, patients on chronic hemodialysis and other individuals who are at risk of recurrent exposure to the HBV. In nonresponders and hyporesponders (anti-HBs < 10 mIU/mL), additional or increased doses have been reported to elicit seroprotective levels in about half of the cases.50,51,52Individuals less than 40 years of age respond better than older individuals. Neonates and preterm infants also have a slightly lower response rate.53 Other conditions showing diminished responsiveness are shown in Table 5. Another group of nonresponders are otherwise healthy individuals in whom the lack of responsiveness appears to be genetically determined.The duration of protection against infection remains uncertain, but many studies indicate that protection against clinical disease is well prolonged54, although levels of anti-HBs may fall below the 10 mIU/mL threshold. Anti-HBs disappears from the serum of as many as 40% of vaccinated adults within 10 years. Nonetheless, immunity against clinical disease persists for years after the loss of anti-HBs. The need for booster doses, therefore, remains uncertain in healthy adults. Although, in immunosuppressed patients, including those on chronic hemodialysis, anti-HBs levels should be tested annually and booster doses given if levels fall below 10 mIU/mL.Vaccination is recommended for all infants born to HBsAg negative mothers and has been included within Iran's national vaccination program since 1992. Furthermore household contacts of patients infected with HBV and high risk groups should also be vaccinated. (Table 6)Whether or not to test for HBsAg positivity before administering HBV vaccine is a point of controversy. A report based upon commercial retail rate of the hepatitis B vaccine in the United States suggested that prevaccination testing is cost-effective only in populations where the prevalence of anti-HBs positivity exceeds 30%.56 In Iran however, we currently do not suggest prevaccination testing except in possibly high risk groups where testing has a higher gain and also helps in identifying carriers.Post-exposure prevention Infectivity depends on the concentration of viral particles in the blood and the presence or absence of markers of viral replication (HBV DNA by non-PCR assays, HBeAg, HBV polymerase, etc). The chance of contracting the infection after a needle stick injury will be about 2-5% if HBeAg is negative, and 27-40% if it is positive. The victims of needle stick or splashing incidents or those with sexual exposure should be immediately vaccinated against HBV and should concomitantly receive hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG). HBIG is given at a dose of 0.04 to 0.07 ml/kg and injected at a different site from that of the vaccine. In the case of needle stick incidents the vaccine and HBIG should be administered within 12 hours while in sexual contact prophylaxis is effective even when delayed up to 14 days.Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers should receive both HBV vaccine and HBIG (0.5 ml), within 12 hours of birth. Vaccination of these infants is the most important step towards the eradication of chronic HBV infection. Protective efficacy exceeds 95%.58 In some countries, similarly high protective efficacy rates have been reported without concomitant HBIG administration.59 However, studies in Taiwan and Hong Kong found that the protective efficacy of vaccine alone was significantly lower being only 75 to 80 percent.60,61 Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers should be tested at about 12 months of age to detect vaccine failures.Recommendations for control of HBV infection in Iran In spite of the availability of an effective vaccine and the incorporation of HBV vaccination in to the national infant vaccination program,hepatitis B continues to be an important health problem in Iran. Some of the more important reasons for vaccination hold back are summarized in Table 7.To overcome these problems many steps must be taken among which providing adequate information to the public is probably the most important. Health care providers should also be further informed through continuous medical education programs and actively involved in the control of this disease. According to surveys performed in Iran, less than 60% of health care providers are vaccinated against HBV in spite of the availability of free vaccination programs for this group. This fact underlines the need for promotional programs urging high risk groups to comply with such vaccination routines.Some third world countries, such as China and Korea, are now producing their own HBV vaccine, which has drastically reduced the cost of vaccination in these countries. We too should plan to accelerate the already begun production of both the vaccine and medications such as IFN and LAM in Iran.



 






